REFLECTIONS Upon Two BOOKS, The One Entitled, The Case of Allegiance TO A
KING in POSSESSION: The Other, AN ANSWER TO Dr. SHERLOCK'S Case of Allegiance
to Sovereign Powers, IN Defense of the CASE of ALLEGIANCE to a King in
Possession, On those Parts especially wherein the Author endeavors to show his
Opinion to be agreeable to the Laws of this LAND.

In a Letter to a Friend.

London, Printed for W. Kogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCI.

REFLECTIONS ON The CASE of ALLEGIANCE to a King in Possession, and The Defense
of it.
SIR,
IF I could be uneasy under any of your Commands, this, you may be assured,
would be the time of my showing it: It is an hard task you have laid upon me;
The Books, of which you require my thoughts, are long: and speak the Author
(whoever he is) to be a Man of great Learning and Reason; one, who can argue to
the best advantage his Subject will bear. And the Collections he has made,
plainly show, that he has taken great pains, and bent all his thoughts for some
time, to the maintenance of that Cause, to which some Prejudice has unhappily
determined him. I, Sir, to your knowledge never saw the Books till within these
very few days, and I fear you will have too much reason from what I write to
believe me, when I tell you, That the reading the Books once over, (and that
with frequent Interruptions too) wasted almost half the time I have been able
to allow my thoughts upon the Subject. This has prevented my consulting any
Books written in favor of Submission to a King in Possession, nay, of reading
Dr. Sherlock's Book, which the Defense pretends to Answer. You must not
therefore be suprized, if you happen to meet here with what others have said on
the same Subject, without any acknowledgment that I received it from them; or
(which I more fear) if you should find Opinions differing from those of very
great Men, who have undertaken this Controversy. They were my Thoughts, Sir,
which you required, and I have taken a course to give them to you free, neither
biassed, nor overruled by the Opinions or Authority of others.

The Question, as it is stated by the Author of the Case, is put very cautiously
and strongly in favor of the Cause he proposes to himself to maintain; he has
fenced it in with such Restrictions in the stating, and the Exposition of the
Terms, that it would be a very unnecessary thing to undertake an Answer to him,
if his Book did not offer at the proof of more than the first Question under
his Limitations, does require from him.

No one, I suppose, who has submitted to Their Majesty's Government, who thinks
it too the Duty of all English Men to do the same, and to pay Faith and
Allegiance to them, will therefore believe himself at all concerned to maintain
that, If a Person who has no manner of Right, by force, exclude, or depose a
King, whose Right to the Crown is clear and undoubted, and thereby gets the
Exercise of the Government into his hands, the Regal Authority, and undoubted
Right remaining still in the excluded Prince, the People ought to pay a full
and entire Submission and Obedience to this King in Possession, so as never to
attempt any thing against him, but stand by and defend him against the
dispossessed Prince, with his Life and Fortune. This is a Case of our Author's
own making, and bears no Resemblance to the present State of this Nation: Nay,
on the contrary, if I may take the liberty to reduce the general Question to
our particular Case, I think the two things agreed by him, as Preliminaries,
will sufficiently justify any English Man in his swearing Allegiance, and
paying the Duty Case, f. 2.
of a Subject to Their present Majesty's. For the first of them agrees, That a
bare Possession, tho purely by Usurpation, will carry a Right to the Subjects
Allegiance in an Hereditary Monarchy, where the whole Royal Line is extinct; to
prevent the Bloodshed and Confusion which might follow upon the Peoples
attempting to set up another Person or Government. This prudential Reason, and
a Submission upon it, he lays down to be a sufficient Title to the Usurper, and
that it makes him from thenceforth King de Jure, one to whom all Faith and
Allegiance becomes due. ('It Is so obvious of it self, that I might spare the
observing, That he frames his Case upon a Supposition of the whole Royal Lines
being extinct, for no other purpose than to restrain it so, as to extend only
to Cases where there is no other Person in being, who has a just Title to the
Crown, and whose Right is invaded by that Possession).

The second agrees, That where there are diverse pretenders, and it is not clear
who has the true Right or Title; the Subjects Allegiance is to follow the
Possession.

If therefore the late King, by the assuming to himself an Authority to
suspend, and by general and unlimited Dispensations to repeal Laws without
Parliament; by the entrusting almost the whole Power, Military and Civil, in
the hands of such Persons only as would undertake with their endeavors to
support him in those Excesses; By the putting those few Laws which he found it
his interest to observe, in Execution, by such generally, as were by Law made
incapable of all Trust and Rule; By the constant aim and tendency that every
one of his Actions had to enslave us at home, not to omit the Bonds prepared
for us, by his immovable Adherence to the Interests of the French King, from
which (as a chargeable Experience teaches us) the utmost effort we can make,
and that assisted with very great and powerful Alliances, will scarce rescue
us. If his unwearied endeavors to destroy the Reformed Religion, with a
thousand other Male-Administrations, that struck at the very Being and
Foundation of the Constitution it self, and the Laws and Liberties of the
People of England; did declare, that he would not govern by our Laws or Act by
an Authority limited by them. If upon the Parliaments humble and modest
Representation to him (according to their Duty) of the unwarrantableness of
such Proceedings, and the Alarm that the People took at his great Violations of
their Rights, and Breaches upon the Government, he broke them up in Anger, and
thereby showed an obstinate and settled Resolution to assert that unlimited
Power to himself, and govern according to it. If having by these Arbitrary
Proceedings drawn great Difficulties upon himself, instead of taking proper
Courses to secure his People against such Excesses for the future, he held to
the same Counsels still, and by their Advice quitted the Kingdom, then in the
utmost Confusion, without making any Provision for the Administration of the
Government, and voluntarily put himself into the hands of its avowed perpetual
Enemy. If all these things put together, will amount, either to a renouncing
and disclaiming his Title to a Government limited by Laws, or a disabling and
rendering him incapable to Exercise any Government at all. Nay, If the share and
interest which the Body of the People have in the Preservation of the Laws and
Constitution, and their concern in the welfare of the whole, will make it come
up but to a doubtful Case. If upon this, to rescue us from those Confusions, to
preserve what remained of the Ancient Government, and to restore what had been
impaired, the Representatives of the People did fill the deserted Throne by
proclaiming the Authors of our Deliverance, King and Queen, and the Body of the
People (for the number of Malcontents is so inconsiderable, that there is no
need of softning the word upon their account) have owned their Title to the
Crown, submitted and sworn Allegiance to them as their Governors: And if it be
visible to the whole World, that their Government has produced all the good
Effects that were proposed or aimed at, and they are in as full and quiet
Possession of the Throne, as ever any Princes were who sat upon it, with a
repeated Recognition of their Title. I cannot but think, that every one, who
will give himself leave calmly to consider, must agree, That our Case comes up
to that which our Author puts. It does not, cannot appear that any other Person
has a better Right to the Crown: and the consequence of our Author's drawing
from that, will be, That every Englishman ought to bear Faith, and pay
Allegiance to Their Majesty's, who (thanks be to God) are in so full a
Possession of the Throne.

But not to enter farther into the general Question, which, I think, ought not
to be too freely searched into, lest it give Advantage and Encouragement to a
sort of People, who will be forward out of Wantonness, to put things in
practice, which nothing but the utmost necessity can justify; I conceive I
shall effectually answer all that can be materially objected from the Case of
Allegiance, etc. and the Defense of it, against our present Settlement, if I
can maintain this Proposition* That where a King is in the full and quiet
possession of the Throne, and Exercise of the Government; has been solemnly
proclaimed, and freely and voluntarily recognized and submitted unto by the
States of the Kingdom as their King; has visibly the Power and Strength of the
Nation in his hands; the Laws have their due course in his Name, and all
public justice is administered by those deputed and commissionated by him;
although he had no precedent legal Right, and that there is another person living,
who according to the ordinary course of Hereditary Succession, has a just claim
to the Crown; yet the Laws of England do require every private subject to pay
their Allegiance to such a King in possession, and protect them in their so
doing. And this, I hope, will be fully made out, by plain Law, and all the
seeming Objections offered against it from the Laws of the Land, answered.

To save my self and the Reader some trouble hereafter, it will be convenient,
before I enter into the particular consideration of our Author's Arguments and
Objections, to observe, That the Government of England is to be considered in
two respects: 1st, With regard to the Power of Legislature, viz. The King and
Body of the States, who have power over all positive Laws, to make new ones
according as they in their Judgments shall think expedient, and to alter,
amend, and supply the defects of the old ones, as they in prudence shall judge
the present circumstances of Affairs require. 2ly, The Executive Power, of
which the King is supreme, and Courts of Justice, and other Officers
subordinate under him. To them it belongs not to deliberate or determine, what
in their opinions it were fit or reasonable the Law should be, and thereupon
declare that to be Law; but to declare what the Law is, as it at present
stands, in every case coming judicially before them, and to put that Law in
Execution. This is so very obvious, that it must without hesitation be agreed
to me; and so must the consequence that I draw from it: That I need not make it
any part of the present Question, Whether the Acts of one who is called an
Usurper in Title, that tend immediately to the destruction of the right of the
dispossessed Prince, be just in themselves, so that they ought to continue in
force, and not be repealed and annulled, by a Power competent for that purpose,
upon the injured Prince's happening to be restored to his Right: But whether
such Acts being done according to the known legal Forms and Ceremonies, by such
a Possessor of the Throne as I have before described, every private subject may
not, in good Conscience, submit unto and obey them, without taking upon him to
judge of his Governor's Title? Nay further, whether the Laws of the Land do
not protect him in so doing; and not only so, but require it from him?

I think the Affirmative is agreeable to the Laws: And I now come to consider
what our Author says to the contrary.

The first Point he endeavors to make out, is, That notwithstanding the
Opinions of the Eminent Lawyers whom he mentions (which I must observe were
delivered in the times of Kings, whose Titles to the Crown were undoubted, so
that there was no necessity for their straining the sense of the Law to make it
favor their Master's interest: and which, for ought that ever yet has
appeared, were never contradicted hitherto by any one of that profession), A
King de facto is not Seignior le Roy within the Statute of 25 E. 3.

I shall through this Discourse take those words to mean, one who is in the
full and peaceable possession of the Throne, and Exercise of the Government,
with the free submission of the People, by their Representatives assembled in a
Parliamentary way; but wants a Title by proximity of Blood and Hereditary
Succession; and undertake for the defense of the duty of Allegiance to such an
one only, and not to any possession without a true Right, short of that: If any
of the proofs which I shall make use of hereafter, shall carry it further, they
will more strongly prove this: But I will not answer for more.

I observe in general upon this Statute, 1. That the punishment prescribed by
it, for the offenses now under debate, is the utmost to which a temporal Law
can reach, Death and Disgrace: This will make it highly reasonable, that the
offense should be plain and certain. And in the second place, That this Statute
was made in favor of the Subject, that he might be at a certainty what hazards
he runs, and not be swallowed up in the Gulf, before he apprehended himself to
be beyond his Banks: It made no new offense, but was restrictive of the liberty
that Judges had taken before, of expounding every thing, that an angry or
jealous Prince did resent as a wound of his Majesty, into High Treason. This is
so well known to all that have looked into the Law, that it were idle to quote
Authorities for it. I will, add in the third place, as a thing not improper to
be observed, That it would be a very hard thing before E. 3's time to prove a
certain Hereditary Succession. The best Historian will find but few Instances
of that kind from the Conquest till the time of the making of this Statute. So
that the defect of Hereditary Title, could not be a thing forgotten, or slipped
over, as out of the minds of King or People: Yet I cannot perceive any thing in
this Statute, to lead to such a distinction as is now made; tho it was made as
a Rule for the Subject, from which he might learn, how he might demean himself
in those great matters with safety* There is not so much as an Hint, that the
trying who has the just Right and Title to the Crown, whether He, who is owned
by the States of the Kingdom, and has the full Government and administration of
all Affairs; or another, who a thoughtful busy man (that cannot content himself
in the private station wherein God Almighty has placed him, but must make
himself a Judge of the highest matters) will be fancying ought to be there. I
say, That the trying that Point, should be left to a Jury of 12 men; as it must
be, should a private person be proceeded against for an attempt upon the
Possessor, in order to the restoring the dispossessed Prince; If it be true,
that it is not Treason by that Law, for a private Subject to attempt any thing
against the King in possession, in behalf of him, that of Right, by Hereditary
Succession, ought to be King.

This would be an hard Interpretation of a Statute, made in the time of a King
who obtained possession of the Kingdom by a War levied against his Father, and
a forced Resignation, after the Arms, of those who took part with him, were
successful: In which taking up Arms against the King in possession,
notwithstanding all that might justify it in Reason of State and Prudence, he
was sensible that the Laws of the Land would not bear his friends out; and
therefore thought fit, in the first year of his Reign, to have an Act of
Parliament passed, to indemnifie them against ordinary legal proceedings; for
what they had done. This he looked upon as necessary, tho at the same time, he
thought the Cause in which those who fell in the War, died, so just in it self,
that he made a new Law on purpose, to save them from suffering in their
Estates: For we find, in the same year, there was a Statute made, to entitle
the Executors of those, who were Slain in his Quarrel, in the pursuit against
his Father, to Actions to recover their Testators Goods.

Lawyers account Co-temporaneam Expositionem, the best interpreter of the Sense
of Statute-laws. I would fain have the Author, or any one else, who would
confine the words Seignior le Roy in that Statute, to, Lawful and Rightful King
by Hereditary Succession only, to show any thing leading to that Interpretation
in the History of that time, or any of the Kings Reigns before that. Where it
was ever heard of before that Act, that Allegiance was due to the uncrowned,
unsubmitted-unto Right Heir? Nay, I will go farther, Where in any public
Record, before that Statute, there does appear a damning of the Title of such a
King, after a Submission of the People to him, in favor of him that was nearer
in Blood? Whether the several Predecessors of E. 3. who had not a legal Title
by Hereditary Succession, are not called Kings, in the Statutes of almost every
year of his Reign, and all their Acts unquestioned? If there were nothing
extant to direct the Subjects to the contrary, and the King himself so often
told them, that those, whom I must call Kings de Facto only, were Kings without
any addition (the very letter of this Statute) it would instead of being an
Ease and Relief to the People, have proved according to the present
Interpretation, the greatest Snare that was possible.

'Twas easy for them to see and know who exercised the Kingly Office, under
whose Administration they had the benefit of the Laws, and by whose Authority
all Judicial Proceedings took their Course. They might too, without any great
difficulty, learn who were the visible Attendants on the Throne, the King's
near Relations, his Wife, Son, and Daughter. The Throne is but one, and they
saw who possessed that. The name King, is a name of Office, which consists in
Exercise, that too was as plain to them. The words of the Statute seem as
plain, It Is Treason to compass or imagine the Death, etc. of the King: Would it
not now be a very great hardship to put it upon a private Person, to seek an
hidden Sense in plain Words, and at the peril of his Life and Family, to make
himself judge of all the Difficulties which may arise upon our Constitution,
(which, what it is in all points, never was or will be agreed upon)? Whether
this Person that is so expressly within the words of the Statute, may not
hereafter appear to have been wrongfully possessed: And upon that apprehension,
to put the poor Man under an Obligation of laying himself, for the sake of a
Nation, open to the Vengeance of one, who has the plain words of the Law on his
side, and Power to back it? To put him under a necessity of being a Sacrifice
to his own private Opinion, against the public acknowledgement of the Body of
the People, in a case wherein common Sense, and the Wisdom of all Governments
forbid the admitting a private Person to be a Judge; nay, will not endure its
being made the Subject of a nice and curious Inquiry?

But I perceive by Defense f. 6, 7. That it is one main ground of our Author's
Opinion, and whereon he principally relies, That the Law does not look upon the
King de Facto to be King, but accounts him that is dispossessed, and de Jure
ought to be so, to be so; and he calls upon Dr. Sherlock for Authorities to
prove the contrary. This explains the two first Lines of his Book, where he
makes it the description of a King de Jure, That he is the Person that has the
Regal Authority. The Doctor had asserted, That the King de Facto was King, as a
self-evident Proposition; and I should think my self very safe in my
Proposition still, were I in the Doctor's case, without any other proof. But I
will for once comply with the Author's Request, and refer him to a very
ingenious Book, called, The Case of Allegiance to a King in Possession, where
he may find a great many unanswerable Authorities to that purpose; even as many
as ever there were Revocations, or Repeals of the Acts of such Kings. There
they declare, That the Usurper was in fact King, but not in right; and after
they have done so, unless there can be two Kings, they have left no other sense
for the words, King de Jure, but that of right he ought to have been King all
that time, tho the other in fact was so. For his full satisfaction, I will give
him a taste of one, out of many, and it shall be his Darling Act, the Statute 1
E. 4. which may be seen printed in the Record of Baggot's Case, in the
Year-book, 9 E. 4, 9, 10. The Author quotes it often, and once as an Authority
for him in this point, because (speaking Historically, and describing Persons
according to the series of times, that it speaks of them in) it calls H. 4.
Henry late Earl of Darby, as he was, when he reared the War against R. 2. which
is the thing that follows that Name: But let us see what other ill things it
says of him, Why, He usurped and intruded upon the Royal Power, Estate,
Dignity, Pre-eminence, Possession, and Lordship of England. And after he had
done so, and King Rich. 2. was dead, it is true, By Law, Custom, and
Conscience, the Right and Title of the said Crown and Lordship, descended to
the Earl of March. But then (as if it were afraid the sense of the words, Right
and Title, should be mistaken) it sets them in the next Sentence, in a direct
Opposition to the Possession of the Throne in the Sense I contend for; where it
says, That E. 4. according to the Right and Title of the said Crown and
Lordship, after the decease of the Duke of York his Father, took upon him to
use his Right and Title to the said Realm, and entered into the Exercise of the
Royal Estate, Dignity, Pre-eminence, and Power of the same Crown, and to the
Reign and Governance of the said Realm of England, and Lordship. And amoved H.
6. from the Occupation, Usurpation, Intrusion, Reign, and Governance of the
said Realm, to the great Joy of the Subject for their being departed from the
Obeisance and Governance of the unrighteous Usurper, etc. If this be not
enough, take the words more plainly, where the Statute tells us, The Crown
after the death of Rich. 2. should have descended to the Earl of March, as next
Heir of the Blood, if the said Usurpation had not been committed. The effect of
these words is again repeated with regard to E. the 4th's Title. And the
Statute expressly distinguishes, That the King was in right from the death of
his Father, very just King of the same Realm, but only from the fourth day of
March, in lawful Possession of the same Realm, with the Royal Power,
Pre-eminence, Estate, and Dignity belonging to the Crown thereof; with
abundance more to the same purpose. These Authorities, without remarking on
them, will probably go a great way in proof of the Doctor's Proposition; and
the rather, because they are of times when de Jure was triumphant; if they
don't satisfy, upon a little Intimation, more shall be given.

I confess, I can scarce with Patience hear some Opinions that are fondly
broached upon so weak a Foundation as a private Judgment; so very dangerous to
all Governments, and destructive to the Persons themselves who advance them. If
the Constitution of the Kingdom were plain and positive, so that it were
impossible for any unbiassed, considering Man, to think otherwise, but that our
Monarchy is so unalterably Hereditary, that neither the Consent, or other Act,
nor any manifest impediment or defect of the Person, who is next in Blood,
could according to our Constitution, divest him of his Right to the Crown, or
discharge the Subject from Obedience to him; Then, indeed, a private Man, whose
certain knowledge of the Royal Pedigree convinced him where the undoubted Right
was, might reasonably think himself bound in Justice and Conscience to pursue
that Title with his Services, however Unsuccessful, Violence, and Injustice
might for some time render the Undertaking. But since it must be agreed, That
the Hereditary Right to the Crown by our Constitution, was never looked upon to
be so sacred and inviolable, but that the next in Course may have such a known
unfitness and incapacity upon him, of answering any of the ends of Government,
that he may, without any Violation of that Constitution, be laid aside: (As
suppose him, to instance in one that all Mankind agree in, a perfect Idiot from
his Nativity) And that one, who was once possessed of the Crown, may divest
himself of his Right of Government, by a voluntary Quitting, or Resignation of
it; which may be done without making the whole Nation witnesses to it. So that
it must be allowed, that there may be instances wherein proximity of Blood in
the right Line, will not be an infallible Badge of a Right to govern; and there
may be great doubts who has the best Title. And since in the Case of an
absolute Incapacity to Rule, and in differences and competition between Titles,
there must be some Judge. And since Reason and Usage say, That things of that
nature, ought not to be of any private Determination, but are proper for the
Decision of those who represent the whole Body of the People only, the whole
being concerned in it; I cannot tell whether Pity, or an hard Name will best
suit that particular Member of the Body, who will not acquiesce in the Decision
which the States of the Kingdom (his own Representatives amongst the rest) make
of such a Case; but must be setting up particular Notions of his own, and
taking a great deal of Pains to warp, and with violence strain the plain words
of a Law to his own undoing. If those who argue so warmly against themselves,
and every private Subject of England in this matter, would but consider what is
said before, that the 25 E. 3. was made in favor of the Subject, to show him
his danger before he fell into it, and that it was not at all the end of that
Law, to settle the Right of the Crown, (which our Author agrees is done by the
Fundamental Constitution, and not any positive written Law) but only to secure
the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom from the attempts of private Persons against
their Governors, That the description the Law generally gives of Treason, is,
that it is Crimen Laesae Majestatis, which seems to refer principally to the
Office, and the Person as investd with that, not to a dispossessed, tho
rightful Heir, who is forced into a private Condition, and has little of that
Majesty to be guarded: And that in Glanvill's time, the Peace and Settlement of
the Kingdom was so much considered, that it was called Treason, Machinari
Sedition^m Regni, as well as Mortem Regis; They would surely confine their
thoughts to their Closets, till they could show a little better Agreement
between them, and what has been the received Opinion in all Ages, since the
making of the Statute; or till they can write enough to satisfy a prudent Man,
that it were to be wished it were otherwise. The doing which, I presume, will
take some time; since I could never yet meet with One, till I saw the contrary
in Print, who did not think it so reasonable in it self, and so much the common
concern of Mankind to maintain it; that 'twas their Sense, words ought to be
strained (if there were need of it) to support, not to destroy the Proposition
I am endeavoring to maintain.

The Author allows some of those particular Treasons recited in the Act, As the
Clipping the Vsurper's Coin, Caese, f. 4.
Counterfeiting his Seal, nay, Levying War against him upon any account, but in
behalf of the dispossessed Prince; may by the Law (that is by this Law, for
there is none other for it) be punished as Treason. He is very cautious indeed
in his wording of it; These may be Treason under an Usurper, and punished as
Treason under an Usurper: And will not confess in express words, That these are
Treasons against him, but that they are rather against the course of the
Government, and the Authority of the Lawful King through him. The notion is
fine, but it is of very late date; the Indictments upon which those Persons are
to be punished, speak nothing of it; they say, It Is against the Duty of their
Allegiance to him, and against his Crown and Dignity. And it will be hard to
make the word King in one part of the Statute, signify only a certain Person,
who ought of Right to be King, but is not so, and perhaps never may; when the
same word, without any Explanation, stands in the next line for another Person
possessed of the Throne by wrong, and in prejudice of the Man's right that was
described by the self-same word just before.

When the Author convincingly proves, That the next of the Royal Line in course
of descent, has as inherent and inseparable a Right to the Allegiance of the
Kingdom, as God Almighty has to the Worship and Service of his Creatures; and
that an Idol in Possession, as he words it, by virtue of its being set up in a
Temple, is possessed of God's Power, and God Almighty divested of all Rule,
(not to run the Parallel farther for fear of Blasphemy) then I will grant he
has offered a good Argument to prove that the word King in this Statute Caese,
f. 7. Defen. f. 4.
can only signify the Right Heir, by the same Reason that the word God in the
third Commandment can mean none but the True God. The Being of God is in its
Nature unchangeable, his Name, and Right to govern us incommunicable. The
Office of a King, and the Right of particular Persons to that Office, are of
politic Institution, and may be separated. It may often vary, and cease,
either for a time, or absolutely, according to the Laws of the Constitution.

So if the Author will make the Priesthood such an Office, as, that a Man's
exercising the Functions of it will make him really and in truth a Priest,
without entering in at the door (which my Profession does not lead me to the
Interpretation of; but I suppose the Author must think, signifies some setting
apart, by those with whom Christ has left such a Power) then his Text may bear
some Resemblance to an Intruder into an Office, of which all sides agree
Possession Defen. f. 4.
may be taken by force, and that that Possession does make him in fact (tho not
in Right and Justice) a King.

I could have wished, that our Author had considered a little better, before he
had made these and some Def. f. 69.
other Comparisons.

Our Author will make me weary of putting him in mind what the end of the
Statute 25 E. 3. was; if he had weighed that well, he would have found, That
notwithstanding what is offered by him, from the word Heir, against the
Interpretation, my Case f. 7. Def. f. 8.
Lord Coke was not so much in the wrong, when he said, That our Lord the King,
meant him that is King.

I have already said, That that Statute does not offer any thing toward the
Determination of the Title to the Crown; who ought to be King, whether he that
is in Possession, or another who pretends he has a just Claim to it, is not its
business. There is, notwithstanding what our Author says to the contrary,
another proper place for the deciding such a Controversy. But the Law declared
by this Statute, secures the Throne against the Attempts of private Subjects,
and binds them to a quiet Submission to the Office and Power, which is sacred,
in whose hands soever it is And therefore (taking our Monarchy to be an
Hereditary one, as it undoubtedly is) I can see nothing unreasonable, much less
contradictious in the affirming, That the Eldest Son of a King de Facto, that
is, one owned and submitted unto by the People as their King, is Heir apparent
to the Crown, and ought to be looked upon as such, by every private Subject,
until the Rightful Owner regain the Possession, or obtain the Sentence of
those, to whom the Right of determining it belongs, in his favor.

Possession, without any precedent Title, is a good Title against all the
World, but him that has the true Right; so that, as between the Usurper and any
private Person, the Usurper has a Right to the Throne, which is by the
Constitution an Hereditary one. The Author himself will grant this, unless such
private person act in behalf of him, whom he supposes to have the very Right;
but of that Right, I cannot by any means allow the private Subject a Judge.

I will readily agree, That this Statute did not intend any kindness to the
Usurper, or the establishment of his Title: nay, that the principal aim and
design of the Law (of which that Statute was declaratory) was to preserve the
Government, by securing the Person of the King, (a Possession and Right then
going together) and taking care of the Succession. And it has taken a much more
effectual way to do it, then our Author's Interpretation, if that were
admitted, would do. Let us turn our Author's Exposition into express words, and
the Law will run thus, It shall be High Treason to compass, etc. the Death of
the Lawful and Rightful King, etc. But if there be one in Possession of the
Throne, who is not Lawful and Rightful King, then it shall be no fault for any
particular Subject to compass, etc. his Death, in order to the instating him
that has Right, in the Throne. Would ever any King, be his Title never so
undoubted, think himself advantaged or secured by such a Provision, where, by
express words of a Law, liberty would be given to every particular Subject, to
examine and pass Sentence on his Right? Is it not a more reasonable and prudent
Provision, and more likely, even to prevent an Usurpation in after times, to
guard by express Law his Person, (who was at the time of the making the Law
rightful Possessor) and that of him, who of Right ought to succeed him, and so
downwards for ever under the highest Penalties. And (taking it for granted,
that that Provision would keep the Right and Possession together) to require
the Obedience of every particular Subject to the Possessor from time to time,
without allowing the Rabble a liberty of examining into the Title.

So that it is very far from being an unreasonable Exposition of the Law, tho
it should happen to be a Protection to the Wife and Son of an Usurper in Title,
to say the Title of the Possessor of the Crown shall not be canvassed by every
Subject, but the Dignity of the Office shall set him above any particular
persons passing Sentence on, and exercising Authority over him.

In short, The Common Law, which made such extraordinary Provision for the
security of the Persons of the King and his Relations, could not do it for any
Sanctity of their Persons, any otherwise, than as they were invested with the
Kingly Office, and in relation to that. It secured them for their own sakes,
but more for the sake of the Government, and to preserve the Peace and Order of
that. It supposed indeed, that no Person would obtain it, but he who had a
Right, because no other ought to do so; and all the Subjects are obliged under
the greatest ties to prevent it; But 'twas as far from the Intention of the
Law, as it is from Sense and Reason, to leave it at the liberty, nay, make it
the duty of every particular person to raise Disturbances, and throw an whole
Kingdom into Confusion; because he, against the Recognition and Sense of the
Body of the People, thinks another's Title to the Crown better than his who
wears it. So, (to carry this on) as against the People who have no Right at all
to the Crown, for the preserving and continuing the Hereditary Monarchy, it
provided for and secured the Son of the King in Possession, as the Person who
according to our Constitution, has presumptively a Right to succeed his Father
in the Throne, till there be some Authoritative Declaration against his
Father's Title. I confess, Heir Apparent to a King de facto, who has no Title
to the Crown, but his own Possession, as the Author has tacked the Def. f. 9.
words together, does seem odd; but the difficulty is in the words only, not in
the thing. The name King is never clogged with these words de Facto, till he is
out of Possession: The private Subject must look upon him as his King, and
consequently on his Son, as the Heir of his King, and so not attempt any thing
against them, which is what the Laws against Treason provide for. The de Facto,
which is all that imports any inconsistency or Contradiction, does not then
belong to him.

But we are told, That the constant Practice and Custom Case f. 9. Def. f. 13.
of the Realm, is so far from warranting my Lord Coke 's Gloss, that it proves
the contrary. For that the Parliaments upon every Revolution, used to Attaint
the Adherents to those who opposed them, tho acting under a King in Possession;
nay, dealt with the Possessor himself as a Traitor, scarce allowed him the Name
of a King, or looked upon his Acts of Government as Valid and Authoritative in
themselves.

I lay all these together, because the same Answer will in a great measure
serve for all of them, tho each may have its particular consideration.

None of those Proceedings amount to so much as a colorable Proof, That to act
against one, who in Justice, and according to our Constitution ought to be
King, but is out of Possession; in Obedience unto, and Defense of the King who
is publicly submitted unto by the Body of the Kingdom, and in Possession of
the Government, is by any Law, at present a Law of the Land, Criminal. All
those Attainders were by Parliaments, whose Power is not to be contradicted, or
the Reasons of their Proceedings disputed: It was, without doubt, by all
moderate men at that time looked upon as very hard, and contrary to Equity, to
punish men by positive Laws, ex post facto, for what was no breach of any of
the public Laws, or Acts of State then in being. These Laws were undoubtedly
iniquae, unequitable, but I believe no one would have put the Author to the
trouble of proving them to be Laws. Def. f. 15.


The People either of themselves to make Court to the Power then uppermost, or
being overawed by the Interest and Recommendation of those about the King, did
generally elect and return the Friends and Adherents of the prevailing Party,
whose Wounds being fresh, and their Losses quick and piercing, they kept
themselves within no bounds of Justice or Moderation: They were resolved to
gratify their private Resentments, and revenge themselves for Injuries done
them or their Friends upon any terms; so that they took not either the Laws of
the Land, or the common Rules of Justice, for their guide, but made both
truckle to their Passions. The King was glad to lessen the number of his
Enemies, the cutting off many of whom, and frightning the rest into Submission
by such Examples of his Severity, he looked upon as the only means to secure
himself against another turn. That this was the Case, is certain, and I wish we
could find instances in our Ancient Histories only, in the times of our
Edward's and Henry's, to prove, that where there are two contesting Parties in
a Kingdom, neither of them will make use of the advantages they happen to
obtain over the other, with such a temper as right Reason and Prudence would
direct. But the violence of such Proceedings must not be offered as any proof
or measure of Right; nay, they are unfit to be mentioned, or made use of in any
cool debate, unless it be to create in the minds of Men, an abhorrence of such
Actings, and by setting forth the calamitous Consequences that were produced by
the punishing the poor Subject, upon the various Successes on cach side, to
recommend that wise and equal Law, which not only declared, That the Subject 11
H. 7.
ought to be indemnified in his paying his Service to the King for the time
being, for that it was his Duty to do so; but provided, That all Statutes made
afterward to the contrary, should be void. This latter part was all of the
Statute which was new, the residue was always Law, and is there only
authoritatively declared to be so. And that part of it that was new, cannot have
its full effect to restrain subsequent Parliaments, to which no positive Laws
can give bounds. But yet their aiming at such a Restraint, is a sufficient
Caution to future Parliaments, to consider very well before they make any Law
contrary to it; which is thereby adjudged a thing utterly unfit to be done, and
that in the most solemn manner, by as wise a Prince as ever filled the Throne;
and a People, whose Sufferings under the mischiefs of a contrary Practice had
convinced them, not only of the reasonableness, but the absolute necessity of
the thing.

I think, I need not say any thing farther as to the Instances out of History,
during the Wars between York and Lancaster: If there were need, the Author has
done it to my hand, Case f. 11. and elsewhere; at least, as to any Argument of
Right or Justice that can be drawn from the Vengeance they dealt to each other
upon any Advantages. E. 4. attainted H. 6. and all his Adherents, being an
Usurper upon his Rights, and gave very hard words to him, as well as to his
Grandfather H. 4. the first Invader of the Right of the House of York; and H.
6. his being actually a King in Possession was not a Protection against it.
Will it thence follow, that by the standing Law of England, a King in
Possession not being rightful Heir to the Crown, and all those that act under
him, are Traitors and Rebels to the dispossessed Prince? Will not H. 6th
returning his Complement to the full, when he was restored to the Crown, as
effectually prove the Law to be with him being in Possession, tho E. 4. had the
better Title. In truth, none of these Instances prove any thing, but that de
Facto and de Jure were much alike esteemed, when they got the Power into their
hands; they made their Parliaments say, and do what they pleased, when either
of them had sufficient Power to put the Acts made against his Rival, and those
who adhered to him, in Execution.

I cannot forbear observing, That in all these violent times, there is not so
much as one Instance of any Person adjudged a Traitor for his serving the King
in Possession, upon an Indictment in the ordinary course of proceedings
according to the established Laws. All those Determinations proceeded from the
Parliament, ex plenitudine potestatis. And it is plain, that they did not so
much as pretend to square their Actions to the Laws then in being, by the
Instance he gives, where H. 6. is attainted of High Treason for Case f. 10.
the death of Richard D. of York at the Battle of Wakefield, when it is
apparent, not only that the D. of York had by his own Agreement and Oath put
himself into the condition of a Subject to H. 6. during his Life; but that the
poor King was at the time of the fighting that Battle, in the Power of the D.
of York himself, left by him in the Custody of the D. of Norfolk and E. of
Warwick.

Not to mention that the Author agrees, the D. of York Case f. 11.
was not King, but only declared Heir to the Crown after H. 6th's death. And
all agree, That the death of the Heir 3 Inst. 9.
Collateral to the Crown, is not High Treason within 25 E. 3.

As to his particular instances of hard Names given by Case. f. 13.
Ed. 4. to the pretended Parliament 49 H. 6. besides what has been observed in
general before, I will add only, that the Right and Justice of his Cause
depended upon the Nullity of their Proceedings; and yet he durst not insist
upon the Original Nullity of them, which (it may be supposed he knew) 'twas not
the part of private Men or the Judges to determine: And therefore it was done
by a Law; and that Law is an Act of Repeal only, Reversing, revoking, and
making, not declaring the former proceedings void.

Nor is there any thing in what we find Case. f. 14. that can amount to a Proof
of his Position. In the end of that Page he grants that Acts of Parliament
passed under an Usurper are valid without any Confirmation: If he had not, we
have a better Authority for it, That of the selfsame Parliament that gave the
Determination in favor of the D. of Tork's Title to the Crown: That the Laws
took no place against that. And they that were so bold to do that, would not
have been afraid to have carried it on further, if Law or Reason would have
suffered them. Yet they, and the D. of York himself, solemnly declare, That all
the other Acts and Ordinances made in the Vsurper's Parliament, be good and
sufficient. (Now if it be essential to every Act of Parliament, that the King's
Approbation give it life, surely the Law must look upon those Persons to have
been Seigniors les Roys, whose Laws are unquestionably allowed to be good.)
Nay, it appears most plainly that the Statute of 1 E. 4. c. 1. for confirmation
of Judicial proceedings, which our Author insists on, was Case. f. 14. Def. f.
37.
Cautionary only, and that from the Act it self; for the Preamble says, 'twas
made, In eschewing of Ambiguities, Doubts, and Diversities of Opinions which
may arise, ensue, and be taken, etc. when he was settled in the Throne, and the
Parliament and Judges (as 'twill be easily believed) were ready to complement
his Right to the highest pitch; they could not strain it higher, than to make
it a doubtful case, whether the Acts of the preceding Kings in Deed, not in
Right, were not valid. And the words used in the Statute are Declare,
Establish, and Enact, etc. the first of which, we know, was never looked upon as
a proper word for introducing a new Law; or made use of upon such an occasion.

But his third Argument deserves something a more particular Case. f 11. Def.
f. 32.
consideration. It is this: If Treason lay only against the King in Possession,
whether King de jure or no, then the Subjects may not, under pain of High
Treason, admit any Claim of the King de jure against him; for that were to be
adherent to the Enemy of the King in possession.

I confess I wonder that a Man of our Author's Learning and Reason should set
down such a Consequence: But this was brought in, it is probable, to make way
for the main Assertion of his Book, and the most material thing in the whole
Controversy, That the Parliament cannot Case. f. 65.
be, and that there is no Judicature provided to determine the Title to the
Crown, where there is a Competition about it.

Both these will receive one Answer. I should think (if there were no Precedent
or Express Authority in the point) that it would be allowed a sufficient proof
of the contrary, That Right Reason, and the very Nature of Government, do make
some such power of determining absolutely necessary. For the Foundation of all
Governments is supposed to be the good and benefit of those who form themselves
into it; and in all cases whatsoever, unless there be an express provision to
the contrary, what is agreeable to the Sense and Reason of Mankind, and
necessary to the support and well-being of that Government, must be supposed to
be the very first general ground agreed upon: so that in such cases, where
there is not any thing positive against it, Is and ought to be, seem in reason
to be covertible terms. And 2dly, There cannot, as the frame of our
Constitution is, any other be imagined, than the States of the Kingdom. This I
am sure will be agreed unto me, If there be any such Judicature, it can be none
but they: And allowing them to be so, common sense will say, They being made
Judges, must thereby impliedly have a Right to act in it, free from all
precedent Obligations of Duty to either Party; They act as freely in that
point, till the Determination is made, as their Ancestors did, when they may be
supposed to be met together, to agree upon a Form of Government; Only that they
are to keep to the Rule, which they find settled and agreed on both sides, viz.
That our Government is an Hereditary Monarchy; And the Question to be
determined by them is, Which of the Pretenders has the best Title upon that
Foundation. Is it not then an Affront put upon the judgment of a Reader, to
say, That, because it is maintained, that the positive Laws of the Land, for
the Quiet and Preservation of the Monarchy, forbid every private Subject, in
his capacity of a Subject, to take upon him to censure the Title of a King
possessed of the Throne, it will thence follow, That the States or Body of the
Nation, when there is such a stop in the proceedings, by some doubt upon the
very Constitution it self, that the whole is likely to fall, unless a decision
be made of it; shall not have an equal Power to rescue themselves from that
Confusion, as their Ancestors had to form themselves into Order.

They do this upon the Reason of the Constitution it self, and by a Power and
Fundamental Right, which of necessity must be supposed to be reserved, when
they embodied themselves into a Politic frame: they act in it upon their old
Natural Liberty, which could never be submitted to the Prince in this instance,
because the Question arises only upon the doubt, who is the Prince.

And therefore the Duke of Tork, in his Answer to the Objection, that was made
against his Claim to the Crown from the Oaths they had taken to Hen. 6. tells
the Lords, He lawfully may claim and pursue his right, and demand Justice in
such form as he does: And that all other persons, and namely the Peers and
Lords of this Realm may, and by Law of God and Man ought, to help and assist
him in Truth and Justice, notwithstanding those Oaths, etc.

Our Author calls for a proof, of the Authority of the Parliament Def. f. 34.
or States of the Kingdom, to determine the Rights of contesting Princes: As if
there were a printed Instrument of the Fundamental Constitution extant, by
which the Privileges and Powers of each part of it are limited. It Is said
before, that necessity of Government warrants this; and the same necessity
warrants their convening in order to it, without the formality of a Summons.
That Form and Method of proceeding supposes a King and Government settled, and
is one of the Rules which direct the King how he shall administer that
Government, and what are the Duties and Offices of particular persons under it:
This is above all those Forms; a necessary Means to settle the Rule it self.

However, I am pretty confident that those conversant in our ancient Histories,
and Parliamentary Records, will find reason, to carry the Power of the States
of the Kingdom farther, rather than to deny their Authority in this point. The
Claim of the D. of York 39 H. 6. is not the only instance of the thing; but it
being a very solemn and notorious one, and a full proof of this point, I will
lay it down a little more fully and in a piece, then it was for our Authors
turn to do.

Richard Duke of York 39 H. 6. comes to the Parliament, and by his Counsel,
puts in his Claim in Writing, to the Crown; deriving his Pedigree very plainly,
so as to entitle himself as next Heir by a Lineal Succession.

The Pedigree could not be unknown, to any one of the Lords, before whom the
claim was laid; yet King H. 6. having long enjoyed the Crown, the Lords say,
The matter was so high, and of such weight, that it was not to any of the
Subjects to enter into Communication thereof, without his high Commandment,
Agreement and Consent had thereunto. They thereupon go to the King opening the
Claim; He could not be put into a better condition then he was; and therefore,
had he looked upon this cautiousness of the Lords to be more than Complement, he
would never have consented to their hearing it; but he does not offer to forbid
their proceeding; tho it is certain he was sensible of the defects of his Title,
and therefore earnestly prays the Lords to examine strictly, and raise all the
Objections they could against the Duke's Title.

Then they read the Claim, and order the Judges to say what they could in
maintenance of the King's Right. They excuse themselves, say, It has not been
accustomed to call the Justices to Counsel in such matters; the matter was too
high, and touched the King's High Estate and Regalie, which is above the Law,
and passed their Learning; wherefore they durst not enter into any
Communication thereof, for it pertained to the Lords of the King's Blood and
the apparage of this Land, to have Communication and meddle in such matters.
But this was not the only reason the Judges gave for their silence; They say,
They were the King's Justices, and have to determine such matters as come
before them in the Law; between party and party they may not be of Counsel: And
this matter was between the King and the said Duke of York as two parties.

The Judges Excuse was allowed as proper, for, Counsel was not their Duty;
'twas not a matter to be adjudged by the express Laws of the Land, of which
they had the Exposition and Execution; but by something above the positive
Laws; And, they were not a part of the Parliament, that Power of determining
they had none. But the King's Attorney and other Counsel being required to do
what had been required of the Judges, the like Excuse would not be admitted
from them, for they were the King's particular Counselors, and therefore they
had their Fees and Wages: They return, They were the King's Counselors in the
Law, in such things as were under his Authority, or by Commission; but this
matter was above his authority, wherein they might not meddle: Yet they are
overruled, for 'twas their Duty to offer what they could in a Court of
Judicature in defense of their Master's Title. Then It was agreed by all the
Lords, that every Lord should have his freedom to say what he could say,
without any reporting or magre to be had for his trying. And after the saying
of all the Lords, every after other, Objections are framed against the Duke's
claim. The Duke puts in Answers to them, and often prays that the matter might
be determined. The Lords solemnly declare that the Duke's Title could not be
defeated, but agree upon the Expedient which the Chancellor proposes, desiring
the Lords, that if any of them could find any other or better means, that it
might be showed; whereupon after sad and ripe Communication in this matter had,
it was concluded and agreed by all the said Lords, that since is was so, that
the Title of the said Duke of York cannot be defeated, and in eschewing the
great inconvenience that might ensue, to take the means above rehearsed (viz.
That the King should keep the Crowns, and his Estate and Dignity Royal, during
his life, and the said Duke, and his Heirs, to succeed him in the same.) The
Lords open this Expedient to the King, and both the Parties solemnly submit and
agree to it.

From this proceeding it is very plain in the first place (which I touched upon
before) That if the Judges who made the Excuse, and Lords who admitted it, know
any thing of our Constitution, they are to judge according to the known and
written positive Laws of the Land, which prescribe the Offices and Duties of
particular persons, and to speak what their sense is; but have nothing to do
with enquiring into, or giving their Judgment upon the King's Title: They are
to put the Laws in Execution under the King: But they cannot find any Law to
condemn or meddle with the Title of the King in possession, no nor to defend
it, (being called in question in a proper place.) The Laws with which they were
entrusted, meddle not with it the one way or the other; And they declared
themselves incompetent to give any Advice or Determination in it; tho our
Author will make every particular man a competent Judge of it.

And it is as plain in the next place, That all the Parties agree the Parliament
to be proper Determiners of such a difference, (which may inform our Author,
who after erecting a Court in every private man's breast to do it, cannot find
in our Constitution any Court for that purpose.) Nay Case. f. 66.
the Judges tell you, The King and the Duke are before them as party and party:
That is, Two persons, contesting in a proper Court, for a Judicial
Determination.

The Lords think so too; They oblige the King's Counsel to appear before them,
and defend their Majesty's Right, as a part of the Service that they owe the
King, for their Fees and Wages: The Duke often presses them for their Judgment,
and at last they give it.

In the third place, I observe that this Expedient is of the Lords own finding
out, and they decree it. It Is true, in the Chancellors repeating the Opinion of
the Lords, there are the words, If he would, upon which great stress is often
laid, not only by our Author, but others; and more then the thing will justly
bear: The Chancellor says, That it was thought by all the Lords that the Title
of the said Duke cannot be defeated: That is, That none of those things
objected to it, had destroyed the Right of the Duke and his Line, for ever. And
in eschewing the great Inconvenience that may ensue, a mean was found to save
the King's Honor and Estate, and to appease the said Duke if he would, etc
(which imports no more, then that the mean they agreed upon, would be to his
satisfaction, if he would be contented with reasonable terms) This, I say, is
only the repetition of the Chancellor of the result of the Lords Debate: But
when they come to the Judgment, that is general; That the said mean shall be
taken; and this given, before any Declaration of the Consent either of the Duke
or King to it; tho afterward, upon its being opened to them, it was with great
solemnity agreed unto by them, and passed by the King into an Act of Parliament.

The very Statute of 1 E. 4. allows this Judgment to be good; and that, by
virtue of it, and the Agreement upon it, H. 6. should. have held the Crown for
his life, tho the very Right were with the D. of York: But it being part of the
Agreement that the Lords should support it, and keep, observe and strengthen,
inasmuch as appertains to them, all the said things, and resist to their
power, all them that will presume the contrary, according to their Estates and
Degrees. E. 4. gets a solemn Declaration by that Statute, that H. 6. had
attempted the breaking the Agreement, and therefore his dispossessing him was
just, etc. He thought it advisable, that the breach of the particular Agreement
about the Crown, as well as the Title it self, should be declared and settled by
Parliament: And indeed the very nature of all Acts of Recognition, and the
constant usage of them in almost every Reign, show the Expediency of some
public Declaration to the People, that they may know to whom their Obedience
is due; and imply as much as the Preamble of the Stat. 1 R. 3. speaks in
express words, which Preamble our Author quotes, because it affirms the Title
of an Usurper; (He was an Usurper, but one who made as good and wise Laws, as
any lawful King his Predecessor) That the most part of the People cannot be
sufficiently learned in the Laws and Customs which make out a Right and Title
to the Crown: And that the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, and the
People of the Land of such a Nature and Disposition, that Manifestation or
Declaration of any Truth made by the three Estates of the Realm assembled in
Parliament, and by Authority of the same, makes, before all things most
faithful and certain quieting of men's minds, and removes the occasions of
Doubts and seditious Language. This is Truth and Reason out of whose mouth
soever it comes, or for whatever End it was pronounced; and in all Justice
ought to protect every private Person in his submission to a Power acknowledged
in that manner, against all the Disturbers of the quiet of our present
Settlement.

I come now to consider the Observations he makes upon the Authorities quoted
by my Lord Coke to justify the gloss made upon the words Seigneour le Roy in
the 25 E. 3. The first is Baggot's Case. To state this matter fairly, as it
appears on the Book, the Case in short is this. Baggot brings an Assize of his
Office, etc. Ivy the Tenant pleads, Baggot was an Alien, etc. and so could not
hold the Office, etc. not being the King's Liege Subject. Baggot replies, his 9
E. 4. 7. b. 9 E. 4. 9.
Letters of Naturalization. Ivy sets forth the Act 1 E. 4. which recites at
large the Pedigree and Title of E. 4. and the Usurpation of the three Henry's,
and averrs, that the Patent was granted by H. 6. one of the Usurpers; and so
leaves it to the Court to judge whether the Patent was valid in Law: Baggot
demurrs upon this Rejoinder, and Ivy joins in demurrer. Brian, of Counsel for
Ivy* insisted, 9 E 4. 11. b.
That King E. 4. being restored in his Remitter, as Cousin and Heir of King R.
2. the Patent made by K. Henry, who was but an Usurper and Intruder, was void,
etc. I will not repeat what Baggot's Council offer, because the greatest part
of it is mentioned by our Author, as well as my Lord Case. f. 16. 9 E. 4. 12.
Coke. After hearing what was urged on both sides, the Justices say, They had
conferred with the Judges of the Common Pleas upon all the Points objected, And
they all agreed, That none of the Objections had any thing in them to arrest
the Judgment, and therefore Baggot recovered* The only Reflections I will at
present make upon this Case is, That although, what is referred unto by my Lord
Coke might be, Originally, the Argument of Baggot's Counsel only, yet surely in
a Point of such Consequence as this, the Judges would not have let these
matters pass without some Check or Censure, if they had not approved them: They
would not have given Judgment on the side of those who argued in that manner,
without distinguishing what they did agree unto, and what was not to be allowed
of, if any part of what they had laid down, had not been agreeable to the Law
and their Opinions. As Affairs then stood, there was much greater danger, that
the Judges, who owed their Offices to the Power in possession, would lessen and
vilify the Acts of the cast-off, dispossessed Prince; and that the Counsel
would be afraid of speaking up to the full, what their Cause would bear; Then
that extravagant things should be asserted at the Bar, and not only pass
unreproved from the Bench, but have the countenance of a Resolution of the
Court on their side; and that a very solemn one, upon Advice with the other
Judges; which must be singly upon that point, and not any of the others, they
not being worth the least debate or haesitation.

I think this were sufficient, but I will add this further Observation; That
there never has been in any Times since, (the Times of most undoubtedly
rightful Kings) any contradiction to this Opinion, or so much as a Quaere put
upon it. Brook in the Abridging of it, recommends it with a Nota, as a thing
worth observing. Coke, Hales, and Bridgman in Print declare this to be Law: Our
Author is the first hardy Man that has undertaken to set himself against so
generally a received Opinion: He has taken pains in it I confess; but that he
has not so thoroughly weighed it, as he ought, appears by the Answer he gives to
that part, quoted to prove, That a Pardon granted by a King out of Possession
is Case. f 24.
void: If he had read the words over carefully, he would have found they amount
to thus much in English: If 9 E 4. 2.
he that is now King, in the time of Henry VI. had made a Charter of Pardon, it
would be void even Now; for every one who grants a Pardon must be King in Fact.
These words will not admit of the Evasion of its being void in Effect only, and in
its Operation, not from a want of Authority to grant it, but of Strength to
enforce and support it. The only Judge that speaks publicly (for they were
ticklish Times, and they thought fit to act very cautiously for fear of giving
Offense) was Billing. What he says, plainly proves, what our Author elsewhere
will not admit, That the Office of King and the Royalty it self is in the King
de facto, while he is in Possession. This Billing's words, as quoted by our
Author, prove: There he gives a Reason Case. f. 16.
why the Legitimation by H. 6. should be good, viz. That it is an Act of Grace,
and it belongs to every King by reason of his Office (of which Office he took
H. 6. to be possessed) to do Acts of Justice and Grace: His other case of
Exemptions, put in the same place, proves as 9 E. 4. 2. Br. Exemp. 4.
much: For if he were not possessed of the Royalty it self, he could not make
any Grant to the Subject, either of Interest to bind his Successor, or of Ease
to discharge the Subject in the time of a succeeding Prince, from what the Law
subjects or obliges him unto.

But our Author has found an Instance, wherein it was Def. f. 41.
held, that Grants of a King de facto to the Prejudice of a King de jure, are
not valid: If I should tell him, that after the rightful Heir (at least he that
pretended to be so, and to avoid his Grant upon that ground) had agreed to
submit to him as his King for his Life, he was not an Usurper upon him; then
his Case will prove too much. But the thing it self is not to be wondered at,
that a succeeding King should find or make a Reason for the resumption of Crown
Lands. There are People abroad in the World that would have helped Henry II. to
another, viz. That the Revenues of the Crown are so far a Trust in themselves,
being given for the Support of the Government and Defense of the Kingdom, that
they are not of Right alienable.

But, to return to Baggot's Case, I agree, that the Council do not argue, or
the Judges determine (as our Author Case. f. 17.
observes) from any Statute of this Realm: There was not any such, nor any need
of one. Common Law and common Reason justified their Resolution. And if the
Reason of the Thing, and Necessity of Government determined that case to them,
where there was not any thing else to Govern it: Had not that Man need have a
great deal of Wit and Subtilty who undertakes to prove, That as plain words in
an Act of Parliament as can be devised, having the same Reason and Necessity to
enforce their being taken in their common and ordinary sense, ought to be
expounded away by the Judges into quite another thing, only to avoid their
falling in with that reasonable and convenient sense.

But this is not the only Book-case before the Statute of H. 7. which Rules our
Point in effect. When Hen. 7. had obtained an entire Victory, killed King
Richard in the Field, and was Proclaimed King, he resolved soon to call a
Parliament: One of the ends of his doing it speedily, as Lord Bacon says, was,
To have the Attainders of Bac. Hist. H. 7. f. 11.
all his Party (which were in no small number) reversed, and all Acts of
Hostility, by them done in his Quarrel, remitted and discharged: And
accordingly Acts were passed to that purpose. But before it was done, a
Question in Law was moved. Diverse of the most considerable favorers of the
King's Party, during the Reign of Richard the Third, were attainted by
Outlawries and otherwise for that cause: Or, as my Lord Bacon expresses it, His
Partakers were attainted for Offenses incident to his Service and Succor. Many
of these were Returned Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament; the Judges are
advised with upon it, who forthwith assemble in the Exchequer-Chamber, and all
agree, That the Lord Bacon ubi sup. 1 H. 7. 4. Br. Parliament 37.
Knights and Burgesses who were attainted, ought not to come to the House till
a Law were passed for the Reversal of their Attainders; nor ought to be in the
House at the time of the Reversal.

But they went further, and unanimously Resolved, That there was no manner of
Necessity to do any thing for the Reversal of the King's Attainder (who was
attainted too;) For that Eo facto, that he took upon himself the Royal Dignity
to be King, he was discharged of all Incapacities, and needed not any Act for
the Reversal of his Attainder. My Lord Bacon's Remark upon this Resolution is,
That it was A grave and safe Opinion and Advice, mixed with Law and Convenience.

Now, in this Resolution, the Judges must either take H. 7. to have a Right to
the Crown, or that he had not, but was an Usurper. That they took the former
for granted, is, I think, very plain: Or at least they must know, that the Lady
Elizabeth (whose Cause he undertook, and with whom, by Pact precedent with the
party who brought him in, he was to Marry) had so. If they did so, then they
plainly determined that a Conviction of a Man under an Usurper, for High
Treason, where the very Act of the Treason was, Adherence unto, and Attempts to
recover the Rights of the dispossessed injured Prince, still remains, even
after the Rightful Prince has regained possession of the Throne; since all
Incapacities continued upon those Loyal Men, till their Convictions were
Reversed by Parliament; That is, till a new Law was made to help them: Till
that was done, those who had the Execution of the present Laws only, could not
say other than that the Offense whereof they were convicted (which was an
Attempt against the Prince then in possession) was High Treason; and they were
still obnoxious to the Punishments the Laws inflict on Traitors; although what
they attempted was done to serve and support the Interests of the Rightful
Princes.

If the Judges took Hen. 7. to be an Usurper, yet we gain this point by their
second Resolution: They agree him to be invested with the Royal Authority by
his Assuming the Crown, and the Submission of the People: By that, his Natural
Person is changed, and so consolidated with the Politic Capacity, Plow. Com.
238. b. that every Imperfection was purged, and all the Objections that lay
either against his Person by Rich. 3. Attainder, or against his Title, which
was for ever condemned by Act Temp. H. 6.
of Parliament, removed.

And this Opinion of the Judges in Henry the Seventh's case was not the first
Instance of this kind, as appears by the Case of Hen. 6. mentioned by Townsend,
who after his Resumption of the Crown held a Parliament, though 1 H. 7. 5. b.
Br. Parliament 105.
he were before attainted and disabled; For, says the Book, all that was void
when he took the Crown upon himself.

Neither was the Notion of the Person being changed by the Assuming the Crown,
new, or framed for that particular Case: For we find that when Rich. 3. assumed
the Royal Estate upon himself (and he was undoubtedly an Usurper) it was found
necessary to make a Statute in the first Year of his Reign, That where he was
enfeoffed jointly with others to an Use, the other Cofeoffees should stand
seized to the Use; where he was sole seized, the whole Estate should be vested
in the Cestuique use; and this, because by the taking the Politic Capacity on
himself, his Natural Person was gone, and Seignior le Roy cannot stand seized to
an Use.

If the Treason of Sir William Stanley in the time of Bac. H. 7. f 134 Case. f.
3.
Hen. 7. were what my Lord Bacon, and our Author relate it to be, viz. his
saying, That if he were sure that Perkin were King Edward 's Son, he would
never bear Arms against him: It goes a very great way in the showing what the
Opinion of that time was; and that the Lawyers don't agree, that the Statute of
11 Hen. 7. has enlarged the sense of Seignior le Roy, but that they thought
'twas always the Duty of the private Subject to pay his Obedience to the
possession. This Case, I say, proves not only that it is Treason for a private
person to overrule the Title of the King that is in possession, which my Lord
Bacon deduces from the words, but it makes it Treason to refuse his Active
Obedience for the Support of that King in possession, even against him, who, he
is satisfied, has a better Right. This I am sure must be the Opinion of those
who condemned him; and the Historian in that place takes Notice that the Judges
of that time were great and learned Men, and the three Chief of them of the
Privy Council.

And to show how far the Lawgivers of that time looked upon private Subjects to
be bound up by such Acts of Government made in the time of an Usurper, as our
Author would have called Inauthoritative, null, and void, until an equal Power
have adnulled, or declared them to be so, I will refer my Author to the
Year-Book, 1 Hen. 7. f. 5. b. There he will find a special Memorandum of the
Reversal of an Act of Parliament, which Act was so false and scandalous, that,
upon Advice of the Justices it was not thought fit to recite the Matter or
Effect of it in the Act of Reversal, lest it should remain in remembrance: And
this Act was made directly against the Right of the Children of Edw. 4. to
Bastardize them; yet a special Note is made of it, That having been done by a
Parliament, there was a necessity for another Act of Parliament to take this
Scandalous Bill off from the Roll. They it seems did not look upon the private
Judgment of the Clerk of the Parliament to be sufficient to adjudge of our
Author's Nullities in themselves; though that private Judgment determined in
favor of what they looked upon to be the Right, joined with the Possession.

I come now to consider the Statute 11 Hen. 7. c. 1. the Preamble of which
declares, That the Subjects, by reason of their Duty of Allegiance, are bound
to serve their Prince and Sovereign Lord for the time being, in his Wars, for
the Defense of him and the Land, against every Rebellion, Power, and Might
reared against him, and with him to enter into Service, if the Case so require.

And that whatever the Success fall out to be, it is not reasonable, but against
all Laws, Reason, and good Conscience, that they, so going with him in his
Wars, attending his Person, or being elsewhere by his Command, should lose or
forfeit any thing, for doing their true Duty and Service of Allegiance.

Thereupon it is Enacted and Established by that Parliament, That no person from
thenceforth, that attend upon the King and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the
time being, in his person, or do him true and faithful Service of Allegiance,
shall for that be vexed or troubled, either by Act of Parliament or otherwise.

Our Author by what has been already said, will find the mistake that he is
under, when he says the Lawyers agree, That it is this Statute only, which has
extended Def. f. 5.
the words Seignior le Roy in 25 Edw. 3. to comprehend an Usurper in
possession, as King for the time being, whereas before, 25 Edw. 3. meant Lawful
and Rightful Kings only. What is already said to that purpose, will, I believe,
satisfy every one, that the Judges, who are Expositors of Statutes, and were
to put that Act in Execution, did never look upon themselves as competent for
the determining the Title of the Crown, but looked upon him to be Seignior le
Roy within that Act, who executed the Office of King, in administering Justice,
and protecting and defending the People. The end of that Statute 11 H. 7. as I
have said before, was not so much to make a solemn Declaration of the Law
(which all through it is taken for granted, as an indisputable Opinion of that
time at least) as it was to condemn the way that had too often been lately
taken, to destroy the good Effects of the Law in that particular; by making so
many revengeful Acts of Attainder upon every change. They endeavored, as far
as the Nature of the thing would admit of it, to tie up, even the Hands of
future Parliaments, from acting contrary to that easy and reasonable Rule: And
having done that, little thought they had left a Liberty to private Men to vent
their Opinions and Fancies, raise Scruples in the minds of People, and write
Books to prove that a King is no King, nor to be obeyed: And that a bare Right
to be a King, (which supposes and imports in the very terms themselves his
being dispossessed of the Throne and Office) makes him, the Only Person meant
by the words Seignior le Roy; whereas he that is in full possession of the
Office and Government, is quite out of them.

But to show our Author that the Notion was not quite new, and first introduced
by this Statute to serve a particular turn, nor the Opinion of Lawyers only, I
would refer him to a Treatise, Entitled, An Historical Account of some things
relating to the Nature of the English Government; there, f. 40. He will find
the words of a great many Historians quoted, which I will not Transcribe, all
censuring the Act of those Nobles, who, upon dislike to William Rufus that was
possessed of the Government, did endeavor to dethrone him, and advance his
Elder Brother Robert to the Throne, as an Execrable Fact, calling them
Traitorous, Perfidious, and Perjured Persons: And declaring, that they who
sided with William, were Faithful to their Earthly Lord: Though as appears in
the same page, those very Historians agreed, that Robert had manifest Right to
the Kingdom by course of Hereditary Succession.

Nay, for want of other Authorities, I would venture to make Use once more of
our Author's Act 1 Edw. 4. which not only very fully asserts, That the Usurpers
were by their Usurpation possessed of the Regal Power, Estate, Dignity,
Pre-eminence, Possession, and Lordship of England, to which purpose it was
quoted before, but goes on; By Edward the Fourth's removing Henry the Sixth
from the Occupation, Usurpation, Intrusion, Reign, and Governance of the same
Realm of England and Lordship, to the Universal Comfort and Consolation of all
his Subjects and Liege Men, plenteously joyed to be amoved and departed from
the Obeisance and Government of the Unrighteous Usurper, etc. Our Author may
with little pains learn what the import of the Term Obeisance was at that time
looked upon to be.

I confess, the Act of 11 Hen. 7. to me seems to make the most Solemn
Declaration of this, as a Rule not to be varied from, That Allegiance is due to
the King for the time being; And it is the Subjects Duty to pay it to him: And I
would desire no more from any Man, but that he would read it over attentively,
to make him a Judge between my Author and me, whether fuller words could
reasonably be thought of to silence all Opinions to the contrary: Let us see
how our Author quits himself from them.

I believe he will not rely much upon the first Objection he seems to make,
That only the enacting part of Case. f. 2^.
a Statute is Law: He brings it in with an If, and never takes it up again: so
that at present, without detaining my Reader in the Proof, that it is day when
the Sun shines, I will take it for granted, That what an Act of Parliament
recites or declares to be Law, is so. And then instead of what our Author has
set down as all that Case. f. 27.
this Statute proves; It proves thus much at least, That it is the Duty of
every private Subject, to attend and pay his Allegiance to the King in
Possession; And contrary to the Laws as they stand at present, and to all
Reason and good Conscience, even for a Parliament, whose Power cannot be
withstood, to make his so doing Penal to him.

I will agree to him, that Hen. 7. himself had not practiced Def. f. 42.
according to this Rule, but made use of the same Liberty former Kings and
Parliaments had taken, of reaking his Vengeance on those that opposed him: He
was too fond of the Crown; He would not else have set up for it, without any
Right at first: And it is not to be imagined that he, who made no scruple of
obtaining it against Right, and put off so long the making his Possession just,
when he had such an Opportunity of doing it, by marrying her who had the
undoubted Right, would make any difficulty of securing himself in that
possession by any means whatsoever: This criminates him in his Morals, proves
him to be a Man whom Interest did Rule, to the doing things which he was
convinced were against Reason and Conscience; and proves no more. Nay, I must
offer in his Excuse, that he afterward made what amends he could, by
condemning his own former ill, and using his utmost endeavors, that the poor
Subject should never be harrassed and punished at that barbarous rate more.

Can a Man be real in Objecting to a Law, agreed unto Case f. 29.
and passed by those Persons, whom the whole Body of the Kingdom thought
fittest to represent them, and to whose Integrity and Understanding they
entrusted their dearest Concerns: That it was made by an Usurper in Title, and
it is not (he determines it) for the good Case. f. 18.
of the Community: Yet such Laws as are for the Public Good, he agrees, are
valid, though passed by an Usurper. Nay, our Author goes further, and enquires,
by helps dehors as the Lawyers call it, Foreign to the words of the Act it
self, what the End and Design of the King underhand was, in procuring the
Statute; and that, he discovers to be nothing less, than to secure himself in
his Unjust Usurpation; because Perkin Warbeck happened to be up in Arms about
that time; so that he proposed to himself to secure his Title by that Act
against the House of York: And that Design shall make this Statute void, though
Perkin prove the Son of a Beggarly Jew, and the Queen, who had long before been
Crowned, and Reigned with him, had undoubtedly the true Right to the Crown.

Neither can I yet work my self up to think, That the Enacting a new Law, in a
particular Case, contrary to the purview of a precedent general one, is a total
Repeal of that Law. As for instance: Suppose in the Case of my Lord Strafford;
Because he was attainted by Act of Parliament, without Proof by two Witnesses,
and for Facts, none of which, considered singly and by themselves, amounted to
High Treason, but made a great accumulative Crime, therefore, if it had not
been for the Caution used, That the like should never be drawn into Precedent
or Example, from that time forward, a load of lesser Crimes must have grown up
into one High Treason, and the Statutes of 25 Edw. 3. etc. had stood entirely
Repealed in those points: They, for so much, having in effect been declared to
be null and Case. f 31.
invalid by a Lawful King and Parliament.

But besides this, as to his Instance of the Duke of Northumberland's Attainder
(not to mention a great many other things which hinder its amounting to any
manner of Proof of what he brings it for) I must tell him, that the Act
confirming that Attainder did not in the least contradict the Statute 11 Hen.
7. for that he was attainted upon the Statute 25 Edw. 3. without being within
any help from this Statute; And therefore his Attainder was Legal, though it
had never been declared so by Act of Parliament; though the Queen thought fit
to make matters sure, and put that in for Company, with the Attainders of
several others, who were attainted upon other accounts. The Lady Jane was never
such a Queen in possession as is within this Law, or to be accounted so: She
was, it is true, Proclaimed by some few of her Friends, and so was the late Duke
of Monmouth in the West? But did ever any one say or imagine, that such a
Possession entitled one to the Allegiance of the whole Kingdom? That is as
Extravagant on the one side, as our Author's Opinion on the other: Temper them,
and make it necessary to the obtaining such a Possession without a Just Title,
as shall claim the Duty of Subjection, That there be a quiet and peaceable
Submission to the Person who fills the Throne by the Body of the Nation, a
Recognition of him by the States, the Treasure, Power, and Strength of the
Kingdom in his hands, Public Justice administered only by those that are
commissionated by him, etc. and you will find the Golden Mean.

The Observation made by the Author, That Queen Mary was no more than
Proclaimed, when the Duke was Tried and Executed by her Authority, makes
nothing against this: She had de jure a Title, and a notorious one too, for
that the Succession was limited unto her by Name in Henry the Eighth's Acts for
the Succession, besides her being his Eldest Daughter: And I will grant to him,
that he is much in the right, when he affirms, That (at this day) the next Heir
of the Blood is actually Case. f 48. Def. f. 7.
King, and in possession, from the very moment of his Predecessor's Death, and
has a Right to the Allegiance of his Subjects from that time. I have told him
all along, though less may amount to a disturbing or disquieting him, that
there must be more than a bare Proclaiming of another to dispossess him: The
affirming of which, is not in any sort inconsistent with their Principles, who
maintain, that Submission is due to a King, who has obtained a full possession
of the Throne. So that the Author might have spared the mannerly Question he
puts to Dr. Sherlock upon this Occasion. Defense, f. 55.

His Argument is the same, Case. f. 34. King Henry the Eight having indulged
himself very greatly in the taking and dismissing of Wives, did from time to
time, according to the run of his Affections, make several Laws for the
Settlement of the Succession; and laid great Penalties on the Infringers of
those Laws, and particularly on such Persons as should Usurp upon others, to
whom, by the plain and express words of the respective Acts, the Crown was
limited and entailed: These Laws were very necessary at that time, because from
the unusual Liberty he had taken in that particular, of necessity great
ambiguities and doubts must arise concerning the several Titles, which might be
pretended to the Crown, and thence would probably ensue great effusion of
Blood, etc. as the Statutes 25 H. 8. c. 22. etc. speak.

To prevent this, he very prudently takes care to tell his Subjects, by Act of
Parliament, where their Obedience shall be paid, names the Persons in course as
they should succeed; And forbids, under the greatest Penalties, any One to
Usurp upon or Claim a Title otherwise than according to those Limitations.
These Acts (supposing that Acts of Parliament can alter the Hereditary Course
of Descent, which perhaps my Author and some few others will not agree, but I
cannot bring my self to make any doubt of) amount to no more than this: That any
who should offer to break through that Limitation, should be Usurpers, and
those that should aid and assist them therein, be Traitors. I have not yet
pretended that those who aid and abett one that has no Title, and put him into
the possession of the Throne, are innocent; or that the Act of Exalting an
Usurper to the Throne, is justifiable: All that I contend for, is, Obedience to
them after they are in quiet possession: So that these Acts make nothing for
what my Author intends to prove, or against what I propose to my self to
defend: They laid not any Obligation on Conscience contrary to the Statute 11
Hen. 7. But provided only to secure the Possession to those mentioned in that
Settlement, by making it Death for any to attempt, or assist in the breaking of
it. But I will for once suppose, those Acts had in express words Enacted* That,
if Persons contrary to those Limitations, did get into the Throne, and obtain a
full Possession of it, all those who had been Assistant unto them in their so
doing; Or who should afterward submit to them, should be punished as Traitors:
Yet this would amount to no more, than that the general precedent Law, and the
Obligation of it, was Suspended and Repealed as to this particular Instance; As
if it had in express terms said, In these particulars, when the Right of
Succession is so plainly determined to the Subject by a competent Power, that
there is no possibility of his being mistaken in it, unless he be so, wilfully:
Whoever attempts any thing contrary to them, shall not have benefit of
Indemnity from any former Laws, but the Person set up, and all his Adherents,
and those that support him in his Usurpation, shall be punished as Traitors.
This would have been so far from a total Repeal, that it would rather have been
a Confirmation of the precedent Laws in all other cases but those particular
Instances.

The same is to be said to the Oaths enjoined by those Laws of H. 8. for the
establishing the Succession: Supposing them to have laid an Obligation upon
Conscience, contrary to the general Purvieu of the 11 H. 7. for the time to
which they extended, yet the matter of them is long since ceased: And I cannot
find any Reason or Authority to prove, that a contrary provision, only for a
fixed and determinate time, does, for ever, repeal a general positive Law.

The late Oaths of Obedience in Queen Eliz. and King James's times, have left
the Title to the Crown, as general and unsettled as it was in the time of H. 7.
So that the Subjects are now obliged by Virtue of those Oaths to the true
Successors in the Kingly Power; and I think what is already said, makes it
plain, that a private Subject must look upon those who are in full and quiet
possession of the Throne, to be truly and lawfully so, till they are either
divested of the Power, or their Right condemned by those that have Authority to
do it. The word Heirs, I own is joined to Successors in these Oaths; but if
either, as the Lawyers say, Haeres dicitur ab Haereditate, or the words of
themselves, being joint, extend only to such an Heir as is a Successor, (as I
must think, till I hear better Arguments to the contrary, then I ever yet have
met with,) these Oaths will make for, not against me.

However I cannot find any contradiction between these Oaths and the Statute 11
H. 7. They do not speak Ad idem. It Is too gross to be put upon any Man at this
time of day, to say, These Oaths oblige us to any certain Person under the name
Heirs and Successors during the life of the Possessor; so that the end of these
Oaths was to put an Obligation on Conscience to prevent the Act of Usurpation,
and preserve the Government Hereditary: The Act of H. 7. supposes that settled,
and declares what a Subject is to do when it is so.

Besides I think the Lawyers generally agree it for a Rule, That it must be a
very plain Contrariety, and absolute Inconsistency, that shall effect a Repeal
of a former by a subsequent Statute, without express words of Repeal: And that
a Law being once established, with the universal consent of the whole Kingdom,
it must not be looked upon to be abrogated by any strained Construction of
general and ambiguous Words. And if this be true, I am sure the Stat. 11 H. 7.
stands yet unrepealed by any of the Laws our Author has produced against it.

I cannot but wonder to hear a private person determining, That a Statute, That
is, a Law of the Land, Case f. 36. Defense f. 47.
must be looked upon as null and invalid, in respect of the matter of it,
because in his Opinion, It establishes Iniquity, and is made, as he says, Case
f. 32. To the disherison of a lawful King, That is, a King of the Laws making.
In plain English this amounts to thus much; The Title which the King has to the
Crown, tho it belongs not to him, either by the Law of God or Nature, but by a
positive Law of the Land, can neither be wholly defeated, or abridged in part,
nor the Power or Rights of it moderated for a certain time, by as positive a
Law: This is a very Paradox, and needs a man of our Author's Learning and
industry to make it look colorable.

This and a great deal more of our Author's arguing, Case f. 37, 38, 39, 40,
41. will fall to the ground, if he will, till he proves the contrary, admit, 1.
That the word King does not necessarily import in it self, in all places, any
certain and determinate Rights and Privileges; but that the positive Laws of
the Land are Bounds unto, and may prescribe the Order and Form of legal
Ligeance, and may enlarge or abridge those Rights which the name King,
according to the natural extent and sense of the Word would have entitled the
Person unto. And 2dly, if I could prevail upon him not to lay so much stress
upon that Word, when it is joined to de jure; not suppose him still in
possession of the Office, but fairly English it, a Person who has Right to the
Office and Government, but is wrongfully put out of it.

The fallacy grounded upon the latter of these, runs through so many parts of
the Book, that more than half his arguing part might have been saved, if he he
would have stated it truly: If he would but agree to me, that the word King, is
rather a name of public Office than personal Right, there would be an end of a
great part of the Dispute. Let us turn it into Governor and see how the
Question will then stand. Whether in this Government, the Subjects are to pay
their Service and Duty to him that is in Fact their Governor, tho he obtained
the Government by unjust means, or to him who ought to be their Governor, but
plainly is not, nor has a Power to exercise any Acts of Government, either
over, or in defense of them. I am apt to think it would be an hard thing for a
man of very great parts, so much as to amuse any man, if he would state the
case so; or to persuade him, that the Duty of the person governed, has any
relation to the Right of the person, distinct from the Office. In short, That
private man goes beyond his Line who looks upon him that is out of Possession
to be his King, or acts accordingly, when the Throne is filled with a Possessor
qualified as I have before set down: And if so, the Statute 11 H. 7. implies
nothing of that Contradiction which the Case f. 53. fixes upon it.

I would not be mistaken in this, so as to have it objected to me, That I am
coming within the reach of that mischievous Position of separating the Person
and Office: It was always my Opinion that the doing it (as it has been formerly
made use of) would be in consequence very pernicious and is contrary to the
Rules of Law. The mischief of that Position is, the distinguishing between the
Kings Acts and Capacities, while he is a King and in Possession: to say some of
his Acts are those of his natural person, separated from his politic Capacity,
and upon that supposition to take a liberty of acting against his natural
Person, as supposing that distinct from his politic Capacity. This appears to
be the Mischief, by what is quoted out of Calvin's Case; where it is said, That
Ligeance Defense f. 25.
is due to the natural Person of the King, which is ever accompanied by the
politic Capacity, and the politic Capacity as it were appropriated to the
natural Capacity; and it is not due to the politic Capacity only, that is, to
the Crown and Kingdom distinct from his natural Capacity. And by the Act of
Uniformity, which declares it a Traiterous Position, to take Arms by the King's
Authority against his Person: This shows, that the ill of the distinction
condemned there, lies in the separating the Capacities when they are really
joined; that is, when the natural Person is in possession of the Kingly Office:
to set him up to fight against himself, his own Authority against his Person;
this is contrary to Law, which, as it appears before, consolidates the natural
Person with the politic Capacity. I am so far from denying this, that it is
the ground whereupon I take Obedience to be due to a King de facto: But the
mischievous part does not at all reach our Case, where we suppose him, who has
a Right to be King, to be utterly dispossessed and divested of the Office, and
the Right of the Possessor solemnly recognized by the Body of the People:
There, it is not a nice distinction that separates between the Capacities, but
evident Fact and Truth, common Sense, and the Laws of the Land; and to the
Person, as a Person divested of the Office, Allegiance is not due. That it was
a very great wrong unjustly to divest the Person of the Office, and put another
into it, cannot be doubted; and it is a part of that wrong, that he is thereby
divested of that which makes the Relation between him and the People, that of
right ought to be his Subjects, and pay him Allegiance; but till he reunite the
Office to his Person, the wrong remains, and the Relation during that time
fails.

It may be very well maintained, that the Statute 11 H. 7. shall have all the
Effect and Operation the plain Words of it will reasonably bear; and yet none
of those dismal Breaches upon the Constitution, and Calamitous Consequences set
forth, Case f. 38. attend it.

That the Fundamental Constitution of England is a Monarchy, and that settled
antecedently to any Statute Law, will be very readily agreed to him by me: But
he goes a little too fast when he infers thence, That therefore there must of
necessity be some certain person in every Age, in whom the Constitution vests a
Right; by virtue of which, he is lawful and rightful King of this Realm: For
it is not of absolute necessity that the particular Race and Family should be
part of that Fundamental Constitution.

May it not be rationally supposed that the Framers of our Government proceeded
by degrees; first, debated what the form of the Government in general should
be; and fixed upon a Monarchy: What kind of Monarchy would make another step,
and I will suppose that, to prevent the ill effects of Ambition and canvasing
for it, they agreed, it should be an Hereditary one, such as should be governed
by the course of descent, not elective: This in common sense it must be
presumed they did, before they came to fix upon certain Persons or Families,
into whose hands they should put the Government: Nay it is impossible to
maintain our Government to be a limited or mixed Monarchy in its nature, without
such a supposition: so that I cannot by any means look upon the particular
Family to be any part of the Original and Fundamental Constitution; but at
most, only a secondary one, a putting the Constitution that they had agreed
upon into Act and Execution: And therefore it may very well be, for any thing
that I can find in reason to the contrary, That the Government may fall into
the hands of persons, that have no relation to the Line of the Princes first
submitted unto, who shall yet have a Right by virtue of the Fundamental
Constitution.

Our Author has almost yielded me this in his first Case f. 2.
Preliminary: But to vary that instance a little: Suppose during the Life of
him that should happen to be the last of the Race of our Princes, He and his
Parliament should agree, that after his death another Person and his Race
should succeed to the Throne according to the directions and Measures
prescribed by the present Laws, would any body question his right to succeed?
The Fundamental Government would be still the same; A mixed Monarchy according
to the present Constitution: And I cannot persuade my self that in the
Constitution it self, the interest of the particular Family was so highly
regarded, as that the one must necessarily fall with the other. Our Author
indeed I find thinks, that because Hereditary is joined to Monarchy, Defense f.
12.
when once it falls to another Family, the Monarchy is gone. An Estate in
Fee-simple has this Quality, that it is an Estate of Inheritance: That is, an
Hereditary Estate: If therefore the possessor transfer it to a Stranger, must
the Estate be gone? suppose Hereditary should be expounded in the one case as
well as the other, to signify such an Estate as will of its own nature descend
to Heirs, and vest in them a Title if the Descent, be not interrupted, by such
methods as the Law allows of: And be looked upon, to be set in opposition to
Elective in the one case, and an Estate determinable upon the death of the
Party in the other.

I confess I should think it an exceeding of their Power, for a King and
Parliament to turn this Government into a Commonwealth; for they act under the
present Frame and Constitution: Whenever that is dissolved, they have no longer
a right to act as Representatives of the People; so that they cannot, for them
submit to a new form of Government. To the doing any thing of that kind, there
must be first a dissolution of the present Frame, and then, either all must
join in the erecting a new one, or they must, after they are reinstated in the
Liberty which they had by nature, agree upon some method of being represented,
and delegate their Right and Power to such Representatives. This shows that
this opinion does not offer at the warranting a subjection to any Usurper, but
such an one as is in possession, under the form the present Constitution
allows. All others, not agreeable to this Frame of Government, are in, above or
beside the Law, and consequently have not Right to Legal Allegiance, which is
the result of the present Constitution, and of Laws made for the preservation
of that. Such a Power may hold me in subjection as a conquered Man or a Slave,
and for the obtaining my Life or Freedom, I may anew stipulate with them; and
from that time they may justly claim my Allegiance by virtue of that
stipulation: I may stipulate anew, I say, if my former allegiance obstruct it
not: But that may very well fall out to be the case, for till there is an
entire dissolution of the Government (whether that must be done by the
agreement of all who have an interest in it, or that a majority will determine
the rest) I own that Allegiance is due from every private Man some where; And I
am sure I may, without contradicting any thing I have hitherto said, fix the
right to it in the Person of the King de jure, where the Kingly Office is not
exercised by any other: But where another is possessed of the very Kingly
Office, which is wrought into the Constitution it self, and he puts in
execution all the same Laws by which rightful Kings ought to govern; to that
Office, and the Person possessed of it, my Allegiance is by those Laws due, and
no Law makes me a Judge of the King's Title.

And it was upon this Ground undoubtedly that my Lord Chief Justice Hales (who
plainly held the Law in the Case of the Statute 11 H. 7. to be as I now
maintain it) would never try any Treason or other Offenses against the State,
as our Author says, while he was Case, f. 4.
Judge under Cromwell.

But to return: What if I should suppose, (as some wise Men have affirmed) that
when our Ancestors heretofore submitted to a certain Family, to take away
occasion of Factions and making Parties, they confined the Crown to that
Family, but did not so strictly oblige themselves to him who should be next in
Course of descent; but that the States of the Kingdom, who represent and
include the body of the whole People, if they found him absolutely unqualified
and unfit for the Government, might skip over him, still keeping to some of
that Line. (And since what the Original Frame of our Constitution was, is not
derived to us with any certainty, by History or Authentic Records, that may
well be supposed to be our Constitution, if constant Practice and Usage, till
very lately, be a probable proof of Right in things where the positive Rule is
lost.) If this were the case, what would then become of the Supposition of a
certain Person, always lawful and rightful King, by Virtue Case f. 8. 38.
of the Original Constitution, etc. But not to rely upon this, I must take
leave to believe what I touched upon before, That it was the Form of the
Government it self, of which our Ancestors, who framed it, were so fond, and
not of the particular Person or Family; tho they were by that Form to have the
greatest Trust and best Share (comparing them with particulars, not the whole
Body) in it: And therefore I am fully satisfied, as I said before, that the
very Fundamental Constitution may remain, tho the Family should be changed by a
Competent Power; and that no Injury or Injustice is done them thereby, since
their Right was given them only by positive Laws, and may therefore be taken
away again by the same means: And if so, after all our Author's Labor, the
Statute 11 H. 7. does no ways break in upon our Constitution. If our Author
would but explain the words King de jure, as I have all through this Paper
pressed him to do, we should easily rid the Stat. 11 H. 7. of the Contradiction
which he supposes Case, f. 39
it implies.

A King de jure has a Right to something, as he says; that something is the
possession of the Throne, which will consequently draw the Royalties and
Revenues of that, with the Allegiance of the Subject. But till he attains that
Possession, in virtue of which the Right to those Royalties, Allegiance, etc.
belongs to him, he must content himself without them.

And the same Answer serves to his other Objection, That this Statute is
against the Law of Nature, which Case, f. 40.
our Author from that Huddle of Inconsistencies. Calvin's Case, says, makes
Faith, Obedience, and Ligeance, due to the lawful King, etc. and some parts of
'em indispensable, and not to be transferred.

It is not worth the while to argue any thing from Calvin's Case, the Authority
of which can never be of advantage to either side, because there is scarce any
one Proposition (unless it be the very point adjudged) advanced through that
whole Case, as it is reported by my Lord Coke, but what may be answered (that
is, contradicted) by something else of the same Author in the same Case; but to
consider according to reason, as much of it as our Author makes use of. I will
not dispute at present but that Obedience to Governors is due by the Law of
Nature; that is, That the Law of Nature does extend it self to Civil Societies
when they are framed; and in general obliges such as are in the Condition of
Subjects, to pay their Governors all that Duty, which, according to the Frame
of their Government and Laws, is necessary to the Maintenance and Welfare of
that Society: Other natural Allegiance there is none; nor does the Law of
Nature (tho our Author affirm the contrary, without offering any Proof or
Reason for it) lay before the Subject any certain Duties which they are to put
in practice, whether the particular Laws of the Realm enjoin them or not, and
such as no human Authority can dispense with, as long as they stand in the
Relation of Prince and Subject. This is a very wild Notion, and can have no
Foundation in Reason: Take away the Relative Terms of Prince and Subject, and
suppose that a Nation submits to a particular Person after this manner: He
shall have Rule over them, and govern according to such particular Rules, as
then are, or with their consent afterward shall be agreed upon, and none
other. Is not all the Freedom which they had by Nature, but their being obliged
to submit to the putting those Rules in execution, left with them, and
unsubmitted; May not any positive Law afterward alter, enlarge, or abridge
those measures of Obedience and Submission, which were the Creatures of
positive Law at first? It may be said, it will be inconsistent with the name of
King to have no Allegiance due to him. I would ask the Objector, Which is more
reasonable, that a Notion, the Pedantry of affirming positively what the
natural Sense of a Term is, should have Power over, and render insignificant,
or repeal the plain Words of an express Law; or that the Law should for once
frame a new, tho it may be an improper Sense, for the Terms, and overruled the
Grammarian? If the Law should in express words say, That he that has a just
Title to the Crown shall be styled King de jure while he is out of Possession,
(tho that is not so, nor is that name ever allowed him till he is restored:)
And he that is in Possession King de facto; that during the time of his
Possession a temporary Allegiance shall be paid by the People to him, and not
to the King de jure: I think common Sense will say, that there is no
inconsistency in this, unless the words King de jure are so very Sacred, that
they cannot lower their Signification, to a positive Law, but must eternally
carry with them one and the same extent of Power and Exercise of Authority.

That the Law of Nature obliges a Man to make Restitution for Injuries done, I
agree, but that must be out of what is his own, without Injury to another;
else, having robbed one, and having nothing of my own wherewith to make him
Reparation; I might rob another to do it: So in the present Case, If I have
been accessory to the unjust dispossessing the rightful Prince, nature obliges
me to make him what recompense I justly may: But if it fall out, that nature
does not at all intermeddle with determining what particucular Persons have a
Right to the Government, Or make one Man King, the rest his Subjects, but that
the Case f. 40.
Relation between the Persons governing, and to be governed, and the measures
of Protection and Obedience thence flowing, are of positive Institution, and
the Effect of the particular Laws of the Land: And if the Laws of the Land have
so fixed the Duty of my Allegiance to the King in Possession, that, acting in
the condition of a private Subject, I cannot withdraw it from him, without a
breach of those Laws, without taking from him what the Law has given him a
Right unto: The Law of Nature cannot oblige me to that; nor has the dispossessed
Prince any Right by the Law of Nature to claim or exact that satisfaction from
me; so that the Statute 11 H. 7. does not at all thwart or contradict the Law
of Nature, or any Duty in dispensibly incumbent on the Subject by it.

This Consideration will indeed aggravate the Injustice of my contributing
toward such an Usurpation, and make People that have any sense of Religion,
very cautious how they venture upon doing a thing of that kind; where the very
Act of doing the thing, puts it out of their Power to wipe out any part of
their former Sin, by an endeavor to make Reparation, without their contracting
a new Guilt.

Our Author compares the case of Obedience due Case f, 23.
to the King, with the Case of the Subject, as to the Protection which the King
is obliged to give him: These, I agree, are very fitly considered together, as
mutually explaining and proving one the other. Let us see whether the reason of
that Case will not fully come up to the proof of what I am endeavoring to make
out.

The King is obliged to maintain his Subjects in their Rights and Properties
not only while they are in possession, but also, when another has disseized
them by fraud or violence: True, he is to do the latter (which carries a
resemblance to the case in question) as well as the former: But it must be,
according to the measures, and pursuing the methods the Law prescribes. Where a
subject is disseized, Law is to precede force: There must be a decision by a
proper Judge in his favor, before there be a restoring him to his possession:
Till that be done, he is to quiet and defend the Possessour in the Possession,
though gotten by fraud and injustice: The King himself, to whose Wisdom and
Authority the Constitution has entrusted so much, cannot by virtue of all that
Power do the greatest or least of his Subjects that Right, which, he in his
private Capacity undoubtedly knows belongs, and that the Law ought to adjudge
to him; and shall we then say, that, in the Kings case, a private Man, to whom
the Law has given no manner of Authority to judge of any ones Title, shall take
upon him, by force, to attempt the unsetling a King, who is quietly Possessed
of the Government, because he thinks another man has a better right? Is it not
more agreeable to the Comparison our Author has made, and to the Reason of
Mankind, That where there is a National Submission, in a Parliamentary way, to
the Possessour of the Throne, Every pretender to impeach that Settlement, ought
to wait for a Declaration of his Right by the States of the Kingdom, till which
is done, Particular Subjects, ought, with regard to common Safety and Peace, to
acquiesce under the Power from which they receive Protection, and to which, by
their Representatives, they have Submitted.

I own there may fall out very hard cases sometimes, upon these grounds, and
such Objections as will not receive an easy Answer: But I am sure it will be
very easy to maintain, That the mischiefs will be less in themselves, and
likely to fall out seldomer, than by allowing every Subject a Liberty to
embroil the State, upon a pretense that the Government is not in the hands it
ought to be.

In matters of this kind in a mixed Monarchy, there will be some difficulties in
the Theory, that are unanswerable. The notion of a mixed monarchy it self, will
not bear a strict disquisition: For, granting that of necessity there must in
all Governments be some last resort for the final determination of all
differences (which will seem a very reasonable proposition) any Man may
immediately run it up to a Tyranny or Popular Government.

If the last resort and final determination of Right or Wrong between the King
and People, should be agreed to be in the King; notwithstanding all the Laws
now enacted, he may when he pleases (in Theory) make his Will the sole Law: For
whenever he is minded to attempt it, after the matter's running through other
hands, it comes at last to him to give the Rule, which is the gaining of his
point. So on the other side, if the People are the ultimate Resort, and sole
Judges of the Rights of their Prince, of necessity their determinations must be
obeyed, though they determine against his true Right. And that will in
consequence prove the Government no Monarchy, though he be in Possession, and
carry the name of King, there being a Power superior to him, and to which he
is accountable for his Actions. If both Prince and People are to join in it,
and they differ in their Sentiments, there is no determination, and
consequently uncertainty and confusion.

This is the natural consequence of driving up these notions to their height:
But this is not therefore every day the case: There is a good old saying, that
will interpose to save us: Ipsae res nolunt male administrari. This will,
notwithstanding all those fine notions, keep both the Parties from attempting
successfully any thing extravagant, and utterly inconsistent with that mixture
of Power, by which we are ruled, so much to our ease and advantage, though that
mixture of Power cannot be maintained in strict reasoning. I say all this to
this purpose: I find it is strongly objected to what I have advanced (viz. That
a private Subject after a solemn submission of the Kingdom to an Usurper in
Title, ought not to attempt the restoring the King de jure, till there be some
solemn decision in his favor, the Power of which I have placed in the States
of the Kingdom) That this way of applying to the Parliament for Justice, and
making their Claim there, may be prevented by the Usurper's not admitting the
States of the Kingdom to meet, or receive such Claim, etc.

If I should grant that they have no Power of meeting to that purpose, without
the consent of the Usurper (which I do not;) and so, that this is a defect in
our Laws, and one of the cases against which a certain Remedy is unavoidably
wanting in a mixed Monarchy; yet I may venture to say, That if the right of the
dispossessed Prince be apparent, all the Attempts of the Usurper to suppress
it, will at long run prove unsuccessful. We see the Parliament of H. 6. and
Convention of 1660. did find Opportunities of doing right to the injured
Prince; and without them the People, whether they ought or no, is one case; but
I think I may venture to say they will not long bear it.

If Usurpations do put us under these great Difficulties, the natural Influence
that the Consideration of that will have, is, that the Nation will submit unto
and suffer but very few of them; and it is a very unlikely thing, that the
Rightful Prince should be turned out without great Misadministrations. But
after all, I think no one need be ashamed of owning it to be his Opinion, That
if it should unhappily fall out to be the Case, that one of that Family to whom
the Crown was at first limited, should be injuriously dispossessed of that
Crown; and the restoring him to it, could be compassed by no means, but such as
would lay a Foundation for daily Disturbances and Civil Wars in future Reigns,
that that Person's Right which was given him by the Laws, ought not to be set
in Competition with the Laws themselves, and the Peace and Quiet of the whole
Body of the People.

The Consequences which our Author draws from his Supposition, that Cromwell
had been made King (which I confess would have been very mischievous and
intolerable) move me not at all. In the first place; notwithstanding what he
affirms, That it was almost come to a Conclusion that he should take that Title
upon him. I cannot grant that there was any likelihood of his being a King in
Possession, entitled to the Protection and benefit of this Law. Perhaps he
might have made an Interest in some of the Army (though most People believe the
fear of their falling off from him, kept him from it) to have proclaimed him;
and in the House of Commons, or Parliament as they called themselves, to have
submitted to him. But I have before said, a bare proclaiming one King will not do
the business, for then we may have as many Kings de facto as there are Rabbles
of People in the Nation: But to make one who had no visible Right before, such
a King de facto as may claim a Temporary Allegiance from the People, he must
have not only the Power of the Nation in his Hands, and the Administration of
Justice in his Name; but (what Cromwell, as he had been forced to manage
matters for the getting himself into that monstrous lawless Power he enjoyed,
could never have obtained,) the Submission of the remaining parts of the
Constitution, the Lords and Commons, to him as their King and Governor. Till
that is done, I know no Obligation any private man is under of paying
Allegiance to such a King, never having by himself or his Representatives,
submitted to him. As on the other side, when that is done, and I receive the
benefit of Protection from him, till his Possession which protects me is lost;
or the Submission which was made for me revoked and undone by an equal Power: I
know nothing that can justify my thinking my self wiser and more knowing than
my own and the whole Peoples Representatives; and from such an overweening
Opinion of my self, endeavoring the Disturbance or Subversion of a Government
well and fully settled.

But why in the second place should such Suppositions of what may be, be used
as Arguments: May we not from the Observation, That no instance like that did
ever yet happen to set Conscience so upon the Rack, reasonably attribute some
share in the Guidance of those Affairs to the Providence of a good God, who
hitherto has; and, as we have reason from that Experience to hope, (unless by
our Unthankfulness we draw the contrary on our selves) will still continue to
deliver us from such Difficulties and Snares.

If all those Advantages which our Author reckons up, would have followed his
obtaining the Crown, and if it was in his Power to have taken it when he had
pleased, Does not the neglecting those Advantages seem to proceed from an
Infatuation, as if Providence had determined against him? And ought not that
rather to strike an Awe and Reverence on the Minds of all People toward their
present Majesty's Persons and Government; every step of whose Undertaking and
Progress till their Advancement to the Throne, seems to be a Series of
Providence; and the Effects of whose Government are such, as a Man need not
stand in fear of being taxed with Impiety, if he attribute the Cause of them
immediately to God's own Hand.

Before our Author comes to Answer Objections, (which I Will not meddle with, but
leave them to shift for themselves) he produces Two Arguments to prove his
Assertion, and it would be unjust not to take notice Case, f. 48.
of them. The first I have granted already, and it makes nothing against me.
The second I will but just mention, and leave the Reader to make his own
Observations upon it. It Is the difficulty of knowing Case f. 53.
who is a King in Possession: It were a great hardship to put the determining
that upon the Judgment of ordinary Subjects, Persons of mean Understanding; and
therefore for that Reason their Allegiance shall not be due there; but it is
nothing to require it of the same Persons, that they be perfect Masters of our
Fundamental Constitution, and the Pedigree of the Royal Family, that they know
Who it is Case, f. 56
in whom the Crown is vested, deemed, and judged hy the Law: These are things
more obvious to them than what they see and feel every day.

This, Sir, I think sufficient to be said to what is urged from the Laws of the
Land in the Case or Defense, as far as they concern the Position I undertook to
maintain. Perhaps the Reader may think I have copied the Author's Pattern, in
offering things which seem to prove more than the Question, according to the
strictness with which I have stated it, required: I am not sensible that I have
omitted the taking notice of any one Argument that is materially offered from
the Laws, in conttradiction to my point; I am sure if I have, it was past over
for want of taking notice of, not by design, as what I thought could not
receive an Answer.

But, Sir, when I have said this, I must bespeak all the favorable Allowances
your good Nature can give, to what I have written, to the ill handling a good
Cause, that would have born a much better Defense in the substantial Parts of
it; and more, to the Faults that I have been guilty of in the manner of it: An
ordinary Reader would hardly pardon the latter, because he will think a little
care might have avoided them; and I am sensible how guilty I am of the worst of
that kind, abundance of Repetitions; which must be tedious and uneasy. All the
excuse that I can offer for my self is, that the manner of writing in the way
of Reflection, (which obliges me often to take notice of the same Arguments used
to different purposes) and not as an entire Discourse, has made that
unavoidable. And, Sir, you know I have not had time enough allowed me to make
it short: Whose Fault that is You can best tell: And therefore, whatever others
do, you in Justice must excuse,

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

Books lately Printed for William Rogers.
A Sermon Preached at White Hall before the Queen on the Monthly Fast Day,
September 16. 1691. 4 to.

A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
Eighth Edition. 12 mo.

Both by his Grace John, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

A Sermon Preached on the 28th of June, at St. Andrews Holbourn, by John Moor,
D. D. Bishop of Norwich Elect, when he took his leave of that Parish. 40.

A Sermon Preached at St. Mary le Bow, on Sunday the 5th of July 1691. at the
Consecration of the Most Reverend Father in God John, Lord Archbishop of York,
and the Right Reverend Fathers in God, John, Lord Bishop of Norwich, Richard,
Lord Bishop of Peterborough, Edward, Lord Bishop of Gloucester; by Joshua
Clarke, Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of
Norwich. 40.

The Necessity of Serious Consideration, and Speedy Repentance, as the only way
to be safe both living and dying. By Clement Elis Rector of Kirkby in
Nottinghamshire. 80.

Sir VV. Petty's Political Anatomy of Ireland. 80.

The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, Stated and resolved
according to Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England,
with a more particular Respect to the Oath lately Enjoined of Allegiance to
their Present Majesty's King William and Queen Mary. The 6th Edition. 4 to.

A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, in Reply to
an Answer to a late Phamphlet Entitled Obedience and Submission to the Present
Government, demonstrated from Bishop Overal's Convocation book; with a
Postscript in Answer to Dr. Sherlock's Case of Allegiance etc. 4 to.

A Sermon Preached at White Hall before the Queen on the 17th of June 1691.
being the Fast day. 4 to.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death, the fifth Edition. 80.

A Practical discourse concerning a Future Judgment, 80. (will be Published in
a few days)

These five by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the
Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesty's.

LICENSED,

October 10. 1691. J. Fraser.

ERRATA
Page 11. Line 16. for Nation read Notion. p. 30. l. 1. read so that. p. 30. l.
14. for trying r. seying. p. 31. l. 23. for Majesty's, r Matters.


