REFLECTIONS UPON THE CONDUCT OF THE King of Great Britain In the late WARS.
Contained in a LETTER from a Subject of One of the Confederated Princes, to a
Friend in HOLLAND.
Done into English.
SIR,
SInce in renewing the Correspondence between us, which has so long a time been
interrupted you are fallen upon the subject of the Affairs of Europe, and
particularly touching the share that the King of Great Britain has had therein
for some late years, which has given you occasion to take some freedom in
making reflections upon the Conduct of that Prince; I do not doubt but you now
reciprocally expect my Sentiments upon this Matter, which by consequence I will
give you, with the same liberty, but also with all the impartiality, that an
honest Man can have in judging of the actions of others, and much more of those
of Great Princes. You may easily imagine, I know nothing of the Articles of
that Treaty of Alliance you speak of, between the said King and Spain, and I
must confess to you, that the Author of the Reflections upon that Treaty, seems
to have found a fine matter for the exercising of his Pen. But as amongst all
the sportings of his Wit, the severest Remark he makes, seems to me to be in
the Paragraph where he blames that King for not having endeavored to put a
stop to the course of the Victories of France when it lay in his Power; and for
having contributed more than any Other to the Greatness of France: it does
likewise concern us Allies, for the measures we are to take, to judge soberly.
If this imputation can be justly charged upon that Prince, it is then very
true, that to take the thing in general, it is difficult not to lay the blame at
His Door, for not having taken the part of the Allies before the Peace, and
that this seems to justify Our Resentments against Him. However, to give them
so much the more ground, if they are just, let us consider what time in the
course of Affairs could be assigned to Him for the entering into War; and to
decide that question in general, it seems it ought to have been either when the
Interest of His Nation, or His own Honor, or the Necessity of the Allies began
to exact it. Now as for the Interest of His Nation, and principally of His
Great City of London, methinks that King could not have chosen a better Policy,
than after being got out of the War, wherein He had left His Neighbors
engaged, to keep His People as long as He could in Peace, and in a state of
enjoying alone the Commerce of Europe, and advantage which We know was envied
them with anguish by you Hollanders, and which made you so impatient to engage
England in a War as well as your selves, even before the Honor of that King
obliged Him to it, or He was pressed to it by the Necessity of the Allies. As
for the Honor of His Majesty, what could He desire more glorious, than to see
Himself the Sole Mediator, and when He pleased, the Arbitrator of the Affairs
of Europe, to receive the Differences and Addresses of all other Pinces, and in
short, to have it in His Power to re-establish a sure and Honorable Peace,
when He thought convenient, either by His own sole Authority; or by joining His
own Forces to it, when it should be necessary to employ them for that purpose:
this Case of Necessity being the sole one, which could change the
Considerations of the Honor of His Majesty, and the Interest of His Nation.
We Have now to examine at what time it began, when it was pressing, and how far
we may impute to the Prince we speak of, the having failed in what all these
Considerations together Counseled Him to do. We shall easily agree, that while
Our Forces were sufficient, not only to defend us, but even to attempt upon
France, it would not have been handsome for us to have proposed to that King to
have engaged Himself contrary to the Interest of His Nation. Now it is manifest
that during the three first Campaigns, at least after the Peace between His
Majesty and Holland, We were in that posture, which may be easily made appear
by looking back upon the events of those Campaigns. Certain it is that at and
after the Battle of Seneffe, in the Year 1674: the Forces of France were
worsted and continued in the weakest condition, the Prince of Conde was obliged
to retire beyond the Sambre; and the Army of the Confederates was then in a
posture of laying Siege to Oudenarde; and though the Prince of Conde made an
effort to come suddenly to its relief, he would in all probability have been
repulsed, if the Count de Souches, General of the Imperial Army, would have
come up in time according to the Advice of the Prince of Orange, of which His
Highness made great Complaints to the Emperor, and several of the Principal
Officers of the Army refused to serve any longer under this Count, which
obliged the Emperor to to take away his Commission. The Armies of the Allies
were likewise much the stronger upon the Rhine that same Campaign; the Elector
of Brandenbourg took his Winter Quarters in Alsatia, from whence Monsieur de
Turenne was obliged to retire and go to Paris; and though by an admirable
Diligence and Conduct, he returned the same Winter, and constrained the Forces
of the Elector to repass the Rhine, which he likewise passed himself in order
to the Campaign of 1675. This however having been his last and fatal Year,
General Montecuculi repulsed and pursused his Army, diminished by above half,
to the other side of the said River, and laid Siege to Saverne: and though when
the Prince of Conde (who was sent to save the Ruins of that Army, and give
reparation to the Affairs of France) approached him, he raised the Siege, yet
indeed it was only to triumph over that Prince, and to drive him before him as
far as he pleased, after which when it seemed he might have made some good use
of his advantage, he attempted nothing farther before their going into
Winter Quarters. On the other side the total rout of the Marshal de Crequi by
the Forces of the Dukes of Lunenburg, and the recovery thereupon of the City of
Treves out of the hands of the French, had reduced their Affairs into that
condition, that His Most Christian Majesty found not a more present remedy,
than to have recourse to His Arricreban, which was likewise beaten by the Duke
of Lorrain, the Elector of Brandenbourg having besides so gloriously freed his
Country from the Swedes and the Duke of Lunenburg and Bishop of Munster having
stripped them of all they possessed in the Duchy of Bremen, except the City of
Staden; Denmark having likewise taken part in the War, whereby the Sweeds
remained altogether unable to defend themselves, and much less to assist
France, the Forces of the Allies began to be formidable to it, and found
themselves capable in the Campaign of 1676, to attempt at the same time the two
Sieges of Maestricht and Philipsbourg. But as the most of 'em saw themselves in
a fair way of making Conquests, Jealousy began to rise up among them, each
Party fearing that his Neighbor would have too good a share therein, the
Disputes for the Dividend having delayed the taking of Staden, and the succors
which were to have come to the Prince of Orange, of the Troops which blocked up
that Place, were the causes that this Prince was obliged to raise the Siege of
Maestricht, during which the French had time to take Air from the Spaniards.
Hitherto we all thought our selves uppermost in our Affairs, which I might
easily demonstrate by things that passed openly in the Congress of Nimeguen,
which it was clearly to be seen by all the World, that the Most Christian King
aimed at nothing but securing His Honor by a Peace that might have given us
satisfaction. But after the misfortune of Maestricht, the Hollanders began to
fear with more apprehension what afterward happened, namely, That the
remissness and different interests of the German Princes, the weakness of
Spain, and the diligence of the French, the Spanish Low Countries would be
swallowed up in spite of all the Forces of the Confederates. Yet as by the
taking of Philipsbourg the Power of the Emperor was augmented, by that of
Staden the Princes of Lunenburg and of Munster had their Hands free, that they
promised a good and sincere Correspondence; and as there were great hopes
conceived from the Zeal and good Conduct of the Duke of Lorrain, who commanded
the Imperial Army, the Power of the Allies seemed still vigorous and
formidable. But as the Most Christian King, by his usual diligence, began the
Campaign of 1677. with the Sieges of St. Omer and of Cambray at the same time,
before any Army of the Allies could or would appear, except that of the States,
and the Prince of Orange being netled with the reproaches of the Spaniards,
that he did but eat up their good Land of Waes, while he saw two of their Towns
besieged, out of a generosity which filled them with admiration, hazarded both
his Army and Person for the relief of St. Omers, but without any other success
than what might be expected from an Army inferior in Forces to that it
attacked, which was likewise powerfully succored by that of the Kings insomuch
as the above mentioned Places and the Town of Valenciennes were thereupon taken
by the French, and afterward the Prince of Orange was obliged to quit the
Enterprise of Charleroy, by a laudable and necessary prudence not to hazard
once again all the Forces the States had left for their defense. On the other
side it was evident that it was impossible for the Duke of Lorrain, and would
be always so for the Imperialists to make any great Invasion into France, or to
execute any considerable Enterprise elsewhere, while the French should content
themselves with acting upon the defensive with a sufficient Army. I must
confess it was in that juncture our Affairs began to stand in need of some
powerful intercession of the Prince whose Conduct we are considering, and it is
from what passed since in England, that we are principally to judge of his
intentions.

The Parliament had been a long time making him Addresses to recall his Troops
out of the service of France; and though His Majesty suffering at the same time
Six Regiments of His Subjects in Holland, and being to keep his Neutrality as
Mediator, did at first only forbid by His Proclamations any new Troops from
passing into France, He recalled them at length, and they returned very much
diminished in number, and misused as is well known. But as this was but the
least remedy to our evils, and the Parliament had more warmly taken the Alarm,
in the beginning of the Campaign 1677, Those Gentlemen were of Opinion that it
was time to make some Paces toward a War, and prayed the King in their
Addresses to fortify himself with Alliances against France. Hereupon to our
misfortune, which will be found theirs likewise at the end of the account,
Jealousies began to break out between the King and His Parliament. His Majesty
demanded of them a Sum of 600000 l. Sterling, as necessary for the putting him
in a posture of speaking and acting as became him. Those Gentlemen gave him
only credit for 200000 Pounds with general promises of assisting him after he
had made His Alliances. His Majesty imagined that the course they took was an
encroachment upon his Prerogatives, and upon that Prorogued from time to time
their Assembly, until the beginning of the Year 1678. In the mean while, after
the end of the aforementioned Campaign of 1677, He called his Nephew the Prince
of Orange into England, for the Personally concerting Affairs with him, and
gave him in Marriage the Lady Mary, against the will, as was believed, of the
Duke of York, that Princesses Father, which methinks is a sufficient testimony
that this King withdrew himself entirely from France, and it has not been
doubted but that the French so understood it. His Majesty made likewise
thereupon an Alliance with your Republic, and at the assembling of the
Parliament, communicated to them these things, with promises if they would arm
him sufficiently to enter into a War, he would never be at rest until he had
re-established a Peace in Christendom, which any one Prince should not be
capable of disturbing. Those Gentlemen thereupon presented him an Address,
wherein giving him still only general promises of assistance, they desired him
to make new Alliances, engage all his Allies not to make any Peace, but upon
the foot of the Treaty of the Pyrenees, nor to have any Commerce with France,
nor to suffer the Ships of any Nation to enter or go out of the Ports of that
Kingdom. This Proposition which was very remarkable gave different motions to
those it concerned. Most of the Allies took Courage seeing the assurance and
resolution with which those Gentlemen spoke. It gave astonishment to you in
Holland, where you were not desirous to embark in a long War, and were content
with a Peace of less safety, and your profound Dreamers in Policy did already
imagine that the English might carry their Arms as far as formerly into France.
But it was very displeasing to the King as may be seen by the answer he made
thereto, which was found very rational, and wherein after his Arguments, he
presses them again to hasten their assistance of Money as the time required.
But there still passed a Month or more before they completed the Resolution
for Money to raise Forces. By that time the French had made themselves Masters
of Ghent, and were in a condition of proceeding much further, before the
Succors that were preparing in England could hinder them. The Holl^nders
seeing none of their Allies ready, some refusing to March, their own Forces
being for the greatest part in the Spanish Towns, from whence they could not
withdraw them, the rest being incapable to defend them, were in a great
consternation. The Most Christian King did not fail to take advantage of this
juncture, and having made them Propositions of a General Peace, which he caused
to be Printed, they easily disposed themselves to accept them, and to persuade
their Allies to do the like. They sent for that purpose to the Duke of Villa
Hermosa who opposed it a long time, but the Parliament in England seeing by the
disposition of the Hollanders, that it would be almost impossible to prevent
the Peace, and not being willing to leave the King armed, turned all their
thoughts from War, and took the resolution to speak no more of Money, until
they had obtained their demands in affairs of Religion, that Duke did likewise
then accept of the Peace, seeing there was no timely succor to be expected
from England.

This, Sir, I take to be the true Draught of things, from whence we are to
judge if the King of England is the only cause of the Greatness of France. We
may certainly say, the Jealousies that arose betwixt him and his Parliaments
are the true occasion of them. It was to be wished both for Him and Us, that
either one Party or other had yielded sooner. I am not well enough acquainted
with the Maxims of their Country to decide positively which ought to have done
it. The King not only thought his Prerogatives were usurped upon, but seemed to
have just apprehensions of engaging in a War, which it would be in the Power of
his People to put an end to by shutting their Purses. If they had furnished him
with the Sum of 600000 Pounds when he demanded it, he might either have engaged
himself in a War, or been in a posture of making Peace as he thought
convenient; but those Gentlemen apprehended to put Arms into the Hands of His
Majesty for fear that he should make use of 'em to render himself absolute.
However since they found it necessary to do it afterward, had it not been
better they had done it in time? To speak the Truth, methinks that Great Body
though composed of so many Wise Heads, did not sufficiently foresee what might
happen, or, those Gentlemen did secretly aim at Peace, while they openly
declared for War, and they hoped the heat and resolution which they showed for
the latter, would produce the former without striking a blow, and such an one
too as they desired. We must however say that they showed a great deal of
Wisdom in not continuing inflexibly bent to the last, to hazard rather the
Ruin of Europe, than to confide an Army in the King. The consideration they
had for the Public Good has likewise appeared in that they made no difficulty
of paying that Army, though the King kept it on foot much longer than they
ordered, for the obliging the French to restore the Towns of the Spanish
Netherlands, before the restitution of the Swedes. The King likewise on his
side, had manifestly made appear the little ground there was to suspect him of
a design to render Himself Absolute; since having that Army so long at his
Disposal, he made not the least use of it to that purpose. Methinks then that
His Subjects may be in repose on that side, and would to God for our Interests,
that the future Parliaments may be in the same disposition as was that we speak
of, of yielding rather to His Majesty, than suffer France to draw the fatal
advantages from their Dissension, which in all likelihood it will endeavor to
do.

I am, etc.

London, Printed for H. R. 1682.


