Strange NEWS FROM Stratton in Cornwall: OR, A True Relation of a cruel B^oody
Murder committed by one J. R. UPON His Own FATHER, for Lucre of enjoying his
Estate; who (after he had Committed the Fact, and laid the Knife in the Bed
wherein his Father lay) called in several Neighbors to witness that his Father
had Murdered himself; but upon search, his Shirt and Breast were found
besprinkled with his Fathers Blood; upon which search he fell in a Swound, and
after his Recovery Confessed the Fact, and is now in Goal

Written by one William Reddish, who was in Stratton at the same time when the
Murder was Committed: And Written since in a Letter to Mr. Pearce Manaton in
Windmill-Court in the Butcherrow near Temple-Barr, by his Brother, living
within half a Mile of the said Town.

With Allowance.

Printed for I. Goniers, at the Sign of the Raven in Duck-Lane.

Strange News From Stratton in Cornvval. OR; A True Relation of a Cruel, Bloody
Murder, Committed by one J. R. upon his own Father.
IT is very remarkable that amongst all capital crying sins, the sin of Murder
very seldom, or never goes unpunished: notwithstanding the Patience and
long-suffering of God against many prophain and presumptious despisers of his
ways and truth; yet particularly herein he seems to show forth his Justice in
all Ages to the shameful downfall and destruction of such as are found guilty
of this detestable monstrous sin even in this life, and they leave the memory
of their names as odious as their savage cruel practices have been in their
life time.

This short Story affords you as true a Relation of as inhumane a Murder, as
any this age has afforded, or any future can parallel, which was as follows.

THe murdered person, by name William Ross, was a very aged man, but his Wife
was some years younger, they had but one only Son (the cruel actor of this
bloody Tragedy) neither ever had they any more children then he; they had about
16 or 18 pounds per an. in land, and 'twas thought the provident old Man had
money by him: this his son he had bred a Scholar, more then usually men of his
degree do in the Country, and had thoughts to have placed him in some way
whereby he might be a comfort to him in his old age, but proving of a more
stubborn nature, his designs were frustrated, and he resolved his Son should
live with him, during the remainder of his life, which by the course of nature
could not be long; but this bloody inhumane wretch not satisfied with this way
of living, giving his will to much indulgence after youthful extravagancies;
and thinking the time too long till he had the full possession and sole
disposal of all himself.

He takes the opportunity (which by all probabillity had been long hatching in
his hellish brain) of a very fit time for his cruel design: (if without sin one
may call any time fit for such barbarous cruelty) his Mother being called out
to the labor of one of her Neighbors, being on the 27th. of March, last at
night, leaving none in the house but her aged Husband and her Son; About three
of the clock in the morning he takes a great sharp Knife, which was his Fathers
own knife, and goes with as much privisie as possible he could to his Fathers
bedside, and therewith cut his Throat, cross the Windpipe, and cut so deep
that at one stroke he cut the Pipe almost through, and holds him down in the
bed until he left him incapable of moving; and then laid the Knife by his
Father in the bed, and about five a clock he ran out like a distracted man (it
being his custom to rise early and go abroad into the fields) to call in the
neighbors, not only where his Mother was, but several others, crying aloud as
he went, My Father has killed himself, My Father has killed himself: upon
which, neighbors crouding in, found the poor old man weltering in his own
blood in the bead, which amazed all spectators, knowing him to be a civil
honest man, and a good liver; then this vile wretch endeavored to lay it upon
his Mother, that it must be done by her before she went out; but all to little
effect, for the Neighbors had still more charitable thoughts for her then for
him: and amongst the rest, a Merchant in Stratton being present, desired that
he might be examined, who stood peremtorily, affirming that his Father was dead
before he rose from his own bed, and as he came through his Fathers Room, he
saw blood upon the Sheets, and about his neck, but could not have the heart to
lift up the sheets to see where the wound was, but immediately ran forth to
call the neighbors, etc.

But says the Merchant Mr. B. Neighbor, not that we do mistrust that you are
concerned in the Fact, but for our own satisfaction pray let us see your Shirt
and Arms, for your hands seem to be clean, and we do heartily wish they may be
so in reallity, and your heart too in this matter; upon which his color
changed, which bread more suspicion amongst them, and unbuttoning himself, they
found not only his shirt, but his breast all besprinkled with his Fathers
blood: How now, quoth the Merchant, thou cruel Monster, what say you now? upon
which he fell down in a swound and so continued for above an hour, and after
his recovery he confessed the whole Fact, and was immediately committed to Goal
where he is to remain until the next Assizes.

I desire that this and other precedent examples of the like nature, which are
too too common in our ears in this wicked age, might at least be a warning to
all, especially to Young men that are too apt to let their mind Rove after
great things, and think they they may commit any Enormity to attain to their
desired ends, but many times it proves bitterness to them in the end; For a
little well gotten is worth a Lordship of Land with a Curse.

FINIS.

