THE Reformed Papist, OR High-Church-Man. Characterized in Reflections on his
Principles and Designs.
IT is an old Charge managed against many of the Church of England, and has
lately been revived; namely, that either they are downright Papists in their
Hearts, and would not only be glad of, but help forward the introduction of the
Romish Religion, or else are possessed of such Principles and Opinions, as touch
very near upon the Popish Doctrines, being differenced from them but by a very
slight distinction, and therefore are previously disposed and prepared for an
easy Reception of that superstition, whenever opportunity shall be offered of
so doing: How far this assertion may be proved, and against whom, and on what
grounds, is the business and enquiry of this Paper.

The very Constitutions of the Church it self in its Offices, Ceremonies and
appointments have not escaped some Men's censure, as being too gross Relics of
and Borderers on the Romish Superstition, but in my Opinion that Accusation
flies too high, and in endeavoring to prove too much, fails of its end, and
proves just nothing at all, such an Attempt was that of -- a Sancta Clara's in
the time of Archbishop Laud, who upon what encouragement I will not suggest,
wrote a Book to show how how the Articles and Doctrines of the Church of
England might with a very little favor and candid construction be reconciled
to the meaning and intention of the Roman Catholic, that for the most part
they did only differ in forma and modo loquendi, in the Phrase and manner of
Speech, but in substance were the same, and so a fair way to an Accommodation
and Union between Us and the Romanists was opened, which undertaking however
absurd and impossible, (since neither the Public Constitution nor Doctrines of
our Church can be proved to be Popish, whatever either Dissenters or Recusants
may wish or pretend.) Yet some Transactions of those times, as the particular
favor shown to Romish Priests: the correspondence held with the Eminent
Persons of the Roman Church and Court, do give just cause to suspect, that
since the Romish Church cannot advance so much as one step toward an Union
with us, nor depart from the least tittle of her pretensions in Spirituals;
some leading Men among us might be glad to strain as far as they could, and
gladly stand by and see themselves proved good Roman-Chatholicks in those very
Tenets and Doctrines, which were designed to be the Marks and Characters of
true Protestants. But that Task being too intricate for the greatest subtilty
to compass, it was impossible to effect this reconcilement without a nearer
approach to Rome; and therefore we find some Opinions started in those times,
and since owned by several Men in ours, as bid very fair for this Union, could
these scurvy Romanists advance but one pace toward it, and not leave us
wholely to the disgrace of yielding. It Is not, I confess, criminal to endeavor
an Union with Rome, if they can be brought to renounce their corruptions,
neither do I believe it to have been the intent of any of our Prelates to
condescend to all the Romish Superstitions without distinction or exception;
but fancied that a bare formal external Union, though there were no substantial
agreement in Doctrinal points, would be of such great advantage and profit to
the Church, that it would be worth the while to shuffle up all Questions and
Disputes, to give the Romish-Opinions the fairest construction, and their own
what possible Latitude they could, so to close up the breaches between us by
lightly skinning over the sores of that Church with a superficial gloss, and
kind Interpretation, merely to avoid the mischief and uncharitableness of a
Schism, and in hopes they might some time or other hereafter, when the heat of
Dispute was allayed reform themselves. Now they who ever entertained this
project, or have been Disciples of those by adhering to their Principles
commonly pass by the name of High-Church-Men; that is, Persons principled in
Religion above the ordinary Standard, Moderation or current Opinions, but
asserting higher and stranger Doctrines then are either of common use, or
within the reach of ordinary capacities and prospect.

A Gentleman who has long owned himself such an one, and I question not is
proud of the character has lately published another Notion of the term
High-Church-Man; and that is, a Reformed Papist, an expression I believe he
repents of by this time because of its great absurdity: For the Word Papist, so
plainly imports one who owns the Pope's Supremacy, infallibility and
consequently whatever he Doctrinally teaches, that he who is so far reformed as
to deny those, (as every true Protestant is) immediately ceases to be a Papist,
which is a denomination inconsistent with such a Reformation:
Reformed-Catholick, indeed I have heard of, and Logicians usually distinguish
things under the same Summum genus, or general Head by a specifical difference,
as they call it; and never conjoyn those differences so as to hope that one
should limit the signification of the other, which it totally takes away and
destroys: So we say not a Rational Beast, when we would express a Man, but a
Rational Creature or Animal; which word being common to both Man and Beast, (as
Catholic is to Protestant and Papist) is applicable to either, but to apply
that difference of Reformed (which is made use of to distinguish a Protestant
from a Papist) to a Papist from whom the Protestant is distinguished by this
very defference, so as to say a Protestant is a Reformed Papist, (which terms
immediately deny one another) is as absurd as to say a Man is a Rational Beast,
or a Beast an Irrational Man: but enough of this; it was a venturesome
expression of his, by which he thought he would propose a Paradox to people and
a muse the Vulgar (which He takes great pleasure in doing) in the mean while
laughing to himself as being secure of a handsome Exposition whereby to come off
creditably with Scholars who understand the Arcana and Labyrinths of Speech:
However I shall take this advantage of his expression, to show how too near
being a Papist, and too little reformed he is; who as an High-Church:Man, (in
which quality he has always beeen reputed,) does either in his own judgment, or
else implicitly in complaisance to other embrace such Opinions as want a second
Reformation.

1. The true Protestant resolves his Faith into the Authority of the Scriptures
as baring Testimony to its self to be Gods word by the evident marks of Gods
Holy Spirit which are there visible to every Reader, Together with the
additional proofs of the ordinary Grace, assistance and enlightening God affords
to him who seriously attends to it, and the miraculods derivation of it down to
us at so great a distance of time from its first promulgation, and the general
acceptance it has received as such from a great part of Mankind, and therefore
the Moral impossibility it should be fictitious, having so great an Authority
of History to vouch it as that is: to be plain; the true Protestant gives this
reason, why he is a Christian, because God's word the Scripture instructs him
so to be, and he believes the Scriptures to be God's word, because it appears
by its Heavenly Doctrine to be so, because his conscience and spirit are
strangely convinced that it is so by a particular light God has assisted his
reasoning withal in the reading it, becaue the Doctrine it contains, though
contrary to Flesh and Blood has most strangely overcome all the difficulties
which both They and the Devil put in its way, and has been propagated down
through all Ages over the face of the whole Earth; the History of all times
baring witness to its Doctrine to have been then what we see it now; and this
is the sure and only Basis and Foundation the Christian has to rest his Fatith
on.

But now the High-Church-Man, tells you that the Faith of the unlearned cannot
rely upon any other Principle then the Authority of their Pastors expounding to
them the substance of a Christians duty. Page 100. of the Original of all Plots.

The immediate reason that you must give of the hope that is in you, why you
believe and are a Christian, is, because the Church (meaning the Clergy) tells
you so; and why are the Clergy to be relied on in this case; is it only matter
of Prudence, because they are the honestest and Larnedest Men, or because,
whether they are so or no, they are invested with Authority and Jurisdiction to
propose to the People what they ought to believe, and these are obliged in
Conscience to believe what they propose; this is the very reason says the
High-Church-Man.

All the Articles of Faith and all the necessary rules of Government are so
clearly decided (that is, by the Authority of the Church) that there is no room
left for farther doubt about them, did Men but think it their duty to submit to
the Churches (That is the Clergy's) Authority, as is most certain they ought to
do, Page 108. and again; since God has been so gracious as to continue likewise
a constant Succession and Authority in his Church for our direction, (that is,
in matters of Faith,) why should we not pay that duty which we once to it, and
make use of such remedies as the wisdom of God has ordained to quiet our
dissentions. Id page 110.

Here is plain dealing: God has left Authority in the Clergy to direct us in
matters of Faith, what we must believe, and what we must not believe; and why
should not we rely on the Clergy's determinations, on this Judge in
Controversies; so necessary in the Church for determining Questions, (says the
Guide in Controversies) that God could not in wisdom, but ordain such a
standing Oracle for quieting our dissentions, (says the High-Church-Man.) How
near a Neighbor this Opinion is to that of the Papists resolving their Faith
into the Authority of the Church and implicit believing needs no Guide in
Controversy to determine: I only remark, that what he first asserted
cautiously to be only the duty and obligation of the Unlearned, to rely upon
the Authority of their Pastors, he next picks up courage enough to say
indefinitely, that it is most certainly Men's duty to submit to the Churches
Authority, and last of all sticks not to say, Why should We not pay that duty,
etc. which Word We including himself, must needs now be extended to the Learned
themselves, and lay on them also the same Obligation as on the meerest Fools.

In the next place, the High-Church-Man is not so unwise as to believe God's
Wisdom should oblidge him to settle an ordinary Judge in the Church, and engage
us to obey that Judge, and yet fail him so foully in this, as to leave this
Judge in a capacity of Erring, and yet in full Authority to impose his Errors;
that cannot be: The Judge (that is the Church or Clergy) must needs therefore
be infallible: and this Doctrine of Infallibility; I only infer by consequence,
I quote not the High-Church-Man for it (though perhaps it were no difficult
matter so to do) but assert it to be the genuine proper and immediate
consequence of the former Principle; and so much for Infallibility.

But now you wonder perhaps what is become of the Scriptures all this while,
into which I resolve my Faith; why, I suppose, (says the High-Church-Man) no
Man will say that the Principle of the Scriptures sufficiency and perspicuity
does infer, that every Man at what time of his life he pleases merely by
reading the Bible, can find out of his own aecord all things necessary to
Salvation, id. page 100. If he can read it, I question not but he may; if he
cannot, he may as well trust a Layman reading it to him, as a Clergyman, or
the Testimony of all Laymen as well as of all the Clergy: but says the
High-Church-Man, I will not say absolutely with the Papist that the Scriptures
are not perspicuous, nor sufficient instructions to Salvation; but that they
are not perspicuous enough, nor sufficient to All Men, so that Any One can by
reading find out all things necessary to Salvation; but this is enough to
disrcedit the Scripture as defective and insufficient the better to bolster up
the Authority of the Churchmen, and their Traditions.

Next, from this last Principle, I infer the needlesness of Reading them, by
the most ignorant sort; for if they cannot of their own accord find out all
things necessary to Salvation, they must, trust the Churchmen for some, and if
for some, they had as good trust them for all, since it is alike dangerous to
Err in one point necessary as in all; and so they may e'ne lay by their Bibles.

The Church being possessed of so ample an Authority in the great Affairs of
Religion, and in necessary Articles of Faith, it will next be pertinent to
inquire, whether the circumstances of Religion are determinable by any other
but it self, and whether the accidental appendages of forms and manners in
ordine ad Spiritualia; may be Ordered and Appointed by any other: why no says
the High-Church-Man; for that Modern contrivance of some State Flatterers who
leave it to the Power of the Civil Magistrate to prescribe the form and manner
of Church Government, will not be any means to quiet, but the ready way to
promote dissensions in the Church: He asserts it is the ready way to give Birth
and Original to a Plot, for the civil Magistrate to suffer himself to be
flattered into an Opinion, that he may appoint what Church Government he
pleases: that is a thing forsooth without his verg and cognizance; the very
form, Model and Pattern of it is de jure divino unalterable, and it is the sin
of the Holy Ghost with the High-Church-Man to dislike and dissent from it, much
more to put it down and set up another: and therefore let not the Prince, says
he, meddle with what he has nothing to do withal.

He indeed blames the Pope for assuming a jurisdiction over the Bishops and
Clergy of all the World, forasmuch as he has nothing to do with any thing but
what was subject to the Roman Emperor; and therefore for the Eastern-Church,
he thinks the Pope has no power over it: but yet he cannot and will not deny
him his due, the Western Church, and the Western Patriarchate; he owns him for
his Canonical and Ecclesiastical Superior, and that is an high Character; for
Canons are with him as Sacred and inviolable as God's own Laws, being imposed
by so Revered an Authority as a Council assisted by the Holy Ghost as he
believes: So that to the High Churchman the Bishop of Rome is, though no more,
Papa Nostri Orbis, and we are not at all helped by his discharging the East
from Obedience to Rome, since we are Fettered by most irrefragable Canons to be
subject to our Patriarch.

He is no Enemy to Auricular Confession, and between You and I, some times
hears it; and for Absolution, he is apt to think it to be more then a
Declaratory power: for every one may declare to another that his Sins are
forgiven him, if he repents; nay the Scriptures tell him so, and he may tell
himself so: but he believes such a power of forgiveness in the Priest; that the
Penitents Sins are retained till it be actually pronounced, so that it is an
ordinarily necessary medium and condition of forgiveness, though Crotius and
other Learned Protestants admit of no such thing.

Perhaps he favors Corporal punishment, as in its Nature expiatory of sin: I
am sure the Compilers of the Commination Office do imprudently use the Word
Penance thus:

In the Primitive Church -- Such Persons as stood Convicted of Notorius Sin
were put to open Penance and punished in this World, That their Souls might be
saved in the day of the Lord:

Besides the ordinary acceptance of the Word Penance for Corporal Punishment,
(which if it be put for Repentance, not one in an Hundred knows so much,) the
subjoyning these words immediately to it, and punished in this World makes the
place look as if it favored the Opinion of expiating Sin by Temporal
punishment, especially because the reason and end of that punishment is
immediately Assigned thus, That their Souls may be saved in the day of the
Lord: I say these words are unwarily placed and capable of an evil
Interpretation, and who knows what ill use an High-Church-Man may make of this
hint in order to favoring that Popish Doctrine, of satisfying for Sins by
Voluntary Penal infflictions.

The reality of Christ's Body being Spiritually given and received in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist he openly avows; by the Word Spiritual not meaning
to take off the reality of his Presence, but to show the manner of it: So that
Christ being really and Spiritually present though not Corporally comes to thus
much; that either Christ is present there without his Body (which methinks is a
little hard, to part him from that) or his Body is present Spiritually, that
is, is a Spirit; for nothing can be present after another manner then is
agreeable and sutiable to its Nature; but so is not spiritual Presence to a
Body, nor Corporial Presence to a Spirit: However he will have it said that
Christ is really Present, because it helps toward the Union he projects, which
he imagines may be founded on a verbal and nominal though not real agreement.

Lastly; He prays with all his heart for the dead; there are several instances
of this in Print, Particularly in Bishop Andrews devotions: and this were it
never so harmless, yet because we have no warrant from Scripture so to do, and
no knowledge of the middle state of the Dead, is a sond, affected and
scandalcus imitation of the Romanists, praying for Souls in Purgatory.

And thus far our Reformed Papist; for a Papist, he is not in the grossest
Notion; but sure I am, such extravagant and affected Opinions in some Members
of our Church, and those who account themselves Her only true Genuine and
Legitimate Sons and Children, gives greater advantage to some Men to traduce
the Church of England as Popishly inclined, then Her Ceremonies and Service can
do: though those Principles once known make such impression on Men's miunds that
they are ever after prone to suspect even the most innocent and harmless
things: and it is a thing not altogether impossible, that in a Revolution of
times and Religions, such Churchmen so prepared might easily prevail with them
selves to strain a little f^rther; for the sake of Safety, Profit, Authority
and Honor.

FINIS.
London, Printed for J. Blackborne 168^.


