ANIMADVERSIONS By way of ANSWER TO A SERMON Preached by Dr. THOMAS KENNE, Lord
Bishop of BATH and WELLS; In the Cathedral Church of BATH.

On ASCENSION-DAY last, Being the Fifth Day of May, 1687.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into the Old
Spring-Garden near Charing Cross, 1687.

TO THE MOST SACRED MAJESTY OF JAMES the II. KING of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland. Defender of the Faith, etc.
THIS little Treatise (most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,) was occasioned by a
Sermon Preached the last Ascention-Day, by a Bishop of the Church of England,
whose Tallent was so much commended, that I was no less curious than desirous
to hear him: And so I did with attention. I confess, I am no competent Author
to fasten an Opinion of his Lordship on any; yet being not at all pleaed with
his Doctrine, I gave my best Friends the faithfullest report I could of the
chiefest Points of his Discourse. His Lordship I own, is Orator enough, and
was sufficiently moderate for a great part of his Sermon, till at last he flew
to Controversies nothing material to his Text, and much less Consonant to good
Doctrine. Then I was resolved to have a sharp Eye after him. Sermon being done,
immediately I Recorded his chiefest Errors, and endeavored at leisure to
reduce them to the best and easiest method that was possible for me.

May it therefore please Your most Sacred Majesty to countenance this little
Scroul, in hopes that under Your Gracious Protection it may get the Credit to
be worth the Reading. I am most certainly sure it can never be set forth to the
Public advantage of Souls, better than by Dedicating it to a KING, who has
done more in one day for God's Glory, and the propagation of the Christian
Faith, than most of the Christian Kings have done in the whole course of their
Lives. It is well known that He has truly a Paternal Breast to all His
Subjects, and most particularly to them, that profess any Zeal toward the
Conversion of Souls, having this Sentence of St. Denis deeply Engraven in His
Royal Heart: Divinorum Divinissimum est co-operari Deo in salutem animarum. The
Divinest of all Divine things is to cooperate with God for the salvation of
Souls.

Now then, (Dread Sir,) I Consecrate my self and this little Paper together
with all the Faculties of my Soul and Body to Your most Sacred Majesty's
Spiritual and Temporal Service, for I never desire to live longer, than I am
able to serve Your Self, and Your Royal Family. And shall conclude with this
hearty Address to Almighty God, that as he has most Miraculously preserved Your
Royal Person from so many Eminent, Evident, and hidden Dangers both on Sea and
Land, Abroad and at Home, and settled Your Majesty in spite of Fate, on the
Throne of Your Royal Ancestors, so He may settle Your Majesty and Your Royal
Consort on a Throne of Glory in Heaven, after living a full Century on years in
all Prosperity on Earth, to the perfect Conversion of all Your Subjects. This
with the blessing of a most Hopeful Prince, who shall perpetuate Your Royal
Names to the Worlds end, shall be the constant Wishes, and daily Prayers of,

Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's most Dutifully Obedient Servant, and most
Loyal Irish Subject F.J.R. C.J.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
IT happened (Courteous Reader,) that I have been lately entreated by one of my
best Friends to go hear a Church of England Bishop Preach: I confess, I had no
great mind to go; yet to please my Friend, and (may be) yield something to
curiosity, I went. But seeing a Christian Prelate in the Pulpit, begin (as I
thought) a Christian Sermon, and omit the characterical Sign of a Christian, I
was much astonished at such an odd sight, being the first Preacher (to the best
of my Memory) that ever I saw begin a Sermon without making the Sign of the
Cross.

To this you will answer, that in the Church of England they do not usually
make the Sign of the Cross, contenting themselves to make it once for all, Viz.
When they are Baptized, but is that the Custom as well with Protestants, as
with all other Dissenters? Yes, well then, I say that it is a very ill Custom,
which can never be otherwise, then a most scandalous practice: For my part, I
declare I was mightily scandalized to see one, that pretends to be a
Christian-Teacher, begin to Preach, and omit the Sign of a Christian. This with
his ill Doctrine made me observe him narrowly, and sift thoroughly all his
Discourse, and endeavor to refute his chiefest Errors, as you will see, if
you be pleased to read this following Treatise. But this Advertisement is
chiefly to show that the practical omission of using the Sign of the Cross, is
a practical contradiction as well of the holy Bible, as of the Primitive and
modern Practice of the true Church of Christ. But before I enter into any
positive Proof, either of holy Scripture, or Antiquity, I think it expedient to
take away all doubts and scruples of the lawfulness of this holy Sign: and thus
I argue. That practice can never be unlawful in it self, which both Parties own
to be once so lawful, that it is against the Law of God to omit it: But both
Roman Catholics, and Protestants do own, that it is against the Law of Christ
to omit the Sign of the Cross at the actual administration of the Sacrament of
Baptism; Ergo, the constant practice thereof must needs be lawful, Nam quod ex
natura rei semel est licitum semper est licitum, for there is nothing less
alterable than the nature of a thing, which in Schools is called Quiditas rei,
that is, the very Essence of a thing, which cannot be changed without
destroying the thing it self: None therefore can deny the constant use of the
Cross to be lawful, seeing all confess it to be once absolutely necessary, Viz.
In the actual Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism: so that, whoever
teaches the contrary, may see his own judgment in St. Paul, 3. Chap. to the
Phillip. 18. v. Quos saepe dicebam vobis, and nunc flens dico, inimicos Crucis
Christi, quorum Deus venture est finis interitus. For many walk of whom I have
told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the Enemies of the
Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly.

Consider seriously this passage, and beware never to despise the Sign of the
Cross; otherwise you will act directly against the express word of God: As you
will see in what follows. Read, I pray, the 7th. of Revelations, 3 v. Where
one Angel said to four other Angels (hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor
the Trees, till we have signed the Servants of our God in their Foreheads.)
Read again the 10th. Chap. of St. Mark, 16 Verse. And he took them, and blessed
them.) The same is proved also out of St. Luke 24th. Chap. 50. Verse. And he led
them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them.)
You see therefore, that blessing, and signing with the Cross are founded on
holy Scripture,

That it was the Primitive practice of the true Church, used in all Ages, since
the Passion of Christ, cannot be denied. I call to witness all the Crosses that
ever have been Erected in Highways, and on Eminent places, some by the
Apostles, some by their Successors, others by devout Laymen, and all by the
Authority and Example of the Church: Witness that great Cross found not many
Ages ago in the Indies, where St. Thomas the Apostle Preached the Gospel of
Christ: Witness all the Crowned Heads of Christian Kings, that are now, or ever
have been in the World; witness, in fine, all the Church-Pinacles that ever
were seen, as well in England, as in any other part of Christendom. We ought
not sure to forget Chairing-Cross, supposed by many to have been the richest of
most Crosses, after that on which our sweet Redeemer has suffered. Now I leave
to your own Judgment (Impartial Reader) to consider the difference between the
Church, that Erected all of those Monuments of Christian Piety, and the
pretended Church that levelled all to the Ground, and endeavored to bury the
memory of Primitive Piety, and ancient Devotion. Do not we find in History that
it was revealed from Heaven to the first Christian Emperor, an Englishman
born, and his Mother an English-woman, also quod in hoc signo vinces (you will
overcome in this sign) and well it became him, for he was never ashamed
thereof, but showed himself all his Life time, a true worshipper of the Cross;
and for that he had always the better of his Enemies, both visible, and
invisible; and it is well known, that all the true Worshipers of the Cross, do
the like. But some body will say, that I mistake in Protestants, that they are
not at all such Enemies to the Cross, that many of them can very well abide a
Crucifix in their Chambers, and pay to it due Respect and Veneration: And why
not I pray, a Roman Catholic? Cannot he have the Spirit of discerning the
Honor due to a Crucifix, as well as a Protestant? Sure that zealous Church of
England Worshipper of a Crucifix intends to persuade the world, that what may
be a respectful Ornament in his Chamber, must needs be a Golden Calf in that of
a Roman Catholic, and why? Because he supposes that He alone has the Spirit of
discerning the Honor due to a Crucifix; let him show me this in Scripture,
otherwise I will show him that he judgeeth most rashly; for there can be no
rasher judgment, than that of ones interior, which is only known to God,
scrutator cordium and renum Deus; true or false Worwip must come from the
interior, witness these words of our Savior, populus hic labiis me honorat,
cor autem eorum long est a me: This People honor me with their Lips, hut
their heart is far from me: You see then, that there is but God only, that
knows their heart, beware therefore (gentle Reader) never to offer at being
Judge of that Court, wherein God only is Supreme Judge, and each particular a
sub-altern-one, none knowing effectually what passes in foro Conscientiae, but
God and himself; You must needs then be very weary how you judge, what you
judge, and of whom you judge, for fear of being judged: It is but what we are
commanded to observe in the Gospel Nolite judicare, and non judicabimini; do
not judge, and you will not be judged: This is all the Advertisement I have to
give you (good Reader) before you begin to read the ensuing Treatise,

Farewell.
ANIMADVERSIONS By way of ANSWER TO A SERMON Preached by Doctor Thomas Kenne
Lord Bishop of BATH and WELLS In the Cathedral Church of Bath, On ASCENTION-DAY
last; Being the Fitfh of May, 1687.
I Was honored, my Lord, with being one of your Auditors last Ascention-day in
the Afternoon at the Cathedral Church of Bath. Your Lordship, I own does not
want the parts of an Orator, and of an Evangelical one too, had you but sucked
your Doctrine, (as St. John has done) De Sacro Dominici pectoris font, that
is to say, within the Bosom of his only true Spouse on Earth, the Roman
Catholic Church, Mother and Mistress of all Visible Churches. That you have
not sucked your Learning from the Breast of Christ in his True Church, I prove
ex ore tuo.

To enter directly to the matter, I begin, my Lord, with your Text drawn out of
the 47 Psalm, 5. Ver. Ascendit Deus in jubilo, God is gone up with a shout, the
Lord with the sound of a Trumpet. I remarked your Lordship sweated hard to fit
this Text more to the Typick ascent of the Ark of Alliance from the house of
Obededon to Mount Sion, than to the real assent of Jesus Christ from Mount
Olivet to the right hand of God the Father. You took so much pains in
describing to the least circumstance of the first, that you had not time enough
to enlarge your self much on the latter, though This was far more to your purpose
then That: it was not want of time, for you were a full hour, and a half in
Chair. All that I could pick out of your tedious description of the Ark, was,
that when you compared it to a long Chest with painted Cherubims much like to
the Angels you Paint now adays: I thought your Church allowed of no Angels to
be Painted at all; But now that you speak of them, you cannot deny but they
were Painted, or Engraved on the Ark by Gods own Direction, God could never
give directions for Idolatry: You see then, my Lord, that to have a Crucifix,
or Picture of Saints, or Angels, and pay due respect to them, cannot be
Idolatry, provided still, that the Worship of Latria only due to God, be not
given them, but a respective veneration, which we call Dulia for Saints and
Angels and Hyper-Dulia for the blessed Virgin, Mother of God.

In the Second place, I took notice your Lordship thought it too too long, you
were without giving a fling at the Popes Supremacy, to which you showed all
aversion imaginable, and that because he is called Supreme Spiritual Head of
Christ's Church on Earth.

We call his Holiness, it is true, Supreme, Spiritual and Visible Head, Vicar
of Jesus Christ, and Successor to St. Peter, the first visible Head our Savior
has ordained in his Church, and we have Scripture enough for calling him so
(as you shall soon see) but you have none to the contrary.

I remember you said, that Jesus Christ was; and is the only spiritual Head of
his Church. A little distinguo here, my Lord, may do well; Jesus Christ is the
only Supreme Spiritual and Invisible Head of his Church as well Triumphant as
Militant, Concedo: Jesus Christ is the only Spiritual and Visible Head of his
Church Militant, I deny, because this Church being in it self Spiritually
Visible, and Visibly Spiritual, must needs have a Head proportionable to it in
all degrees, otherwise it could but appear a monstrous Body, the Head and
Members being of different Natures.

That it is not so, I prove out of the very words of Christ establing his
Church, and that drawn out of your own English Bible.

But give me leave, my Lord, to gloss a little first on your own words, and you
will see I will not forget my positive Proofs of Scripture. In the mean time
you must needs know, I admired much your vehemence in protesting against that
Church which allows of any Visible Spiritual Head; you flew to such eagerness
of Contradiction against this Spiritual Supremacy, that I thought sure you had
some solid authority to disprove the pretended abuse, till at last I found you
had no such Proof in Nature, only probare idem per idem, viz. that the Church
had no such Head at all, but a politic one, such as King Saul was to the
Jewish Church: This was gratis said without the least Proof of Scripture or
Reason, which Circular way of Proof is to be exploded out of all Schools. But
will you give me leave to tell your Lordship, that the Bible could afford a
fitter Example to your purpose, then that of a King, reproved by God for his
Presumption in Church Authority; for all the World knows, that God Almighty
abandoned Saul, because he presumed (in Samuels absence) to offer Sacrifice,
which is a sign he never intended to make him Head of the Jewish Church. But
why did not your Lordship take a better example out of the 14th. Chap. of Genesis
Where Melchisedec King of Salem was mightily pleasing to God for offering Bread
and Wine in an action of Grace for Abraham's Victory over his Enemies? Here you
may find one man King and Priest together, for he is called in the self-same
place Sacerdos Dei Altissimi, The Priest of the highest God. You omitted him (I
suppose) because he is called Sacerdos; if he had been called Minister Dei
Altissimi, sure you would not miss to make him Head of the Church of his
Kingdom, and a Protestant Head too, seeing he offered the self-same substance
you offer now, viz Bread and Wine, the figure of the Flesh and Blood of Jesus
Christ. But this very thing was able to hinder your Lordship from making use of
Melchisedeck's, example, for his Bread and Wine being owned by all to have been
the Type of the Sacrament we adore on our Altars, it could but seem very
strange to your Flock, that the Son of God should take so much pains in
establishing a Figure, that was so many Ages ago established already, and that
by the appointment of God himself; and sure no man of sense could miss to find
such an establishment of an idem per idem, contrary to reason, and much more to
the infinite Prudence of an All-seeing God: for God and Nature have done
nothing in vain: Deus and natura nihil fecerunt frustra, which he must needs
have done, if it be true what Protestants say, that he left us barely the
Figure of his most precious Flesh and Blood in Bread and Wine, having had the
same Type already since the time of Abraham. But of this we will say more in
its own place, now let us turn to the Church Supremacy, and see whether it be
Civilly or Spiritually Established by Christ on Earth; and I will begin by
pressing home the matter to your Lordships own doors.

Tell me, I pray whether your power in Bath and Wells be Spiritual or Civil?
Not Civil, for then you should take your Rank amongst the Lords Temporal in
Parliament; your Lordship ergo, must own your self to be Spiritual Head of your
Flock; and it is so indeed, if any. What privilege, I pray, can your private
Diocese have of enjoying a visible Spiritual Head, and not the whole Church?
For it is more repugnant to Scripture, and Reason, that a private Bishopric
should have that blessing, which you deny to the Universal Church, then that
the whole Church Hierarchically governed should have a Spiritual Head, and that
by the very Institution of Christ. This I prove by Scripture, as I promised,
and do begin with St. Peter his change of name, which was first Simon.

Read, I beseech you without your Spectacles of selfishness and interest all
the following Proofs drawn out of your own Bible, and begin with the 16th.
Chap. of St. Matthew. 17, and 18th. Verse. And there you will find Jesus Christ
ordaining St. Peter Spiritual Head of his Church: First he gives him his
blessing, and calls him by his proper name ( blessed art thou Simon Barjona,
for Flesh and Blood have not revealed it unto thee) You see then how he
purifies him from Flesh and Blood, and consequently spiritualizes him. In the
Verse following he changes his Name in saying, ( And I say unto thee, that thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock, I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it;) What can be more formally positive for St.
Peter's Spiritual Supremacy, and for that of his Successors, than this? But I
will give your Lordship yet the trouble to see more Proofs out of your own
Bible for this Spiritual Supremacy; and I defy all the World to show me as
much as one passage out of Scripture that shall be formally positive to the
contrary: I say the same of all other Controvertable Points. But to come to my
purpose, I desire you to read the 22th. Chapter of St. Luke 31, and 32th. Verse.
(Simon behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat,
but I have prayed for thee, ut non deficiat fides tua.) Remark that Satan
desired to sift all the Apostles, but we see that Jesus Christ did Pray here
for St. Peter only: Rogavi pro te, Petre, that his Faith may not fail:
Wherefore according to the words of your own Bible St. Peter's Supremacy remains
yet in his Successors, and shall do to the Worlds end: Vt fides tua non
deficiat. What says St. Matthew concerning the Infallibity of this Spiritual
Supremacy: It is in the 23th. Chap. 2 Verse. (The Scribes and Pharisees sit on
Moses's seat, all therefore they bid you observe, that observe and do) how
could Christ bid the Jews observe and do all that he should bid by those, that
sat in Moses Chair, if they could err? And why should not we conclude, that
Christ has no less preserved the Truth of Christian Religion in the Chair of
St. Peter, which is in the New and not in the Typick Law? Therefore the power
St. Peter received once for himself and his Successors did never fail, nor ever
shall. St. John in the 11th. Chap. of his Gospel and 51 Verse. Speaking of
Caiaphas the High Priest says much to this very purpose, (And this he spoke,
not of himself, but being High Priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus
should die for that Nation) Will your Lordship be pleased to observe how in
that most wicked time of the Synagogue, speaking out of that Chair, which
Christ commanded to be obeyed, they answer truly in matters of Faith, and their
chief Pastors Prophecy, and why? Because Christ commanded that Chair to be
obeyed: and did not he command the Church built upon the Rock to be obeyed
also: Witness these words of St. Matthew. 18th. Chap. 17th. Verse. (And if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen man, and a
Publican.) Whence it is to be gathered, that the Church of Christ cannot err in
her spiritual Jurisdiction. ( rogavi pro te Petre, ut non deficiat fides tua.)
As for my part, I will never allow that Church to be the Church of Christ, that
owns her self fallible; and this I am ready to Sign and Seal with the last drop
of my Blood. The Protestant Church did, and does still own her self fallible;
therefore it cannot be the Church established by Christ on the Rock.

This should be enough to oblige your Lordship to make it your sole business to
find out truth, and embrace it; there is none that values his Eternal Felicity,
but will think it well worth his while, it being that only; unum necessarium,
so much recommended by our Savior in his Gospel.

But all this, my Lord, might be answered much breifer in saying your Lordship
mistook hugely in the Supremacy the Protestants of England give their King,
which you said to be only civil and politic, as that of King Saul in the
Jewish Church.

Read, if you be pleased, the Oath of Supremacy, and you will find, that the
King is made in effect, what the Popes pretended to have been heretofore in
this Realm: The Popes never pretended any civil or temporal Jurisdiction in
England, but a Spiritual one only; which is the very Jurisdiction King Henry
the Eighth super-added to his Temporal Power, which was never done by any
Christian King in England before, nor elsewhere, that ever I heard or read of.
Your Lordship therefore must allow a spiritual Supremacy in the King, it is the
only genuine sense it can have, and not at all to be contradicted. For alas! If
Supremacy were nothing, then to own a Supreme politic or civil Power in the
King, there is no Roman Catholic this day in his Dominions, that would loose
any preferment either spiritual or civil on that account: For we are not such
fools, as to expose our selves to suffer so many rude persecutions, and undergo
the loss of so many considerable employments of both kinds for not taking the
Oath of the Kings being Supreme Politic and Civil Head of the Churches of all
his Realms. That I am very free to take my self tomorrow, if I could but share
with your Lordship in the fat of your double Benefice. Nay, without any Spes
lucri, I swear, with all my heart, that I know no other Supreme Politic or
Temporal Power in all his most Sacred Majesty's Dominions, but what is in his
Royal Person alone; and do beseech God Almighty to bless and preserve Great
James our Sovereign King, Lord and Master on the Throne of his Royal Ancestors,
till he sees his Subjects in general, and each individual person of them swear
and protest the same, and maintain to the loss of their Lives and Fortunes,
that true Allegiance due by the Laws of God and Nature to his most Sacred
Majesty's Civil and Politic Supremacy (obedite prepositis vestris.) And so in
paying to Caesar what is due to Caesar, they will pay to God also his own due.
This is enough for that Point of your Sermon; let us come now to the
Controversy of the last Part, which was with much vehemence against the Real
Presence; I thought indeed that matter had but little or no relation at all
with the words of your Text (God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the
sound of a Trumpet,) But your Lordship knows best your own Reasons, which I
leave to your self, and come to my Matter, which is to refute your Objections,
and explain the Roman Catholic Doctrine concerning the Real Presence, seeing
you wedged that Mystery into your Discourse without any relation to your
purpose. I did no sooner hear your solemn protestation against this holy
Sacrament, then immediately I supposed you were an Abjurator ready to swear
point blank that Christ's most sacred Humanity is not really and substantially
on our Altars in Virtue of the Sacramental words: For I saw you exhorted with
passion your People not to be tottered by every blast of wind, that shall say
Christ is on this Altar, or Christ is on that Altar, for Christ is actually in
Heaven, and shall continue there till he comes to judge at the end of the
World. As for this Point, I answer first, that if your Lordship means to
persuade your poor People, that he is not really present on your own Communion
Tables, you may swear it confidently, and so may I too; for I own no power in
you to bring him, nor intention to make use of any power to possess his most
sacred Humanity really in your Communion Bread; And it is our Roman Catholic
Doctrine, that without characterical power, and lawful intention he cannot be
really present on our Altars, and much less on your Tables, seeing you renounce
all such power, and intention. But to say and swear his real Presence not to be
on our Altars after Consecration done by a lawful Priest legally intentioned,
is the greatest fit of rashness in nature, for none can say it with truth, nor
swear it without a most sacrilegious Perjury; and that according to your own
Rule of Faith, which is Scripture expounded by every individual person of sound
judgment.

There is nothing more rash, nor that can come nearer madness, then to say,
there is none of found Judgment, nor ever has been amongst so many Learned and
Eminent Roman Catholic Doctors, who are, and have been ready at all hours to
maintain that most holy Mystery to the effusion of the last drop of their
Blood, as many have done, rather then forswear themselves in denying the most
positive Article of Faith, we have in Scripture. And no Protestant ought to
find fault with this Doctrine, seeing their Judgments give them, that they can
most favorably expound Scripture for the mystery of the Real Presence: as you
will see by so many positive Proofs drawn out of the Gospel.

But I would fain know first what you are at concerning this Mystery. I am
mistaken, if you did not intend to persuade your People that Roman Catholics
pretend to have Power by virtue of the Sacramental Words to bring down Christ
Jesus his most Sacred Humanity on their respective Altars, and rob the Saints
in Heaven of the beatifical sight of that Sacred Pledge, in which consists the
plenitude of their Eternal Joy and Happiness: For you exhorted your Auditory
with such eagerness to stick to their Principles, and not to be tottered here
and there, that really I thought you were mistaken in our Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or else that you were not at all sincere in omitting to
expound candedly our Sense thereof to your People. For if your Lordship teach
them that We deprive Heaven of that most sacred Humanity whilst it continues on
our Altars, you impose most grossly on us, and keep your Flock wilfully in
ignorance, For that was never our Opinion: We say, and teach that he is at the
self-same time in Heaven, and on our Altars, because the Omnipotent Word of God
makes use of his absolute Power to re-produce himself truly and really God, and
Man under the accidents of Bread and Wine, nothing of either former Substances
remaining, and this change of Substance is called by the Roman Catholic
Church, Transubstantiation) that is to say, A total Change of the substance of
the Bread to that of the Body, and of the substance of the Wine to that of the
most precious Blood of Jesus Christ: and this is what we call
Transubstantiation.

And John Calvin himself had not the face to deny this to Gods absolute Power,
to whom sin only is impossible. And Jesus Christ says absolutely he does change
it by virtue of these holy words ( Hoc est corpus meum, etc.) for if he has
changed the substance of Water to that of Wine, and multiplied five small
Loaves to the most plentiful saturity of five thousand men, (Water and Bread
being purely material) who can deny, but he can do the like to his own most
sacred Body, being in the actual possession of all the qualities due to a
glorious Spirit, viz. Agility, Subtility, Clarity, and Impassibility. Do not, I
pray fool your poor People any more with the feigned impossibility of
believing, that so proper a Man as Jesus Christ is, or can be in a little
Wafer. Speak, my Lord, like a Christian Scholar, and own that these four
glorious qualities just now mentioned do dispense with the Body of Christ's
local possessing of a place cum extensione partium supra parts: It is true,
that living as a Mortal man on Earth, he took his dimensions corporally as
other Mortal men do, though then it self he might have done it Spiritually as
often as he pleased, which was once only, viz. pridie quam pateretur, that is,
the day before he suffered. You must therefore confess under pain of Eternal
Damnation, that our sweet Redeemers Body is no more subject to time or place.
Who is it that can deny to the glorious Body of our Savior Christ what St. Paul
allows after the day of Judgment to the Bodies of all Souls justified by
sanctifying Grace? Here are his words (Seminatur corpus animale, surget
spirituale, etc.) Hence a Christian Poet took occasion to say: Clari, subtiles,
agiles, impassibilesque
Omnes quadruplici pollebunt dote beati. viz.
Clarity, Subtility, Agility, and Impassibility shall be the four Gifts of
beatified Bodies.

And if it be of Faith that all glorified Bodies shall enjoy these Privileges,
when Doom is over, who can deny it now to the most glorious Body of Jesus
Christ? He says it (Hoc est corpus meum) This is my Body, etc. And who shall
find in his heart to say no? You Will allege, my Lord, that the Mystery cannot
be comprehended; it is true, and why? Because it is incomprehensible, as all
the rest of the Mysteries of our Faith: But this Mystery is called
Antonomastice Mysterium Fidei, that is, the Mystery of Faith by excellency. You
will say, my Lord, you cannot comprehend it, pray tell me whether you can
comprehend the Mystery of the most holy Trinity, the word Trinity being no more
in Scripture, than the word Transubstantiation, and what is the reason you do
not give credit as well to This, as to That? You have the self-same authority
for both, which is that of the Church. Are not there a thousand little bagatels
in Nature you cannot comprehend, viz. The Ebbing and Flowing of the Seas, the
regular Fits of Agues, the occult Virtue of the Sun giving real Life to
Insects, and cooperating vertually to the Life of all other Sublanary
Creatures, whether Vegitatively or Sensibly Living, and many other such
examples in nature obvious enough to our Senses, but incomprehensible to our
understandings: and shoul'd not this be more then a sufficient argument to
captivate our understandings in obsequium fidei.

This is not, my Lord, to totter the People with every blaste of Wind, saying,
Christ is here, or Christ is there; that is to be understood not of Christians,
but of the Jews, who after long expecting the Messiah, will at last feign he is
here, and he is there, being weary of his tedious delay. But Jesus Christ
himself gave this warning to the Christians, that will live in those days, to
the end that they may not be tottered by every blaste of Wind, that shall say
he is on this Altar, or on that Altar. We teach, my Lord, the Doctrine Jesus
Christ left to his Apostles. And his Apostles by Succession to Posterity, and
which shall continue in the Church of God to the Worlds End. It is the
unquestionable Doctrine of Christ preached by his Apostles and their
Successors in all Ages: And your Doctrine is questionable to every body, even
to your selves; for you do not know the way or manner Christ is in your
Sacrament, as I will instance out of your own Catechism before I end. But I
prove now that you taught in that Ascension Sermon a Doctrine quite repugnant
to your own Bible: Here are the words of St. Luke 22th. Chap. 19th. Verse. (This
is my Body, which is given for you.) What can be more plain? Notwithstanding
your Lordship must needs maintain, that what Christ gave, and his Apostles
received, was nothing else but Bread and Wine. Do you pretend to know Christ's
meaning better than himself? Is not this quite contrary to the great longing he
had to eat this Passover with his Disciples, (Defiderio desideravi hoc pasca
manducare vobiscum,) Luke 22th. Chap. 15th. Verse. With desire I have desired to
eat this Passover with you, before I suffer. Now to refer these words to a
figurative eating only by Faith, were most absurd; for we cannot say that Jesus
Christ could eat himself by Faith, since all the Schools of Divinity forbid us
to admit Faith in the Son of God, who is, and always has been in the full
possession of all the Objects of Divine Faith, and that by Virtue of his
Hypostatical Union: We must therefore own, and confess, that what our Savior
desired so vehemently to eat with his Disciples before he suffered, was truly,
really, and substantially his most Sacred Body.

But for further proof of this verity, go to the 6th. Chap. of St. John's
Gospel, and read it all over with attention, and there you shall find nothing
more plainly proved, then the Real Presence: But when you come to the 52th.
Verse thereof I beg of you to read it leasurely: here be the words of that
Verse: I am the living Bread, which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of
this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the Bread, that I will give is my
Flesh, which I give for the Life of the World. What can be more positive for
our purpose? Yet Beza had the impudence to translate most perfidiously (Life
giving Bread) instead of Living Bread, but in this he was most absurdly
perfidious, for the Sun is Life giving, though not living: and being granted that
this Bread is living, it must of necessity be Jesus Christ's own precious Body.
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. v. 16. Proves it positively as appears by the following
words (The Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
Blood of Christ? The Bread, which we break is it not the Communion of the Body
of Christ?) And 1 Cor. 12. v. 29. (for he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself not discerning the Lords Body.) There
is none (if he be not wilfully blind) but may see out of both these passages,
and out of many more, that before Jesus Christ gave this Sacrament to his
Apostles, at the actual giving it them, and after he had given it them, and
they to others, both Christ and his Apostles call it Flesh and Blood, Christ
says: (This is my Flesh, this is my Blood.) And the Apostles name it, Corpus
Domini, the Lords Body.

Now, my Lord, I will urge one instance more against your Communion by Faith
only, and thus I proceed: either your Lordships Soul in your actual Communion
ascends to Heaven, there to feed on Christ by Faith, or else Christ
descends to feed your Soul. What to this, my Lord? You cannot allow the
first, for so your unglorified Soul should be in two places at once, which you
deny even to the very glorified Soul and Body of Christ. You do not allow the
second, for so Christ should be in two places at once, and if in two, why not
in an hundred, and an hundred thousand? For the one is no more difficult to
Gods absolute Power then the other: This you do not allow, for once granted,
the rest could not be denied. I would fain then know what you are at in your
Sacramental Communion, for I do not find any third way your Lordship can feed
in truth and really on Christ's Body in your Sacrament, nay I am sure you never
found it out yet your self, nor ever shall. Now I see you must own you cannot
well tell the way or manner how your Soul feeds on Christ's most Sacred Body in
the Sacrament: You eat him then (non dijudicans Corpus Domini) viz. Not
discerning the Lords Body. Pray then read your own judgment in St. Paul, 1
Cor. 22. judicium sibi manducat and bibit.) He eats and drinks his own
judgment. I shall beg of your Lordship once more to deal sincerely and tell me
your own opinion of the Protestant Communion. I know full well what you say in
the exposition of your Catechism Printed for Charles Brom, anno 1686. That I
know, and will soon bring down your very words, which are quite opposited to
what I heard you Preach the last Ascention-Day. But tell me once more I pray
your meaning in this particular: For my part I want day to find you out, for I
see your Sermon contradicts your Writings, non es ergo tibi constans, i. e. you
are not constant to your self: For now you receive Christ's Flesh and Blood
virtually, now Figuratively; another time spiritually by Faith, and in
Exposition of your Catechism you contradict all, that in teaching the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ to be verily and indeed taken by the Faithful in our
Lords Supper; Here are your own words, Page 75. Glory be to thee, O adorable
Jesus, who under the outward and visible part, the Bread and Wine, things
obvious and easily prepared, both which thou have commanded to be received,
do communicate to our Souls, the Mystery of Divine Love, the inward and
invisible Grace, thy own most blessed Body and Blood, which are verily and
indeed taken, and received by the Faithful in thy Supper, for which all Love,
all Glory be to thee.

These are your own words, my Lord, Catholic enough on the Paper, but quite
contrary to what you teach in the Pulpit, for there you say That the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ is verily and indeed taken by the Faithful, and here you
say not at all, but sometimes one way, and sometimes another, spiriritually to
day, by Faith only; and virtually to morrow, and in your Catechism you write
(indeed and verily.) So that I cannot compare your Opinion of this Mystery
better, then to what White of Lincoln charge Bishop Ridley with concerning
the destruction of Altars, and the Erecting of Communion Tables in the
beginning of the Reformation: You will find it in Doctor Heylins History, the
5th. year of King Edward the 6ths. Reign, Page 106. Here are the words ( That
when their Table was Constituted, they could never be content in placing the
same, now East, now North; now one way, now another, until it pleased God of
his goodness to place it quite out of the Church.) So much out of Heylin.

I say the same of your Lordships placing the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, now Virtually, now Figuratively, now Spiritually, now by Faith only,
and in your Catechism verily and indeed, until at last it pleased God of his
goodness to place himself quite out of your Sacrament. Disprove this parity, if
you can.

In fine, I remember your Lordship protested mightily against Roman Catholics,
for Coining, and Forgeing new Articles of Faith, as well in relation to
Transubstantiation, as to spiritual Supremacy, etc. You ought to know, my Lord,
that there is no Church on Earth, that protests more against Innovations in
matters of Faith, Manners, and Religious Ceremonies, than the Roman Catholic
Church. As to what belongs to Faith, we say, write, and teach publicly, that
all Articles of Faith are in themselves un-alterable, being they are Eternal
Verities, whose Objects are eternally true, Omnes articuli fidei sunt
immutabiles, eo quod objecta eorum sint eternae veritatis.

Nay, we say, and solemnly protest that St. Peter with all his Successors
together (if you will) in one Chapter cannot alter, and much less make one only
Article of Faith, they all being eternal verities belonging solely to Gods
immediate Revelation. It is true, the Church can declare what is of Faith, to
be of Faith, and what is not of Faith, not to be of Faith: And this is all the
Church of Rome pretends to in the Decision of matters of Faith. So much in
answer to your Lordships vehemence against Coiners of new Articles of Faith.
Find them out, and our Church will condemn 'em with much more Authority than
your Lordship, who ought rather to charge your own Church with that error
(witness your 39 Articles) than ours. This is the substance, my Lord, of all
the convertible Points I took notice of in your last Ascension Sermon: and
unless I be much mistaken that days controversy was in order to take away all
suspicion of your being Roman Cotholickly inclined: For your Lordship living
(as Seneca says) sine impedimento, that is to say, without a Wife, and having
the reputation of one that lives morally well, which is enough for the Rabble
to say you are Popishly affected, you undertook that days work to take away the
scandal, which had no other ground than your good Works; thank then, my Lord,
your own Church for this abuse, which proceeds from that unhappy Merit-killing
Doctrine, which prives out of your Schools all good Works, and Meritorious
actions.

To this purpose I remember the Friday following, your Lordship used all means
in your instruction of Faith to persuade your Auditors, that Abraham's
Justification was for his Faith, and not for his good Works: All your Proof
was, because Abraham believed before he was circumcised: a very weak, or rather
no argument indeed; quasi vero, that all Abraham's good Works were only
comprehended in his circumcision. Pray tell me now if you have this positively
in Scripture? You can never do it, my Lord, but you will find the contrary in
positive Terms both in the New and Old Testament. What shall be the final
Judgment of Predestination, and Reprobation? Shall it not be for Doing, or not
doing good Works; Witness the very words of our last Sentence recorded in the
Gospel, venite Benedicti patis mei, esurivi enim, and dedistis mihi manducare,
etc. Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. I was hungry, and you gave me to eat,
etc. And the other Sentence shall be most terribly terrible against the
Reprobate for want of good Works: Ite maledicti in ignem Aeternum, etc. Go ye
cursed to the everlasting Fire, etc. And why? Esurivi enim, and non dedisti
mihi manducare, etc. Because I was hungry, and you did not feed me, etc. I will
content my self now with one Proof out of the Old Testament, it is in the 30th.
Chapter of Deuteronomy 19 verse, I call Heaven and Earth to record this day
against you, that I have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing,
therefore choose Life, that thou and thy seed may Live. How could God Almighty
call Heaven and Earth to Judge them, if he had not endowed them with Free Will?
for you cannot Lawfully hang a Cripple for not running, nor a Man Born Blind
for not Reading: You must make God then far more cruel than Man, if he damns
for not doing Good Works, you supposing he deprives him of Free Will, which is
the Doctrine of our pretended Reformers, who attribute all to Faith, and
nothing to Merit. As for your Lordship, I think I cannot deal fairer with you,
then to remit you to the Western Window of that Cathedral, wherein I heard you
Preach, and there you will find in Capital Letters, your own Judgment drawn
out of the 2d. Chapter of St. James, v. 26. For as the Body without the Spirit
is Dead, so Faith without good Works is Dead also.

This is all I have to say against those two Sermons I heard your Lordship
Preach; now I beseech the Almighty God, that you may rather soon, then late,
make it your main Concern to find out Truth, and for this purpose you must
invoke faithfully and fervently, the Holy Ghost to Englighten your
understanding, that you may see your error, and inflame your will to embrace
truth, and return speedily to the bosom of Christ's only saving Church on
Earth; and then you will have the Sign of the Holy Cross in Veneration, you
will make use of it in the beginning of all your undertakings. You will own out
of the words of God himself a Visible, Spiritual, Supreme Head of his Church on
Earth; and that the Sacrament of the Altar cannot be a Sacrament according to
the Institution thereof, if Christ's most Sacred Humanity be not there
substantially and really present. And finally you will confess that Free Will
and Meritorious Actions are absolutely necessary for Salvation. Recant timely,
my Lord, otherwise it is much to be feared that this just Judgment shall
surprise you (ignorans ignorabitur) Do what lies in you, and God will never
refuse his helping hand: It is a Principle with us in Divinity, that facienti
quod in se est Deus non denegat Gratiam, Do it again I say, with all the speed
possible; for S. Ambrose assures us that the Holy Ghost does not Love to be put
off, Nescit tarda Molimina Spiritus Sancti Gratia. Tertulian says, Christiano
Christianum non est, a Christian has no to Morrow, but will say with the Royal
Prophet, ecce nunc coepi. Your Lordship will Pardon me, I hope, for exhorting
you to mind your Salvation timely, having no other Interest in your Conversion,
but the Glory of God and the good of your Soul. But if you shut your ears to
this spiritual Admonishment, I call God to Witness, that there is not a Tittle
in this silly Scroul, but shall arise in Judgment against you: I am but a poor
Beggar I own, nay a Beggar indeed, that begs his bread daily, and feeds only on
the Charitable Benevolence of Christians, and will do so while I live in please
God, for I can never aspire higher; but do not despise the words of the little
ones, quia infirma mundi elegit Deus ut confundat fortia. I am the weakest of
all men I confess, in utroque homine, yet my poor Prayers shall be for your
Lordships speedy Conversion to the greater Glory of God, to your own Eternal
Felicity, to the great Joy of all the Angels and Saints of Heaven, to the
public Edification of your fellow Subjects, to the Conversion of Thousands of
your poor straggling Sheep, and perishing Lambs; and finally to the unspeakable
comfort and satisfaction of My Lord, Your most humble Servant and Well-wisher
in Soul and Body, F. J. R.

FINIS.
Books Printed and sold by Nathaniel Thompson, at the Entrance into the Old
Spring-Garden near Charing Cross.
A Manual of Controversies, clearly demonstrating the Truth of Catholic
Religion, By Texts of Holy Scripture, Councils of all Ages, Fathers of the
first 500 years, Common sense and Reason. And fully Answering the principal
Objections of Protestants, and all other Sectaries. Price bound 1 s. 6 d

A Manual of Devout Prayers, Fitted for all Persons and Occasions. To which is
added the Rosary, Latin and English, Prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary, etc.
The Prayers of St. Bridget, and other most devout Prayers upon several
occasions, never before published. With a Catholic Calender for ever. Price 1
s.

A most excellent way of hearing Mass, with profit and Devotion; Containing the
whole Mass in Latin and English; with diverse choice Select Prayers before and
after Confession and Communion: An an Examen of Conscience. To which is added
the Rosary of our Blessed Lady, Prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Prayers
of St. Briget, etc. And several other most Devout Prayers to our Blessed
Redeemer. Also the Vespers or Even-Song, in Latin and English, as it is Sung
in all Catholic Churches. Newly Corrected. Price 1 s.

A Collection of 86 Loyal Poems, all of them Written upon the two late Plots,
viz. The horrid Salmanca Plot in 1678. and the real Fanatical Conspiracy in
1683. To which is added Advice to the Carver, Written on the Death of the late
Lord Stafford. With several Poems on their Majesty's Coronation; never before
Published. The second Edition. Collected by N. T. Price Bound 2 s.

A choice Collection of 180 Loyal Songs, all of them Written since the two late
Plots, etc. Intermixed with some new Love Songs. With a Table to find every
Song. To which is added, the Musical Notes to each Song. The Third Edition with
many Additions. Price 2. s.

The Lawyer Out-lawed; or a brief Answer to Mr. Hunt's Defense of the Charter.
With some useful Remarks on the Commons proceedings in the last Parliament at
Westminster, in a Letter to a Friend. Price 6 d.

Janua Scientiarum; or, a Compendious Introduction to Geography, Chronology,
Government, History, Philosophy; and all gentile sorts of LITERATURE. Price
Bound 1 s.

The State of the Church Affairs in this Island of Great Britain, under the
Government of the Romans and British Kings: Written by a Person of Quality: And
published by Authority. Price 4 s.

The Succession of the Church and Sacraments, from Christ and his Apostles to
the end of the World, cleared, and stated, according to the Ancient Doctrine of
the Greek and Latin Churches. Price 6 d.

A brief Explanation of several Mysteries of the H. Mass, and of the Actions of
the Priest Celebrating: Very necessary for all Roman Catholics, for the better
understanding thereof. Together with certain Reflections upon the Apostles
Creed, touching the B. Sacrament; and also diverse Meditations and Prayers both
before and after Communion. Price 1 s.

Veritas Evangelica, or the Gospel Truth, asserted in Sixteen useful Questions,
being seriously searched into, will open the way to find out assuredly the True
and Saving Faith of Christ, which is but One, as the Apostle affirms; Ephesians. 4.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. Price 1 s.

A Discourse of Confession to a Lawful Priest, wherein is Treated of the last
Judgment; By Peter Manby, Dean of Londonderry in Ireland. Price 1 s.

The Considerations which obliged Peter Manby Dean of Londonderry, to embrace
the Roman Catholic Religion. Humbly Dedicated to his Grace the Lord Primate of
Ireland. Price 6 d.

Some Queries to the Protestants conerning the English Reformation. By Peter
Manby Dean of London-Dery in Ireland.

Popery Anatomised or the Papists cleared from the false Aspersion of Idolatry.
Price 4 d.

A Papist Misrepresented and Represented: Or a twofold Character of Popery,
etc. Price 1 s.

Ordo Recitandi Officii pro Anno Dommini 1687. Price 6 d.

A Net for the Fishers of Men; being the same which Christ gave to his
Apostles; wherein the points controverted betwixt Catholics and all Sectaries,
are briefly vindicated by way of Dilemma: By two Gentlemen Converts. Price 4 d.

An Explication of the Holy Ornaments and Ceremonies which the Priest uses at
Mass. Price 2 d.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen in their Majesty's Chapel at St.
James, on Sunday, October. 24. 1686. By the Reverend Father Dom. W. Marsh, Monk
of the Holy Order of St. Benedict: Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty,
Published by his Majesty's Command: price 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in their Chapel at St. James's the
25th. Sunday after Pentecost, Nov. 17. 1686. By John Dormer of the Society of
Jesus. Price 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in their Chapel at St. James's the 2
d. Sunday in Advent: Dec. 6. 1686. By John Dormer of the Society of Jesus.
Price 6 d.

A Sermon of Judgment Preached before the Queen Dowager in her Majesty's
Chapel at Somerset House, on the first Sunday in Advent, being the 25th. of
November, 1686. By John Dormer of the Society of Jesus. Price 6 d. all
Published by his Majesty's Command.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at their Chapel at St. James's,
on the Feast of the Holy Patriarch St. Bennet. By J. Cross of the Holy Order of
St. Francis.

An Apology for the Contemplations on the Life and Glory of the Holy Mother of
JESUS, showing the Innocence, Equity, and antiquity of the Honor and
Veneration given to Her by the Holy Catholick-Church. By J. C.

A New Test of the Church of Englands Loyalty.

FINIS.

