Reflections upon the Opinions OF Some Modern Divines, CONCERNING The Nature of
Government.

Licensed,

June 29. 1689. J. FRASER.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. COncerning the Original of Sovereign Power, Page 1 CHAP. II. The
different Opinions of Philosophers and Divines concerning this matter Page 7
CHAP. III. That Sovereigns do not receive their Power immediately from God Page
10 CHAP. IV. An Examination of the Arguments which are alleged for the Proof
of this Opinion Page 13 CHAP. V. Whether the Power of Sovereigns be absolute
and unlimited Page 19 CHAP. V. Concerning the Extent of the Power of Sovereigns
Page 24 CHAP. VI. Concerning Non-resistance Page 28 CHAP. VII. That the
Scripture does not assert the point of Non-resistance Page 31 CHAP. VIII.
Whether the States can deprive Sovereigns of their Authority when they abuse it
Page 34 CHAP. IX. Concerning Regal Dignity, and the Rights belonging to it
among the Jews Page 38 CHAP. X. Concerning the Royal Law in favor of the Roman
Emperors Page 50 CHAP. XI. That the States of the West, and of the North, never
knew this Royal Law Page 56 CHAP. XII. That the Power of the Emperors of the
West, is a limited Power Page 63 CHAP. XIII. That the Power of the Kings of
Poland is limited Page 66 CHAP. XIV. That the Monarchy of France is not an
absolute Empire, but a limited Royalty Page 68 CHAP. XV. That the Royalty of
England never had any other form than the rest of the Northern and Western
States Page 79 CHAP. XVI. An Answer to some Difficulties moved against this
Truth Page 85 CHAP. XVII. An Answer to the last Objection Page 91 CHAP. XVIII.
A Reflection on some Remarks made out in this Treatise Page 97
APPENDIX.
CONCILII TOLETANI IV. Canon. LXXV. Page 103 The 75. Canon. of the Fourth
Council of Toledo, ibid. Capitula super quibus facta est Magna Charta Regis
Johannis, ex MS. Arch. Cantuar. Fol. 14. Quae etiam authentice cum Sigillo
extant in manibus Episc. Salisburiensis. 113 Diploma Regium sive Ordinationes
JOHANNIS Regis Angliae, queis statuit quid Nobiles, quid Plebeii observare
debeant, ad pacem and tranquillitatem Regni stabiliendam 121
THE PREFACE.
IT IS a strange and almost incomprehensible thing, that at this time there
should be found so many discontented Persons among us; when but a little while
since, the whole Body of Protestants appeared so unanimous, viz. at the
beginning of the miraculous Revolution. Though it has already retrieved the
State from Ruin, and will without doubt prove its Happiness; it might easily
be guessed, that those who had contributed to the overthrow of the Laws,
apprehending the Reward they had so justly deserved, would make up a Body of
Malcontents, and that their Numbers would be considerable. It Is notorious
also, that in all times, those who think they are not considered or treated
according to the Justice of their Merit, are ready to murmur against the
Government; and the Ambition that possesses them, renders them every where, a
Race of discontented Persons. But whatever difference of Principles there might
be among Protestants, the fear of their common danger having reunited them, and
made their Interests the same with those of the State and Religion, which they
saw equally exposed to inevitable Ruin, there seemed but small ground to
apprehend, that as soon as the Fright was over, there should still be found a
Generation of Men, whom their old Animosities, and habitual Prejudices, would
engage in disaffection and murmuring against the Government. And yet it is but
too true, that scarce did the State and Religion begin to breath again, but
immediately there appeared a Party, who made it appear by their snarling, that
what filled the generality of Men with Joy, and made them give Thanks to God,
afforded them very small Satisfaction. I pretend not to tax the whole Body of
the English Church: It is well enough known, that as their Settlement was
furiously struck at by Popery triumphant, and observing no kind of measures,
her principal Members, as well as the generality of those that resort under
her, have, and still do witness their Zeal for the Government, which God has
been pleased to establish among us. I speak only of some certain Members of
this Church, whom the Court has long employed in overthrowing, by their Maxims,
the Foundations of the Public Liberty, in order to a sure Establishment of
Popery. Those Disciples of L'Estrange, the Pensioner and Drudge of a Popish
Court, no sooner perceived that what was like to happen upon James the Second's
Desertion, would extremely expose them, as Men that had betrayed the Interests
of their Religion and the Government, by Maxims which they had maintained with
so much boldness, every where began to publisb their discontent, and still
endeavor to inspire the same into the People, as founded upon pure Tenderness
of Conscience.

It cannot be denied, but that hitherto the Government has showed an
extraordinary lenity, in reducing them to Reason, whom Danger seemed to have
made wiser. The method and careful management which has been made use of to
obviate whatsoever might afford them the least Jealousy, or give them the
least trouble, is an evident Mark hereof. But in fine, since they continue in
their Mistakes notwithstanding all this care and tenderness, and that nothing
will satisfy them; what can be more prudently undertaken, than to prevent the
pernicious Effects which their Example, and the Maxims wherewith they are
leavened, might produce in the minds of the People. We have thi^ Satisfaction
already, that the Public is well aware they know not themselves what they
would be at; for how free soever they may be to disperse their Murmurs and
Disaffection, yet probably there is scarce one among them that would have James
II. recalled; neither indeed would it be so difficult a thing for them to find
him out, in case their Consciences linked them so closely to him, as they would
make us believe.

But we may have also another satisfaction in this Point; which is, That in
examining their Maxims in good earnest, we may make it appear, That they know
not themselves what they affirm; and that the Opinions they have so long
maintained, concerning the Nature of Government in general, and that of England
in particular, are properly and truly a Heresy in Matters of State. Let no Man
wonder that I call this Opinion of some of the Clergy of England, a Political
or State-Heresie. Their Opinions respect a Political Question truly such; but
these Gentlemen have been pleased to mould it into an Article of Faith,
forsooth, of the Church of England; and their aim was to make that pass for an
Article of the Law, which indeed was no better than a dangerous Error in
Policy. And truly all the Characters of Heresy so fitly suit these their
Sentiments, that it is a hard thing to resist the Temptation of giving them
that Title. These Assertions are a perfect Novelty in Policy, as well as
Divinity. Some late Writers have fully made out, That their Opinions are little
more than of fifty years standing. And it is as true, that they are the fruits
of Ambition. Consider whether all those that ever undertook the defense of
them, did not do it, to raise themselves in the Church, and to be promoted to
higher dignities than they could hope for from their merit. Truth never employs
any thing for its own defense, but the light and evidence which are so
connatural to it; but would to God the Authors and Defenders of these Opinions
had never practiced any violent means, to make their Party triumphant, by which
both Church and State have equally suffered, and been both reduced to within
two inches of their utter Ruin and Destruction.

I confess these Gentlemen have endeavored to delude the World, by alleging
the Holy Scripture and Fathers, in favor of their Opinion. But herein they
have behaved themselves as the Heretics do, in citing the Scripture and
Tradition in defense of their Novelties; that is to say, wresting them to their
own Perdition, as St. Peter says; and making the Father^ speak what best
pleases them, rendering them as pliable as the Sound of Bells, which (according
to the Proverb) do tink as the Fool is pleased to think. And this is that which
I undertake to justify and make out, by my Reflections on this Matter.

To perform this with some method, I shall first of all explain the Original of
the Power of Kings. Secondly, I shall examine the Extent of that Power. And
Thirdl^, I shall consider the Remedy that may be justly opposed against the
Abuse of it. And in the sequel, shall make it my business to apply these
general Matters to most of the Western Kingdoms; and shall make it evident,
That there is no pretext at all for the vast Pretensions of those, who set no
bounds to the Power of Kings, and who believe that nothing but a Stoical and
invincible Patience, can lawfully be opposed to their Injustice and Tyranny.
And for as much as in examining these three Articles, I shall be obliged to
oppose the Prejudices of some New Divines, I think my self bound to advertise
the Reader, That it is not against their Character, but against their Opinions,
that I set my self; and that I do not in the least pretend, by entering into the
Lists with them about a Political Question, to derogate in the least from their
Authority, or to render their knowledge in Theological Questions suspected.
Tractent Fabrilia Fabri, Let Smiths keep to their own Anvil; for by their
disregarding of this Proverb, they have wandered and lost themselves. They have
cut the King lumping Penny-worths out of the Rights of the People, and
imprudently made way for the Establishing of that Tyranny, which would
infallibly, in continuance, have destroyed their Religion. We must therefore,
if it be possible, oblige these Gentlemen to permit others to enjoy their
Rights, and then the World will be happy. I am not ignorant, that there be many
among those, who are dipped in this Opinion, that make great show of Virtue and
Piety: But forasmuch as by this their Conduct they delude and hoodwink the
People, it is but fitting to endeavor to prevent this ill effect, in defending
the Truth. Shall we account the Rights of Truth the less certain, because they
have escaped the discerning of some honest and virtuous Men? Or the Delusion
the less dangerous, because proceeding from those that are such? Let it be
lawful for us then to bring back these Men from their Wanderings; and to
convince them, that they ought no longer to defend Maxims, whose falsity is not
more visible, than it is prejudicial to the Interest of the Church and
Community.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE OPINIONS OF SOME MODERN DIVINES, CONCERNING The Nature of
Government in General, AND That of ENGLAND in Particular.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Original of Sovereign Power.
WE may assert, That the Rights of Sovereignty, to speak properly, have no
Institution in the Law of Nature. A Father indeed has his Children in his
power, and they are subject to him by a Natural Institution, as well because
they have received their Life from him, which is the Foundation of all Good, as
also for that they are beholden to him for their Education; which is another
Life, no less precious than the former. But though this Power were not included
within the narrow Bounds of each particular Family, and though we should
suppose it extended to the taking away of the Life of Rebellious Children, yet
certain it is, that the Paternal Power is not unbounded, with respect to Time;
for as soon as a Man is married, and begins to form another Family, this Act
emancipates him from the Paternal Authority, as Jesus Christ supposes, when he
said to the blessed Virgin, John 2.4. Is not my hour come yet? Which words
Gregor Nyss^n explains thus, An nondum venit mea hora, quae praebet aetati ut
imperet, and sui sit Juris? Is not my hour come yet, which allows my Age to
command, and leaves me at my own dispose? But the case is not the same with
Magistrates, whose Authority reaches over a whole Society composed of several
Families; for as they do not owe their Birth to the Magistrate, nor are obliged
to him for their Education, as they are to their Parents, their Command cannot
be founded on the Right of Nature, which subjects Children to their Parents.

Neither can we suppose that the Authority of Magistrates is bottomed upon some
Excellence they have by Nature above their Subjects. I own there be some
Virtues and Talents which do ordinarily submit the Spirits of such as know
them, to those who are adorned therewith; and the highest degrees of Virtue and
Wisdom do naturally procure a veneration for those that possess them. But who
sees not, that this is insufficient to be the foundation of Civil Power. A
Magistrate is not always distinguished by these illustrious Talents and
Qualifications, which so powerfully attract Veneration in particular. A Man may
be very wise, and yet be never the more obeyed by those who don't understand
the price of Wisdom. He may be very valiant, but his Courage, being
unaccompanied with Prudence, may render him contemptible in the Eyes of those
who apprehend his Temerity. It is plain then, that it is not this natural
difference God has put between Men, which is the ground of the Magistrates
Authority* Indeed, the same is the case of Magistracy, as of the Ceremonial
Law, which entered into the World because of Sin; for certainly, if Men in their
behavior lived up to the Precepts of the Law of Nature, one Man would never
invade what his Neighbor is possessed of, either by Inheritance, or by his own
Industry: One Man would not defile the Bed of his Neighbor, or spill his
Blood, to hinder the Opposition his Neighbor might make against his
Enterprises. But because Men are so prone to violate those equitable Laws, to
sati fie their Passions, and corrupt Inclinations, therefore is the Magistrates
Authority become necessary.

And how great soever we may conceive this Authority to be, yet we must
acknowledge, that God never instituted it till after the Deluge, as appears
from Genesis 9.6. We read in the Scripture, that Cain, when he had killed his
Brother Abel, told God, That he feared that every one that met him, would kill
him; but do not find, that he did in the least apprehend, that his Father, as
his Natural Sovereign, should sentence him for that Murder. This Impunity of
Cain proved an encouragement to Lamech, as we see Genesis 4.24. It seemed indeed
that the Authority of Adam, their common Father, together with that of the
Patriarchs, might have been sufficient to contain Men within the Bounds of
their Duty, as well as the near Relation and Alliance that was between them.
But this Paternal Authority, having by the space of fifteen Ages been found
incapab^e to restrain the licentiousness of Men, and too weak to put a stop to
their Debaucheries and Murders, which at last drew down the Deluge upon them;
we find that God afterward instituted Magistracy, as a stronger Curb, to stop
the impetuosity of Men's exorbitant Passions. Moreover, Men being obliged to
separate themselves from one another, in order to their peopling of the whole
Earth, consequently could not observe the same Principles of Communion which
linked them together under the Patriarchs; wherefore it was Natural to
substitute to that Patriarchal Authority, a Government more accommodated to the
state of Men in their different and dispersed Habitations. Wherefore, because
Men had learnt from the Example of those who were drowned by the Flood, to make
small account of the remonstrances of their Parents, as well as of the Divine
Denunciations, God thought fit to lay a more strong Curb in their Mouths, and
to restrain them, by making temporal Death the Reward of those who would not be
contained within the Bounds of their Duty by the fear of Eternal Sufferings, in
these words, Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed.
This being the sense and full import of this Declaration, according as the Jews
unanimously agree. Now this granted, it is evident, that since Sovereign Power
was instituted by God for a Curb to sin, we must suppose that there be Laws,
which serve for a foundation of Society, and for the conservation of which
Sovereignty was introduced at first: it is to make these Laws inviolable, and by
punishments to restrain the unruliness and exhorbitance of the passions of Men,
from transgressing of those Laws, that the Sword at first was put into the
Sovereign's Hand, and power given him to punish Criminals, or utterly to cut
them off, as destructive to Society it self.

From these two Principles, we very naturally deduce a third, viz. That the
Character of a Sovereign, consequently requires, That he who is clothed
therewith, be one of the most perfect of the Society, that is one at the
greatest distance, from a disposition to violate the Laws: for if he encourages
others by his Example to violate them, and if by this means he subvert the
foundations on which the Society subsists, directly crossing the design and aim
for which he was made a Sovereign; it is evident to a demonstration, that he
possesses the Sovereignty contrary to the intention of God, and the natural end
of Society.

Nothing is more evident, than what I have here laid down; but it respects only
the Society, considered with regard to those of whom it consists: for if we
look upon it with respect to those who are strangers, and who may destroy it,
by invading it by force of Arms, it appears clearly that the Sovereign, being
the defender of Justice at home, finds himself naturally obliged, to protect
the Society by Force; so that together with Justice, he ought also to be
qualified with the Character of Valiant, that he may oppose himself, with
Success, to all Enemies from abroad, and hinder them from destroying the
Society.

And lastly, the Character of W^se is particularly required in a Sovereign, for
neither Justice, nor Valor, are of any great use, as long as they are separate
from Wisdom and Prudence. Wisdom is useful in Peace, and no less in time of
War, is necessary with respect to Subjects as well as Enemies; she shines forth
in Treaties, as well as Ruptures; she is of use in the prosecuting of injuries,
as well as in the choice of means to obtain reparation; she finds out
Expedients, against the greatest difficulties; and, in a word, we may say that
without her, the Political Government is as a Body without a Soul, and a Ship
without a Pilot, or Helm, which is abandoned to the Winds to be tossed at
pleasure, and which at last perishes infallibly by dashing it self against the
first Rock it meets with.

If we attentively heed what has been here advanced, we shall find that this
has served as a common Principle, to all the different forms of Government,
that have at any time obtained amongst Men. Indeed it is not easy to
determine, what form of Government God instituted by that Law, mentioned in the
Ninth of Genesis, whether he by those words determined the Authority to one or
more Magistrates; because the word Man, is often taken collectively, to express
many; so that the words are too general to decide this question: they conclude
only that Murder is to be punished with Death. From whence we infer that the
Magistrate has power to punish Murderers and other Criminals, that destroy the
Laws, whereby the Society subsists. It is manifest therefore that by reason and
experience Men came to prefer one kind of Government before another, and
variously to divide the Authority amongst many, according to the different acts
to which it ought to be extended.

It seems that force was at first only made use of as a refuge for the weak,
either to destroy the wild Beasts, that devoured their Cattle, and some times
Men too; or to put a stop to the injustice of those, whose bodily strength
inspired them with designs to rob the weaker sort of their possessions. And it
is very probable, that forasmuch, as soon after, they observed that the force
which protected them, might as well oppress the Society, for whose defense and
protection it was armed, they found that Magistracy could not be looked upon as
an advantage, if it were not committed to the wise conduct of the most ancient
of the Society, who seem to have been the Judges, Magistrates and Counselors
of State, among all Governments, that were ever instituted with any prudence.
Those who considered the great parts that are necessary for the governing of a
Society, preferred the way of choosing their Governors. Those who had
experienced the ill effects of corrupt Elections by Bribes or other ways,
followed the way of taking for their Governors, the Children of those who had
ruled them with Prudence. They who observed that one person is rarely capable
of resisting and moderating so many different passions as may trouble a
Society, thought good to divide the command amongst many. Those who took notice
that this equality produced dissensions amongst many Governors, placed the
power in one person only. Those that were aware that a single person might
overturn the Laws, and set up his will as the only rule of his conduct, found
it necessary to preserve to the People their share in the Government. In a
word, every Nation chose that way they thought most sure and proper to obtain
the true ends of an happy Government in order to secure and preserve the
Society.

What I have said in general, concerning the original of Sovereignty or
Magistracy amongst Men, shows that it cannot be denied, but that the
institution thereof is Divine, though God did not think fit to determine it to
any certain form of Magistracy, whether of Monarchy, Aristocrasie or
Democrasie, but left it to the Peoples free choice, to pitch upon that form
they should judge most convenient for them. But to procure a farther light to
this matter, we must consider the Judgment of Philosophers and Divines
concerning this point.

CHAP. II. The different Opinions of Philosophers and Divines concerning this
matter.
IT may be said, That there are three Opinions concerning the original of
Sovereign Magistracy. Cicero, in his Books of the Commonwealth, was of Opinion,
as appears from the definition he sets down, That Governments were at first
formed by an effect of pure necessity, St. August. de civit. D.
which forced the weaker to seek for aid and succor, from those that were
stronger, to secure themselves from oppression. This was also the Opinion of
the famous Archbishop of Burgos in the Council of Basil. Fascic. Fol. 7.

The Body of Christian Divines maintains that the Authority of the Sword was
instituted by God, as may be seen Genesis 9. And it appears that whereas before
the Deluge the Patriarchs were the only Masters of their Families, which gave
occasion to abundance of Crimes, Justice not being executed with vigor enough,
to put a stop to the course of exorbitances: as long as it was in the hands of
a common Father, God was pleased to enact a Law whereby the Sword should no
longer be bound up to each head of a Family, but committed to one who should be
particularly charged therewith by the common consent of the Society.

The Third Opinion is that of some new Divines, and other flatterers of the
unbridled power of Princes, who maintain that Kings derive their Authority
immediately from God, and not mediately from the consent of the People. Thus
Peter de Marca declares himself on this point, de concord. lib. 2. c. 2. v. 1,
2, 3. following therein the sentiments of Victoria and Duval, the one a
Spaniard and the other a Frenchman.

We need not wonder, if Cicero was mistaken in the deciding of this matter, as
being destitute of that light, which Moses furnishes Divines with. He
determines this point only as a natural Philosopher. However we must observe
that Cicero himself, and the most wise amongst the Heathens, have sufficiently
given to understand, that they conceived Magistracy, without which it is
impossible for a Society to subsist, to be of Divine Original, as well as all
other good and profitable institutions for the benefit of Mankind.

But not to insist upon this, forasmuch as all Divines agree that the original
of Magistracy is from God, our business only is, to enquire, which is the truer
Opinion, theirs who acknowledging the Divine institution of Magistracy,
maintain that this Authority is communicated to the Powers and Magistrates by
the People, or of those who pretend that God immediately communicates the same
to the Magistrates that are invested therewith.

In order to the resolving of which, before we pass any further, we are to
observe, 1st. That the Body of Divines who defend the former of these Opinions,
do agree, That the Authority of Magistrates is not to be accounted less Divine,
because it does not immediately come down from God. They own these Two things.
1st. That God has ordered there should be Sovereign Magistrates to regulate and
govern Societies. 2ly. That God having divested private Persons of the right of
doing themselves Justice, in case of Offenses given them, has ordained that the
Magistrates should have the Sword put into their Hands, by Capital and other
Punishments, to stop the violence of those who disturb the Peace of the
Society, and violate the Rules of Justice. And in this respect they acknowledge
Magistracy, (...), a divine Settlement and Institution.

Secondly, We are to observe, That when on the other hand they maintain, That
the Power of the Magistrates is conferred by consent of the People; in which
respect they pretend, That St. Peter calls them (...), that does not in the
least diminish the Authority of this Divine Institution of Magistrates, which
they refer solely and immediately to God.

Thirdly, That whatsoever Notion we may frame of the Power of Magistrates,
whether we suppose it conferred upon them immediately by God, as M. de Marca
pretends; or whether it be only mediately derived to them from God, by the
intervening consent of the People, the thing is still the same; because it is
evident, that this Power is not communicated to them, but for the subsistence
of the Society, the Preservation whereof is the natural End of Government and
Sovereignty.

Fourthly, That they do not oppose this Notion of the immediate Collation of
the Sovereign Power by God, save only that they might express themselves more
exactly, and distinguish the ordinary Governments of the World from the Kingdom
of Israel. For the same Divines generally own, That the Institution of the
Royal Power in Israel, was an immediate Act of God; but withal maintain, That
the same cannot be said of other Sovereigns.

This laid down, I say, That nothing can be imagined more vain, than the second
of these Opinions; and it is enough only to understand the terms which those
Divines make use of to express their Sentiment, concerning the Original of
Sovereign Magistrates in every State, and to consider the Proofs they allege,
to evidence the falseness of it; which Opinion accordingly I shall refute in
the following Third Chapter.

CHAP. III. That Sovereigns do not receive their Power immediately from God.
I Say then, That it is false, That Sovereigns receive their Power immediately
from God. This is a Truth may be easily made out. Indeed, though the Power of
Magistrates, of what sort soever they be, be of Divine Institution; which of
all the present Sovereign Powers, whether Monarchs, Commonwealths, or any other
Form of State, was instituted immediately by God? And who are the Persons
invested therewith, whom God has immediately called to that sort of Power? All
States are formed either by Conquest, or by Consent of the People; which
intervenes in the Election at the first Founding of a State, and which is
renewed in every subsequent Election of Princes, or which is perpetuated in
successive Kingdoms. Was there any thing like to this in the advancement of
David to the Royal Dignity?

Secondly, Is it not visible, that in order to an immediate Establishment from
God, there is required an express Revelation, such as may be equivalent, at
least to a public declaration of his Will, in favor of him whom he will set
on the Throne? Thus things were carried with respect both to Saul and David;
and who will affirm there is any King now in the World that has attained the
Regal Power after this manner? If there be any, let them acquaint us with his
Name, and the manner of God's revealing himself to the People, to make them
know, that he immediately made choice of such a Person to supply that Place.

Thirdly, Who sees not, that the whole Discourse of these Divines is nothing
but a continual Equivocation? An Office is instituted immediately by God;
wherefore all that are called by ordinary ways and methods, are immediately
established in it by God. I had as lief they should tell me, That because
Marriage derives its first institution and beginning from God in the Person of
Adam and Eve, whom God joined to Adam, That therefore all Marriages are made
immediately by God, and that he is the immediate Author of them. The one is
every whit as reasonable as the other, and in the mean time the second is
absolutely false. The Author of Ecclesiasticus says, Chap. 7.16. That the Art
of Tilling the Ground was created by God: Does it follow from thence, that God
has immediately settled such and such a one in the Calling of Husbandry.

Fourthly, If all Sovereign Magistrates desire their Institution immediately
from God, how is it that we find so great a diversity in the Form of these
Sovereign Governments. In some States we find Kings, in others Aristocrasies or
Democrasies: Does not this variety make it evident, that though God indeed have
instituted Magistracy in general, yet he has left it to the People to determine
the Form of it, according to their Need, their Inclinations, and the
Circumstances wherein they find themselves.

Fifthly, Does it not most evidently appear, That if the Person were
immediately instituted by God, it would be great folly for any Society to
trouble themselves about enacting Laws for a Free Election at every Change, or
to establish it by way of Succession in Monarchies? If God establishes all
Sovereign Magistrates immediately, to what purpose are all those Rules and
Limitations, which by their variety afford us a sufficient demonstration, that
this Institution is not an immediate effect of the Deity.

The Philosophers were fully of this Opinion, as we may see in the Books of
Aristotle's Policy; where he makes out, That the cause of the various sorts of
Governments that are in the World, is nothing else but the different Judgments
of the People, concerning the several sorts and manners of Government: Some of
which have chosen one Form, to avoid the Inconveniences they foresaw and
apprehended from another; and others again being induced to embrace that Form,
by the advantages they discerned in it, rather than another. This is a matter
we ought to mind very carefully, that we may not put a ridiculous sense upon
some Expressions of the Ancients when they speak of Magistracy, as founded in
the Law of Nature.

The Lawyers agree with the Philosophers in this Point. Vlpian and Justinian
both of them tell us, That the People of Rome bestowed upon the Emperor
Augustus, by the Royal Law, all the Right and Empire by which they were
subjected unto that Emperor, lib. 1. ff de Constit. Princip. Theophilus
explains what properly a Prince is, in these terms; A Prince (says he) is a
Person who has received from the People the Power of Commanding and Ruling over
them,. 6. de Jure Nature. and Gent.

The Canonists of the Church of Rome are no less express in this Matter, than
the Philosophers and Lawyers. Cardinal Bertrandi lays it down for his
Foundation, in his Treatise of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, Bibliotheca
Patrum, which was copied by an English Monk, and is found among the Manuscripts.

The Divines of that Communion make a Principle of it, as appears by the
Discourse of the Archbishop of Burgos, which I have before cited. And Soto
says, lib. 4. de Just. and Jure, Regalem potestatem, Populi naturali lumine
erexerunt, That the People, by the Light of Nature established Kingly Power

M. de Marca owns, That the Canonists of his School do not favor his Opinion;
but withal maintains, That they have fallen upon the Opinion contrary to his,
that they might make a greater difference between the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Power, than there is indeed; and to depress the Civil Power below the
Ecclesiastical. He might also have alleged against the Divines of his School,
That in this Question they relied too much on the Judgment of Aristotle, who
was their St. Paul, until the times of the Reformation. However, that which M.
de Marca declares as his Judgment concerning this Matter, is too generally
spoken: For we see Marsilius of Padoua following the same Principles, in his
Defensorium Pacis, though he undertook the Defense of the Emperor Lewis of
Bavaria, against the Enterprises of the Pope; but however he pretends, That the
Scripture and Antiquity furnish us with quite other Notions about this Matter;
which we shall next make it our business to enquire into.

CHAP. IV. An Examination of the Arguments which are alleged for the Proof of
this Opinion.
HE alleges only two places of Scripture, the one is that of St. Paul, Romans
13. and the other is taken from the Sixth Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon,
which is an Apocryphal Book; but neither the one nor the other proves the thing
he pretends.

It appears by the former of these Texts, That the Apostle endeavors to oppose
the Opinion of those among the Jews, who pretended, That because the Monarchies
or States of the Heathens had not an immediate Institution from God, as that of
Israel, to which God had in a particular manner subjected the Jews, that
therefore they were not obliged to submit themselves to the Authority of
Heathen Magistrates. Wherefore he points them from that immediate Institution
made in favor of the Kings of Judea, to that common and more ancient
Institution of Magistracy among the Posterity of Noah, which Moses sets down,
Genesis 9. as being sufficient to make the Authority of Magistrates respected,
whatsoever Nation or Religion they might be of; whether they derived their
Power from the Consent of the People, or whether they had obtained it, by
Robbing the lawful Sovereigns of their Authority, as the Romans had done, with
respect to the Kings of Judea. In a word, the Apostle in that place intends
nothing else but to authorize the Maxim of the Essenians, as it is related by
Josephus, lib. 2. de Bello Jud. cap. 12. Fidem omnibus servare, maxim vero
principibus, (...), to be faithful and true to all Men, but more especially to
Princes; because the Sovereign Command never befell any one without the Divine
Providence. These Essenians maintained against the Sect of the Pharisees, that
they might lawfully submit themselves to a Heathen Conqueror, without always
fostering a Spirit of Rebellion against him, and without disputing or
questioning his Authority, under pretext that the Jewish Government had been
established immediately by God. But does this Text of St. Paul in the least
prove, that every Pagan Prince was immediately set upon the Throne by God?

The Passage quoted from the Sixth Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, is nothing
at all to their purpose; because the Author of that Book addresses himself, in
all appearance, to the Kings of Judea, who, as all agree, derived their
Accession to the Throne immediately from God; so that it might well be said to
them, Power is given you of the Lord, and Sovereignty from the Highest.

True it is, That Jesus Christ expresses himself in words much to the same
purpose, John 19. speaking to Pilate the Governor of Judea; Thou could have
no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. But it is
visible that he speaks this only with respect to the Order of the Divine
Providence, which had suffered the Throne of Judea to be overthrown by the
Romans; so that instead of her Natural Magistrates, she was now subject to
Strangers. The Empire of Nimrod was founded in the same manner with that of the
Romans, and yet I scarce think any Man will pretend, that God committed the
Sovereign Power to him, in the same manner that he did vouchsafe it to David.

True it is, That the Scripture gives Cyrus the King of Persia the Title of the
Lord's Anointed; which seems to import, as if God had in an immediate manner
raised him to the Throne like David: But this is no due consequence; for the
Notion of the Lord's Anointed, signifies only his particular Destination of
him, to be the Instrument of the Jews deliverance from their Captivity. I
freely own, That a Divine Providence may ordinarily be observed in the
Elevation of Kings; and that the same may be taken notice of, as intervening in
a more especial manner, in the raising of those Kings whom God designs to make
use of for the good of his Church, which is linked with the Civil Society: But
I do not conceive that from thence it will follow, either that the acts of
ordinary Providence, manifesting themselves upon occasions, are sufficient to
make an immediate divine Institution of Princes, no more than other Events,
wherein Providence intervenes, can properly be called immediate Effects of the
Deity; nor that the extraordinary Acts of Divine Providence, as were those that
respected Cyrus, ought to be alleged as an Argument in common Events.

The words we find in the Eighth Chapter of the Proverbs, are also commonly
quoted to this purpose, By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice; but it
is manifest, that this is said with regard to Wisdom, of which he was speaking
before, and which displays it self in the management of Humane Affairs, without
intimating any immediate Act of the Deity.

Moreover we are carefully to observe, That though the Scriptures attribute to
God the Institution of Magistrates, in which respect also they call them a
Divine Institution, and ascribe to God the Exaltation of Princes in particular;
yet they never express themselves but in a very general manner, as when they
set forth to us the part God bears in all Events. Thus God is said to overturn
Thrones, in like manner as he is said to erect them; he is said to settle
Tyrants, as well as the most lawful Kings: All which Expressions relating to
his Providence, which does or permits things by the intervening ministry of
Second Causes, can have no influence upon the Judgments we are to make
concerning the Authority of Princes, with regard to their Divine institution.

M. de Marca makes use of some Passages out of the Fathers, to confirm his
Opinion. But, First, they infer nothing but what we are ready to grant, viz.
That God having ordained Magistracy, those who are invested therewith, ought to
be considered, as the Ministers of God; which is sufficient for a foundation of
their Authority, without any necessity of supposing, that God immediately
endows every King with the Royal Power, wherewith he is invested. This is the
Opinion of Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, ad Autol. Lib. 1. where he says, That
the Prince has received in some sort from God the administration of the
Government ((...)) which expression does visibly respect a mediate institution,
but does not at all express an immediate institution, as M. de Marca conceives.
Secondly, They distinctly lay down, That Magistracy is a humane institution, as
St. Peter qualifies it, because all Magistrates, and Kings themselves are
ordained, and established by Men; as Oecumenius explains that place, 1 Pet. 1.2.

St. Irenaeus says no more, lib. 5. contr. Haer. C. 24. He refutes the Opinion
of the Gnostics, who would have Magistrates to be an institution of the Devil,
and he makes it appear, that both the Old and New Testament confirm, That
Magistrates are one of the means which Providence has judged necessary to put a
stop to the Current of Wickedness and Crimes, which had deluged the Heathen
World, whom the fear of God alone was not able to keep within the bounds of
Justice. To which purpose he says, Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu
and Reges instituuntur; by whose command Men are born, by his command Kings are
ordained. Neither does Epiphanius advance any thing more than this. Haeresi 40.
contra Archontic.

Tertullian expresses himself to the same purpose, in his Apologet. cap. 30.
Inde est Imperator, unde and homo antequam Imperator; inde potestas illi, unde
Spiritus. Thence is the Emperor, from whence Man is before he was Emperor,
thence he has his power from whence he has his Breath.

St. Chrysostom exactly follows their footsteps, as well as St. Isidore Bishop
of Pelusium, Lib. 2. Epist. 206. Indeed how could St. Chrysostom teach any
other Doctrine, who in his 23. Hom. upon the Epistle to the Romans plainly
asserts, That Jesus Christ never gave his Laws with design to overturn the
received forms of Government, (...). and expressly denies that those words in
the 13. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans; for there is no power but what is
of God, must be understood concerning Government in general, and not of those
who are invested therewith. Quid dicis, Omnis ergo Princeps a Deo constitutus
est? Istud, inquit, non dico. Neque enim de quovis Principe sermo mihi nunc
est, sed de ipsa ^re. Quod enim principatus sunt, quod isti quidem imperant,
isti vero subjecti sunt, quodque non simpliciter ac temere cuncta feruntur....
divina sapientiae opus esse dicit. Propterea non dicit, Non enim Princeps est
nisi a Deo, sed de re ipsa disserit dicens; Non enim Potestas est nisi a Deo.
What do you say then that every Prince is constituted by God? No I don't say
so, for I am not speaking here of every particular Prince, but of the thing it
self. For that there are Principalities, that some rule, and others obey, and
that all things are not carried rashly and without order; this the Apostle
declares to be an effect of the Divine Wisdom. Wherefore also he does not say,
for there is no Prince but who is of God, but, for there is no power but what
is of God.

St. Augustine de Civitate Dei, Lib. 5. cap. 21. holds forth no other Doctrine.
Qui Augusto Imperium dedit, ipse and Neroni, qui Vespasianis, vel Patri vel
filio, Suavissimis Imperatoribus, ipse and Domitiano crudelissimo. He that
bestowed the Imperial Dignity upon Augustus, gave it also to Ne^o, and the same
who advanced the Vespasians, Father and Son, most beneficent Emperors, exalted
also the most cruel Domitian. All which expressions do evidently refer to
nothing else, but the order established by the Divine Providence, without, in
the least, deciding the question in Controversy.

Neither do I find that the Bishops of France entertained any different
Opinions concerning this matter, when they represented to Lewis the good, the
greatness and importance of his Dignity, and the necessity that lay upon him,
to afford Justice to all his Subjects, because he owed his Sovereign Dignity to
God himself and his Predecessors. Quapropter, say they, quisquis caeteris
mortalibus, temporaliter imperat, non ab hominibus, sed a Deo, commissum sibi
regnum credat. Multi namque munere Divino, multi etiam Dei permissa regnant.
Wherefore whosoever temporally rules over other Men, ought to think his Kingdom
committed to him, not by Men but by God. For many do reign by a Divine Grant,
and many only by Divine Permission. Which words were used by them, only as a
motive, to oblige that Emperor, not to look upon the Royal Dignity as an
Inheritance or Possession, but as a charge or office instituted by God, of the
administration whereof he was to give an account to God. Council. Paris. Lib. 2.
cap. 5. Anno 829. The Fathers also of the Council of Trosly, simply declare,
That the Royal Dignity was instituted by God, when the Apostle said, Be subject
to the King as chief, which would be a strange Conclusion, if he had not had an
eye to the institution of the Office, and not to the immediate institution or
consecration of the Person.

I know it has been customary for Emperors and Kings, to look upon themselves
as chosen of God, Crowned of God, etc. which has given occasion to some
Painters and Gravers to represent them, as receiving their Crowns from Heaven.
I am not ignorant also that the Emperor Lewis, of Bavaria, maintains, That the
Imperial Power and Authority, is immediately from God, and not from the Pope;
but his first expression respects only the order of Providence, and the second
the Pope's pretensions, who maintained, That Emperors held the Empire as a
Fief, whereof the Pope was the Lord Paramount.

After all, though these Gentlemen, who attribute to every Sovereign Magistrate
and to every King, the power which they enjoy, as immediately conferred upon
them by God, think by this means to lay a more sure foundation for the
veneration which the People owe to the Royal Power, it is very evident that
they advance little by this their Opinion, if it be true, that this power,
though we should suppose it granted immediately by God, must be limited by
certain Laws, and that the People have right to impose them upon them, when
they elevate them to that Dignity.

CHAP. V. Whether the Power of Sovereigns be absolute and unlimited.
IT is commonly conceived that there are two sorts of Government, the one
Absolute, and the other Limited: Absolute Government is supposed to be that,
wherein the Governor does so absolutely enjoy all the Authority necessary for
the subsistence of the Society, that none share with him in it, so that he
exercises it according to his good pleasure. In such a Government as this, the
Prince can make Laws, and again revoke, or dispense with them. He can settle
inferior Magistrates, and discharge or remove them again at pleasure, and
repeal their Acts or Decrees. He can declare War to the Enemies of the State,
and make Peace with them. He can save the Lives of Criminals, or take them
away: all which he may do without any one having any right to contradict or
oppose him. Neither is there any thing contrary to the nature of Government, in
this Absolute Power: for since it is necessary to make Laws for the good of the
State, according as there is need, to nominate Magistrates, and to remove them;
to examine the Judgments of inferior Courts, and repeal them, if they be
unjust: it is a thing indifferent to the State, by whom these things are done,
so they be but done in such a manner, as to answer the natural end of
Government, which is the good of the Society.

But we must take heed of conceiving any such Absolute Power inherent in any
Sovereigns whatsoever, whereby they may lawfully frustrate and overthrow the
ends of Government. For how absolute so ever a Prince may be conceived to be,
yet can he not be so in all respects: for first he is subject to the Divine
Laws, as well as the meanest of his Subjects. Secondly, He is subject to the
Laws that are founded on the Right of Nations. Thirdly, He is obnoxious to the
fundamental Laws of the State, which he governs. Fourthly, he lies under an
obligation of following the Laws of the Government, committed to his charge, so
far as to endeavor to obtain the ends thereof, by procuring the happiness of
the Society.

But if any Man conceives a Government absolute in all respects, and whereof
the Sovereigns are not bou^ht up by the four Ties abovesaid, he imagines an
illegal and monstrous Government; neither can there be any such, but the
Tyrannical, which is no Government at all. For seeing that Tyranny is
diametrically opposite to the natural end and aim of Government, I do not see
how it can be ranked with lawful Governments, there being as much absurdity in
supposing it such, as to suppose an unjust and impossible Law, to be a good and
true Law, because published by one, who has the Authority to do it.

I cannot find that ever there was any Empire or Authority Absolute in all
respects, as is pretended. Those very Sovereigns which are conceived to be
resolute to this degree, as those of the Medes and Persians, had
notwithstanding some irrevocable and inviolable Laws, which were fundamental to
that State; as appears from the Book of Daniel, Aristotle seems to speak of
these s^^^s of Government. Polit. Lib. 3. 210. where he disti^^^ishes them from
a Tyrannical Government, forasmuch as they were established upon some
fundamental Laws or Customs. And I very much question, whether any such
example can be produced, no not in the Empire of the Turks, which has been
always looked upon as the most Absolute and Despotical Government, where the
Sover^igns have attributed to themselves so vast and unbounded a Power, and
actually enjoyed the same.

I know it is commonly apprehended, that Conquerors, such as Nimrod, and many
others, did in so absolute a manner possess themselves of all the Rights of
Sovereignty, that there was nothing left to their Subjects of what Rank or
Order soever. But to declare my sense of this matter, we are to observe, First,
That Conquerors had no other aim, but to rob other Sovereigns of their Power,
without changing any thing in the Government of the State they had invaded.
Secondly, That those Invasions having no other foundation, but a Conquest by
force of Arms and Violence, contrary to the Law of Nature, which made Seneca
call this sort of Conquerors Magnos and furiosos Latrones, great and furious
Robbers; these Conquerors easily perceived, it was necessary for them, to trim
and rectify this their unjust Power, if they would have their Authority to be
lasting: whereupon they accordingly took care to moderate it, by Conventions
and Laws, to the Justice of which the People gave their consent. Thirdly, That
these Conventions and these Laws, were to speak truly and properly, the lawful
Title of all the Authority their Subjects owned in them. Fourthly, That this
consent of the Subjects, always supposes, that the ends of Government be
preserved, except we should persuade our selves, that there be Subjects Fools
enough to consent to a Government, whose aim should not be levelled at their
Advantage and Prosperity.

It Is horribly to delude ones self, to found the Idea of an Absolute Government
in all respects, amongst Men, upon a notion of the absolute Empire God has over
all his Creatures: for is it not evident that this Divine Empire, supposes an
immovable Justice, and infinite wisdom, and a most tender love for his
Creatures, which are the Essential Attributes of God, and which cannot be found
in any mortal Man? But some, it may be, will tell me, That I contradict the
Style of Holy Scripture, in denying that Tyrants can lawfully enjoy so absolute
a Power, when the Prophets tell us, concerning some Kings, That God gave them
such absolute Power: as we find it expressed in particular concerning
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.18, 19. But the answer to this Objection is obvious,
First, That which ought to be referred to God's Permission only, is not to be
attributed to a concession of the Deity, which latter is only sufficient to
establish a lawful Right; for otherwise, we must say, That God had given a just
right to the false Prophets to deceive Ahab, by their lying Oracles. If this be
not the case, let any Man answer me these Two Questions, First, Whether
Nebuchadnezzar sinned, in using this absolute Power, which he had, without any
consent or concurrence of his Subjects, in killing them without cause, and
contrary to the Laws of Justice and Equity? Secondly, Whether God could justly
punish Nebuchadnezzar, as he did, for making use of this Tyrannical Power,
which he had suffered him to invade. Nemini injuriam facit qui jure suo utitur.
He that makes use of his own Right injures no body, is a Maxim of Law.

Secondly, Otherwise we should be fain to suppose, That those, who at any times
have raised themselves against Tyrants, had been great Criminals, whereas the
Holy Scripture does set them forth for Heroes, such as Ehud, who have
undertaken to rid the World of their unjust oppression, by killing them.

Possibly it may be further objected to me, That by these assertions I oppose
the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, which equally command all both Jews
and Christians to submit themselves to the Powers that had conquered them, and
particularly to the Power of the Romans, who pretended to be absolute over all
their Subjects. But it will be found that there is nothing at all of any
contradiction between that which I maintain, and what is here objected. The
Jews being conquered by Nebuchadnezzar, were become the Slaves of that Monarch,
and owed him all manner of obedience, which Bondmen do to him who has saved
their Lives, when it was in his power to kill them. And for the rest, the
Scripture does not determine, whether the Tyrannical power they attributed to
themselves, be lawful or no. Sure it is, that an unlawful and Tyrannical
Sovereign may rule legally in several respects, in which case, it imports
little, to those who are subject to it, contrary to their wills, whether the
Power, under which they are, be lawful in all respects or not.

Let this therefore be laid down for a certain truth, That every lawful power
is necessarily limited by Laws, That these Laws are the foundation of the
Government; from which the Sovereigns cannot depart, without overturning the
Society, for the subsistence of which, the Political Government was at first
instituted by God.

But this is not the only kind of limitation, which may be observed in the
Powers that govern Societies. As God has not prescribed any sort of Government,
in preference to others, the Wisdom of Men have diversely limited the way and
constitution thereof. Most People finding by Experience, That Monarchy, though
it have many advantages before other Governments, is apt to degenerate to
Arbitrary Power, thought it fitting that the greatest Lords of the Community,
should concur with the King in the exercise of his Authority: others again were
of Opinion, That the People ought to have the chiefest share in the Government,
forasmuch as the main end of the Government is to make them happy. These
different apprehensions of Men, have established the several forms of
Government, the aim of those, who contrived those different forms, being only
to prevent oppression and injustice, which directly cross the end of Government.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Extent of the Power of Sovereigns.
WHat I have here set down concerning the Nature of Governments, the most
Absolute of which are not unbounded by the Laws of God, by the Laws which
constitute the Right of Nations, by the fundamental Laws of the State, and more
particularly by Bounds prescribed to the Authority of Sovereigns: sufficiently
shows what is the just extent of Sovereign Power, and how far Men are obliged
to yield Obedience to it. Indeed, forasmuch as Authority and Obedience are
relative terms, which reciprocally establish or overthrow one another, it is
easy to judge, That Obedience cannot be due to Authority, but in proportion to
the extent of the Authority.

Paternal Authority, in the manner as God had established it under the Law,
could not inflict Death upon a Son, but in the presence of the Judges, and upon
the hearing of Witnesses. The Authority of a Judge cannot be discharged, but in
the due Forms of Judicature, and according to the Laws; he cannot punish a
Criminal extrajudiciously, notwithstanding he might have absolute knowledge of
his Offense.

This laid down, and there is nothing more evident, it will be easy to
determine, how far the Obedience of Subjects is engaged in the various sorts of
Government under which they resort.

As to those Governments or Powers, which have no other Law but their own Will,
whether at first they were raised by way of Conquest, which seems to reduce
Subjects to the condition of Slaves; or whether from lawful Governments they
have by degrees degenerated into Tyranny by the Injustice of Sovereigns, we
ought naturally to distinguish between the use these Powers make of their
Authority; and their abusing of it, by rendering their Authority unlawful, and
extending it beyond its just limits. The Captain of a company of High-way-men,
that is a Father, may exact of his Son the Obedience which a Child owes his
Father; but his quality of Captain of High-way-men, does not give him any right
to command his Son to rob or murder: And so far is the Son from being obliged
to obey such kind of Commands, that he becomes Criminal by obeying them.

It is evident then, That in these sorts of Governments, as long as the Prince
enacts Laws conformable to the fundamental Laws of the State, and that he
behaves himself as a Father of his Country, there lies a necessity upon the
People of obeying him; and this necessity is founded upon their Relation to the
Authority, which is just and legal, with respect to its Function and Exercise.

But we must judge otherwise, when the Question is of unjust Laws which the
Power enacts for the Oppression of his Subjects: For then there seems no
further necessity of obeying, to lie upon the Subjects, than what results from
a desire of avoiding their own destruction, which depends on the Pleasure of
the Power that oppresses them, which cannot settle a lawful Right on Tyrants,
other than such as a Master may have over his Slave or Bondsman, according to
the Laws of Servitude.

And as to Governments which are bounded by fundamental Laws, it is apparent,
That the Powers having no Authority at all, but according to the Laws whereby
they are established, their Subjects are set free from obeying them, as soon as
they transgress those Laws. If a King, who has no Power to make Laws, will of
his alone Authority undertake to publish any, without the concurrence of those
who share with him in the Legislative Power, none of his Subjects are obliged
to obey him. If a King, who has no right to lay any Taxes on his People,
undertake to charge them with Impositions, the People are not obliged to pay
ought of them. If the King, who has no Power to declare War, does do it without
consent of the State, the People are not obliged to go to War.

Nothing is more visible, than that Obedience may yet more justly be refused,
when Sovereigns undertake to overthrow the State, in dispensing with all the
Laws, and in attempting to rule by an Arbitrary Power: whereas the fundamental
Laws of the State, which are the Bond of the Society, do only allow them a
limited Power.

Hitherto our New Divines agree with others, That Subjects are dispensed with
from giving Obedience to an Illegal Power. But forasmuch as a State must
necessarily perish, when subject to a Power that is resolved to overthrow all;
the Question is, What may be expedient and lawful for People to do in this case?

There are but Two means imaginable to remedy so urging an Extremity: The one
is to resist the Power that abuses his Authority, thereby to oblige him, for
time to come, to keep himself within the Bounds that are set him.

The other is to reject him altogether, and to rid themselves of him, when
there appears no probability of reducing him to the terms of Justice, and to
the Rules of his Institution.

It Is against these Two Articles our New Divines oppose themselves might and
main. They conceive on the one hand, that though the People be not bound to
obey unjust Commands, yet they never can have any Right to resist the Sovereign
Power; no, not when they make use of Violence, to oblige the People to execute
their wicked Designs. This is the Doctrine of Non-resistance or Passive
Obedience, which has been so much agitated of late years.

And as to the other Article, they maintain the People have yet less right to
cast off their Princes, or rid themselves of them, how high soever the Abuses
may be they commit, in exceeding the bounds of their Authority, and how
Tyrannical or Arbitrary soever their Government may be: That Sovereign Powers
depend on none but God, so that the People cannot, without invading the Rights
of the Deity, undertake to depose or punish them.

These are the Points we are to consider at present. I begin with
Non-Rresistance, otherwise called Passive-Obedience.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Non-resistance.
THis Doctrine of Non-resistance, seems to me to be founded upon Three
Suppositions, which may be easily convinced of Falsity.

First, These Gentlemen forge to themselves an Idea of Sovereign Powers, and
ascribe certain Rights to them, which they afterward look upon as Essential to
Government, and consequently as Rights inseparable from Sovereignty, whatsoever
sort of Sovereignty it may be. Which Essential Rights, according to their
account, are these: First, Not to be accountable to any but God. Secondly, To
have the whole disposal of the Sword. Thirdly, To be exempt from all Coercive
Power whatsoever. Fourthly, Not to be liable to suffer Resistance, on any
pretext. Fifthly, to be invested with the Legislative Power. They conceive,
that without these Rights a Prince is still but a Subject; and consequently,
that they are all Essential to Sovereign Power, and therefore inseparable from
it. Upon these Premises they with ease establish this Conclusion, That
forasmuch as the Right of not being liable to Resistance, is inseparably
annexed to Sovereignty, the People can never of Right resist their Princes on
any pretext whatsoever.

If we object against this their Scheme, That the Rights they attribute to
Sovereignty, are such as cannot agree with a Sovereignty limited by Laws, which
allow of Resistance, because there can be no Authority but by Law, and
according to Law: Whence it follows, That it is lawful to Resist him who has no
Authority.

They suppose in the Second place, That all Limitations whatsoever, do only
respect the Exercise of the Sovereign Power, without being able in the least to
derogate from the Essentials of Sovereignty; and that after all, these
Limitations are only the Effects of the consent of Sovereigns; which proceeding
only from their good will, are revocable, ipso facto, as soon as it pleases
them so to do.

The Third Supposition is this: They pretend that the Holy Scripture holds to
us such a Power inherent in Sovereigns, as can never be lawfully resisted; and
that it exhorts People to submit themselves so absolutely to it, that they
never undertake to oppose themselves against its unlawful Effects otherwise
than by Patience, when they are convinced in Conscience, of the Injustice of
the Laws and Commands enjoined.

It Is an easy matter to overthrow the First of these Suppositions.

First, I would fain know who has given these Gentlemen the Power of
determining, as they do, what is Essential to Sovereignty. Do they derive these
their Notions from Revelation, or from Reason, which is common to all Men? If
they say they derive the definition they give us of Sovereignty from
Revelation, they will do well to point us to the places of Scripture where this
Notion is set down.

If they draw it from Reason, then I cannot but wonder that so many Statesmen
and Writers of Civil Matters have failed of stumbling on the same Notion; and
it seems to me an inextricable thing, that so many Nations should agree to
reject what they approve, and to approve what they reject.

To say here, That they draw this definition from the Idea of Sovereignty,
which loses its nature when divested of these Characters, shows they are
willing either to abuse themselves or others by a pitiful Equivocation. The
word Sovereign imports a relation to Inferiors; and as the relation has a
certain foundation, so it is likewise evident, that it has its bounds set
proportionable to its foundation. Where there is no Authority, neither is there
any foundation for Obedience: Now there is no Authority but in proportion to
the Laws which establish the Authority; wherefore it incontestably follows,
There can be no Authority where the Law is so far from allowing any, that it
opposes it.

It will never cease to be true, That the Authority is Sovereign, though it be
not so in all respects. The Consuls of Rome were Sovereign Magistrates, though
the People had Power to oppose themselves against their Authority, when they
abused the Power they were entrusted with, for the good of the Commonwealth. In
France they give their Parliaments the Name of Sovereign Courts, though their
Sentence be not always irrevocable.

The Second Supposition is only founded upon this Notion, That Conquerors
having invaded the Liberty and Privileges of the People, were afterward so
kind, to restore some part thereof to them again by their Concessions; but that
these Acts of Grace do not at all divest them of the Right of Acting whenever
it shall please them, as if their Power was altogether Unlimited and Arbitrary.
This Notion is much the same with that of the Partisans of the Court of Rome,
who maintain, That the Liberties of the Gallican Church are only Acts of Grace
and Favor granted to that Church; whereas the French pretend, That they are
common Rights and Franchises which their Ancestors have constantly maintained,
according to what P. Pithou declares concerning them.

But indeed, to speak truly, this Supposition cannot be admitted with respect
to conquered States, at least for the most part. Ordinarily a Conquest is made
upon the Power that governs the State; so that the State only changes its
Master, the fundamental Laws of the Land receiving no Alteration from this
Change. Of this we have an Instance in England, when King William conquered it,
who at his Coronation swear to keep the Laws of St. Edward; and his Successors
were fain to swear the same. Now one of these Laws ( c. 15. T. 1. Spelm. p.
622.) imports, That a Prince that abuses the Power he is entrusted with, does
lose the Title of King: From whence it follows, That his Subjects need not own
or obey him, and that consequently it is lawful to resist him.

To maintain, That a King, whose Power is limited by the fundamental Laws of a
State, and which he is invested with upon that condition, when at his
Coronation he swears to the People, is indeed obliged to keep the said Oath,
for fear of God; but that he is not at all engaged by this his Oath to the
People, is rather a piece of Raillery, than Reasoning. What, Does not the Oath
the People swear to the King oblige them in Allegiance to him? and how can we
then suppose that the reciprocal Oath of the King should not as well oblige him
to his People? Surely, if we well weigh the case, it is impossible but we must
discern a palpable falsity in this Opinion of Passive Obedience, in the way
these Gentlemen propose it.

First, They grant a Right unto Sovereignty which is diametrically opposite to
the end of Sovereignty, according to the Divine Destination. For the good of
the Society, and its Subsistence, was God's End in insticuting of the Sovereign
Power; whereas by their Hypothesis the Sovereignty may become an instrument of
the utter ruin of the Society, whenever it shall please the Sovereign; his
Subjects in the mean time having no means to attain the said End, or being in
any condition to hinder their being deprived of it.

Secondly, They suppose, That God in allowing a lawful Right to Sovereigns, has
subjected the People to a necessity of groaning under an Illegal Right, and
which God has never bestowed upon them; and for the Usurpation of which he will
condemn those who do arrogate the same to themselves; which is much to the same
purpose, as if I should say, That because God has established Judges, he has
thereby obliged the People to suffer Robbery, when the Judges shall think fit
to turn Robbers.

Thirdly, They make the condition of a Civil Society more unhappy, than was the
condition of Families in the state of Nature, before Societies were formed. For
the liberty of defending one's self is permitted to every one by Nature; but
after the Society is once formed, it would follow, That the whole Society would
be obliged, by a Principle of Conscience, to suffer their Throats to be cut by
a Prince of the humor of a Nero or a Caligula.

Fourthly, They turn to mere Chymera's and Visions, whatsoever the wisdom of
Men have been able to find out to make States happy, by securing them against
Tyranny. I speak of Laws and Oaths; the Laws are the bands and cement of the
Society, and the foundation, as well as the measure of the Obedience we owe to
Princes. The Oaths are the Seal of the Contract, by which the Subjects are
obliged to obey them, upon condition that they govern according to Law. But all
this is to no purpose, and is of no use to the People, as soon as the Tyrant
thinks fit to overturn the Laws, and to m^ke a Scoff at his Oaths.

Forasmuch as the Third Supposition, viz. That the Scripture maintains
Non-resistance, with regard to Sovereigns, whether they act according to or
against Law, is of greater importance, it will be convenient to examine the
same more heedfully; and the rather because Men of Abilities and Learning have
endeavored strongly to assert it, and to make it pass current with others, and
that with all their might.

CHAP. VII. That the Scripture does not assert the point of Non-resistance.
FOrasmuch as the Doctrine of Non-resistance directly thwarts a natural
Principle, to wit, that of our own preservation, and that of the Society
whereof we are Members; we may easily judge, That in case the Scripture does
assert it, we must suppose it has done it, with all possible clearness and
distinction; but we do not find any such thing.

I find but one place in the Old Testament, which can be wrested to this
purpose with any probability; it is the Description of the behavior of a King,
set down 1 Samuel 8. and 10. where the vulgar Translation interprets Mispath, by
the Word Right, hoc est Jus Regis. But I am astonished how any could be
mistaken in this case. For First, It appears that God in that place gives us
the Description of a Tyrant, and not of a King: for indeed we find nothing like
to it in the Description he gives us of a King by Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. Which
appears to be so, because Samuel held forth this Looking-glass to them, to make
them quit their demand of having a King set over them, as the rest of the
Nations about them. Secondly, It is apparent that what he says of their crying
to the Lord, when oppressed by their King, would have been most ridiculous,
supposing the King to have these Rights from God, and by his Concession. When
Moses tells the Jews, That they should cry unto the Lord, when they should be
oppressed by their Neighbors, waging War against them, because of their
forsaking of the Lord; Does he not plainly suppose, That they would do this to
obtain his Protection against the injustice of those Tyrants? And can any one
be supposed Fool enough to imagine, that according to God's Intention it was
unlawful for the Israelites to defend themselves against the Moabites,
Philistims and other Nations that oppressed them. Thirdly, It is evident that
this supposed, God could not in Justice punish a Tyrant; or if he did, it would
be for making use of a Right, himself had conferred upon him. This reason made
R. Juda to oppose R. Jose, as Kimki observes upon this Text. The same is also
acknowledged by the wisest of Divines. Marchat in horte Pastorum, Lib. 3. Tr.
4. Lect. 13. explains himself thus, Hoc est jus Regis, idem est ac si diceret,
Haec est consuetudo Regum: This is the Right of a King, is the same as if he
had said, This is the Custom of a King, Jus Regum, Jus non legitimum sed
usurpatum. Estius. Samuel speaks there not of a lawful Right of Kings, but of
an usurped and arrogated Right, and the same is the Opinion of Cornel. a Lapid.
and the Jansenists of Port Royal.

After all that has been said, it is natural to observe, That forasmuch as all
the several kinds of Government, are no less founded on Divine Authority, than
the Kingly, yet according to this Hypothesis, none of them would be invested
with this Right so fatal to Society, but Kings only, which certainly is the
worst Argument they could have lighted on, to recommend a Government, which God
by his own institution, has constituted a true Tyranny.

The second place is that of St. Paul, Romans 13. where the Apostle forbids
resisting of the Powers, for fear we should resist the Ordinance of God. But we
are to take notice, that the Apostle in that place does not in the least touch
this Question, Whether it be lawful to resist the Po^ers, when they endeavor
to overthrow the Government.

First, He considers the Powers in the lawful use of their Authority, punishing
the Evil, and protecting the Good. Now it is ridiculous to suppose, that the
same Privilege that appertains to him, who makes a lawful use of his
Authority, is every whit as applicable to him who has lost his Title by the
abuse of his Power. Rex, says St. Isidore, a recte agendo dicitur; si enim pie
and just and misericorditer agit, merito Rex appellatur; si his caruerit, non
Rex, sed Tyrannus est. A King has his name from acting right and well; for if
he acts piously, justly and mercifully, he is deservedly called a King; but if
he want these qualifications, he is no King, but a Tyrant. Addit. 2. ad capit.
Carol Magn. cap. 21.

Secondly, This would suppose the Powers that act under Sovereigns to be every
whit as irresistible as the Sovereigns themselves; which is an extravagant
position in the sense of all Modern Divines. Besides we are to observe that
Sovereigns with their Power, are only the Organical chiefs of the Society; the
true head or chief is the Principality with its Members, which are the integral
parts of it. This is the same that was acknowledged by Charles Moulin, the
Prince of French Lawyers, and the great defender of the Kings of France and
their Authority.

Upon this account it is that the People have right to prosecute the
misdemeanors of the King's Attorneys and Ministers, and to punish them; which
would be strangely ridiculous, if the State were not persuaded, that all the
Power they have, is a power received from the State, tho the King have the
Power to elect and raise them to those Employments.

It is apparent therefore, That these words of St. Paul, only have an eye to
the repugnance the Christian Jews had, to submit themselves to the Dominion of
Heathens. This was the Opinion of the Pharisees, who tempted Jesus Christ, upon
occasion of the Tribute which the Emperor levied in Judea; Josephus shows that
the Essenians opposed them in this point, and St. Paul here takes the Part of
the Essenians. And indeed we do'nt find that the Christians did any way oppose
the Decree of the Senate, when they declared Nero, The Enemy of all Mankind. We
find also that the Christians of Tertullian's time, and those that followed
after, did very well agree with the Sentiment of Heathen Authors, about the
Justice of the People's or Senate's resistance against such Tyrants; as is
apparent from Lactantius de Montibus Persecutorum, and the like may be seen in
Eusebius, Orosius, and in St. Augustine de Civit. Dei. But I can say more than
this, viz. That the Scripture is so far from teaching the Doctrine of
Non-resistance to an unjust Power, and that violates the Laws, that she
represents to us contrary Examples, with commendation, and sufficiently
intimates that we rather sin in not resisting. For don't we see David taking up
Arms to defend himself against Saul? Don't we see him offering Achish to fight
for him against Saul, notwithstanding he was his Father-in Law? Don't we see
the Ten Tribes opposing themselves against Rehoboam, upon his declaring for
Tyranny and Arbitrary Government?

Let us take the pains heedfully to consider the carriage of the High Priest,
and his Colleagues, when King Vzziah presumed to exercise the Functions of the
Priesthood in offering Incense, and it will plainly appear, they did not think
it unlawful to resist Sovereign Authority, when it goes beyond its bounds, 2 Chronicles. 26.17. Azariah the High Priest follows him with fourscore Priests, all
valiant men, drives him out of the Temple; and afterward he is deprived of his
Government, and his Son placed on his Throne. It cannot be alleged by these
Gentlemen, that this happened to him because of his Leprosy, because they
suppose that a Prince cannot be resisted, whatever his behavior may be, or
divested of the right of Governing, for any reason whatsoever.

After all, Let us consider how severely God punished Israel, for the sin of
Saul, in breaking the Troth plighted to the Gibeonites, and we shall find they
were enveloped in the punishment of his sin, because they had not opposed
themselves against Readiness breach of Faith. And we make the same Reflection,
about the punishment God inflicted on the People, for their consenting to
David's numbering of them, which God had forbid. And why so, but because they
did not oppose themselves against this enterprise of David, as they ought to
have done? We do not fi^d the People engaged in the punishment of David's
Adultery with Bathsheba, because indeed the People had no share in that sin. We
see the inhabitants of Libna rejecting Joram, because he had forsaken the Lord
his God, 2 Chronicles. 21.10.

Lastly, I desire that those, who talk so much of Passive Obedience, would be
pleased attentively to consider the behavior of the Maccabees, when they shut
the Gates of Modin against the Envoys of Antiochus, and afterward took up Arms
for the defense of their Liberty and Religion, 1 Mac. 2. As also that of
Matthias, who shut the Gates of Modin, in exhorting his Children to continue in
their resistance; and does the same at the hour of his Death, without believing
that he was guilty of any sin in taking up Arms; and his Children follow his
Exhortations, with an extraordinary Courage and Piety.

I own that the Books which have preserved this History are not Canonical, no
more than Josephus, who has followed them. But I must observe,

First, That it sufficiently appears, what the Opinion of the Jewish Church was
in this point; who still retains an Abridgment of these Books, in her Books of
Prayers, highly praising the Maccabees for their Virtue and Piety.

Secondly, That the Christian Church has allowed the public reading of them,
notwithstanding they were not Canonical, and that with great esteem too; which
would have been extravagant and impious, in case the resistance of the
Maccabees had been a true Rebellion.

Thirdly, I have still more to say, viz. That the Apostle St. Paul, in the
Eleventh of the Hebrews, makes an Encomium of the Maccabees, and approves the
War they undertook. This is that which is acknowledged by the learned Thorndike
in his Right of the Church, Page 306. by St. Chrysostom Hom. 27. in Epist. ad
Hebr. and by Haymon Bishop of Halbarstad, as also by Menochius and Estius in
their Commentaries.

Fourthly, That Lucifer de Cagliari in his Book, De non parcendo in Deum
delinquentibus (a Book approved by St Athanasius, who calls this Lucifer a New
Elias, Page 1068.) openly sets down, not only that he believed it was lawful to
resist Kings, under the Old Testament, but also to put them to Death, in case
of Idolatry, which he maintains the Arrians were guilty of. Si veteris
Testamenti temporibus vixisset (Constantius Imperator) gladio potuisset
extingui, and defuncti ossa igne absumpta fuissent. If Constantius the Emperor
had lived in the times of the Old Testament, he might have been killed with the
Sword, or at least his Bones after his Death would have been burnt.

CHAP. VIII. Whether the States can deprive Sovereigns of their Authority when
they abuse it.
THEY who maintain it is not in the Power of the Subject, justly to resist the
Authority that is once established, though it abuse the Power committed to it.
believe also consequently, That it is not lawful for a State to reject their
Sovereign, nor to deprive him of his Authority, though he make use of it, to
overthrow the Government: but forasmuch as the former Opinion is wholly
contrary to all good Sense, and Justice; the lesser cannot be less so. I own it
is unjust to deprive a Sovereign of the Power he enjoys, as long as he uses it
lawfully: and in this regard it is, we must not attempt any thing against the
Authority of Kings, or other Sovereign Magistrates. I acknowledge also that the
People may not rise up against their Superiors, for the first Fault they
commit, in matter of Government, Kings being no more infallible than other Men;
we cannot with justice expect from them, that they should commit no faults at
all in their managing of the Government.

It is also evident enough that the People must not oppose themselves against
every thing that seems to have some air of severity or hard usage in the
Government; as St. Paul also orders Servants to suffer patiently the hard usage
of a too severe Master. Good sense alone is sufficient to inform People, That
they must not expose the public Tranquillity to danger, for some severity, or
for some interest which respects only some particular persons. And indeed with
this respect we may say that private persons are obliged to sacrifice their
particular interest, to the public Good and Peace. But there is a vast
difference between a King, that governs justly, or that falls into some error,
which he is willing to retract and amend upon a remonstrance from his Subjects;
and a Tyrant who overturns the Laws of the State, and the end of the Government
designedly and of deliberate purpose. It would be a strange delusion for us to
attribute to a Tyrant the Privileges of a King; or to suppose, as otherwise we
must, That there is no means to distinguish them; both which Extremes are
equally ridiculous. For,

First, All wise Men that ever were, have declared, That it is easy to know
the difference between a King and a Tyrant. Aristotle gives us an exact Idea of
a Tyrant, Polit. lib. 4. cap. 10. Pol. 6. Hist. lib. 5. gives us the Character
of a Tyrant, in opposition to that of a King. Synesius also gives us a very
lively Portraiture of one de Reigno. Isidorus gives us this description of
Tyrants, Origin, lib. 9. cap. 3. Jam postea in usum accidit Tyrannos vocari
pessimos atque improbos Reges luxuriosae Dominationis cupiditatem, and
crudelissimam Dominationem in Populis exercentes; Now it is become customary to
call bad and wicked Kings Tyrants, who are ambitious of Arbitrary Power, and
oppress their Subjects by a most cruel Dominion. A King (says the Scholiast of
Aristophanes) differs from a Tyrant, in that a King possesses his Kingdom,
certis sumens conditionibus, (...), receiving it on certain conditions; whereas
a Tyrant enters upon it by force and violence. Bartholus, among the Lawyers,
gives us a Description of a Tyrant, and the Characters wherewith he sets him
forth are infinitely different from those that ought to be in every King.
Wherefore we cannot imagine, that the difference between a King and a Tyrant
should be none at all, or imperceptible.

Secondly, Heathens as well as Christians, Papists as well as Protestants
equally agree, That it is lawful for a State to rid themselves of a Tyrant, by
wholly casting him off.

This is a constant Maxim among Heathens, whereof we may see the Proofs in
Thucydides, lib. -- in Pausanias in Attic. in Polyb. lib 2. in Cicero, lib. 3.
de Offic. and Orat. pro Milone, and lib. 2. de Invent. in Seneca, lib. 2. de
Benefic. cap. 20. in Seneca the Tragedian, in Hercule Furente; in Pliny, lib.
3^. cap. 4. in Valerius Maximus, lib. 2. cap. 10. in Plutarch. in vita B uti,
and in Themistius Orat. 14.

The Jews have reduced this Maxim into practice, as we may see in the History
of the Maccabees, who took up Arms against the Authority of Antiochus Epiphanes.

As for Christians, we find this Sentiment confirmed by Lucifer de Cagliari,
and approved by St. Athanasius. We find that St. Austin August. libro contra
Adim. c. 17. Nec tamen hoc secerunt justi homines, nisi authoritate divina, ne
quis arbitretur passim sibi esse permissum necare quem velit, aut judicio
persequi aut poenis quihussibet afficere. Aliquando autem aperte ponitur in
scripturis ipsa divina authoritas, aliquando autem occultatur, ut and
manifestis lector instruatur, and exerce^tur obscuris. Certe inimicum and
persecutorem suum, nimis ingratum and nimis infestum Saul Regem accepit David
in potestatem ut ei faceret quod vellet, and elegit parere potius quam
occidere. Non enim erat jussus occidere, sed neque prohibitus, imo etiam
divinitus audierat se impune facere quicquid vellet inimico, and tamen tantam
potestatem ad mansuetudinem contulit. Dicatur mihi quem timuit, cum interficere
noluit? Nec hominem possumus, dicere timuisse quem acceperat in potestatem, nec
Deum qui dederat. Vbi ergo nec difficultas fuit occidendi nec timor, dilectio
profuit inimico. Ecce David ille bellatur implevit praeceptum Christi quod
accepimus, ut diligamus inimicos.
maintains against Adimant, cap 17. That though David did not kill Saul, yet he
had right to do it. Brontius agrees with this Judgment of St. Austin. And
Sozomenus, lib. 6. proves, That if the Roman Soldier, who was suspected to have
killed Julian the Apostate, had done it indeed, that he had done it justly and
of right. We find the same thing asserted by Englishmen, as by Joannes
Sarisbur. Polycrat. de nug. curial, lib. 7. cap. 17, 18, 19; by Matthew Puris
ad An. 1233, in the business of the Bishop of Winchester.

The Church of Rome has always been of this Opinion, before the Reformation, as
appears by the Judgment of Thomas Aquinas 22. qu. 24. art. 2. of Aureolus and
all the Schoolmen. In a word, we can affirm, That this was received as an
indubitable Opinion, in the Council of Basil, who laid it down as a Principle,
whereupon they grounded their right of Deposing the Pope.

This has always been the Opinion of Popish Lawyers and Canonists, as we may
see in L. decerminus de Sacrosanct. Eccles. in Bartholus, in tractatu de
Tyrannia: in Paris de Puteo: in Syndic. where he puts the Question, Whether it
be lawful to kill a King that is a Tyrant. In Andreas Iserus institut. quae
sint Regalia. In Mar. Laudun. in tractatu de Princip.. 3. in Angelus de
Clavasio in Summa voce, Seditio. Quaest. ultima, in St. Antonin. in summa 2.
par. tit. 4. c. 8.. 1.

Neither do the Protestants differ from them in this point, as is evident from
the Writings of Zuinglius, Luther, Calvin, Paraeus, Bilson, Abbot, etc.
Conringius lays it down as an indubitable truth, ad Lampadium de Imp. Romans 119.

And the Papists since the Reformation are of the same judgment, as will
appear, if we consult Gregor. de Valentia, Tit. 3. disp. 5. qu. 6. Tolet. in
summa l. 5. c. 8. Mariana de Rege Lib. 1. Cap. 3. and 6. Lessius de Jure and
Justitia Lib. 2. cap. 9. dub. 4. Molina tr. 3. disp. 6. de Justitia and jure.
Eman. sa in Aphor. verbo Tyrannus. Suarez in defens. fidei, lib. 6. cap. 4.

Neither let any one imagine, That this is only a Doctrine of the Jesuits: We
may see the contrary, in those who have written concerning the Deposition of
Henry the Third, and who have maintained the Justice of that Deposition. And we
may affirm, That among so many French Authors, who have writ against Baronius
and Bellarmine, who attribute the Deposing of Childeric to Pope Zachary, and
the placing Pepin on the Throne in his stead, there is scarce any to be found,
who whilst they dispute the Pope's Right to Depose Kings, do not acknowledge,
That it is a Right inherent in the States of the Kingdom.

And indeed to weigh the thing in it self, it is evident, That when a Prince is
become the Enemy of his People, and endeavors to destroy them, he thereby
loses the Right of Governing them. If we take the Sword out of the hand of a
Madman, that he may do no hurt with it; who doubts but we have the same right
to take away that Power from a Prince, which he makes use of, as if he were a
Madman.

The History of Portugal fully sets forth to us the Judgment of that Nation,
with respect to King Alphonsus III. This Prince minding nothing but hunting,
his Council represented to him, That if he did not apply himself to the
business of State, they would Depose him, and place another on the The One. What
would not they have said, think we, had they seen him Murdering his Subjects
in cold Blood, as their last King, whom they banished, because of a like
madness.

I acknowledge, That the Commonwealth has put its rights into the hands of the
Prince, by which she seems to have deprived her self of that Power. But it is a
strange and uncouth imagination to suppose, that a State should deprive it self
of the right of resisting injustice and violence, which is a right, that Nature
communicates to every Creature together with its Being. Besides it is certain,
That if a State be limited by Laws, and that the People are the Authors of
them; so that they share and exercise the Sovereign Power, in this case they
are naturally supposed to possess and hold the Authority, which is necessary to
preserves the Right that belongs to them.

Let Men Philosophise as long as they please, they shall never be able to make
out, either that a Prince can pretend to a Power of destroying the Society,
without any danger of being called to an account for it; or that a People can
ever be esteemed to have granted him a Right, tending to their own Ruin and
Destruction.

But some may say, That the Title of a King, ought to secure a Tyrant against
any resistance, he might be liable to from his Subjects; even as the name of a
Father is a Title that puts Children out of a Condition of setting themselves
against him, whose cruelty they have experience of. But besides that, there is
a great deal of difference between these two Titles, which is the ground of the
difference there is between the Subjects and a King, and the Children and a
Father; is it not notorious, and practiced every day, that a Father who is
become the Enemy of his Children, is deprived of the administration of his
Goods, and of the disposal of his Children; which practice being grounded on
the Law of Nature, does not in the least violate the order of the Society.

Moreover it is certain that a Title, how venerable so ever it may be, cannot
secure him that bears it, from the resistance of those that are oppressed by
him. Let us conceive a Physician, that has a design to Poison his Patient; the
Title of a Physician which has induced his Patient to commit the care of his
Health to his trust, can it hinder the Patient from prosecuting him as a
Murderer, in case he resolved to take away his Patients Life, instead of
contributing to his Cure.

We know that Divines look upon the Government of the Church, as a Government
instituted by God, and immediately instituted by him: and yet who knows not,
that they have deposed the Pope, Bishops and Popish Priests, by withdrawing
themselves from their Dominion, and that upon this Ground, that tho there be
something lawful in their Ministry, yet they oppose themselves to the end of
their Ministry, by reason of the Tyranny which they exercised over their
Consciences.

But some may imagine, that because God has not expressly given this Right to
People to cast off their Kings when turned Tyrants, and that he has thought it
sufficient to recommend Obedience to them, he has thereby authorized all their
unjust Proceedings and Violence, without leaving any means to the People of
opposing themselves against their Oppression by deposing them. This is a mere
Delusion; and to see through it, we need only consider God's Silence concerning
the irregular comportment of the High Priest, who notwithstanding was subject
to the same Punishments, as were the meanest Levites, in case of his violating
the Rules of his Institution, and transgressing the Laws which God had given to
all the People of Israel, and to the Priests in particular. Indeed, it was not
needful that God should prescribe any such thing to the People, because Nature
alone is sufficient to teach People aright they are possessed of, by giving
their Consent to the Elevation of the Powers that govern them. In a word, I
say, that God had sufficiently intimated to the Israelites, that they could not
lawfully be oppressed, in that he had expressly forbid their Kings to heap up
vast Riches, or to multiply the Number of their Cavalry, which the Kings could
not do without violating the Law of God, and without drawing upon themselves
the Resistance and Opposition of their Subjects; as Josephus very well infers,
who maintains, Lib. 4. cap. 8. That the People ought of Duty to oppose
themselves against a Prince, who transgressed the Bounds God had prescribed to
him in the 17th of Deuteronomy.

But this Point leads us insensibly to consider more particularly, what kind of
Royalty it was, that obtained amongst the Jews, which deserves carefully to be
examined. This I intend next to consider, and afterward shall proceed to take
a view what was the Law of Royalty among the Romans; and shall make it appear,
that the Kingdoms of Europe, which have been formed out of the Ruins of the
Roman Empire, have neither followed the one nor the other of these Models, tho
some Divines have asserted it without respect to Truth.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Regal Dignity, and the Rights belonging to it amongst the
Jews.
I Am to make out four Things in order to the clearing of the Character of
Royalty, which obtained amongst the Jews.

The first is, to enquire, whether it was immediately established by God?

2ly, To show, that it was limited according to the Description we have of it
in the 17th of Deuteronomy.

3ly, To evince solidly, that all that Samuel declared concerning the Right of
Kings, was only a Prophecy about the Tyranny of Kings, and not the Right of
Royalty.

4ly, To make it appear, that supposing that of Samuel's, to be a Description
of a Lawful Right, yet that particular Settlement could not be of any
Consequence to those Estates that had another Institution.

For the first, I say, that the Institution of some Magistrates amongst the
Jews, was by express and immediate Revelation from God: Moses his Ministry and
Authority was established and confirmed by miraculous Signs and Tokens, as
appears Exodus 3. And for the Judges of the People of Israel, as may be seen in
the 18th Chapter of the same Book; But we find nothing like this, in the
establishment of the Kingly Authority amongst them. For we do not find that
God, in the 17th Chapter of Deuteronomy, enjoins the People to establish a King
over them, as the Jews themselves believe; but only that he foresaw the
disorderly Inclinations of the People, who in Time to come would demand a King
to rule over them, in conformity to those of their Neighbor Nations. A
demonstrative Proof of what I say is, because that God himself having declared
himself solemnly to be their King, in giving them Laws, in leading their
Armies, etc. they could not reject him without committing a great Sin. This is
that which Gideon was very sensible of, as appears by his absolute refusal of
the Royal Dignity. The same thing may also be gathered from the words of
Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. and of God himself.

I own indeed, that when the People showed themselves obstinately resolved to
have a King, there happened something of an immediate designation of Saul to
that Dignity, as may be seen 1 Samuel 10. for the Election was made by casting of
Lots in the presence of Samuel, to show that the appointment of Saul was
immediately from God. But for all this it continues a great Truth, That the
establishment of the Royal Power in Israel was an Act of the People, and not an
immediate Act of the Deity. And we ought to give the more heed to what was
immediate in the Institution, because it is the Foundation of many particular
Expressions we find in Scripture; when it is said of the Judges of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 1.17. That their Judgment was God's Judgment; That they are Gods, Exodus
21.16. and 22.8, 9, 28. Psalm. 82.1. John 10.35. That God is with them in their
Judgment, 1 Chronicles. 19.6. All those Expressio^s refer to their immediate Divine
Institution. When the Scripture, speaking of the Kings of Judea, says, That
Solomon sat upon the Throne of God, 1 Chronicles. 29.23. that is to say, that God
had placed him on the Throne of Israel, which God himself was possessed of, till
their demanding a King of Samuel, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. When it calls them the Kings of
God, 1 Samuel Psalm. 18.50. and his Anointed Ones, 2 Samuel 22.51. which Title is
given to Saul, as well as David and Josiah; all those Expressions respect God's
Establishment of Kings, after that the People had earnestly and obstinately
demanded to be governed by their Ministry.

As to the second Head which respects the Laws that God prescribes to the Jews,
to regulate the Choice, and the Conduct of their future Kings, set down by
Moses, in Deuteronomy. 17. v. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

We may therein observe these two things.

1st. That God supposes, that forasmuch as they would some time after set up a
King over them, they would also suppose it lawful for them, to prescribe to the
Royal Power, the Form and Rules which their Neighbour-Nations, amongst
themselves, had set to that Form of Government.

2ly, That God leaving to the People the natural Right of limiting the Royalty
amongst themselves, according to their own liking and fancy, or for giving it
more scope and liberty, as their Neighbors had done, only thought good to
prescribe to them these Rules and Limitations. 1. God limits their choice as to
the Person of a King, that he must be one chosen by himself. 2. They might not
choose a Stranger. 3. He does not allow the King to multiply Horses; 4. Nor to
lead back the People to Egypt; 5. Nor to have great store of Wives; 6. Nor to
heap up vast Riches. 7. He enjoins him to study the Law of God, and have it
always with him to observe and keep it. And, 8. To do Justice equally to all
without distinction.

These are the Laws which Josephus has compendiously set down, Lib. 4. cap. 8.
p. 123, after Philo, in his Treatise, concerning the Creation of the Prince.

Now it is natural and obvious, to conclude from all this; 1. That God does not
in that place proscribe a platform of a Monarchy for the Government of the
Jews; but only supposes that the Jews, being desirous of Monarchy, would be
apt to borrow the Model of it from the Neighbour-Kingdoms. 2. That in
prescribing some Rules concerning the choice and behavior of a King, he
endeavors to prevent the State of Israel from falling into the Inconveniences,
into which their Neighbour-Nations had cast themselves, by allowing their
Kings, or at least suffering them to take too great a Power and Authority,
whether in Matters of State or Religion. 3. That he supposes, that the People
ought to oblige the King to observe these Laws of God, and that they might
oppose themselves to Princes, who at any time should have the boldness to
violate them; as Josephus expresses himself in the place quoted before. 4.
That he allows the People of Israel the same Rights to oppose themselves
against the unjust Enterprises of their Princes, turned Tyrants, which other
Nations were possessed of against their Princes, when they abused their
Authority: the Reason why People desire a King, being, that he may Judge and
Govern them, not that he should Destroy them by playing the Tyrant.

It is of importance to make these Observations, because it appears that in all
this God did so far accommodate himself to the Design of the Jews, that he
never pretended to carry his Laws any farther: for we see he does not speak to
them concerning the Manner how they ought to behave themselves, when they
should be attak'd or subjugated by Foreign Powers, as supposing that common
sense would be sufficient to instruct them, that in those Cases they were to
follow the Example of other Nations, who bore patiently the Yoke of the Prince
that conquered them.

These things thus laid down, it clearly appears, that God set Bounds to the
Royal Power, long before he established any King in Israel, and that the Jews
could not but believe, that Kings had another Law set them than that of their
own Wills.

Indeed we see, 1st, That this Institution did not at all derogate from the
Rights of the People, to choose their own Kings, under certain Conditions, and
by a form of Treaty, Compact, or Capitulation. We find that the Election of
Jephtha, Judge. 11.10. clearly supposes this, as likewise afterward the same
may be seen in the Election of Saul, David and Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.8. and 1 Chronicles. 29.24. We find that Ishbosheth was brought into the Camp by Abner, only
to show him to the People, that they might consent to the choice of him, 2
Kings 2.9.

2ly, Though this Institution seem to be immediate, yet did it not at all
hinder or prejudg the Peoples Right of making Treaties and Capitulations with
their Prince, and consequently of rejecting them, when at any time they should
invade or violate the said Rights and Capitulations. And of this we have an
illustrious Example in the Sons of Samuel, whose ill administration gave the
Jews an occasion to demand a King, by which means Samuel himself was, as we may
say, obliged to renounce his Power as Judge, which notwithstanding he had
received immediately from God himself.

3ly, How immediate soever the Kings of Juda may have been established by God,
yet they never had the Character of an Arbitrary and unbounded Power, as is
supposed by those, who would infer, that because Monarchy was instituted by
God, the Power of him that is invested with it cannot be justly limited,
neither can, for any Misdemeanour whatsoever, be deposed.

To make it more sensible and evident, we need only take notice of what the
Scripture tells us in several places.

1st. They could not alienate the Lands and Countries that belonged to the
State, to any Strangers, neither could they take them from their Subjects by
way of Truck or Exchange, as appears from that History of Naboth, 1 Kings 21.

2ly. They could not invade the Sacerdotal Functions, as is apparent from the
History of Vzzia, who was boldly and courageously resisted by the High Priest
Azaria and his Colleagues, 2 Chronicles. 26.18.

3. They could not constrain the Levites to go to War; that Tribe being
excepted from all the rest, who were subject to that Service, as Abulensis owns
it, 1 Kings 9.22.

4. They could impose no Tributes but in case of Necessity, and with the
consent of the People; and those who have undertaken to do otherwise, have been
censured therefore by the Prophet, Mic. 3.1. Not to mention, that the excessive
Tributes Solomon imposed on the People, were the cause of the ten Tribes
shaking off Rehoboam's Yoke, 1 Kings 12.3.

4ly. I say that though God had seemed, to fix the Royal Dignity to one Family,
to wit, that of David, yet was it not so bound up, that the Succession must
always pass from the Father to the eldest Son, and not to the younger. Thus we
see that Solomon was preferred to Adonijah by David, by the consent of the
People. Thus Rehoboam designed to settle the Succession upon Abijah the Son of
Maachah, as thinking him most fit for Government, though he had elder Brothers,
2 Chronicles. 11.22. Jehoshaphat on the contrary preferred Jehoram to the Succession
before all his other Sons, because he was his Firstborn, 2 Chronicles. 21.3.

All which evidently proves that both Kings and People, supposed themselves to
have right, from the Divine Grant or Concession for the Establishment of
Kings, to regulate the Rights of Royalty, and the Questions depending thereon,
according to the Maxims of Political Prudence, and the Rights of Nations.

Neither do we find that Samuel grounds his Discourse on any other Principles,
or that he supposes that Kings ought to be invested with a boundless Power, as
some imprudently do imagine. See in what manner he expresses himself, to
diswade the Jews from their importunate Demand to have him settle a King over
them, 1 Samuel 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, to the end. And it came to pass, that when Samuel
was old, that he made his Sons Judges over Israel. But his Sons walked not in
his ways, but turned aside after Lucre, and took Bribes, and preverted
Judgment. Then all the Elders of Israel assembled themselves together, and came
to Samuel unto Ramah, and said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy Sons
walk not in thy ways; now therefore make us a King to judge us like other
Nations. But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a King to
judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord said unto Samuel,
Hearken unto the Voice of the People, in all that they say unto thee; for they
have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over
them. According to all the Works which they have done, since the day that I
brought them up out of Egypt, even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken
me, and served other Gods, so do they also unto thee. Now therefore hearken
unto their Voice, howbeit protest solemnly unto them, and show to them the
manner of the King that shall reign over them. And Samuel told all the Words of
the Lord unto the People that asked of him a King; and he said, This will be
the manner of the King that shall reign over you, he will take your Sons, and
appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, and some
shall run before his Chariot; and he will appoint him Captains over thousands,
and Captains over Fifities, and will set them to ear his Ground, and to reap
his Harvest, and to make his Instruments of War, and Instruments of his
Chariots; and he will take your Daughters to be his Confectioners, and to be
his Cooks and Bakers. And he will take your Fields and your Vine-yards, and
your Olive-Yards, even the best of them, and give them to his Servants. And he
will take the tenth of your Seed, and of your Vineyards, to bestow it upon his
Officers and his Servants. And he will take your Menservants and your
Maidservants, and the goodliest of your young Men, and your Asses, and put
them to his Work. He will take the tenth of your Sheep, and ye shall be his
Servants: And ye shall cry out in that Day because of your King, which ye shall
have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that Day. Nevertheless the
People refused to obey the Voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay, but we will
have a King over us, that we also may be like all the Nations, and that our
King may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our Battles. And Samuel heard
all the Words of the People, and he rehearsed them in the Ears of the Lord. And
the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto their Voice, and make them a King: and
Samuel said unto the Men of Israel, Go ye every Man unto his City.

It Is obvious to observe from this account: 1st. That the Injustice and
Miscarriage of Samuel's Sons was the cause why the Jews demanded a King to be
set over them.

2ly. That their Demand is couched in those terms, that make it evident, they
desired to be governed after the manner of their Neighbour-Nations. 3ly. That
this their Demand was displeasing to Samuel. 4ly. That God looked upon it as a
Contempt of himself, and a casting off of his Authority, for the Reasons before
alleged. 5ly. That God strictly enjoins Samuel to protest and declare unto
them, how they must expect to be treated by the Kings that should reign over
them. 6ly. That Samuel in this his Declaration delineates to them the complete
Pourtraiture of a Tyrant rather than of a King, to affright the People from the
Demand they had made; and that as a Prophet he foretells the things should
happen to them under the Government of their Kings. 7ly. That he represents to
them the Miseries annexed to Royalty, as their Bondage in Egypt, and the
several other Servitudes, which had forced them to cry unto God, but denounces
to them, that God, to punish them for this their Rebellion against him, and
their Contempt of his Administration, would not hear them. 8ly. That the People
dazzled with the Luster of Royalty, and the Advantages they thence promised to
themselves; in time of War, notwithstanding this Remonstrance, persevered in
their Demand. 9ly. That finally therefore God commands Samuel to give way to
their Request, and to set a King over them according to their Desire.

This in short is the sense, which Josephus gives of this History. Antiq. lib.
c. 4.
From whence it is evident, that the Synagogue never believed that God had
granted to the Kings of Judea, any of those Tyrannical Rights, which some would
appropriate to Kings from these Words, Hoc est jus Regis.

Josephus makes out, that what is said, 1 Samuel 10.25. that Samuel wrote the
Right (or rather the Manners and Behavior) of a King in a Book, and laid it up
before the Lord, was done by him for this end, that the People for time to come
might know, that he, as a Prophet, had, in this his description of the Manners
of a King, Ibid. cap. 5.
foretold them all the Calamities and Miseries that would overtake them under a
Monarchy, changed into Tyranny, that thereby they might be induced to
Acknowledge their unthankfulness toward God, and their Folly in being so
earnest for a King, as often as they should cast their Eyes on this his
Prophecy.

I know that some to assert the unbounded Power of Monarchs, have endeavored
to prove from these Words of the vulgar Latin Translation, hoc est jus Regis,
that the Monarchical Government amongst the Jews was of this Nature, and that
therefore Samuel does not represent the Kings here as subject to any Laws or
Punishments, which it seems he consequently ought to have done, after that he
had declared their Conduct and Behavior, as absolutely contrary to the Rights
of the Society.

But as I have already before observed, never was so weak a Foundation made use
of, whereon to raise such vast Pretensions as may be easily made out so as to
convince those, who make use of an improper Translation, both to delude
themselves, and to abuse others, about a Question which is of so great
Importance to the Society.

Now that Samuel had not any the least Design to appropriate an unbounded Power
to the Kings of Israel, 1 Samuel 8. by these Words, hoc est jus Regis, appears
1st. Because the word Mispath ordinarily signifies, consuetudo, agendi ratio, a
custom, manner or way of acting, in case we do not explain this word in the
same sense it carries in the 2d. chap. of the same Book, ver. 13. we shall make
this passage to contradict Deuteronomy. 17. which cannot be otherwise avoided. This is
acknowledged by Learned Men, who therein agree with Schickardus de jure
Hebraeorum, Cap. 2 Thessalonians. 7. p. 65.

2ly. The Fathers are of the same opinion; see what Beda says in his
Exposition upon Samuel, Lib. 2. Hoc erit jus Regis, qui imperaturus est vobis.
Non qualis esse debeat, moderatus and justus Imperator, exposuit, cujus and in
plerisque Scripturae sacrae locis, and maxim in Deuteronomio, perfectio
docetur, sed potius Rector improbus, qui austeritate, subjectos sit
oppressurus, intimat, ut per hoc populum a pertinaci ejus petitione revocet.
This will be the Behavior of the King that shall rule over you. He does not
s^t forth the Qualifications of a moderate and just Ruler, who is fully
represented to us in many places of Scripture, but especially in Deuteronomy,
but rather those of a wicked Governor, who by his Cruelty should oppress his
Subjects, that thereby he might deter them, ^^om their obstinate demanding of
him.

3. The Divines that did not understand Hebrew, yet by good sense and Reason
were led to the true meaning of this word. Gerson lays it down as a certain
Truth, that this word does not express a lawful Right, but an unjust Power.
Dictio haec [Jus] non significat semper Jurisdictionem, sive Justitiam, sed
significat interdum Potestatem quae non est justa, etc. sicut haec dictio Rex,
quandoque sumitur pro Tyranno, and Benedictio, pro maledictione, and Lex
injustitiae, pro injustitiae execratione, and Deus pro Diabolo. This word [Jus]
does not always signify Right or Justice; but sometimes an unjust Power, etc.
even as also the word King, is sometimes taken for a Tyrant, and Blessing for
Cursing, and the law of unrighteousness, for the execrable unrighteousness, and
God for the Devil. Opusc. contr. Adulator. Princip. in Consid. 8.

The same also was the Judgment of Claudius Espenseus a famous Divine of the
Romish Church, who told Henry II of France: Your Majesty ought to abhor that
Right nothing less than Regal, and nothing more than Tyrannical, which God by
the mouth of Samuel did not allow the King, but wherewith he threatened the
People, saying, Hoc erit Jus Regis, this will be the Right of a King. Treatise
of the Institution of a Prince Chapter 8.

4. It appears evidently that Samuel represents to us the picture of a Tyrant,
in opposition to the description of a King, God had set down in the 17 chap. of
Deuteronomy.

5. The Jews of old have always owned as much, as appears from Josephus, Lib.
4. cap. 8.

6. It appears that those who conceive the matter otherwise, suppose a greater
Power and Authority in Princes, than they ascribe to God himself, who never
commands any Thing but what is reasonable and just; as St. Paul judged, who
calls all the Duty we owe to God, a Reasonable Service, Romans 12.

7. If any one will take the pains to read the Characters Solomon has given of
a King, in diverse places of the Proverbs, he shall find that nothing can be
more opposite to this Idea of an unbounded Power, which some would gather from
these words of Samuel.

8. The Kings of Israel never enjoyed any such Power, or ever pretended to it:
the History of Naboth, whose Vineyard King Ahab greatly desired, is a proof
hereof beyond all exception. 1. Kings chapter 21. Jezebel would never have been put
to the trouble, to employ false Witnesses to destroy Naboth as a Blasphemer, if
she had had in Israel some of those Divines, Flatterers of the Grandeur of
Princes, who abuse the Holy Scripture to authorize all the injustice and
oppression they are guilty of. I am sure it is impossible to read without
astonishment the extravagance of some Divines, who conceive that the words of
Samuel contain an Explication of the Rights of Royalty, and that Samuel wrote
them in a Book as being the public and incontestable Rights of Monarchy.

Withal let us make this Reflection which is very natural: The Jews here
complain of the injustice and violence of Samuel's Sons, who made a mock of the
Laws; whereupon it is supposed that they to remedy this mischief, require of
Samuel to set a King over them, that might govern them according to his own
Fancy, and treat them like Slaves: Is there any thing of sense in the
Supposition? We suppose that the King has already a Rule prescribed him in the
17 of Deuteronomy, and at the same Time we maintain that Samuel a Prophet, has
in a public Record set down the Description of a Tyrant, to whom God gives
Right, to violate all the Rules he had prescribed in his Law. Sure it is that
neither the Ancient nor Modern Jews, did ever conceive any such thing. If we
read Josephus, where he sets down an abridgment of the 17 of Deuteronomy, we
shall find that he expressly asserts, that it was not only the Right, but also
the Duty of the People to oppose themselves against their Designs in case they
violate the Rules of the Royalty God had prescribed them. Let us consider the
carriage of the Maccabees against Antiochus, and we shall find that they did
not believe it unlawful to resist Tyrants, and to oppose themselves to their
destructive Government.

Let any one read the 14 of the first Book of the Maccabees, and he will see
whether the Rights of the King, which at that Time were engraven on Brass, had
any resemblance with what we find in the 8th chap. of Samuel. This is a sure
way to judge whether the Jews ever pretended that God, by these words of
Samuel, had granted to Kings an unlimited Power. They to this day acknowledge,
that the Scripture does not only prescribe Moral Laws, which their Kings could
not violate; but also positive Laws, to which they were obnoxious, and which
they could not transgress, without submitting themselves to the same
punishments with the rest of their Subjects. This is the common opinion of the
Jews, as we may see in Maimonides de Regibus Cap. 3. Sect. 4. and in the
treatise of the Sanhedrim cap. 19. number. 166, 167, 168. which Doctrine he
borrowed from the Talmud cap. Cohen Gadol, and from Siphri upon the Parasche
Schophetim.

2ly, They hold that if the King did change the form of Government into
Tyranny, the People had Right to reject him. The History of Rehoboam rejected
by the ten Tribes, is a proof hereof beyond exception.

3ly, They hold that the People supposed themselves to have Right, and that it
was their Duty to reject Athaliah, who tho she was a Woman, yet had invaded the
Throne, 2 Kings 11 chapter ver. 3. which the Jews pretend to be contrary to the Law
set down in the 17 of Deuteronomy.

4ly, They declare that King Herod appeared as a Criminal and indicted Person
before the Sanhedrim, tho they mistake themselves in the story related by
Josephus lib. 14. cap. 17. Antiq. whence it appears that he was only Viceroy.

I acknowledge that Casaubon, Exercit. 13.. 3. (from whence Bishop Usher seems
to have taken it) maintains, that the Jews believe, That no Creature can judge
the King but God alone; and to this purpose quotes a passage out of Midrasch
Devarim Rabba in Shophetim: but it is now 64 Years since Schickard has observed
Casaubon's mistake, in handling a matter he did not understand; for indeed the
Jewish Maxims are directly opposite to it. 1st. In the place by him cited, we
find a Gloss, which shows that that passage did not concern the Kings of Judah,
but those of Israel, who by their Power had changed the Government into
Tyranny. Schickard de Jure Regio, page 63, 64. and trampled under Feet the Laws
of God, which made them obnoxious to punishment. 2ly, We must observe that the
Jews believed, that the Maxim never took place, but a little before the last
extirpation of their States, upon occasion of one of their last Kings named
Jamneus, Gemar in cap. 2 Sanhedrim.

I own that Samuel does not set down any express Law for the deposing of Kings,
or punishing of them when turned Tyrants: but yet he supposed as a thing
certain and evident, 1st. That their Crimes being contrary to the Law, were
punishable according to the general Definitions of the Law against Idolaters
and other Criminals: We don't find that God has spoken any thing in particular
neither concerning the High Priest, from whence the Papists falsely conclude,
That he was exempt from Punishment, tho he did transgress the Law. 2ly, I say
that tho the Execution of those Laws was not committed to Inferior
Magistrates, yet did it of right belong to the public, according to the
natural Dictates of common Sense.

But after all, whatsoever Idea we may frame of the Jewish Monarchy, I maintain
that it cannot be of any consequence to other States. 1st. Because that State
was formed immediately by God, for particular Ends which do not respect other
Societies. God might, by Example, grant to the Family of David, which he had a
mind to distinguish from others, some Prerogatives, which he had no design to
communicate to other Sovereigns. 2ly, Because it is false that God has granted
any particular Right to the Kings of Israel, contenting himself to give way to
the Peoples desire, who would be governed by a King like their Neighbors. 3ly,
Because whatever the Rights of Royalty may have been amongst the Jews, it is
certain they have been abolished by an Order of Providence, which has wholly
destroyed the State of the Jews, and the Rights of their Kings. We don't find
that Jesus Christ obliged his Followers to regulate their Obedience to
Sovereigns, according to the measure of Obedience the Jews rendered to their
Kings. 4ly, Neither do we see, that the Jews since their dispersion did ever
take part with Tyrants, when the States where they lived rejected them, or that
they thought themselves obliged thereto by the Law. 5ly, We should be forced to
suppose that all the Christian States, and all the Bishops and Pastors in the
Churches and States without the Roman Empire, had been pitifully mistaken in
not following or recommending this Judaical Form of Despotical Royalty, and
purely Tyrannical, described by Samuel, which is so strangely extravagant, that
it is unworthy to insist on the refutation of it.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Royal Law in favor of the Roman Emperors.
IT IS a difficult thing to understand the Nature of the Western Governments,
without being acquainted with the Nature of the Government of the Roman
Emperors, of that Empire, whose Ruin has been the rise of most of the Western
Monarchies. Now it is certain, that as Contraries serve to illustrate one
another, so the opposition which is found between the Constitution of those
Kingdoms, and that of the Roman Empire will afford us a clear sight of the
Characters which distinguish them.

We must know then, that in the Year 729. of the City of Rome, Dion. lib. 53.
Tacit. annal. lib. 2.
Augustus and Norbanus being Consuls, Lata est Lex Regia, qua summa and Regia
Potestas, quam sibi Populus Romanus ab ejectis Regibus sumpserat, in unum
Principem translata est, ita ut is, nulla Legis necessitate teneretur, omnique
jure scripto solutus esset; ei vero parerent omnes. The Royal Law was enacted,
whereby the Sovereign and Kingly Power which the People of Rome, ever since
their rejecting of the Kings, had taken to themselves, was transferred upon the
Prince alone; so that he was not bound to the Law at all, and was exempted from
all written Constitutions, but that all were to obey him. This is the true
Epoch of the Power which the Roman Emperors had of making Constitutions, and
to publish Answers to Questions of Law proposed to them.

Antonius Augustinus has published some of the Remains of the Royal Law, which
was divided into several Tables. See here some of the chief Articles of it,
which Gruterus has inserted in his Inscriptions, page 242. -- foedusve cum
quibus volet facere liceat, ita uti licuit Divo Augusto Ti. Julio Caesari
Augusto, Tiberioque Claudio Caesari Augusto Germanico.

Vtique ei Senatum habere, relationem facere, remittere, Senatus-consulta per
relationem, discessionemque facere liceat, uti licuit Divo Augusto, etc.

Vtique cum ex voluntate Authoritateve, jussu mandatuve ejus, praesenteve eo
Senatus habebitur, omnium rerum jus perinde habeatur, servetur, ac si e lege
Senatus edictus esset, habereturque.

Vtique quos Magistratus potestatem, Imperium, Curationemve, cujus rei petentes
Senatui Populoque Romans commendaverit, quibusque suffraga^^onem suam dederit,
promiserit, eorum Comitiis quibusque extra ordinem ratio habeatur.

Vtique ei fines Pomoerii proferre, promovere, cum ex Republica censebit, esse,
liceat, ita uti licuit Ti. Claudio Caesari Augusto.

Vtique quaecumque ex usu, Reipublicae Majestate, Divinarum, Humanarum,
Publicarum Privatarumque rerum, esse censebit ei agere, facere jus potestasque
sit, ita ut Divo Augusto, Tiberioque Julio Caesari Augusto, Tiberioque Claudio
Caesari Augusto Germanico fuit.

Vtique quibus Legibus, Plebisve scitis scriptum fuit, ne Divus Augustus
Tiberiusve Julius Caesar Augustus, Tiberiusve Claudius Caesar Augustus
Germanicus tenerentur, his Legibus Plebisque scitis, Imperator Caesar
Vespasianus solutus sit, quaeque ex quaque Lege, rogatione Divum Augustum,
Tiberiumve, Julium Caesarem, Tiberiumve Claudium Caesarem Augustum Germanicum
facere oportuit, ea omnia Caesari Vespasiano Augusto facere liceat.

Vtique quaecunque ante hanc Legem Rogatam acta, gesta, decreta, imperata, ab
Imperatore Caesare Vespasiano Augusto jussu mandatuve ejus a quoquo sunt, ea
perinde justa rataque sint, ac si Populi plebisve jussu acta essent.

SANCTIO.
Si quis hujusce Legis ergo, adversus Leges, Rogationes, Plebisvescita,
Senatusve-consulta fecit, fecerit, sive quod eum ex Lege Rogationeve,
Plebisvescito, S ve C. facere oportebit, non fecerit hujus Legis ergo, id ei ne
fraudi esto, neve quit ob eam rem Populo dare debito, neve cui ea de re actio,
neve Judicatio esto: Neve quis de ea re apud se agi sinito.

These are the chief Articles of the Royal Law, which were engraven in Marble,
from whence Antonius Augustinus copied them. This Marble stood in the Palace of
St. John of Lateran, and was engraven under the Reign of Vespasian.

We are to observe, for the better understanding of this Law;

1st, That it was extorted, Vi and Metu, by Force and Fear, as Dion Cassius
tells us, Lib. 53. Indeed, we read in Cicero against Verres, Regie seu potius
Tyrannice statuit; He ordained King-like, or rather Tyrant-like. There is but
little appearance that the Law was called Lex Regia, or the Royal Law, the
Emperors choosing rather to take that Title, which signified only the General of
an Army, than that of Kings, which the People of Rome had an horror for, ever
since the Tarquins. And Dion Cassius relates in the before-cited place, with
what sweetness Augustus always carried it toward the Senate, and how great a
share he left in the Administration of the Affairs of the Empire, reserving
chiefly for himself the Care and Conduct of the Provinces, which were exposed
to the Violence of Enemies.

2ly, That the wisest of the Roman Emperors have condemned the Government which
this Law supposes, for a Tyrannical Government. This was the Judgment of the
Emperor Pertinax, in a Speech of his to the Senate, set down by Herodian, page
372 Edit. Steph.

3ly, That after all, Justinian agrees, that the People of Rome had transferred
all the Power upon the Person of the Emperor: See how he expresses himself;
Cum enim Lege antiqua, qua Regia nuncupatur, omne jus, omnisque potestas Populi
Romans in Imperatoriam translata sint potestatem. Lib. 4. cod. de veter. Jure
enncleando, and tit. de Jure Naturae and Gentium and Civili.

4ly, That by this Law the Roman Emperors were not above all Laws, but some
Laws only, being subject to the rest as well as any of their Subjects.

5ly, That the Power which the People of Rome had granted to their Emperors,
expired together with them, and was fain to be renewed upon every Succession.

6ly, That whatever was done in virtue of this Law, before such renewal of it,
did make the Doer of Right liable to Punishment.

But however thus much is apparent, That though the Roman Emperors were above
certain Laws; yet they had not wholly deprived the Commonwealth of their
Authority, nor the People of their Liberty, of which we can give some very
evident Instances.

1st, This Royal Law did not overthrow the Propriety of the Subject, as appears
from the recital of Bodin, concerning Justinian, who himself was obliged to
demand leave of a Widow to pull down her House, for to build the Church of
Sancta Sophia, which she had refused the Lords he had sent to desire her to
surrender her House to him.

2ly, It did not expose the Subjects to the blind Fury of the Emperors,
otherwise it would have been a great Folly in Theodosius to have undergone the
Public Penance which St. Ambrose laid upon him, for having caused some of the
Inhabitants of Thessalonica to be murdered by his Soldiers, for assisting in
a popular Sedition, where a General of his Army had been killed.

3ly, The Emperors never pretended that the People were become their Slaves: In
which Point the Romans differed from the Persians, which made Lactantius say,
speaking of Maximian, as of a Tyrant; Post devictos Persas, quorum hic ritus,
hic mos est, ut Regibus suis in Servitium se addicant, and Reges Populo suo,
tanquam familia utantur, hunc morem nefarius homo in Romanam terram voluit
inducere, quem ex illo tempore victoriae, sine pudore, laudabat. After he had
overcome the Persians, whose Custom and Manner it is to be Slaves to their
Kings, the Kings using their People as their Servants and Domestics, this
wicked Man was willing to introduce the same Custom amongst the Romans, which
from the time of his this Victory he commended without all shame.

4ly, The Emperors made no alterations in the Laws, though they attributed to
themselves the right of interpreting them, and to enact new Ones upon emergent
Occasions.

The Right of assembling the Senate, and the Nomination to Offices and Places
of Trust, as well as the Power of appointing Governors in the Provinces, which
before were left to the disposal of the Senate, was the greatest Right of the
Emperors.

The Right of making Peace and War, was of the same Nature: There was only this
difference, viz. That this Right was granted to the Emperors for ever, whereas
it was but rarely granted to the Generals which Rome formerly nominated.

And as for the Right of not being subject to Laws, that was only a Right
limited to certain Laws, and was not to be understood with respect to all Laws
whatsoever; Accordingly we see, 1st. That the Emperor Constantine expresses
himself thus: Contra Jus rescripta non valiant, quocunque modo fuerint
impetrata. Quod enim publica Jura praescribunt, magis sequi Judices debent.
Orders contrary to Law are invalid, which way soever they be obtained. For the
Judges ought to keep themselves to what the Public Laws prescribe, Lib. 1.
cod. Theod. de diverse. rescript. The Emperors, Theodosius and Valentinian,
speak yet more expressly; Digna vox est Majestate Regnantis, legibus alligatum
se Principem profiteri. Adeo de Authoritate Juris, nostra pendet Authoritas. It
is a saying worthy of the Majesty of a Ruler, for a Prince to profess himself
bound by the Laws: so far does all our Authority depend upon the Authority of
the Law. Lib. 4. cod. de Leg. and constitut. Princip. We see in the second
place, that the Senate sentences Nero, without believing that by this Act they
violated the Oaths they swore to the Emperors every New Years day. The Senate
declares some Emperors, as Heliogabalus, Enemies of the State, and arm their
Subjects to destroy them, and make void all their Acts: which makes it evident,
that tho the Emperors often boast themselves of their not being tied to Law,
yet they were fain to approve the Proceedings of the Senate against their
Predecessors. The Reason of this Conduct is, that though it be a general
Compact of Humane Society to obey Kings, as St. Austin speaks, lib. 3. confess.
c. 8. yet it is no less notorious, that this Compact does not respect Tyrants.

Accordingly we see that the wisest of the Emperors did so little believe that
it was lawful for them to govern arbitrarily, that Trajan, in favor of whom
the Royal Law was renewed, at the time of his exaltation to the Empire,
addresseth himself in these words to the Prefect of the Praetorium; Accipe hunc
gladium, pro me si recte agam; sin aliter, in me magis; quod moderatorem omnium
errare minus fas sit; Take this Sword and use it for me, in case I rule well;
but if not, rather against me; because it less becomes him that rules over all,
than it does others, to commit an Error. Dion. and Aurel. Victor.

2ly, That the Emperors, who were most renowned for Virtue, did never affect to
publish any Laws of their own Heads, till after they had got them approved by
the Senate. This is that which Lampridius records concerning Alexander Severus;
and we see the same practiced by Theodosius, l. Humanum C. de F.

But whatever this Royal Law may have been, sure it is,

1st, That the same was abolished together with the Roman Empire, which ended
in the West with Augustulus.

2ly, That it ceased in the East with the Emperors of Constantinople.

3ly, It is certain that they who ruined the Empire in the West, did never
adopt this Royal Law, to govern their Subjects by that Arbitrary Rule.

4ly, It is also certain that the Princes, who since the Year 800 have
succeeded Charles the Great, and who have taken to themselves the Names of
Roman Emperors, did not govern according to this Law, nor ever pretended that
that Law ought to be observed in favor of them, under pretense of their
bearing the Title of Roman Emperors.

This is that, which I believe it will be of use solidly to evince, though I
intend to do it very compendiously, that I may not tire the Reader.

CHAP. XI. That the States of the West, and of the North, never knew this Royal
Law.
THough the People of the West allowed their Princes the Title of King, yet it
may be averred, that the most part of those Kingdoms, which had their Rise from
the Ruins of the Roman Empire, never owned this Royal Law. The Power of their
Kings was originally limited, as Caesar witnesses in his Commentaries
concerning the German Kings, which were, to speak properly, only Commanders or
Generals. I make particular mention of the Germans, because, for the most part,
they were the Founders of the Northern and Western Kingdoms; Germany having
been, as it were, the Nursery, from whence have proceeded most of those
Nations, who at this Day have any Name in Europe. See what Tacitus asserts
concerning the German Kings; Nec Germanorum Regibus infinita aut libera
potestas est; de minoribus rebus Principes consultant, de majoribus omnes. Rex
aut Princeps auditur Authoritate suadendi, magis quam jubendi potestate; si
displicuit sententia, fremitu aspernantur. Neither is the Power of the German
Kings altogether free or unbounded. Matters of lesser Moment are left to the
Advice of the Princes, but those of greater Concern are debated by the whole
Society; they hear the King as one having Authority to persuade, rather than
any Power to command them; and if his Sentiments displease them, they are
rejected with boldness.

Caesar gives us much the same portraicture of the Kings of the Gauls.

And that their Successors, who tore the Roman Empire to pieces, have retained
this Form of a Limited Monarchy, is Matter of incontestable Evidence, to every
one that will take a little pains to peruse the Histories of those Nations, to
run over their Laws, and take notice how they have carried it toward their
Kings whenever they fell to Tyranny.

They who would be informed how far the Power of the Gothic Kings in Spain was
limited, need only to cast their Eyes upon the account which Gregory of Tours
gives us, Lib. 2. cap. 31. concerning this Matter, and upon their History in
the Chronicle of St. Isidorus. We have the fundamental Laws of their Kingdom
set down by Molina, de Hispan. Primogenit. Cap. 2. N. 13.

But this appears yet more clearly from the Body of their Laws, which is still
extant, and published by Lindenberg.

1st. It appears that their Laws were enacted, ex universali consensu Civium
and Populi, by the universal Consent of the Citizens and People, Lib. 1. Tit. 7.

2ly, It appears that the Kings were no less obnoxious to the Laws, than the
Subjects themselves. Lib. 2. Tit. 2.

3ly, It appears not that the Romans Laws, and much less their Royal Law, had
any Authority amongst them. Lib. 2. Tit. 9.

4ly, It appears, that their Kings had not so much as the Power to pardon
Crimes, without the consent of the Bishops, and chief Lords, Lib. 6. Tit. 7.

Lastly, It is evident from their History, that their Kings were liable to be
deposed by the States, when ever they went about to transgress their Bounds,
and tyrannize over their Subjects.

I confess, that the Council of Toledo IV. in their last Canon thus express
themselves. Quicunque amodo ex nobis, vel totius Hispaniae populis, qualibet
conjuratione vel studio, sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro Patriae Gentisve
Gothorum statu, vel conservatione Regiae salutis (vel incolumitate Regiae
Potestatis) pollicitus est, temeraverit, aut potestate Regni exuerit, aut
praesumptione Tyrannica Regni fastigium occupaverit, Anathema in conspectu Dei
Patris and Angelorum, atque ab Ecclesia Catholica, quam perjurio profanaverit,
efficiatur extraneus, and ab omni Coetu Christianorum alienus, cum omnibus
impietatis suae fociis: quia oportet ut una poena teneat obnoxios, quos similis
error invenerit implicatos. Whosoever from this time forwards, either of us, or
of any of the People of Spain, shall by any Conspiracy or Attempt, break the
Oath of his Fidelity he has taken for the welfare of his Country, and the
Gothic Nation, the conservation of the King's Life, and maintenance of the
Royal Power; or who shall deprive him of his Kingdom, or by a Tyrannical
Presumption usurp the Throne, let him be Anathema in the sight of God the
Father, and the Angels, and be cast out from the Catholic Church, which he has
profaned by his Perjury, and be turned out of all Christian Assemblies, with
all the Accomplices and Associates of his Wickedness: because it is but fit, that
all they should be liable to the same Punishment, who are involved in the same
Crime. The same is repeated in the Council of Toledo V. cap. 1. and in the
Council of Toledo X. Cap. 2. But we may affirm with truth, that those who have
worn this Canon threadbare by their frequent citing of it, did either not
understand it, or changed the sense of it to impose upon and delude others.

Wherefore let those that read these words well observe;

1st. The Order which the Fathers of the Council of Toledo IV. observe in
speaking of Oaths, Sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro Patriae, Gentisque Gothorum
statu, vel conservatione Regiae salutis (vel incolumitate Regiae potestatis)
pollicitus est. I own it is to be considered that the [vel] here signifies as
much as [and], this being the common style of those Times. I say it is
remarkable, that the good and happy State of the Nation, was the first Object
of their Oaths, the second Object was joined with it, viz. the Conservation of
the King, yet with the understood Proviso, if he did not oppose the first, but
was subservient to it. For indeed, I cannot believe that God made the Goths of
another nature than the rest of Mankind, or so much Fools (enough) as to prefer
the Means before the End; and to believe that they ought to engage themselves
to seek the Means, any further than they are of use to obtain the End. Ad
Tutelam Legis Subditorum Rex creatus est. The King, says Chancellor Fortescue,
is made for a Safeguard to the Subjects Laws. The Preservation of the Subject
is the first Obligation, and the next that of the Prince.

2ly, We must observe, that the words of the Canon regard those, who by a
Conspiracy undertake either to kill the King, or to deprive him of his Kingdom,
or to usurp the Throne by a Tyrannical Presumption. But all this while they
suppose a lawful King, that is to say, a King acknowledged as such by the
State, attacked by some furious Conspirators, with design to dethrone him,
against all Right and Justice, for to place another in his stead. The Council
does not in the least suppose that it is unlawful for the State to deprive a
Tyrant of the Authority he abuses. If we suppose the contrary, we must take
St. Isidore, who was President of that Council, for a Fool, fit to be shut up
in Bedlam, for he expressly makes this Observation, that Rex a recte agendo
vocatur; si enim pie and just and misericorditer agit, merito Rex appellatur:
si his caruerit, non Rex sed Tyrannus est. Addit 2 ad Cap. Caroli Magni, c. 21.

3ly, I maintain that of all the Passages of Antiquity which are alleged by
the Defenders of Passive Obedience, there is not any to be found which they
ought to have been more careful to suppress in silence, than that of this
Council. And we must judge them possessed with a brutal Stupidity, or guilty of
strange Malice, in employing such a Passage as this to support their Prejudices
in favor of those Princes who overturn the Government. For who were these
Fathers of the 4th Council of Toledo? They were the very Men, who three Years
before this Council, had cast off Suinthila, after he had reigned ten Years
over them; who had raised Sisinandus in his room, against whom they justly
feared that some furious Fellows might hatch a Conspiracy. They were the Men
who pronounced three Anathema's against Suinthila for the Crimes he had been
found guilty of, whilst he was possessed of the Royal Power. They were the Men
who declared, That if a King does not well acquit himself of the high Charge he
is entrusted with, he ought to be excommunicated, and consequently deprived of
all Power in his Kingdom. All which is contained in Chap. 75. of the same
Council, where they observe, that the Election of Kings took place after the
Death of their Fathers. Which makes it apparent, that there is no ground at all
to suspect the Goths, or the Bishops of Spain and of Gallia Narbonensis, who
assisted at that Council, to have espoused the Maxims that some would fix upon
them.

The Lombards observed the same Rules in their Government, as we may see in
their History written by Paulus Diaconus.

And as for what the other Kingdoms that were formed of the Ruins of the
Empire of Charles the Great, we find that their Power was always limited in the
same manner, none of those Princes having ever thought of reviving the Royal
Law of the Ancient Roman Emperors in favor of themselves.

And because this Affair bears so great a resemblance with the present
Revolution, I desire the Reader not to take it ill, that I have copied the 75th
Canon of the 4th Council of Toledo, at the end of these Remarks, and that he
may make his Reflections thereupon: for he will find that those who make use of
it, have no reason to complain, That they who have made choice of the Prince of
Orange, upon the desertion of James II, after so many unjust Proceedings and
Enterprises, tending to the total overthrow of the State and Government, have
exactly followed this Example of the Kingdom of Spain; and that the Clergy who
have followed these Decisions of State, have therein imitated the Conduct of
this Council of Toledo; and that those who oppose themselves against it, are
found in the same Case with those whom the Church of Spain and of Gallia
Narbonensis did so solemnly excommunicate.

The Kings of Burgundy reigned with the same Limitations: For which we may
consult the Law of Gondebaud, which is still extant, and which was made, Habito
Consilio Comitum and Procerum, with the Advice of the Earls and Lords, who
signed the Law as well as King Gondebaud: which makes it very evident that the
Kings of this People had not the Legislative Power invested in them alone. We
find the same Clause in the second Addition to that Law. And indeed we need
only to take notice of what Marius Aventicensis relates concerning King
Sigismond in his Chronicle, to enable us to judge that those People had other
Laws besides that of the Will of their Princes. For this Prince having caused
his Son to be strangled without any Form of Justice, his Subjects conceived so
great an Indignation against him, that he was forced to hide himself, and to
take upon him a Friars Habit, for a Mark of his Repentance, which yet was not
able to give them Satisfaction, for as soon as he appeared, they delivered him
to Clodomer King of Orleans, who carried him to France, where soon after he
lost his Life in a Tragical manner.

We find Instances of the sharing of the Sovereign Power between the Lords and
the King in the Ancient Histories of Sweden, as may be seen in Joan. Magnus,
Hist. lib. 15, and 29. and in Crantzius, lib. 5. We find also that by the Oaths
taken at the Coronation of their Kings, the Bishops, Nobles, Citizens and
People oblige themselves, in case the King commit any thing by himself, or by
another, contrary to the Articles or Treaty he swears to at his Coronation, to
oppose themselves to his Enterprises upon their Honor, and upon their Oath,
Chytraeus, lib. 2. They who do not know the Manner of the States of Sweden
deposing of Sigismond, and the Reasons they alleged for it to King James, may
peruse the Relation of it in Goldast.

We find the same Limitations of the Regal Power in Denmark, as Pontanus
observes in his 8th Book; and it was for endeavoring to break through these
Bounds, that Christiern the II. was deposed, as may be seen in Petersen, in
Chron. Holsat. Where he has set down the Acts and Reasons of the State of
Denmark about that Proceeding.

That the Power of the Kings of Hungary, was a Power limited by the Fundamental
Laws of the State, is a Matter so notorious, that Chalcondilas has made it his
Observation, in the second Book of his History, where he compares the Royalty
of Hungary in that respect to the Kingly Power in England. And which may be
farther made out by the Fundamental Laws of Hungary, set down by Bonfinius,
Decad. 4. lib. 9. Where we also find the Oath taken by those Kings at their
Coronation, being the most expressly conditional that can be imagined.

Chalcondile says the same Thing of the Kingdoms of Arragon and Navarre, Lib.
5. where he observes, that the Kings did not create the Magistrates, that they
could not make any Garrison without the Consent of the People, and that they
could not require any thing of them, contrary to their Customs, that is to say,
contrary to their Laws. Accordingly we find that the Kings of Spain have no
Power to lay any new Impositions upon their Subjects without their consent.
They are obliged to swear they will observe the Laws. And in Arragon the People
declare to the King at his Coronation, that if they do not perform their Oath
and Promise, their Subjects are thereby set free from their Oath of Allegiance.

We find the same Thing in the History of the Kingdom of Portugal, but
especially in that part of it which gives an Account of the Reign of Alphonsus
III. The Fundamental Laws of which Kingdom we find in the 17th Title of the
Ordinances of Portugal, Lib. 2.. 2, 3. and seq.

So true is it that all those Kingdoms never in the least supposed that their
King had an Absolute Power over them. And it is as certain, that almost all
those States have always maintained, That the Power of their Sovereigns was so
limited,

1. That they could make no Laws without the States General of the Kingdom.

2. That they could not levy any Money on their Subjects without their Consents.

3. That they could not break the Laws according to their Will and Pleasure.

4. That in case of their violating the Fundamental Laws of the State, they
were liable to be deprived of a Power which they abused.

5. That the States were free to choose such a Form of Government, and such a
Person for to govern them, as they thought most expedient for them.

This is that which I intend to prove more particularly by Examples taken from
the Empire, and the Kingdoms of Poland, France, Scotland, and England; to which
I shall add some Remarks upon those Titles which deceive some, who consider
Things of this Nature with too little attention.

CHAP. XII. That the Power of the Emperors of the West, is a Limited Power.
THis is a Matter that may be easily gathered from these following Instances:

1. Because Charles the Great, who was the first that took upon him the Title
of Roman Emperor, reigned according to the Customs of the Princes of Germany,
of whose Opinion concerning an Absolute and Despotical Government, Tacitus has
given us some Account, who represents them, as having the greatest abhorrence
for it.

2. Because Lewis the Good, did himself acknowledge, that the Sovereign Power
was shared between him and the chief Members of the Empire; Capitular. Lib. 2.
Tit. 3. Sed quanquam summa hujus ministerii in nostra persona consistere
videatur, tamen and Divina Authoritate, and humana ordinatione, ita per parts
divisum esse cognoscitur, ut unusquisque vestrum in suo loco and ordine, partem
nostri Ministerii habere cognoscatur. But though the whole of this Ministry
seem to consist in our Person, yet it is known to be so shared and divided, as
well by Divine Authority, as Humane Ordination, that every one of you in his
respective Place and Order, is known to partake of this Ministry. Thus was he
pleased to express himself in the Assembly of the States General, whose
Authority he owned to be as much of Divine Right as his own; which made Charles
du Moulin, the most famous of all French Lawyers, say, Ergo solum Caput non
omnia potest, imo persona Principis non est Caput nisi Organicum, sed verum
Caput est Principatus ipse, cum membris integrantibus eum; Wherefore the Head
alone cannot do all, yea, the Person of the Prince is only the Organical Head,
but the true Head is the Principality it self, with its integral constituting
Members. Which are his express words in his Commentaries upon the Style of
Parliament, dedicated to the first President of Paris, and printed with
Privilege.

3. Because though the Western Empire did seem to be so Hereditary, that the
Emperors had divided it amongst their Children; yet, in process of time, it
became Elective, which began to take place in the Eleventh Century, in the
Person of Rudolphus.

4. In that they always excluded Females from the Succession to the Empire,
though they had respect in their choice to the Imperial Blood.

With respect to the Rights of Sovereignty we find, that tho the Empire be a
Monarchical Government, yet we see it is mixed with Aristocracy; for the
Emperor cannot enjoy it, but with the Consent of the States of the Empire,
without making himself liable to be contradicted and deposed also.

He has not the Right of making Laws, without the Consent and Authority of the
States of the Empire.

He has no right to declare War, without the foregoing consent of the States.

He has no right of levying any Imposition on the States, without the Consent
of the Diets.

Whenever he begins to usurp the Rights that do not belong unto him, and to
infringe the Rules of Government he has sworn to observe, the States have a
Right to oppose his Enterprises, to repel Force with Force, and finally to
deprive him of the Empire, in case he continue in the Design of changing the
Form of Government. For though there be no Laws, which bound and regulate the
Article of the Deposing of Emperors, when they abuse their Power for the
overturning of the State, or for invading the Rights of the Princes of the
Empire, and Imperial Cities; yet the Germans have always held, and still do
hold it for a certain Truth, that it is a Right inherent in the Empire, to
deprive an Emperor of the Imperial Power and Dignity, and to confer the same on
another. This is the common Opinion of the German Lawyers represented to us by
Lampadius, Arnizaeus, Diderick, Conringe, and many others.

And indeed we may say, that there is nothing more certain, if we consider the
Examples of Emperors that have been deposed since these 7 or 800 Years;
Examples that are neither rare nor unknown, and upon occasion of which the
States of the Empire have had an opportunity to declare and make out their
Rights and Pretensions. One of the first Examples we find respecting this
Matter, is the Deposition of Lewis the Good, in the Year 833. The Acts whereof
we may see in Baronius, Goldast, du Chesne, and le Comte; Whereupon we may make
these Reflections; 1. That the Thing was done with the Consent of the Bishops,
and of all the Nobility. 2. That the Estates above all accuse him for having
broke his Coronation Oath. 3. That though this Lewis was afterward restored to
the Throne of the Empire, yet those that restored him, never contested the
Power the State had to reject a Prince, who overturned the Rules of Government,
but supposed only that he had not been duly convinced of the Crimes laid to his
charge.

We have another Example, in the Deposition of Henry IV. The Archbishops,
Bishops, Dukes and Earls, declare, that they had not sworn to him, till after
he had engaged himself by his Oath to them, to observe the Laws and the
Capitulations of the Empire: so that having now violated them, they were set
free from the Oath they had sworn to him, and that they considered him as an
Enemy, against whom they would wage war to their last breath. Lambert
Schafnaburg.

One of the last Instances we find in the deposing of the Emperor Wenceslaus,
who was deposed by the Electors of the Empire in the Year 1400, after that he
had been twice taken Prisoner, and had been exhorted by the State, to amend and
take up from his irregular Actings. Aventin. lib. 7. Annalium and Cuspinian. in
Vita Venceslai. We may see the most part of these Articles, and many more
solidly confirmed in the Book of Carpsovius, de Lege Regia Imperatorum
Germaniae, and in the Imperial Capitulations, and other Laws, which he has
caused to be printed at the End of his Treatise.

CHAP. XIII. That the Power of the Kings of Poland is Limited.
WE find the same Limitation in other States, whether they be Successive or
Elective, I shall content my self to allege only one Example concerning the
Kingdoms that at present are Elective, and that shall be of the Kingdom of
Poland.

Poland, from the Relation of Cromer, gives us an illustrious Example of the
Wisdom of Northern People, in bounding the Power of their Princes. After that
the Family of Lech, the first Founder of that Kingdom, was extinct, that State
changed the Royal Government, into that of XII Waywods, otherwise called
Palatines. These Palatines abusing their Authority, they re-established the
Regal Government, in favor of Cracus, whose second Son was expelled by the
Polanders for killing his Elder Brother.

They afterward chose the Daughter of Cracus for their Queen, who, it is said,
having drowned her self to avoid Marriage, the Polanders again established 12
Palatines, as they had done before: but afterward suppressed them again,
because they found them insufficient to defend the Country, and chose Premiel
for their King. This is Lesko the 1, who lived about the year 750. It was not
till the Year 965 that Miesco turned Christian, and took upon him the Title of
King of Poland, which Title was confirmed by the Emperor Otho III to Bosletas
his Successor.

His Successors having reigned until Lesko Surnamed the Black, who was forced
by Flight to quit the Kingdom, because he was not able to resist the Tartars,
and died without Issue: the Poles wearied with intestine Wars, excited by the
Ambition of their great Lords, chose Premiel to be their King, who being
killed, without leaving any Children behind him, they made choice of Ladislaus,
who was afterward desposed, for Maladministration, by the States General.
Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, who had been chosen in his stead, dying in the Year
1305, Ladislaus was recalled to the Government, to whom Casimir his Son
succeeded; who in the Year 1370 designed for his Successor, with consent of the
States, Lewis, the Son of Charles King of Hungary, by his Sister. The Poles
after the Death of Lewis, chose Edwiga his Daughter, upon condition that she
should marry the Person whom the States should recommend to her for a Husband;
the Person recommended by them was Jagello Duke of Lithuania, who had the name
of Ladislaus given him by the Archbishop of Gnesna, who anointed and Crowned,
after he had first baptized him. He outlived Edwiga who died without Children,
and had for Successors the children of his fourth Wife, who reached until
Sigismund Augustus, after whose Death the States chose in the Year 1573 Henry
Duke of Anjou, who after he had reigned four Months in Poland, abandoned the
Kingdom, to take possession of the Crown of France, and was deprived of that of
Poland, by the States, as may be seen from the Acts recorded by Historians.
This Vacancy occasioned a Division in the States, one part of them having
chosen the Emperor Maximilian the Second; and the other part Anne the Sister of
Sigismund Augustus, to whom they gave Stephen Battori Prince of Transylvania
for her husband, who Married the said Anne, and was Crowned at Cracovia in
1576. After the Death of Stephen, the States chose Sigismund, Son of John III
King of Sweden, and of Katharine Daughter of Sigismund I. of that name, King of
Poland.

It is evident from this Abridgment, 1st. That the Poles always pretended to be
the Masters that had right to give the Form to their State, which seemed to
them most comporting with the Good and Welfare of it.

2ly, That they took it for granted that they had Power to reject those Princes
or Palatines, whose Behavior was contrary to the Public Good, for which they
had raised them.

3ly, That they ever had an Eye to Succession, so far as to bestow the Crown
sometimes upon Daughters, yet not thinking themselves bound to it, but only so
far as the good of the State did permit.

4ly, That they had regard to the appointing of a Successor, when the States
had first consented to it.

5ly, That the Flight or Desertion of their Kings, has appeared to them a
sufficient Ground to proceed to a new Election, in their stead, and to reject
them. This is evident from the History of Lesko, surnamed the Black, and of
Henry the III of France.

6ly, That the anointing and Crowning of their Kings, was of no avail to
dispense with their Oath in which they publicly declare, That if they do not
observe the Laws of the State, the People are dispensed from their Oaths of
Fealty they have sworn to them.

CHAP. XIV. That the Monarchy of France is not an Absolute Empire, but a
Limited Royalty.
IT IS not of to day only, that some have imagined the Monarchy of France, to be
an unlimited Power, and an Absolute Empire: Bodinus was of that opinion before
them; but they that follow his sentiment, understand nothing of that
Constitution: or if they do, have a greater desire to flatter the unjust
Pretensions of that Court, than to maintain the Truth.

We need only to lay open the nature and ancient Power of the States General,
with the manner of their Behavior toward those Kings, who abused the Power
committed to them, to make it evident, that the French Monarchy is limited in
its Constitution.

Under the first and second Race of the Kings of France, there was no mention
of any Assembly of the States General, but only of the Franks, that is to say,
the Nobles and Prelates, who were used to meet together, on the first of May, in
the open Field, where they deliberated with the King, concerning matters of
Peace and War, and took Resolutions of what was to be done all the Year after.
After the breaking up of this Assembly, the Court of the Royal Palace,
otherwise called the Court of France, composed of the Prelates and Great Barons,
that is to say, the immediate Vassals of the Crown, met together five or six
times a Year to take care of the Execution of what had been resolved upon in
the General Assembly, to deliberate about public Affairs that offered
themselves, and to determine as Judges the most important matters of private
Persons.

Under the declination of the 2d Race, the Governors of Cities and Provinces,
having made themselves Hereditary Lords of the places of their respective
Governments, under the Title of Counties and Dutchies, cut themselves large
Portions out of the Sovereign's Lands: by which means the Court of France was
no more frequented by the Lords, except only, when they were obliged to do
Hommage, and take the Oath of Fidelity, or when an Enemy invaded France: for
then they presented themselves before the King, to advise about the present
necessity. This Disorder continued until the Reign of Philip Augustus, who
having conquered Normandy, and the Counties of Tourain, Anjou, Maine, from John
without Land, King of England, and the Country of Vermandois from the Earl of
Flanders; restored in some manner the Royal Authority, and forced the Barons to
frequent his Court, and to be present at the Assemblies he called for the
Affairs and Necessities of State. Nevertheless those Assemblies consisted only
of the Prelates and Barons, and this till the Reign of King John (some Authors
say of St. Lewis) who being taken at the Battle of Poictiers, and carried to
England, they were forced to raise a great Sum of Money for his Ransom; and to
this End they applied themselves to the Merchants, and other Inhabitants of
Cities, who were then the richest Men of the Kingdom, who agreed to pay the
King's Ransom, upon condition that they might be received into the Charges and
Offices, as well of Peace as of War, and be allowed to have a Place and
deliberative Voice in the States General, which was accordingly granted to them.

The Power and Prerogative of the States General was such, that the Kings of
France could not make any new Levies of Money without them. Which continued so
till the Reign of Charles VII. as is acknowledged by Philip de Commines Lib. 6
c. 7. Neither could they make any new Ordinances, nor repeal or suppress the
old, without the consent of the said States, as is owned by Davila lib. 2 de li
Guerri Civili.

Under the First, and second Race of the French Kings, the Ordinances were
likewise made in the Assembly of the Prelates, and Barons, which constituted the
Sovereign Court of France; 'twas there the Treaties of Peace were made between
the Kings of France and Foreign Princes, and Nations; the Portions of the
Children of France were there regulated; there they treated of their Marriages,
and generally of all that concerned the Affairs of State, of the King's
Household, and the Children of France. The Ordinances that were made in the said
Assemblies, in the Name of the Kings of France, were conceived in these Terms;
Nos de consilio and consensu Procerum nostrorum statuimus, etc. We with the
Advice and Consent of our Lords do ordain. And from hence is derived the
Custom observed at this Day, of verifying the Royal Edicts in the Parliament
of Paris, which in some sort represents the Assembly of the Prelates and Barons,
who composed, as we have said, the Sovereign Court of France.

In the Treasury of the French Kings, at Chartres, are found several Treaties
between King Philip Augustus, and Richard and John without Land, Kings of
England, at the bottom of which are the Seals of the Prelates and Barons; by
whose Consent and Approbation the said Treaties had been made. And Pope
Innocent VI having sent to entreat St. Lewis that he would be pleased to permit
him to retire into France, to secure himself from the attempts of Frederick II.
the said King answered the Popes Nuncio, that he would communicate the Matter
to his Parliament, without whose Consent the Kings of France could do nothing
of Importance. This is related by Matthew Paris, in the Life of Henry the III.
King of England, ad Annum 1244.

We find also the manner how the States determined all Affairs respecting the
Crown and Succession, as for Example the Process which was between Philip de
Valois, and King Edward. In this Assembly of the States, says the Chancellor
de l' Hospital, was Tried and Debated the most Noble Cause that ever was, viz.
To whom the Crown of France did belong, after the Death of Charles the Fair, to
Philip of Valois his Cousin, or to Edward King of England, King Philip not
presiding in that Assembly, because he was not yet King, and besides was a
Party.

It appears clearly from the Power of the States General, That the Power of the
King of France is bounded by Law; indeed this is a Truth whereof we cannot make
the least doubt, forasmuch as we find it acknowledged by Lewis XI. the most
unbridled Monarch that ever was. See what he writes in the Rosary of War,
composed by him a little before his Death, for the use of Charles VIII. his
Son. When Kings or Princes, (says he) have no respect to the Law, they take
from the People, what they ought to leave them possessed of, and do not give them
what they ought to have; and in so doing they make their People Slaves, and
thereby lose the name of a King. For no body can be called a King, but he that
rules and has Dominion over Freemen.

This thing was so notorious even to Strangers themselves, that Machiavel
maintained that the Stability of the Monarchy of France, was owing to this,
because the Kings there were obliged to a great number of Laws, which proved
the Security and Safeguard of all their Subjects. Lib. 1 di Discorsi c. 16.

Messire Claudius de Seissel, in his Treatise of the French Monarchy, part 2.
chap. 12. dedicated to Francis I. maintains upon this account, That the
Monarchy of France does partake of Aristocrasy, which makes it both more
perfect and durable. Yea he asserts that it was also in part Democratical, and
expressly maintains that an absolute Monarchy is no other than true Tyranny,
when it is made use of against Religion, Justice and the Government; That a
Prince who passes these Bounds, must be held and esteemed for a wicked Tyrant,
cruel and intolerable, who by this means pulls down the Hatred of God and his
Subjects upon himself.

Du Haillan Historiographer of the Kings Henry III and Henry IV. follows the
same notion of Claudius de Seissel, in his third Book of the state of the
Affairs of France, dedicated to Henry III. maintaining that the Government of
France is composed of Aristocrasy and Democrasy, p. 168.

And indeed who can judge otherwise, when he attentively considers these six
things, which are a part of the public Constitution of the Kingdom of France.

1st. That though the Crown for a long time since has followed the form of
Succession, yet the form of Election is still observed at the Coronation. Hunc
vultis, hunc jubetis esse Regem, This is he whom you will and require to be
your King; these Words are spoken to the People before the Coronation. We find
the Peoples Election is mentioned, and the King called elect in the form of
Coronation, published by Hugo Menard a Benedictin.

2ly. The King is there engaged by his Oath, to rule according to the Laws of
the Kingdom; as may be seen in the Ceremonial of France.

3ly. He can make no Laws but in the Parliaments or States General; whereof we
have an Instance in the States of Orleans, in the Year 1560. and is the same
with what D'avila has obin his 2d Book of the Civil Wars.

4ly. He can make neither Peace nor War but by the Advice of the States
General. This is acknowledged by Lewis XI as we find in Philip de Commines 2
Book chapter 14.

5ly. He can raise no Money but by Concession from the States General. We find
this point thus decided by the States of 1338, with the consent of King Philip,
That no Taxes could be imposed or levied on the People of France, without
urgent and evident Necessity did require it, and then only by the grant of the
States. Gila Fol. 157. Philip de Commines, lib. 5. c. 18. says, with respect
to this point: Is there any King or Lord on the Earth, who has Power, besides
his Demesne, to impose so much as a Penny upon his Subjects, without the Grant
and Consent of those who are to pay it, except it be by Tyranny and Violence?

6ly. The Kings of France are liable to be deposed by the States General, in
case they abuse the Authority they are entrusted with.

This last Article, viz. of the Proceedings of the French against those of
their Kings, who abused their Authority, does evidently demonstate, That the
Monarchy of France is altogether limited, according to the Platform Caesar
gives us of the Government of the ancient Germans or Francs, who are descended
from them. There is a passage, which is ordinarily abused, to prove that unjust
Kings and Tyrants cannot be deposed, wherein Gregory of Tours thus expresses
himself, to Chilperic Lib. 5. c. 19. If any one of us who are Lords
transgresses the Bounds of Justice, you have the Power to punish him; but if
you your self do not keep within them, who is it can correct you? We indeed
speak to you, and you hearken to us, if you please, and if you will not, who is
it shall condemn you? except he who has said, that he is Righteousness it self.
I don't believe there was ever any Author, that undertook to defend the
Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, who has not made use of this
Proof: but give me leave to say, that they have quoted this passage with as
much Judgment as they alleged the 75th Canon of the 4th Council of Toledo: for
1st. Observe that this is the Discourse of Gregory of Tours, who was accused by
Chilperic, for opposing himself to the Justice that Prince demanded of a
Council, against Pretextat Bishop of Roven, whom he accused of high Treason,
and forasmuch as the Bishops were persuaded of his Innocence, whom they saw
attackt by false Witnesses, this Gregory had the Courage, to maintain that it
was their Duty to make their Remonstrances to the King concerning this matter.
The King took their Design of remonstrancing him for an opposition to the
Justice he had demanded; whereupon Gregory of Tours made the Discourse just now
mentioned. So that it plainly appears; that this Discourse only respects the
order of Bishops, who under that Relation, have no other way to redress
themselves, with regard to Kings, but only by Remonstrances, but does not at
all speak of the Body of the State, who are invested with other Rights, in
Reference to a King who undertakes to pervert Justice. But to make it appear
that Frenchmen, at that time, did not believe, that Kings had the Privilege,
that they could not be deposed by the States: Though they abused their
Authority, we need only to consult the History of the deposing of Childeric,
Father of Clovis, which is set down by Gregory of Tours, Lib. 2. chapter 11. and
approved of by him.

We find that they had preserved this their Right by the Deposition of another
Childeric in the 8th Century, and whereupon it is obvious and natural to make
these Reflections.

1. That the Francs had the Power of choosing and deposing their Kings.

2. That the Oath they swore to their Kings was conditional, and supposed their
acquitting themselves of the charge and trust reposed in them, and which they
were obliged by Oath to make good.

3. That it is false that King Childeric was deposed by the Authority of Pope
Zachary, as the Papists have maintained; forasmuch as that proceeding was an
Act of the States General, who made use of their Right on this occasion.

This is so true, that Pope Zachary himself laid it down as a Maxim in his
Letter to the Francs, that this was a right inherent in the People. Nam si
Princeps Populo, cujus beneficio Regnum possidet, obnoxious est; si Plebs Regem
constituit, and destituere potest: For if a King, says he, be obnoxious to his
People, by whose grant he possesses his Kingdom; if the People constitute a
King, they may also depose him.

If we come to the Race of Charles the Great, we find Lewis the Good deposed by
the States assembled at Thionville. The whole Proceeding whereof may be seen in
Baronius, du Chesne Le Cointe, where we may observe 1. That it was done with
consent of the Bishops. 2. We see there an Indictment on diverse Articles, which
contains as many Crimes against the State. 3. When this Deposition was recalled
afterward, they did annul the Acts of the former Assembly, not as if they had
acted without Power, but because they had proceeded on false Accusations, and
insufficient Grounds. We find also the same Proceeding with respect of Charles
the Gross, and Charles the Simple.

Indeed it was then so notorious, that the Power of the Kings of France, though
they took to themselves the Title of Emperors, was limited, the Estates being
invested with part of the Sovereign Authority, that Lewis the Good solemnly
avows the same, Lib. 2. Capitul. c. 2, and c. 12. We find also that the Clergy
of France was so far convinced that the States of the Kingdom had right to
dispose of the Crown, for the good of the State, that when Charles the Bald was
chosen by the Kingdom of Lorrain in Prejudice of the Children of the King his
Brother; and that Pope Adrian II. wrote to them thereupon by Hincmar Archbishop
of Rheims, threatening to excommunicate them, they sent back this Answer to him
by the said Hincmar: Petite Dominum Apostolicum, ut quia Rex and Episcopus
simul esse non potest, and sui Antecessores Ecclesiasticum ordinem quod suum
est, and non Rempublicam, quod Regum est, disposuerunt, non praecipiat nobis
habere Regem, qui nos in sic longinquis partibus adjuvare non posset contra
subitaneos and frequentes Paganorum impetus, and nos Francos non jubeat
servire, cui nolumus servire, quia istud jugum sui Antecessores nostris
Antecessoribus non imposuerunt, and nos illud portare non possumus, qui
scriptum esse in sanctis libris audimus, ut pro liberate and haereditate
nostra, usque ad mortem certare debeamus. Desire the Apostolical Lord, that
forasmuch as he cannot be King and Bishop both together, and that his Ancestors
have concerned themselves with the Ecclesiastical Order, which is their
particular Province, and not with the Commonwealth, which is the Office of
Kings, not to command us to take such a one for our King, who at so great a
distance, is not able to help us against the sudden and frequent Assaults of
Heathens, and to require us Francs to serve him, whom we will not serve,
because his Ancestors never offered to impose this Yoke upon our Ancestors,
neither can we bear it, who find it written in the Holy Books, That we ought to
fight for our Liberties and our Inheritance even unto Death.

We see also that he who was the Head of the Third Race, viz. Hugh Capet, was
chosen King of France, notwithstanding the apparent Rights of Charles of
Lorrain, who was the next Heir of Lewis V. by reason that the said Charles
seemed too much linked to the Interests of the Germans, who at that time were
Enemies to France, Guil. de Nangis ad An. 987. and others in du Chesne.

Who does not know the History of Henry III. who having been deposed in Poland,
for deserting that Kingdom, was afterward deposed in France, by advice of the
Sorbonn, and of the greatest part of the States.

We may easily judge from these two Characters, that Frenchmen never were
infected with the Doctrine of Non-resistance: The one is, because they looked
upon this Doctrine as an Error. See what Gerson the famous Chancellor of the
University of Paris says of it; Error est dicere terrenum Principem in nullo,
suis subditis, dominio durante, obligari; quia secundum jus Divinum and
Naturalem aequitatem, and verum Dominii finem, quemadmodum subditi debent
fidem, subsidium and servitium Domino, sic etiam Dominus subditis suis fidem
debet and protectionem. Et si eos manifest and cum obstinatione in injuria and
de facto prosequatur Princeps, tunc Regula haec Naturalis, vim vi repellere
licet, locum habet. Opusc. adversus Adulat. consid. 7. It is an Error, says
he, to assert, that an Earthly Prince, as long as his Dominion lasts, does not
stand engaged to his Subjects in any thing; because, according to the Divine
Law, Natural Equity, and the true End of Dominion, as the Subjects owe to their
Prince Faithfulness, Subsidy and Service, so their Prince owes them
Faithfulness and Protection; and in case he does publicly and with obstinacy
imperiously oppress them, then that natural Rule takes place, That it is lawful
to repel Force by Force.

The second is, that they have always with horror rejected the Abuse that has
been made of the Expression in 1 Samuel 8. Hoc est Jus Regis, for to maintain the
Tyranny of Princes. If we will believe the Laws amongst you Princes, (says
Claudius d' Epense to King Henry II.) you are Lord of our Body and Goods; or to
speak more like Christians, we and ours are at your command. Your Majesty ought
to abhor that Right nothing less than Royal, and nothing more than Tyrannical,
which God by the Mouth of Samuel did not allow to Kings, but only threatened the
People with, telling them, This shall be the Right of the King, etc. And then
adds, Go to now ye Dogs and Flatterers of the Court, go to, and alledg
hence-forward this Right, not Regal but Barbarous, but Turkish, but Scythian,
or if any worse Epithet can be invented.

I acknowledge that the Face of Affairs is very much changed since these hundred
Years. The States General have not been assembled almost these Seventy Years.
The Parliaments themselves, which were established by the Kings and the States
General, to preserve the Rights of the States, have been forced, by the present
King, to verify without any Debate, all manner of Edicts for the Imposition of
Money. But yet after all, this Change is of so late standing, that there is
little appearance it should be looked upon as a sufficient Prescription against
the Interest of the State. Those Frenchmen who have any knowledge of the Laws
of the State, and its Constitution, set down the Epoch or Date of this Change
of the Ancient Maxims of the Kingdom, to wit, the time which followed the
Cessation of the Holding of the Estates General, or the Minority of Lewis XIII,
and the Reign of Lewis XIV.

Let no Body imagine that the Ancient Idea of the Government of France, is
quite effaced out of the Spirit of the Nation. I own, that Lewis XIV. by a
Reign both very long and very violent, has made the French lose a great deal of
their Courage. The Clergy of that Kingdom have, above all, endeavored to
support his Tyranny; by Maxims advanced and contrived by them for the ruin of
the Protestants, with as little regard for their Country, as they have showed
Conscience in their base Panegyricks pronounced to his Honor. But however
there are still in being a great number of honest Men, who adhere to those
Ancient Maxims. I can at this present produce one of these from amongst the
Clergy, the Learned and illustrious M. Joly, Canon of the Church of Paris, who
in the Year 1663, published a Book, with this title, Important Maxims for the
Education of a King. This Man alone may suffice to prove my assertion, for he
very vigorously confirms these Maxims, by the Testimony of Kings themselves,
Chancellors, Ministers of State, Lawyers, and Historians of France, that they
were always of Opinion in that Kingdom, That the King holds his Authority from
the People; That the Power of Kings is Limited; That the French Monarchy is a
Monarchy allayed and tempered with Aristocrasy and Democrasy; That the Kings
can do nothing without the States General, which are the very same things, with
our Parliaments; That the Judges are the Peoples Officers; That the words so
much abused, Such is our Pleasure, signify only, This is the Decree of our
Courts of Judicature: That they have no Right to levy any Impositions, without
the Consent of the States; and many other Articles of that Nature.

CHAP. XV. That the Royalty of England never had any other form than the rest
of the Northern and Western States.
I Have insisted the longer to show how the Royalty was limited in France,
because the most part of our Modern Writers, seem to have had in their aims to
reduce our Monarchy to the Form of that Kingdom, as supposing that it would
have been a most glorious and advantageous Thing for our late Kings, to
transform them into so many Lewis's XIV; that is to say, to change us into
Slaves, and our Princes into Tyrants.

I shall say nothing of the Royalty in Scotland, nor of the Bounds have been
always set it by the Fundamental Laws of the State. There has been lately so
much writ concerning this Matter, to justify the Proceedings of the Convention
of that Kingdom, that it would be of no use to repeat it here.

And for the same reason I shall excuse my self of the trouble of treating what
concerns the Limitation of the Royalty in England so largely, as the Subject
seems to deserve: however what I shall say will be sufficient to make it
appear, that Royalty has been always on the same foot in that Kingdom, as it is
still in the other Western Kingdoms.

If we consider the most remote times that History gives us any account of, we
shall find that the Saxons, as to the Power of their Kings, followed the
Example of the Ancient Germans, whose Authority, if we may believe Caesar and
Tacitus, was altogether limited and restrained.

We find in the Mirror of Justices, cap. 1, 2. that the first Saxons created
their Kings, that they made them take an Oath, and that they put them in mind
that they were liable to be judged as well as their meanest Subjects.

After that the Right of Succession was received in England, yet it never
deprived the English People of the Right of choosing their Kings. This is
evident from the Form of the Coronation published by Hugh Menard, at the end of
the Book of Sacraments of St. Gregory, p. 278. which Form was as follows. After
they had made the King promise to preserve the Laws and the Rights of the
Church, we read these words: Deinde alloquantur duo Episcopi populum in
Ecclesia, inquirentes eorum voluntatem, and si concordes fuerint, agant gratias
Deo Omnipotenti, decantantes Te Deum laudamus? Then let two Bishops speak to
the People in the Church, and demand their Will and Pleasure, and in case they
do agree, let them give thanks to Almighty God, singing, We praise thee, O
Lord. And, page 269, and 270, We pray thee most humbly to multiply the gifts of
thy Blessings, upon this thy Servant, whom we choose to be our King, viz. of all
Albion and of the Franks. That the Kings of England are as well bound by their
Oath, as their Subjects, appears by the confession of Henry III, upon occasion
of one of his Counselors of State, pretending, that he was not obliged to
preserve the Liberties of the Nation, as being extorted from him, expressing
himself in these terms recorded by Mat. Paris under the Year 1223. Omnes
libertates illas juravimus, and omnes adstricti sumus, ut quod juravimus
observemus, page 219. All these Liberties we have sworn to, and we are all
bound to observe and make good what we have sworn. English Men were always so
well persuaded of this Truth, that in their deposing of Richard II, they
thought they had done enough to prove, That the King had forsworn himself by
the Oath he had taken, having broken several of the Articles he had promised to
his Subjects by Oath to observe, as we may see in the Acts of his Deposal
recorded in the Chronicle of Knighton.

James the First was convinced of this, when he told the Parliament of 1609.
the 21st of March, That the King is bound by a double Oath, tacitly, as being
King, and so bound to protect his People and the Laws, and expressly by his
Coronation Oath, so as every just King is bound to preserve that Paction made
with his People by his Laws, framing the Government thereunto; and a King
leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to
govern by Law.

For what concerns the Laws, we find that the Kings alone had not the Authority
of making them. King Edwin published his Laws, Habito cum Sapientibus and
Senioribus Consilio, with Advice of the Wise Men and Elders. Ina King of the
West Saxons did the like. The Laws of Alfrede were made after the same manner,
Ex consilio prudentissimorum, atque iis omnibus placuit edici eorum omnium
Observationes.

As for the Government of the State, we find that the Parliaments met, and that
their Meetings were fixed once a Year by Alfred; which was renewed by Edward
II, by two Laws. Moreover the King was obliged to assist at them, in case he
was not sick; and nothing but his Sickness could dispense with his Attendance.

That Englishmen never believed that the King of England could violate the
Laws, and overturn the State at his Pleasure, without making himself thereby
liable to punishment, clearly appears from the Laws of St. Edward, and by the
manner of holding Parliaments, confirmed by William the Conqueror, and printed
by the care of Dom. Luc. D'achery, in the 12 To me of his Spicilege.

Sure it is, that we clearly find these three things, 1st. That by the
Agreement and Consent of King John, upon the Complaints made against him by the
whole State, there were chosen 25 Barons, with Power to represent to the King
his unjust Oppression of the Nation, and to oblige him by force of Arms to
redress them, which he himself published by his Letters Patents in the Year
1215. which piece was published by Dom. Luc. D'achery, in the old Norman
Tongue. Spicil. Tom. XII p. 583, 584, 585. as it is to be read in Matthew Paris
ad An. 1215.

Secondly, We find that the opinion of the English Nation of old was, That they
could not only resist their Prince, which abused his Authority, but wholly
deprive him of it, by driving him and his wicked Counselors out of the
Kingdom; as we see in Matthew. Paris, in the Year 1233, where he relates, that
Henry III, having called a Parliament, upon the Complaints that came in from
all Parts against his Ministers, and the Strangers, whose Service he made use
of in the management of the Affairs of the Kingdom, the Members of the said
Parliament perceiving that they could not with safety meet together, refused to
come up; Denunciantes Regi per nuncios solennes, quatenus omni dilatione remota
ejiceret, by solemn Messengers requiring the King, that without any delay he
should turn out those Strangers.

3ly, They judged that if the Sword of St. Edward, called Curtana, signified,
that the King reserved to himself the Right of exercising Justice against
Delinquents; yet he was liable to the same Penalties with private Persons,
whenever he transgressed the Laws of the State, whereof he was the Keeper and
Defender, as the same Matthew. Paris explains it in the Life of Henry III. much
after the same manner as Aurelius Victor reports in the Life of Trajan, That
that Emperor understood the Ceremony of delivering the Sword to the Prefect of
the Pretorium.

Surely if we consider our History, we shall find,

1. That the Kings alone never had the Power of making Laws.

2. That they had no Power to lay Taxes on the People.

3. That they had not always the Power of making Magistrates.

4. That they had not the Right of waging War, without the Advice of
Parliament, as is observed by Philip de Commines, Lib. 4. cap. 1.

5. That as they were chosen by the People, they had also Power to depose them.
Nennius the most ancient English Historian after Gildas, tells us, That
Vortigerne was deposed by St. Germain, and the Council of the Britains, because
he had married his own Daughter, who placed his Son Vortimer upon the Throne.
Edward II. Richard II.

6. That the States have cut off the Succession, may be seen by Henry VII.

Indeed we find that our Ancient Lawyers, our Ministers of State, and our
Kings, who of all Men ought well to understand the Form and Constitution of our
Kingdom, were so far from believing that the Royalty in England was an Absolute
and Unlimited Government, that they have expressly declared that it is a
Government bounded by Fundamental and Essential Laws, and composed of a mixture
of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy. See how Bracton expresses himself to
this purpose, Lib. 2. c. 16. Fleta l. 1. c. 17. In populo regendo Rex habet
Superiores, Legem per quam factus est Rex, and Curiam suam, viz. Comites and
Barons: Comites dicuntur quasi Socii Regis, and qui habet Socium habet
Magistrum; and ideo si Rex fuerit sine fraeno, id est sine Lege, debent ei
fraenum ponere. In Ruling the People, the King has above him the Law, by which
he is made King, and his High Court, viz. the Earls and Barons; Earls are so
called as being the King's Companions; and he who has a Companion, has a
Master; and therefore if the King be without Bridle, that is, without Law, they
must bridle him.

Chancellor Fortescue says, That the King cannot alter the Laws of his
Kingdom, for he governs his People, not only by a Regal, but a Political Power;
when it is said the Prince's Will has the Force of a Law, this (says he) is to
be understood of a Regal or Absolute Power, from which a political Power much
differs, for such can neither change the Law, nor charge the People with new
Impositions, against their Wills.

This is a thing so notorious that Philip de Commines has taken notice of it in
his Memoires, Lib. 4. cap. 1. and elsewhere; as also Polydore, lib. 11.

Neither have those only, who have expressly treated of the Government of
England, as Secretary Smith, considered our Monarchy as a Government mixed and
bounded; but Charles I himself spoke of it in these terms: There being three
kinds of Government, absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, and all
having particular Conveniences and Inconveniences; the experience and Wisdom of
our Ancestors has so molded this out of a mixture of those, as to give this
Kingdom the Conveniences of all three, without the Inconveniences of any one,
as long as the balance hangs even between the three Estates, and they run
jointly in their proper Channels. The ill of absolute Monarchy, is Tyranny; of
Aristocracy, Faction and Division; of Democracy, Tumults, Violence, and
Licentiousness. The Good of Monarchy is uniting a Nation under one Head; the
good of Aristocracy, is the conjunction of Counsel in the ablest Persons for
the Public Good; the good of Democracy, is Liberty, and the Courage and
Industry which Liberty begets. The Lords being trusted with Judicatory power,
are an Excellent Skreen and Bank, between the Prince and the People, by just
Judgment to preserve the Law: wherefore the Power of punishing is already in
your hands according to Law.

Let any one judge after all this, whether our Ancestors ever entertained any of
those pernicious Maxims, maintained by some of our Modern Divines, Maxims that
have been the fruitful Mother of Tyrants: viz. That Princes can dispose of the
Goods, Body, and Lives of their Subjects at their pleasure; That they are not
subject to Laws, or to give any Account; That their Succession to the Throne,
is by Nature and Generation, and not at all by the Authority or Approbation of
the States; That neither their Merits or Demerits can be brought into
consideration, to alter any thing about the Right of their Succession, which is
unalterable, That without precipitating our selves into eternal Condemnation,
we may not oppose their Designs, though directly and openly levelled at the Ruin
of the State, and the Change of Religion: In a word, that they may commit all
manner of Injustice and Violence they please, and that safely and securely,
because none but God alone can punish them.

CHAP. XVI. An Answer to some Difficulties moved against this Truth.
AFter having set this Matter in so clear and evident a Light, it is not
without some Shame and Reluctance that I make a stop to answer some
insignificant Difficulties, which those who defend the unlimited Power of the
Kings of England, oppose, to the proofs I have alleged. However such as they
are, I am willing to consider them, that I may rid the Makers of them, from the
least pretext of continuing any longer in so gross and dangerous an Error.

They allege in the first place the Title of Imperial given to the Crown of
England, which, in their Judgments, seems to equalize our Kings with the Roman
Emperors; and to attribute an absolute Empire or Dominion to them: concerning
which I have already showed, that tho this Title were well grounded, yet the
consequence they draw from thence would be null, whether we consider the
ancient Roman Empire, or whether we consider the Empire, as it is now in
Germany.

I add here for a further clearing of this Matter, that the same thing happened
to the Kings of the West, with regard to the Emperor of the West, as befell the
other Kings, who rose after the Destruction of the Roman Empire, and to the
Emperor of Germany, with respect to the Emperors of the East. The Emperors of
the East, as appears from the Embassy of Luitprand at Constantinople, could not
endure that other Princes should take upon them the Title of ((...)) Kings, or
Emperors, believing that the Name of Kings, left them in some dependence upon
the Empire of the East: this obliged the Emperors of the West, to take upon
them the Title of Emperor, to intimate their independency upon the Princes of
the East. Which Title the Emperors of the West having afterward made use of,
as a pretense, to raise themselves above the rest of the Princes of Europe, the
Western Kings did the same which the Emperors of the West had done before, to
assert their Independency.

For not only the Kings of England, but some other Western Kings, have taken
upon them the Title of Emperors.

Alphonsus VI, King of Spain, took upon him this Title by a Concession from
Pope Urban II, because he had suppressed the Mosorabick-Office: Alphonsus VII,
and VIII, assumed the same Titles, and Alphonsus VIII, was Crowned in that
quality by Raymond Archbishop of Toledo, in the Church of Lions, with the
consent of Pope Innocent II, as is reported by Garibay lib. 8. hist. cap. 4. We
find that Peter de Clugny, writes to this Alphonsus, as Emperor of Spain,
Epist. 8. And long time before these Princes, it is certain that the Kings of
the Goths, since Richaredus, had taken to themselves the Title of Flavians, in
imitation of the Roman Emperors; as may be seen in the Councils of Toledo. Yet
Philip II, having demanded this Title in 1564 of Pope Pius IV, it was refused
him.

The Kings of Lombardy had assumed the Title of Flavians, even since Autlaric,
according to the Account given us by Paul Diacon. lib. 3. cap. 8, which they
did to show, that they were Emperors in their own Lands and Territories, and
that they acknowledged no Sovereign or Superior.

And it seems that in Process of Time, some Western Kings affected that Title
for the same reason; and were the rather persuaded so to do, because some
Canonists and Lawyers, have impudently maintained, That the Kings of Spain,
France and England, were Subjects of the Emperors of the West. Glossa in cap.
Venerabil. de Elect. in verbo transtulit, and in caput Venerabil. qui filii
sint legitimi. Bartolus in caput hosts ff. de captivis. Alciat. lib. 2
disjunct c. 22. Baldus in cap. 1 de Pace, juramento fervando in usibus
Feudorum. Tho he contradict himself, by asserting elsewhere That the King of
France is not subject to the Emperor.

And thus much for the first Illusion some make use of to persuade us that the
Kings of England possess the same Rights as the Emperors. A second which seems
to have some more Ground is this: They say that as the Emperors that were after
Vespasian, had the Right to divide the Empire, and to settle it by their Wills
on their Heirs, the Kings of England having done the like; it appears thereby,
they were in Possession of the same Right the Emperors had: to this purpose
they allege the last Will of William the Conqueror, in favor of his Son
William Rufus.

But nothing can be more vain than this Objection.

1. We cannot deny, but that the Election of Kings took Place, during the Reign
of the Saxons; not that they did it with that Freeness, as to prefer the Uncle
before his Nephew, that was under Age 'tho the Kings Son, and the youngest
Brother before the Eldest.

2ly, It is true that William the Conqueror did act in an extraordinary manner,
in disposing of his Kingdom in Favor of William Rufus, in the same way as one
disposes of a Conquest (and this in prejudice to Robert his Eldest Son) as was
also done by William Rufus. But these two Princes dying without Heirs, Henry,
who had Married the Daughter of King Alexander of Scotland who had the Rights
of the Saxon Kings, and who in Consideration of that Marriage, renounced the
Rights he might pretend to England, as heir Presumptive of the Saxon Kings,
having obtained the Government by the Right of his Wife, the Laws recovered
their Strength, and Things returned to their ancient Channel, as they were in
the time of the Saxons. So that it appears that it is Folly for any one to
imagine that the Kings of England may alienate their Estates, as a private
Person can alienate his Inheritance. This was evident in the case of King John,
who was opposed by the whole State, for pretending to subject the Crown of
England to Pope Innocent III.

And indeed if we consider the Thing in it self, and according to the unanimous
Opinion of all Lawyers, these last Wills can really be of no Force, without the
consent of the States, to authorize them, as we find that the same did
intervene in both the forementioned Cases. The reason whereof is invincible,
forasmuch as all States do not consider their Kings as Proprietors of their
Kingdoms, but only as public Ministers, who are entrusted with a Jurisdiction
and Administration for the Good of the public. And this is the Title by which
even Conquerors themselves are at last obliged to hold their Authority.

They tell us in the 3d place, that the Kings of England entitling themselves
Kings by the Grace of God: it appears that their Power being come from God,
cannot be limited by their Subjects, over whom God has set them. A wonderful
way of arguing, and never known till these our Times: at least, it is evident,
that he who has defended Nicholas de Lyra against Burgensis, has made a very
different use of these words, Dei Gratia, by the Grace of God, wherewith the
Kings of the North prefac^ their Titles, from what some now a days make of it.
For he maintains that it is the Character of a limited and tempered Government:
see how he expresses himself upon the 8. chapter of the 1 Book of Kings. Titulus
Imperatoris modo regendi vitiato (that is to say, illimitato, as he expresses
himself before) contradicit; nam titulus ejus est, N. Dei gratia Romanorum Rex
and semper Augustus, hoc est Reipublicae non privatae accommodus. Ita and
aliorum Regum Protestationes sunt sub Dei gratia quae vitiatum Principatum non
admittit. The very Title of the Emperor, says he, is a Contradiction to an
Arbitrary and Unlimited kind of Government; for his Title is, N. by the Grace
of God, King of the Romans, always Augustus (that is enlarger of the Empire)
which implies that his Government is accommodate to the Common good and not his
Private Interest. So likewise we find that the Protestations of other Kings are
under Dei Gratia (the Grace of God) which does not admit of Arbitrary
Government.

There remain but two difficulties more; the first is this, Several Members of
the Church of England having persuaded the People, that a necessity was laid
upon them to suffer all from the Hands of their Kings; The Kings of England
have accordingly usurped those Rights, and were actually in possession of them,
when the same began to oppose themselves to King James; this is that they call
a right of Prescription. They consider the State, as having lost its Liberty,
since their consenting to the Establishment of Tyranny, and consequently having
no right to attempt any thing toward the Recovery of it.

But I desire those who fain would obtrude this Delusion upon others, as they
have upon themselves, to consider,

1. That known Maxim of Right, Possessor malae fidei non praescribit, An
unjust Possessor makes no Praescription. Indeed if this be true, That a Man
needs only usurp the Goods and Rights of another, to make himself the lawful
Master of them; Robbers, Usurers, and those who by abusing of the Law deprive
others of their Rights, will be found to be of the best and most thriving
Trades in the World. If this be so, the Church of Rome and the Pope, by the
Possession they have been in for so many Ages, must carry it by Prescription,
to hang, burn, and massacre; neither can any one oppose himself against their
just Title.

2. They ought to consider that if Kings be accounted Minors or under Age,
because they cannot alienate their Dominions, as being only granted them for
the good of the State, the People are so, on a much better Title, and
Prescription can never prejudice them.

I know it is a Maxim in Law, Praetor cum injuste judicat, jus dicit; that a
Judge, though he judges unjustly, his Judgment stands good in Law, and
accordingly must be obeyed: from whence some might conclude, That the most
unjust Kings cannot be contradicted, and that it is unlawful for any to oppose
themselves to their Decisions. But those who should make this Objection,
probably would not take notice of the Consequence of it. It is for the Interest
of the Society, that the Judgments pronounced by the ordinary Judges should be
valid, though some of their Judgments may be unjust: but no body ever believed,
that this Maxim authorizeth the Magistrate, either Subaltern or Sovereign, to
tread under-feet the Laws, and to make public Profession to judge all things
according to their fancy. 2ly. It Is a constant truth, That Kings could never
justly touch the Peoples Rights, they being commissionated neither by God nor
Man to judge what be the Rights of the People, and having no more right to
deprive them thereof than a party at Law, has right to deprive his party of the
Right that justly belongs to him.

CHAP. XVII. An Answer to the last Objection.
AFter all that has been said, I cannot suspect that any should make an
Objection, that has so little Appearance of any Probability, as is that which
is the 2d of those that remain to be examined by me; some suppose their conceit
to be of some weight, who urge the Acts of Parliament under King Charles II, as
destructive of this form of the English Government. The Words are these; That
it is not lawful on any Pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King,
etc. Indeed it cannot be denied but that these Words seem to suppose, that
those who swear to them, cannot believe it is lawful to take up Arms against
the Kings of England, howsoever they may behave themselves, nor by any
opposition to hinder the overturning of the Laws and Government. We may well
acknowledge that Power to be unbounded, which it is not lawful to oppose by
force of Arms; now these Acts of Parliament declare that it is not lawful to
resist the King; wherefore the King of England must be supposed an unlimited
and absolute Monarch, and by Consequence we must conclude, that the Government
of England is wholly changed and destroyed; so that whatsoever we have alleged
in the foregoing Discourse, can only be made use of as a History of what is
past, but not as a Rule or Precedent for what is to come.

This conceit is so unreasonable, that it seems scarce worth the pains to stop
at it; however I shall endeavor in few Words to satisfy those who seem
unwarily to be taken in the Snare, which the Malice of a Popish Court had laid
for them.

1st. They must know that the Fundamental Laws of any State, are of the Nature
of Contracts, Pactions and Capitulations, which according to the common opinion
of Lawyers are irrevocable. Buxtorf. in Bull. aurea cap. 1. 7. whence it
follows, That all Oaths that are taken against Capitulations of this nature,
may be Sins to those who take them, but cannot oblige them, as being unlawful
Oaths.

2ly. They cannot suppose that the Parliaments of Charles II did ever think of
repealing these Fundamental Laws, without accusing the Members that composed
them of having been prevaricators and betrayers of the Interest of their
Country, by changing the limited Monarchy into a true Tyranny.

3ly. They cannot do this Injury to these illustrious Assemblies, without
casting the same Blemish upon the Bishops, in the House of Lords, during those
Sessions of Parliament, and making them altogether odious either for their
Stupidity, or for their Malice: for their Stupidity, if imprudently they gave
their consent to Laws made on purpose to change the Kingly Government into
Tyranny; or for their Malice, if they wilfully betrayed the Interest of the
State, though they knew well enough what must be the end and aim of these
Regulations. I desire these Gentlemen to make some Reflection on this truth. Is
it possible they should have no Consideration at all, either for the Reputation
or Conscience of their Ancestors. They have showed themselves so jealous of a
change in the form of the Government, by making of a successive State, an
Elective one, and yet they suppose that the Parliament and the Bishops that sat
in them have in sport changed the form of the Government, by making it of a
limited Royalty, to become an absolute and unbounded Monarchy.

4ly, They must needs accuse these Parliaments of a strange Folly; for these
Gentlemen suppose that the Disorders which then ruled in the State, obliged the
Parliament to restore Charles II. They suppose that the Anarchy and various
Sects which had the upper hand before his recall; making wise Men not without
cause to apprehend the Ruin of the Protestant Religion, as well as the
Overthrow of the State, they thought themselves obliged to employ all their
strength, for restoring of Charles II. as supposing him a good Protestant and a
King whom his Adversities had made wise, in hopes of being governed by him
according to the ancient Laws of the Kingdom. And yet after this they will
persuade us, That the Parliament thought it fit and reasonable, to destroy the
Nature of the Royalty in England, by making it Mistress of the Laws, and
authorizing it to destroy the Protestant Religion, whenever the Popish Faction
should think fit to have it done.

5ly. They must accuse these Parliaments of the commission of a horrid piece of
Imprudence, in attempting upon the Liberty of the People: For if this were
indeed their Design, were they not obliged at the same time to repeal all the
other Laws which restrain the Power of the Kings of England? For we know that a
Law cannot be valid nor derogate from other Laws, except in the said Law
express mention be made of the said Derogation with a Notwithstanding to the
Reglements set down in other Laws that are in Authority on that Subject. De
Decimis c. nuper. Ought not they also in like manner to have declared, and that
very precisely too, that they dispensed Charles II from keeping his
Coronation Oath, and to have set down in very distinct terms, that in case the
King should think fit to call in an Army of French Dragoons to ravish their
Wives and Daughters, and to force all his Subjects to change their Religion,
they do not think it lawful to take up Arms against him or them, for to repel
their Violence.

6ly. They are to take notice that Charles II did never conceive that those
Acts had changed the Government of the State. Do we not know that he offered to
the Parliaments of Westminster and Oxford, to impose such Conditions on the D.
of York, as the Parliament should judge necessary, provided only the Succession
might be assured to him: now could any thing be more ridiculous and extravagant
than this Proposition of the King, had he believed that the Acts already past
in his Favor, had given him and his Successors a Right to overturn all,
without being able to be challenged or opposed by any one for so doing? They
themselves did suppose the same thing, and went upon that Ground; what else
could be their meaning in Crowning James II, if they supposed that he was in
full and rightful Possession of the Government by virtue of the Succession,
without being obliged to take the Oaths, by which the Kings of England oblige
themselves to keep the Laws of the State.

7ly. They ought to take notice, that they themselves supposed that the
Fundamental Laws of the State were not abolished. I don't speak here of those
loud Murmurs that were heard every where, when James II by an Act of his
Council, of his own Authority raised the same Sums, which had been granted to
Charles II which he could not do without the Authority of Parliament; nor of
the Complaints that were generally made when he turned out my Lord Clarendon
from being Lord Deputy of Ireland, banished several Protestant Lords out of his
Council, and put Papists into all Offices whether Civil or Military. I only
take notice here of the Petition presented in the Name of the Clergy by the
seven Bishops upon occasion of reading the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience; for had they been of another opinion, with what pretense of reason
could they have complained of James II, governing with an Arbitrary Power, and
his dispensing with the Laws? Why in their Petition did they alledg those Acts
of Parliament which had condemned that Power in 1673, when Charles II published
his Proclamation for Liberty of Conscience. These Acts of theirs, upon this
Supposal, could not be accounted of otherwise, than as Acts of Rebellion, nor
could they be made use of with a good Conscience, after they had been convinced
that the Fundamental Laws being repealed and abolished, they were now subject
to an arbitrary and unbounded Government.

Indeed we cannot enough commend the Constancy of the Clergy and those worthy
Prelates, who refused to read the Declaration of James II for Liberty of
Conscience: that Declaration being grounded upon the Power he attributed to
himself of dispensing with the Laws. But on the other Hand neither can we
imagine any more convincing Proof to make out that at that Time they did not
conceive, any more than the whole State, who so generally applauded them, that
they themselves, as well as the whole State, had cast themselves headlong into
Slavery by their Oaths, because the Power of the Kings of England was become
unbounded and Arbitrary.

In a Word, how ample an extent soever these Gentlemen may give to the Oath
they have taken in pursuance of an Act of Parliament in the 13 Year of Charles
II, they must remember one Thing which is always supposed, which is the natural
Condition of all Oaths, rebus sic stantibus, c. ad naturam, Things continuing
in the same State; for indeed as soon as things have changed their Nature, or
that Circumstances are altered, there remains no more Obligation in Cases,
where exceptions are naturally supposed. I am bound to Obey my Father in all
Things, this being what the Scripture expressly teaches me; but I am not bound
to Obey him any farther, than he Acts like a Father, neither am I obliged to
keep this Command of obeying him in all Things, but only so far as the Things
enjoined by him are just and lawful. I am bound to obey the King according to
the Laws, neither may I lawfully resist Him, in his executing of the Laws, or
upon any pretext whatsoever take up Arms against him: but if in stead of
governing according to Law, he uses his utmost Endeavors to overthrow the
Society, by destroying the Laws which are the Band of it, then all the Oaths I
have taken are no longer of any Force, it is my Right to Endeavor to preserve
the Society, which he goes about to overthrow, and to oppose his Violence by
taking up Arms against him, and to put a stop to the unjust Proceedings of a
Prince, who declares himself an Enemy to the State, by the ways which
providence affords me for my Security.

But if after all these Considerations, these Gentlemen will still maintain,
that they have taken these Oaths in so strait a Sense, that nothing is capable
of satisfying their Consciences; we have great Reason to be Astonished, how it
was possible that Men of so Tender and Delicate a Conscience, could take such
Oaths, which taken in their Sense do visibly overturn both the State and
Religion. Indeed there is no need of any ones being a Prophet to make him
conceive, that they were rather obliged in Conscience to refuse the taking of
such Oaths, and to fly to the End of the World, rather than take them, than
they are bound to keep them, with the hazard of the utter Ruin of their Native
Country and their Religion; or see them Perish without having any Power to
Defend them, as they are obliged by the Laws of nature, and by all the Duties
of the Society and Religion.

It has already been made out by several Writings, that God seeming to spare
and wink at the weakness of those who believed themselves thus fast bound and
tied by their Oaths, and destined to become Victimes to Popery and Tyranny, has
been pleased happily to deliver them from the trouble wherein they had involed
themselves in sending them a Deliverer, whose Rights, in a War which James II.
unjustly wageth against him, are above all those Difficulties, which seem to be
matter of Scruple to them: so that it is not needful for me to insist any
longer on this Matter.

CHAP. XVIII. A Reflection on some Remarks made out in this Treatise.
I Am persuaded, that every equal Reader cannot but acknowledge, that to judge
aright of Things, the Proceedings of England, with respect to James II. have
been the most just and lawful that could be.

The Things I have made out in this Treatise, are summarily contained in the
following Articles.

1. That the Constitution and Establishment of any Government, is the Effect of
the Original Consent of the People, though the Authority of the Magistrates be
a Thing established by God.

2. That this Establishment supposes the Subsistence of the Laws, which are
the End of the Government in the Design of God; for indeed Kingdoms without
Justice, are no better than great Robberies, as St. Austin calls them, De
Civit. Dei, Lib. 4. cap. 4.

3. That these Fundamental Laws, for the Subsistence of the Society, are a Bond
which so strictly ties the Sovereigns, that nothing is able to dispense with
their Obligation to them.

4. That when the Sovereigns do violate them, they break the Ties, whereby
their Subjects are bound to their Lawful Authority.

5. That the Subjects can never be deprived of their Right to hinder the Ruin
of the Society, and of the Laws, for the conservation of which only they have
put their Rights into the Hands of the Prince.

6. That there was never any State that subsisted under other conditions than
these.

7. That England in particular, and Scotland, have always had this Right.

Now these Things supposed, it is evident,

1. That James II. has forfeited all his Rights to the Crown, even before his
Desertion.

2. That the Lords and People justly took up Arms against him, to oblige him by
Force to reform the Disorders he had caused.

3. That the States had Power, without any regard had to Him, to raise the King
and Queen to the Throne.

4. That the Subjects are more than enough freed from their Oath of Allegiance
to King James.

5. That they have Right, and are under Obligation, to take up Arms, and oppose
themselves against James II. and to maintain the Authority of the King and
Queen.

6. That those who oppose themselves to this, are declared Enemies of the
State, and of our Religion, and the Authors and Abettors of Tyranny and Popery.

7. That those who pretend themselves scrupulous in these Points, are the Cause
of the Division, and consequently of the Ruin of the State and Religion,
whereby they grievously sin against God, and therefore are obliged in
Conscience to repent and make amends for the Mischief their Division has caused.

The thing is very evident, and forasmuch as it is of the highest importance
for their Salvation, I beg of them well to weigh and consider these following
Articles, and witness their Repentance in all these respects.

1. Then they ought to repent, for that they making profession to have so
strong an Affection for James II. they have made him fall upon the Designs of
changing the Government into a Despotical and Arbitrary Power, and thus by
their Maxims have advanced and precipitated his Ruin. They are the Men who have
made him conceive the Design of establishing a Tyranny in England; they have
given birth to his hope of being able to compass it according to his Hearts
desire, and his Ruin proceeding from the opposition that was made against these
his Designs, it is them he may thank for all the Miseries into which he is
plunged; and consequently they have great reason to repent, for having
precipitated his Ruin by their false and deceitful Foundation. See what Gerson
says, In opusc. contr. Adulat. consid. 10. Clericus ille Regem suum aut
Principem amaret minime, qui perversas, and tales vellet dare doctrinas, aut
toto posse and scientia illas non impediret -- quia non est modus certior, quo
Rex aut Princeps se perderet in corpore and in anima, totamque ejus
damnationem, quam habendo falsas tales opiniones, and eas opere exequendo. Cur?
Quoniam Dominatio sua in Tyrannidem verteretur and in infidelitatem. That
Clergyman would be far from loving his King or Prince, who should teach him
such perverse and false Doctrines, or that with all his Power and Skill should
not oppose them; because there is not a more sure way for a Prince to destroy
himself, Soul and Body, and to procure his total Damnation, than by
entertaining such false Opinions, and reducing them into practice. Why so?
Because his Government by this means would be changed into Tyranny and
Perfidiousness.

2. They ought to repent, for their having contributed so much toward the
establishing of Tyranny, not only because that would have destroyed the Public
Liberty, but because his Design at the same time was, to overthrow the
Protestant Religion, and substitute in the place of it the Idolatry,
Superstition and Tyranny of Popish Usurpation. This was a thing they could not
do without imitating the Conduct of the Popish Clergy, who since the Popes have
undertaken to tread under their Feet the Rules of the Gospel, and of the
Church, have endeavored to inspire Princes with an indifferency for their
Oaths, and contempt of the Laws, which are a Safeguard and Security of the
Civil Society.

3. They must repent, at least some of them, for having obstinately endeavored
to hide and disguise the Conspiracies which were designed for the Ruin of our
Religion and Liberty.

4. They must repent for having writ in favor of an Opinion contrary to the
Judgment of the Ancient Reformers of England; and for having traduced, as
Rebels, the Protestant Churches beyond the Sea, for their maintaining the
Maxims which the first Reformers of England have Asserted, and for which they
have Writ, in defense of their Protestant Brethren.

5. They must repent, for that by their Sermons and Writings they have
insinuated to the People those Maxims which have put them upon betraying the
Natural Rights of the Society, and in the Sequel, upon imprudently exposing
themselves to betray the Interest of the Protestant Religion, which they were
obliged to deliver safe to their Posterity.

6. They must repent, for having by this means encouraged the Judges to tread
underfoot the Authority of the Laws, and to dispense with them, as having
taught them to look upon the Laws, as the Concessions of Princes, and Acts of
their Will, and by Consequence revocable at their good Pleasure.

7. They must repent, at least some of them, for having mounted to
Ecclesiastical Dignities, by publicly appearing in the Lists for defense of
these pernicious and tyrannical Maxims, directly levelled at the Ruin and
Overthrow of our Liberty and Religion.

8. They must repent, for that their Opinions at this Day are the Causes of the
present Conspiracies, Rebellions and Treasons against the Government, by which
God has been pleased so graciously to secure our Liberty and Religion, from the
inevitable Ruin wherewith they were threatened.

However, we have cause to bless God, that those who are guilty of these Sins,
are but inconsiderable in their Numbers. And I ardently wish for them, they may
once seriously enter into themselves, and that by the Example of their
Brethren, they may, for Time to come, employ all their Endeavors to make
reparation for the Mischief and Scandal their Errors and Prejudices have in a
great measure brought both upon the Church and State.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX CONTAINING I. Concilii Toletani IV. Canon. LXXV. II. Capitula
super quibus facta est Magna Charta Regis Johannis, ex MSS. Arch. Cantuar. Fol.
14. Quae etiam authentice cum Sigillo extant in manibus Episc. Salisburiensis.
III. Diploma sive Ordinationes Johannis Regis Angliae, queis statuit quid
Nobiles, quid Plebes observare debeant ad pacem and tranquillitatem Regni
stabiliendam.


LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell. 1689.

APPENDIX.
The 75. Canon of the Fourth Council of Toledo.
AFter some Ordinances and Decrees made by us, with respect to the
Ecclesiastical Order, and their particular Discipline, the last Resolution
taken by us Priests, is to enact a final Pontifical Decree for the puissance of
our Kings, and the stability of the Gothic Nation, in presence of the Great
Judge of the World. For many Nations are so false and perfidious, that they
make slight of the Oath of Faithfulness they have sworn to their Kings, and tho
with their mouths they profess Allegiance to their Prince, yet retain
Perfidiousness in their hearts: they swear indeed to their Kings, but are as
ready to break it again upon occasion, not fearing that Roll of Judgment, which
brings a Curse and manifold Punishments upon those who swear falsely by the name
of the Lord. What hope is there that such as these should either stand to their
Capitulations in time of War, or observe their Treaties of Peace with other
Nations? Or what Covenant or Contract will they not break? Or what Promise made
to their Enemies will they keep, when they violate the Allegiance sworn to
their own Kings? For who is so mad as to endeavor to cut off his Head with his
own Hand? This is notorious, that unmindful of their own Preservation they kill
themselves, turning their force and violence against themselves and their own
Kings. And whereas the Lord says, Touch not mine Anointed: and David, Who can
stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be guiltless? these are
neither afraid of Perjury, or murdering their own Princes. Sure it is, that a
Promise, tho made to Enemies, ought to be kept: Now if we must keep Faith and
Truth in War to our Enemies, how much more are we to keep them on all other
occasions? For it is a piece of Sacrilege for Subjects to violate the Faith
promised to their Kings, be^^use in so doing they not only sin against their
Princes, but against God himself, in whose name they make their promise. Hence
it comes that the wrath of God does often change and transfer many of the Earthly
Kingdoms, the breach of Faith and corruption of Manners, making way for the
destruction and change of the Government. Wherefore also it ought to be our
great care to avoid the mishaps attending these Nations, lest we be involved
with them deservedly in the same Punishment. Thus we see that God did not spare
the Angels that rebelled against him, who by their disobedience forfeited their
Heavenly Mansions. Wherefore it is said also by the Prophet Isaiah, My Sword is
made drunk in Heaven; how much more then ought we to stand in awe, and fear the
same disaster, lest by our perfidiousness we be destroyed by the same Sword of
an angry God. If therefore we desire to avoid the divine wrath, and to have his
severity turned into Favor and Clemency toward us, let us above all things
with fear keep and observe to God the Religious Worship and Service we owe him,
and to our Kings the Faith and Allegiance we have promised them: Let there not
be found amongst us, as in some other Nations, any wicked contrivance of
Unfaithfulness, or cunning Perfidiousness, or the horrid Crime of Perjury, or
mischievous Plottings of Conspiracies: Let none amongst us, egged on by
Presumption, invade the Throne, or stir up Seditions amongst his
Fellow-Citizens, or compass and contrive the Death of Kings: but when the King
is departed this Life in Peace, let the Lords of the Nation, together with the
Priests, by joint Advice and Consent, appoint and constitute a Successor of the
Kingdom; that so whilst this band of Unity and Concord is thus preserved
amongst us, none may endeavor to make a rent in the Kingdom by force or unjust
ways. But in case this Admonition prove not of sufficient force, to correct the
bad impressions which may be on the minds of any, and to incline the hearts of
all to promote the common good, we think good to pronounce Sentence. Whosoever
therefore, either of us, or any of the People of Spain, shall by any Conspiracy
or Endeavor come to break and falsify the Oath he has taken, for the good
State and Welfare of the Gothic Nation, and the safety of the King, or shall
presume to kill the King, or deprive him of his Royal Dignity, or by a
Tyrannical presumption shall Usurp the Throne, let him be Anathema in the Eyes
of God the Father and the Holy Angels, and be cast out of the Catholic Church
which he has profaned by his Perjury, and be turned out from all Christian
Societies, together with all the Accomplices of his wickedness, because it is but
just that they who are guilty of the same Crime should be involved in the same
punishment. Which therefore we think good to repeat again; saying, Whosoever
from this time forwards, either of us, or of all the People of Spain, shall by
any Conspiracy or Endeavor, break the Oath which he has taken for the good
State of his Native Country, and of the Gothic Nation, and for the safety of
the King's Person, or shall presume to kill the King, or deprive him of his
Kingdom, or by a tyrannical presumption shall Usurp the Throne, let him be
Anathema in the sight of Christ and his Holy Apostles, and be cast out of the
Catholic Church, which he has profaned by his Perjury, and thrust out from all
Christian Societies, and as a damned Person be delivered up to the just
Judgment of God to come, together with all his accomplices and partakers. Yea we
repeat a third time, That whosoever of us, or any of the People of Spain, in
contrivance or deed, break his Oath which he has taken for the good Sat and
Welfare of his own Native Country, and the Gothic Nation, and the safety and
preservation of the King's Person, or attempt the life of the King, or deprive
him of his Royal Dignity, or by a tyrannical presumption shall Usurp the
Throne, let him be Anathema in the sight of the Holy Ghost and the Martyrs of
Christ, and be excommunicated from the Catholic Church, which he has profaned
by his Perjury, and be renounced all Christian Communion, without ever having
any share or part with the Righteous, but with the Devil and his Angels be
condemned to Eternal punishments, with all his Partners joined with him in the
same Conspiracy, that the same punishment of final perdition may reach all that
are Accomplices and Partakers of the same guilt. Wherefore if this thrice
repeated Sentence be according to the mind of all you that are here present,
confirm the same with your Unanimous Voices. Accordingly the whole Body of the
Clergy and People have said and declared, Whosoever shall presume to do any
thing against this your Decree, Let him be Anathema, Maranatha, that is,
accursed and damned at the coming of our Lord, and have his share and lot with
Judas Iscariot, both they and their Accomplices. Amen.

In consideration therefore of the Premises, we Priests do admonish and warn
the Holy Church of Christ, and all the People, to take care that this
tremendous and so often repeated Sentence of Excommunication may not make any of
us obnoxious to present and eternal condemnation, but that keeping the Faith we
have sworn to our most Glorious Lord, King Sisenandus, and serving him with
sincere Loyalty, we may not only incline the Divine Clemency and Goodness
toward us, but may also deserve the favor of our Gracious Prince. Amen.

We also with the Humility that becomes us, do entreat thee, These
qualifications of a good Prince, are most of them taken out of St. Austin. Lib.
5. de Civitate Dei.
O King, here present amongst us, and all Princes thy Successors for time to
come, that behaving your selves with all moderation and gentleness toward your
Subjects, you may in Righteousness and Godliness rule the People by God
committed to your charge, that so you may be able to give a good account of
your Stewardship to Christ who has constituted you; governing your Subjects
with humbleness of Heart, and being found in a constant endeavor of procuring
their Good and Welfare. That none of you alone may undertake to judge of
Capital Matters, or any Man's Estate; but that by public consent of the Judges
and other Magistrates, and in an open Trial, the Guilt of Delinquents may be
made apparent, observing a merciful disposition toward those who have
offended, that your indulgence and mercy in sparing may appear, as well as your
Severity in punishing: So that all things, by the assistance of God, being
administered and preserved by you, with a godly Rule and Government, you Kings
may have reason to rejoice in your People, as well as your People in you, and
that God, may rejoice in you both. And as to what belongs to all future Kings,
we pronounce this our Sentence, that in case any of them without being
restrained by the Reverence due to the Laws, shall by a proud Lordliness, being
puffed up with the Royal dignity, by injustice, violence and oppression, exercise
a tyranical and cruel Power against his Subjects, let all such be condemned and
anathematized by Christ, and be separated from God, and subjected to his
Judgments; for that he presumed to act wickedly, and to endeavor the hurt and
ruin of the Kingdom. And as for Suintilanus, who fearing the punishment of his
Crimes, has deserted the Kingdom, depriving himself thereby of the Royal Power,
we, with the Consent of the People, have Decreed that neither he nor his Wife
nor Children, shall ever be received by us into our Society, because of the
wickedness they are guilty of; or restored to those Honors from whence they
have been so justly cast down; and that they shall not only for ever stand
deprived of the Prerogatives of the Royal Dignity, but also forfeit all the
Wealth they have got by oppressing the miserable People, except only that which
shall be allowed them by the goodness of our Gracious Prince The same Sentence
we likewise pronounce against Geilanus, the said Suintilanus his Brother, as in
Blood, so in Crimes and Wickedness, who was perfidious to his own Brother, and
has broken his Faith promised to our most glorious Lord, wherefore we also cast
him and his Wife, and banish them from our Society, together with those
beforementioned, and exclude them from the Commonwealth of our Nation, and
that they shall not be restored to the Possessions, which by wickedness they
had gotten, except only what they may obtain from the Bounty of our most
Gracious Prince, who as he is ready to enrich those that are good with
bountiful Rewards, so neither does he altogether exclude those that are wicked,
from his diffusive. Beneficence. Now Glory and Honor be ascribed to our
Almighty God, in whose name we are here Assembled, and may Happiness, Peace,
and a long continued Reign be the Portion of our most Pious Lord and Lover of
Christ, King Sisenand, whose Piety and Devotion has ca^l to this Assembly, to
establish and enact this wholesome Decree. May the Glory of Christ strengthen
and establish his Kingdom and the Gothic Nation in the Catholic Faith, and
multiply his Years and Virtues, preserving him to the highest old age; and may
he after the Glory of his Reign here on Earth, pass over to the Eternal Kingdom
in Heaven, that he may Reign there without end, who here has Reigned well and
happily by the grace and help of him who is King of kings and Lord of lords,
with the Father and Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Amen.

The things above written being thus decreed and determined by us, with the
Consent and Approbation of our most Religious Prince, we also have engaged
never to infringe any Point thereof, but exactly to keep and observe the same;
and because these things do greatly concern the good of the Church, and the
welfare of Souls, we have thought good to strengthen and confirm the same by
our particular Subscription, that they may stand ratified for ever. And
accordingly was subscribed by all of them.

Concilii Toletani IV. CAN. LXXV.
POst instituta quaedam ecclesiastici ordinis, Concilio Tolet. v. cap. 7.
decernitur ut hoc decretum in omnibus synodis peractis publica voce
pronuncietur.
vel decreta, quae ad quorundam pertinent disciplinam, postrema nobis cunctis
sacerdotibus sententia est, pro robore nostrorum Regum, and stabilitate gentis
Gothorum, pontificale ultimum sub Deo judice far decretum. Multarum quippe
gentium (ut fama est) tanta extat perfidia animorum, ut fidem Sacramento
promissam regibus suis servare contemnant, and ore simulent juramenti
professionem, dum retineant mente perfidiae impietatem. Zach. 7. of. 8.
Jurant enim Regibus suis, and fidem quam pollicentur praevaricant, nec metuunt
volumen illud judicii, per quod inducitur maledictio multaque poenarum
comminatio super eos qui jurant in nomine Dei mendaciter. Quae igitur spes
talibus populis contra hosts laborantibus erit? quae fides ultra cum aliis
gentibus in pace credenda? quod foedus non violandum? quae in hostibus jurata
sponsio stabilis perm.
permanebit, quando nec ipsis propriis regibus juratam fidem conservant? Quis
enim adeo furiosus est, qui caput suum manu propria desecet? illud notum est,
immemores salutis suae propria manu seipsos interimunt, in semetipsos suosque
reges proprias convertendo vires, and dum Dominus Dicat Psalm. 104. 1 Regum 26.
dicit, Nolite tangere Christos meos: and David, Quis, inquit, extendet manum
suam in Christum Domini, and innocens erit? illic nec vitare metus est
perjurium, nec regibus suis infer exitium. Hostibus quippe fides pacti datur,
nec violatur. Quod si in bello fides valet, quanto magis in caeteris.
suis servanda est. Sacrilegium quippe est, si violetur a gentibus regum suorum
promissa fides, quia non solum in eos fit pacti transgressio, sed and in Deum
quidem, in cujus nomine pollicetur ipsa promissio. Inde est quod multa regna
terrarum coelestis iracundia ita permutavit, ut per impietatem fidei and morum,
alterum altero solveretur. Unde and nos cavere oportet casum hujusmodi gentium;
ne similiter plaga feriamur praecipiti, and poena puniamur crudeli. Sic enim
Deus angelis in se praevaricantibus non pepercit, qui per inobedientiam
coeleste habitaculum perdiderunt. Unde and per Isaiam dicitur, Isai. 34.
Inebriatus est gladius meus in coelo, quanto magis nos nostrae salutis
interitum timere debemus, ne per infidelitatem eodem saevientis Dei gladio
pereamus. Quod si divinam iracundiam vitare volumus, and severitatem ejus ad
clementiam provocare cupimus, servemus erga Deum religionis cultum atque
timore, and usque ad mortem custod.
cum timore; custodiamus erga Principes nostros pollicitam fidem, atque
sponsionem; non sit in nobis, sicut in quibusdam gentibus, infidelitatis
subtilitas impia, non subdola mentis perfidia, non perjurii nefas, nec
conjurationum nefanda molimina. Nullus apud nos praesumptione regnum accipiat;
nullus excitet mutuas seditiones civium; nemo meditetur interitus regum; sed
and defuncto in pace principe, primates totius gentis cum sacerdotibus
successorem regni concilio communi constituant: ut dum unitatis concordia a
nobis retinetur, nullum patriae gentis dissidium per vim atque ambitum moliatur.
oriatur. Quod si haec admonitio mentes nostras non corrigit, and ad salutem
communem cor nostrum nequaquam perducit, audite sententiam nostram. Quicunque
igitur a nobis, vel totius Hispaniae populis, qualibet conjuratione vel studio
sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro patriae gentisque Gothorum Statu, vel
Observatione.
conservatione regiae salutis pollicitus est, Tentaverit.
temeraverit, ut regem nec attrectaverit, aut potestate regni exuerit, aut
praesumptione Tyrannica regni fastigium usurpaverit, anathema sit in conspectu
Dei patris and angelorum, atque ab ecclesia catholica, quam profanaverit
perjurio, efficiatur extraneus, and ab omni coetu Christianorum alienus, cum
omnibus impietatis suae sociis: quia oportet ut una poena teneat obnoxios, quos
similis error invenerit implicatos. Quod iterum secundo replicamus dicentes:
Quicunque amodo ex nobis vel cunctis Hispaniae populis quolibet tractatu vel
studio sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro patriae gentisque Gothorum statu, vel
conservatione regiae salutis pollicitus est, violaverit, aut regem nece
attrectaverit, aut potestate regni exuerit, aut praesumptione tyrannica regni
fastigium usurpaverit, anathema sit in conspectu Christi, and Angelorum
Apostolorum ejus, atque ab ecclesia catholica, quam perjurio profanaverit,
efficiatur extraneus; and ab omni consortio Christianorum alienus, and damnatus
in futuro Dei judicio habeatur, cum comparticipibus suis. Quia dignum est, qui
talibus sociantur, ipsi etiam damnationis eorum participatione obnoxii
teneantur. Hoc etiam tertio acclamamus, Quicunque amodo ex nobis vel cunctis
Hispaniae populis qualibet meditatione vel studio sacramentum fidei suae, quod
pro patriae salute, gentisque Gothorum statu, vel incolumitate regiae
potestatis pollicitus est, violaverit, aut regem nece attrectaverit, aut
potestate regni exuerit, aut praesumptione tyrannica regni fastigium
usurpaverit, anathema sit in conspectu Spiritus Sancti, and martyrum Christi,
atque ab ecclesia catholica, quam perjurio profanaverit, efficiatur extraneus,
and ab omni communione Christianorum alienus; neque partem justorum habeat, sed
cum diabolo and angelis ejus aeternis suppliciis condemnetur, una cum eis qui
eadem conjuratione nituntur: Et
ut par poena perditionis constringat, quos in perniciem prava societas
copulat: and ideo, si placet omnibus qui adestis. Hoc tertio reiteratum
sententia vestrae.
Haec tertio reiterata sententia vestrae vocis Nostram.
eam consensu firmate, ab universo clero, vel populo dictum est: qui contra
hanc vestram definitionem praesumpserit, anathema, maranatha (hoc est) perditio
in adventu.
adventum domini sit, and cum Juda Ischariot partem habeat, and ipsi and socii
eorum. Amen.

Quapropter nos ipsi Et sacerdotes omnes sanctam Ecclesiam.
sacerdotes omnem ecclesiam Christi ac populum admonemus, ut tremenda haec and
totiens iterata sententia nullum ex nobis praesenti atque aeterno condemnet
judicio; sed fidem promissam erga gloriosissimum dominum nostrum Sisenandum
regem custodientes, ac sincera illi devotione famulantes, non solum divinae
pietatis clementiam in nobis provocemus, sed etiam gratiam antefati Principis
percipere mereamur. Amen.

Te quoque praesentem regem futurosque sequentium aetatum principes humilitate
qua debemus deposcimus, Haec omnia de formando optimo Principe, fere desumpta
sunt ex August. lib. 5. de civit. Dei, cap. 24.
ut moderati and mites erga subjectos existentes, cum justitia and pietate
populos a Deo vobis creditos regatis, bonamque vicissitudinem qui vos
constituit largitori Christo respondeatis; regnantes cum humilitate cordis, cum
studio bonae actionis. Ne quicquam vestrum solus in causis capitum, aut rerum
sententiam ferat: Sed consensu publico, cum rectoribus ex judicio manifesto
delinquentium culpa patescat; servata vobis in offensis mansuetudine, ut non
severitate magis in illis quam indulgentia polleatis: Ut dum omnia haec,
auctore Deo, pio a vobis moderamine conservantur, and reges in populis, and
populi in regibus, and Deus in utrisque laetetur. Sane de futuris regibus hanc
sententiam promulgamus, ut si quis ex eis contra reverentiam legum superba
dominatione, and fastu regio in flagitiis and facinore, sive cupiditate
crudelissimam potestatem in populis exercuerit, anathematis sententia a Christo
domino condemnetur, and habeat a Deo separationem atque judicium, propter quod
praesumpserit prava agere, and in perniciem regnum deducere.
convertere. De se Suintilane vero, qui scelera propria metuens, seipsum regno
privavit, and potestatis fascibus exuit, id cum gentis consultu decrevimus, ut
neque eundem vel uxorem ejus, propter mala quae commiserunt, neque filios eorum
unitati nostrae unquam consociemus, nec eos ad honores, a quibus ob iniquitatem
dejecti sunt, aliquando provehamus
promoveamus; quique etiam, sicut a fastigio regni habentur extranei, ita and a
possessione rerum, quas de miserorum sumptibus auxerant.
hauser ant, maneant alieni; praeter id quod pietate piissimi principis nostri
fuerint consecuti. Non aliter and Geilanem.
Gelanem memorati Suintilanae.
Suintilani and sanguine and scelere fratrem, qui neque in germanitatis fide.
foedere stabilis extitit, nec fidem gloriosissimo nostro domino pollicito
conservavit, hunc igitur cum conjuge sua, sicut and antefactum est.
antefatos, a societate gentis, atque consortio nostro placuit separari, nec in
amissis facultatibus, in quibus per iniquitatem creverant, reduces fieri;
praeter in id.
praeter id quod consecuti fuerint pietate clementissimi principis nostri:
cujus gratia and bonos donorum praemiis ditat, and malos a beneficentia sua
congrue non separat.
non separat. Gloria autem and honor omnipotenti Deo nostro, in cujus nomine
congregati sumus. Post haec salus and pax, and diuturnitas piissimo and amatori
Christi domino Sisenando regi; cujus devotio nos ad hoc decretum salutiferum
convocavit; Corroboret Christi gloria regnum illius, gentesque.
gentisque Gothorum in fide Catholica: annis and meritis protegat illum usque
ad ultimam senectutem summa Dei gratia: and post praesentis regni gloriam, ad
aeternum regnum transeat; and.
ut sine fine regnet, qui in saeculo.
intra Saeculum feliciter imperat; ipso praestante qui est Rex regum and
Dominus dominantium, cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto in Saecula Saeculorum Amen.

Definitis itaque iis quae superius comprehensa sunt, annuente religiosissimo
principe, placuit deinde, nulla re impediente, a quolibet nostrum ea quae
constituta sunt temerari, sed cuncta salubri consilio conservari.
conservare: quae quia profectibus Ecclesiae, and animae nostrae convenient,
etiam propria subscriptione, ut permaneant, roboramus and subscripserunt omnes.
.

AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the ARTICLES OF MAGNA CHARTA of King JOHN. As also
concerning The MAGNA CHARTA now printed in this APPENDIX.
THESE Articles or Capitula were found in the Study of Bishop Warner, late
Bishop of Rochester: They were communicated by a Gentleman of that Family to
Mr. Geddis, and by him to the present Bishop of Salisbury.

There can be no reasonable scruple raised against the Authentickness or Truth
of the Writing: For first,

1. It is in a Hand very ancient: They that are competent judges of such
Antiquities, say, It well pretends to the Time of which it treats.

2. It has yet appendant the Seal of King John, without any suspicion of being
lately affixed.

3. In the famous Library of Sir John Cotton, there are now to be seen many
private Charters of King John, which exactly agree with this, both in respect
of the Writing, and also of the Seal.

4. In the Books of the Archbishopric of Canterbury, amongst many things there
entered, of the time of King John, these Articles are Recorded, and were thence
transcribed, many Years before the Original of them came into the Hand of the
Bishop of Salisbury.

5. This Instrument is the same which Matthew. Paris mentions, Page 254. by the
name of SCHEDVLA. Archiepiscopus Schedulam illam, etc. The Archbishop, with
others, bringing that Schedule to the King, recited before the King all the
Capitula, etc. -- Which though the King then rejected, yet shortly after upon
better Advice, He granted; as may be gathered from the next Page of Matthew.
Paris.

These Arguments may satisfy those, who since the late mentioning of these
Articles in the Pastoral Letter of the Bishop of Salisbury, have had the
Civility to doubt of the Truth of the whole matter.

1. As to the substance of these Articles; It is to be observed, that they
contain some part of the Rights of the Barons, due to them by the Unwritten or
Common Law of the Land; which Rights, for more certainty, were in several
Reigns drawn into Writing: And, for more obligatoriness, into Charters, after
the entrance of the Normans. In the time of the Confessor, they were contained
in the Laws of that King. William the Conqueror confirmed (to the old, and new
Barons of his Investiture according to Custom of England) the Laws of the
Confessor, as appears by the Record in Ingulf, and other Testimonies.

2. These Articles, or the Laws of the Confessor, were recognized, and by Oath
re-confirm'd by William Rufus; no doubt, at His Coronation; or not long after.
The old English Chronicle writes thus, William Rufus by his Letters Summoned
the Bishops, Earls and Barons to St. Paul's, and there he Swear, and made to
them Surety by Writing, to sustain, and maintain the Right.

3. King Henry I. ratified these Rights. In his Charter we find in general,
Lagam Edwardi Regis vobis reddo cum its emendationibus, quibus Pater meus eam
emendavit, etc. I restore to you the Law of King Edward, as it was mended (or
enlarged) by my Father, with the Advice of his Barons.

4. It is evident that King John (to omit others) both by His Coronation Oath,
and at other times, confirmed these Articles or Explanations of the Old Law.
Matthew. Paris, page 239. The King (John) strictly commanded that the Laws of His
Grandfather King Henry, should be observed by the whole Kingdom. But what this
Law of King Edward, or Emendations contained, the same Matthew. Paris sets
down in short, page 252. The Charter of King Henry [the First] contained
certain Liberties and Laws of King Edward, granted to the Church of England,
and the great Men; as also some Liberties superadded by King Hen. I. And page
254. Capitula quoque legum and libertatum, etc. The Heads (or Articles) of the
Laws and Liberties which the Great Men desired to be confirmed, are already
entered, partly above in the Charter of Henry I. and partly were gathered out of
the Old Laws of King Edward. The Historian speaks of these very Articles here
Printed.

5. It Is observable, That in these Articles, there is no care taken for the
Liberties of the Church. The reason of which I conceive to be this: The
Churchmen mostly then held with the King. And the Hand of the King was most
heavy upon the Laity, who framed these Articles, without the Clergy.

6. These Articles provide nothing concerning the Summons and holding of the
Common Council of the Realm. The reason whereof probably was this: The Barons
of that time had introduced a Practice, of themselves to appoint the Time and
Place of the Meeting of the Common Council of the Nation: At the granting of
these very Articles, King John sent to the Barons; Vt diem and locum
providerent congruum, ad haec omnia prosequenda. That they (the Barons) would
appoint Time and Place for the concluding that matter. In the time of Henry
III. (in whose Charter the Article de communi concilio habendo was omitted; and
in whose time the Barons begun again to War) we find, that the Lords came unto
the King and said, He must ordain and see for the Welfare of the Realm, and
then set the King a Day to meet at Oxenford, and there to hold a Parliament. So
the English Chronicle. However, this grand Affair, as also that of the Church,
were provided for in the Magna Charta of King John. Whereby it further appears,
That these Articles were but the Rudiments of that Charter, after further
enlarged, upon further deliberation.

I COME now in the second place to say a few things concerning the Perfect and
Complete Magna Charta of King John, here printed in French.

1. It was the Custom of old Times to make three several Copies of Public Acts
and Charters. Of the Magna Charta we have one in Latin, in Matthew Paris. This
in French (or old Norman Language) was kept in the Records of France, and
thence Published some years past by Luke Dachery, in his Spicilegium. That in
English was sent into all Counties, but as yet no Copy in this Language
appears.

Thus also the Laws of Canute, and the Provisions of Oxford (to mention no
more) made in the time of Hen. III. were Published in three Languages.

2. The very same Charter Published in Latin by Matthew Paris, is also extant in
the History of Rad. Niger, almost word for word; and also in two several
Manuscripts in the Cottonian Library; where also about twenty years past the
very Original was to be seen.

3. The Magna Charta of King John is not extant in any Record in the Tower, or
elsewhere, as several affirm; nor the Magna Charta of H. III. but only by
Inspeximus in the time of Edw. I. A thing much to be wondered at. Rudburne
writes of the Charters of Hen. I. Sublatae sunt omnes variis fallaciis,
exceptis tribus. All but three were embezel'd.

4. The Magna Charta of King John, and that of Hen. III. are said to be the
very same; where as they do exceedingly differ, as Mr. Seldom in his Epinomis
has partly observed, and may further appear to any that will compare them.
Matthew Paris page 323. The Tenor of these Charters is fully set down, above,
where our History treats of King John: So as the Charters of King John and
Hen. III. are not found to differ in any thing. These words are not the words
of Matthew Paris, but of Roger VVendover, (whom Matthew Paris often
transcribeth very hastily) in whose History the Charter entered as King John's,
is exactly the same with that Charter of Henry the Third.

5. As to that remarkable Article, Et ad habendum commune concilium Regni. --
And to the holding the Commune Council of the Realm, etc. I shall briefly say,
1. That it has been left out of all the Charters after King John's time, but
is found in several Copys very Authentic, and particularly in the French Copy
now here printed. 2. That this Article does not, as some have written, give the
Original to our Parliaments; for such Parliaments (or communia concilia) were
held before this time. King Richard the First, after his return from the Holy
War, summoned a Common Council (or Parliament) at London, of the Clergy and
Laity, where he demanded Council about his making War upon the King of France;
Earl Roger answered for the whole Parliament, The Earls, Barons and Knights,
will aid you, O King, with their Swords; the Archbishops, Bishops, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Ecclesiastic Persons will aid you with Money; Abbates, Priors,
and such others will aid you with their Prayers. So the English Chron. And to
omit others, an Instance of such a Parliament is found in the Annals of
Burton, page 263. compared with page 265. King John called to Northampton all
the Earls and Barons of England: it follows, Pandulfus spoke (at the same
time) to the Earls, Barons and Knights, O that you, etc. The Clergy indeed are
not here mentioned, but were certainly present, because the occasion of that
Council was to restore Peace to the Church and Kingdom, as Matthew Paris, or as
the Annalist of Waverly wordeth it, betwixt the King and the Archbishop. 3. I
conceive the chief end of adding this Article, was to prevent the taking of
Aids, (commonly called Talliage) or Escuage, by surprise, or by the consent
only of a few, which King John had lately done. For the summoning of the
Commune concilium here is plainly limited to the Sessing of Aids and Escuage:
But the Mirror gives another account of the meeting of Parliaments, worthy of
Consideration, page 225. where the Author refers us to higher times.

There is yet one Article more in this Charter of King John which deserves our
regards, the rather because it being lately alleged in the Pastoral Letter,
has much scandalized some, with its suprising Novelty.

The words are, Barons cum communia totius terrae gravabunt nos. The Barons
with the Community of the Land, shall aggrieve, or distress us, etc. But why
should this sound uncouth to any, who have with Reflection perused the
Histories of this, or the Neighboring Kingdoms, wherein the same Practice is
frequently found. Andrew King of Hungary allowed the same Liberty to his
People, as may be seen at large in the Decrees of the Kings of Hungary, in the
end of Bonfinius: Like Examples occur in the French Annals; and in the Annals
of Waverly in the time of Hen. the Third, page 217.

If any will yet suspect that Matthew Paris, in this Point, has not writ
fairly, or that the Articles produced by the Bishop of Salisbury are not to be
relied on, (and some such dissatisfied People there are) then let them (if they
can be believed desirous of satisfaction) repair to the Red Book of Exchequer,
where fol. 234. they may find the very same Words, and Liberty granted, as
before: Which Record cannot well be suspected of being corrupted, because it
has been always in good Custody.

Capitula super quibus facta est Magna Charta Regis Johannis, ex MS. Arch.
Cantuar. Fol 14. Quae etiam authentice cum Sigillo extant in manibus Episc.
Salisburiensis.
ISTA sunt Capitula quae Barons petunt, and Dominus Rex concedit signata
Sigillo Johannis Regis.

Post decessum Antecessorum haeredes plenae aetatis habebunt haereditatem suam
per antiquum relevium exprimendum in Charta.

Haeredes qui intra aetatem sunt and fuerunt in custodia, cum ad aetatem
pervenerint, habebunt haereditatem suam sine relevio and fine.

Custos terrae haeredis capiet rationabiles exitus, consuetudines and servitia
sine destructione and vasto hominum and rerum suarum. Et si Custos terrae
fecerit destructionem and vastum, amittat custodiam, and custos sustentabit
domos, parcos, vivaria, stagna, molendina, and caetera ad terram illam
pertinentia de exitibus terrae ejusdem. Et ut Haeredes ita maritentur ne
disparagentur and per concilium propinquorum de consanguinitate sua.

Ne vidua det aliquid pro dote sua, vel maritagio post decessum Mariti sui, sed
maneat in domo sua per XC. dies post mort^m ipsius: and infra terminum illum
assignetur ei Dos, and maritagium statim habeat and haereditatem suam. Rex vel
Ballivus non saisiet terram aliquam pro debito dum catalla debitoris
sufficient, nec plegii debitoris distringantur dum capitalis debtor sufficit
ad solutionem. Si vero capitalis de^itor defecerit in solutione, si plegii
voluerint, habeant terras debitoris donec debitum illud persolvatur plene, nisi
capitalis debtor monstrare poterit se esse inde quietum erga plegios.

Rex non concedet alicui Baroni quod capiat auxilium de liberis hominibus suis,
nisi ad corpus suum redimendum, and ad faciendum primogenitum filium suum
militem and ad primogenitam filiam suam semel maritandam, and hoc faciet per
rationabile auxilium.

Ne aliquis majus servitium faciat de feodo militis qu^m inde debetur: ut
communia placita non sequantur ^uriam Domini Regis; sed assignentur in aliquo
certo loco, and ut recognitiones capiantur in eisdem comitatibus in hunc modum.
Ut Rex mittat duos Justitiarios per quatuor vices in anno, qui cum quatuor
militibus ejusdem comitatus electis per comitatum capiant assisas de nova
dissaisina, morte antecessoris, and ultima praesentatione, nec aliquis ob hoc
sit summonitus nisi juratores and duae parts.

Ut liber homo amercietur pro parvo delicto secundum modum delicti, and pro
magno delicto secundum magnitudinem delicti, salvo contenemento suo. Villanus
etiam amercietur, salvo Wainagio suo, and Mercator eodem modo, salva
mercandisa, per Sacramentum proborum hominum de visneto. Ut clericus amercietur
de laico feodo suo secundum modum aliorum praedictorum and non secundum
beneficium Ecclesiasticum.

Ne aliqua villa amercietur pro pontibus faciendis ad riparias, nisi ubi de
jure antiquitus esse solebant.

Ut mensura vini, bladi, and latitudines pannorum, and rerum aliarum emendetur,
and ita de ponderibus.

Ut assisa de nova dissaisina and de morte antecessoris abbrevientur and
similiter de aliis assisis.

Ut nullus Vicecomes intromittat se de placitis ad Coronam pertinentibus sine
coronatoribus, and ut comitatus and Hundreda sint ad antiquas firmas absque
ullo incremento, exceptis dominicis Maneriis Regis.

Si aliquis tenens de Rege moriatur, licebit Vicecomiti vel alio Ballivo Regis
seisire and inbreviare catallum ipsius per visum legalium hominum, ita tamen
quod nihil inde amoveatur donec before sciatur si debet aliquid liquidum
debitum Domino Regi, and tunc debitum Domini Regis persolvatur. Residuum vero
relinquetur executoribus, ad faciendum testamentum defuncti. Et si nihil Regi
debetur, omnia catalla cedent defuncto.

Si aliquis liber homo intestatus decesserit, bona sua per manum proximorum
parentum suorum and amicorum, and per visum Ecclesiae distribuantur.

Ne viduae distringuantur ad se maritandum dum voluerint sine marito vivere,
ita tamen quod securitatem facient quod non maritabunt se sine assensu Regis,
si de Rege teneant, vel dominorum suorum de quibus tenent.

Ne Constabularius vel alius ballivus capiat blada vel alia catalla, nisi
statim denarios inde reddat, nisi respectum habere possit de voluntate
venditoris.

Ne Constabularius possit distringere aliquem militem ad dandum denarios pro
custodia castri si voluerit facere custodiam illam in propria persona, vel per
alium probum hominem, si ipse eam facere non possit per rationabilem causam. Et
si Rex cum duxerit in exercitum sit quietus de custodia secundum quantitatem
temporis.

Ne Vicecomes vel Ballivus Regis vel aliquis alius capiat equos vel carectas
alicujus liberi hominis pro carriagio faciendo nisi ex voluntate ipsius.

Ne Rex vel Ballivus suus capiat alienum boscum ad castra vel ad alia agenda
nisi per voluntatem ipsius cujus boscus fuerit.

Ne Rex teneat terram eorum qui fuerint convicti de felonia, nisi per unum
annum and unum diem; sed tunc reddatur Domino feodi.

Ut omnes Kidelli de caetero penitus deponantur in Tamisa and Medeway and per
totam Angliam.

Ne breve quod vocatur Percipe de caetero fiat alicui de aliquo tenemento unde
liber homo amittat Curiam suam.

Si quis fuerit dissaisitus vel prolongatus per Regem sine judicio de terris,
libertatibus, and jure suo, statim ei restituatur, and si contentio super hoc
orta fuerit, tunc inde disponatur per judicium XXV. Baronum, and ut illi qui
fuerint dissaisiti per Patrem vel fratrem Regis, Rectum habeant sine dilatione
per judicium parium suorum in curia Regis. Et si Rex debeat habere terminum
aliorum Crucesignatorum, tunc Archiepiscopus and Episcopi facient inde judicium
ad certam diem appellatione remota.

Ne aliquid detur pro brevi inquisitionis de vita vel membris, sed libere
concedatur sine pretio, and non negetur.

Si aliquis tenet de Rege per feodi firmam, per soccagium, vel burgagium: and
de alio per servitiu^ militis, Dominus Rex non habebit custodium militum de
feodo alterius occ^sione Burgagii, vel Soccagii vel feodifirmae; nec debet
habere custodi^m Burgagii, Soccagii vel feodifirmae, and quod liber homo non
amittat militiam suam occasion parvarum sergantisarum sicuti de illis qui
tenent aliquod tenementum, reddendo inde cultellos, vel sagittas vel hujusmodi.

Ne aliquis Ballivus possit ponere aliquem ad legem simplici loquela sua sine
testibus fidelibus.

Ne corpus liberi hominis capiatur nec imprisonetur, nec dissaisietur, nec
utlagetur, nec exuletur, nec aliquo modo destruatur.

Nec Rex eat vel mittat super eum vi nisi per judicium parium suum vel per
legem terrae.

Ne jus vendatur, vel differatur vel vetitum sit.

Quod Mercatores habeant salvum ire and venire, ad emendum vel vendendum sine
omnibus malis Toltis per antiquas and rectas consuetudines.

Ne scutagium vel auxilium ponatur in Regno, nisi per commune consilium Regni,
nisi ad corpus Regis redimendum and primogenitum filium suum militem faciendum
and filiam suam primogenitam semel maritandam and ad hoc fiat rationabile
auxilium. Simili modo fiat de Tallagiis and auxiliis de civitate London and de
aliis civitatibus quae inde habent libertates, and ut Civitas London. plene
habeat antiquas libertates and liberas consuetudines suas tam per aquas quam
per terras.

Ut liceat unicuique exire de regno, and redire salva fide Domini Regis, nisi
tempore Werrae per aliquod breve tempus propter communem utilitatem regni.

Si quis mutuo aliquid acceperit a Judaeis plus vel minus, and moriatur
antequam debitum illud solvatur, debitum non usurabit quamdiu haeres infra
aetatem, de quocumque teneat. Et si debitum illud inciderit in manum Regis, Rex
non capiet nisi catallum quod continetur in Charta.

Si quis moriatur and debitum debeat Judaeis, uxor ejus habeat dotem suam; and
si liberi remanserint, provideantur iis necessaria secundum tenementum, and de
residuo solvatur debitum, salvo servitio Dominorum. Simili modo fiat de aliis
debitis, and ut custos terrae reddat haeredi cum ad plenam aetatem pervenerit
terram suam restauratam secundum quod rationabiliter poterit sustinere de
exitibus terrae ejusdem de Carucis and Wainagiis.

Si quis tenuerit de aliqua escaeta ficut de honor Wallingford and Nottingham,
Bonon and Lancaster, and de aliis escaetis quae sunt in manu Regis, and sunt
Baroniae, and obierit, haeres ejus non dabit aliud relevium vel faciet aliud
servitium quam faceret Baroni, and ut Rex eodem modo eam teneat quo Baro eam
tenuit.

Ut fines qui facti sunt pro dotibus, maritagiis, haereditatibus and
amerciamentis, injuste and contra legem terrae, omnino condonentur, vel fiat
inde per judicium XXV. Baronum, vel per judicium majoris partis eorundem una
cum Archiepiscopo and aliis quos secum vocare voluerit, ita quod si aliquis vel
aliqui de XXV. fuerint in simili querela, amoveantur, and alii loco illorum per
residuos de XXV. substituantur.

Quod obsides and Chartae reddantur quae liberatae fuerunt Regi in securitatem.

Ut illi qui fuerint extra forestam non veniant coram Justitiariis de Foresta
per communes summonitiones, nisi sint in placito, vel plegii fuerint, and ut
pravae consuetudines de forestis and de forestariis and Warrennis and
Vicecomitibus and vivariis emendentur per XII. milites de quolibet comitatu qui
debent eligi per probos homines ejusdem comitatus.

Ut Rex amoveat penitus de Balliva parents and totam sequelam Gerardi de Aties
quod de caetero Ballivam non habeant, scilicet Engelardum, Andr. Petrum, and
Gigonem de Cances, Gigonem de Cygon, Mattheum de Martino and fratres ejus and
Gelfrid nepotem ejus and Philippum de Mark.

Et ut Rex amoveat alienigenas milites, Stipendiarios, Balistarios and
Ruttarios, and Servientes qui venerunt cum equis and armis ad nocumentum regni.

Ut Rex faciat Justitiarios, Constabularios and Vicecomites and Ballivos de
talibus qui sciant legem terrae and eam velint been observare.

Ut Barons qui fundaverunt Abbatias unde habent chartas Regum vel antiquam
tenuram, habeant custodiam earum cum vacaverint.

Si Rex Walenses dissaisierit vel elongaverit de terris, vel libertatibus, vel
de rebus aliis in Anglia vel in Wallia, eis statim sine placito reddantur: and
si fuerint dissaisiati vel elongati de tenementis suis Anglicis per patrem vel
fratrem Regis sine judicio parium suorum, Rex eis sine dilatione justitiam
exhibebit eo modo quo exhibet Anglicis justitiam de tenementis suis Angl.
secundum legem Angl. and de tenementis Wall secundum legem Wall. and de
tenementis Marchiae secundum legem Marchiae. Idem facient Wallenses Regi and
suis.

Ut Rex reddat filium Lewelini and praeterea omnes obsides de Wallia, and
Chartas quae ei liberatae fuerunt in securitatem pacis.

Ut Rex faciat Regi Scotiae de obsidibus reddendis and de libertatibus suis and
jure suo secundum formam quam fecit Bar. Angl. nisi aliter esse debeat per
Chartas quas Rex habet per judicium Archiepiscopi and aliorum quos secum vocare
voluerit.

Ut omnes forestae quae sunt aforestatae per Regem tempore suo deafforestentur,
and ita fiat de ripariis quae per ipsum Regem sunt in defenso.

Omnes autem istas consuetudines and libertates quas Rex concessit regno
tenendas quantum ad se pertinent, erga suos, omnes de regno tam Clerici quam
Laici observabunt quantum ad se pertinet erga suos.

Haec est forma securitatis ad observandam pacem and libertates inter Regem and
Regnum, Barons eligent XXV. Barons de tegno quos voluerint, qui debent pro
totis viribus suis observare, tenere, and facere observari pacem, and
libertates quas Dominus Rex eis concessit, and Charta sua confirmavit. Ita,
viz. Quod si Rex, vel Justitiarii, vel Ballivi Regis vel aliquis de ministris
suis in aliquo erga aliquem deliquerit, vel aliquem articulorum pacis, aut
securitatis transgressus fuerit, and delictum ostensum fuerit IV. Baronibus de
praedictis XXV. Baronum: illi IV. Barons accedent ad Dominum Regem vel ad
Justitiarium suum, si Rex fuerit extra regnum, proponentes ei excessum and
petent ut excessum illum sine dilatione faciat emendari. Et si Rex vel
Justitiarius illud non emendaverit, Si Rex fuerit extra regnum, infra
rationabile tempus determinandum in Charta, praedicti IV. referent causam illam
ad residuos de illis XXV. Communa, C. M. Ep. Sal.
Baronibus, and illi XXV. cum communia totius terrae destringent and gravabunt
Regem modis omnibus quibus poterint: scilicet per captionem castrorum,
terrarum, possessionum and aliis modis quibus poterint, donec fuerit emendatum
secundum arbitrium eorum. Salva Persona Domini Regis, and Reginae, and
Liberorum suorum. Et cum fuerit emendatum, intendant Domino Regi sicut prius.
Et quicumque voluerit de terra, jurabit se, ad praedicta exequenda, pariturum
mandatis praedictorum XXV. Baronum, and gravaturum Regem pro posse suo cum
ipsis. Et Rex public and libere dabit licentiam jurandi cuilibet qui jurare
voluerit, and nulli unquam jurare prohibebit. Omnes autem illos de terra qui
sponte sua, and per se jurare voluerint XXV. Baronibus de distringendo and
gravando Regem, cum iis Rex faciet jurare eosdem de mandato suo sicut
praedictum est.

Item si aliquis de praedictis XXV. Baronum decesserit, Sic and M. Chapter Episc.
Sar.
vel a terra recesserit, vel aliquo alio modo impeditus fuerit quominus ista
praedicta possit exequi, qui residui fuerint de XXV. eligent alium loco ipsius
pro arbitrio suo, qui simili modo erit juratus quo and caeteri. In omnibus
autem quae istis XXV. Baronibus committantur exequenda, si forte ipsi XXV.
praesentes suerint and inter se super re aliqua discordaverint, vel aliqui ex
eis notati nolint vel nequeant interesse, ratum habebitur and firmum quod major
pars ex eis provident vel praeceperit, ac si omnes XXV. in hoc consensissent.
Et praedicti XXV. jurabunt quod omnia antedicta fideliter observabunt, and pro
toto posse suo facient observari. D. Matthew. Par.
Praeterea Rex faciet eos securos per Chartas Archiepiscopi and Episcoporum and
Magistri Pandulfi, quod nihil impetrabit a Domino Papa per quod aliqua istarum
conventionum revocetur vel minuatur. Hic and Chapter M. Episc. Sar. sine date.
Et si al quid tale impetraverit, reputetur irritum and inane, and nunquam eo
utatur. Sine dato.

DIPLOMA REGIUM: Eruit D. d'Heroval.
SIVE Ordinationes JOHANNIS Regis Angliae, queis statuit quid Nobiles, quid
Plebeii observare debeant, ad pacem and tranquillitatem Regni stabiliendam.
VIII. JOHAN par la grace de Deu Roi Dengleterre, as Arceveskes, as Eveskes, as
Abbez, as Contes, An. Chr. 1215.
as Barons, as Iustises, as Forestiers, as Viscontes, as Prevoz, as Ministres,
and a toz ses Bailliz, and ses feels, saluz. Sachiez que nos par la grace de
Deu and pur le sauvement de nostre asme, and de toz nos ancestres, and de noz
eirs, and de lenor de Deu, and le sauvement de seinte Iglise, and lamendement
de nostre Regne, par le consel de noz enorez peers Larceveske Estievene de
Cantorbire Primat de tote Engleterre and Cardinal de Rome, and Larceveske Henri
de Diveline, and Leveske Willaume de Londres, Leveske Pieres de Wincestre,
Leveske Jocelin de Ba, Leveske Hue de Nichole Lincoln.
, Leveske Gautier de Wirecestre, Leveske Will. de Cestre, and Leveske Beneit de
Rovecestre, and Maistre Pandol Sodiacre nostre Seignor Lapostoire, and nostre
ami friar Anner Maistre de la Chevalerie del Temple de Engleterre, and de nos
Barons Will. le Marescal Comte de Penbroc, Will. Conte de Salisbires, Will.
Conte de Warenne, Will. Conte de Arondel, Alain de Galwche, Conestable
d'Escoce, Warin le fiz Gerod, Peers le fiz Herebert, Hubert de Borc Seneschau
de Peitou, Huge de Nuevile, Matheu le fiz Herebert, Thomas Basset; Alain
Basset, Philippe Daubeigni, Robert de Ropelee, Johan. Marescal, and Johan le
fiz Hue, and de nos autres feels.

Premierement que nos avons ottie otrie.
a Deu and le confermons par ceste nostre present Chartre, por noz, and por
nos eirs a toz iorz, que les Yglises de Engleterre, seront franches and aient
lor dreitures franches and enterines and plenieres, and volon que cili seit
guard la que chose apert, par co que nos otriames par nostre pure volunte and
de gre les franchises des Ellections que len tienent par plus grant and par
plus necessaire as Yglises de Engleterre, devant que la descorde fust commencie
enter nos and nos Barons, and la confirmames par nostre Chartre and parchacames
que ele fu confirmee par nostre Seignor Lapostoire Innocent le tiers, laquelle
nos garderons and volons que nostre eir la gardent toz jorz en bone fei.

Nos avon encore otrie a tez les francs homes de nostre Regne pur nos, and pur
nos eirs a toz iorz totes les franchises qui de soz sunt escrites, quil les
aient and les tiegnent il and lor eir de nos and de nos eirs, se acuns de nos
Contes, vo de nos Barons, vo des altres qui tienent de nos en chief par servise
de Chevalier mora, et quant il sera mors and ses eirs sera de plein aage and
devra relief, ait son heritage par l'ancien relief, co est a savier li eir, ou
li eir del Conte, de Baronie Contal entiere par C. livres li eirs ou li eir del
baron de la baronie par C. livres: li eirs ou li eir de Chevalier de fie de
Chevalier entier par C. sol au plus, and qui meins devra meins doinst solon
lanciene costume del fie.

Si le eirs d'aucun di tells sera dedens aage, and sera en guard; quand il sera
parvenu a aage ait son heritage sans relief and sans fin.

Les gardeors de la terree de tell heir qui sera dedens aage ne pregne de la
terre de leir fors Reignables, eissues and Reignables costumes, and Reignables
services, and ce senz destruiement, and senz vast des homes and des chooses.

Et se nes avons livree la guard de la terre daucun itel a Visconte o a acune
altre qui nos dei respondre des eissues de la terre, et cil de la guard fera
destruiement o gast, nos prendrons de celuy amend, and la terre sera livree a
deus leals prodeshomes de cel fei qui respoignent des eissues a nos, o celui
que noz comanderons.

Et se nos avons done o vendu a aucun la guard de la terre de aucun itel, and
cil enfra destruiement o wast per de cele guard, and seit livre a deus leials
sage prodeshomes and dicele que I nous respoignent, si come nos avons devant
dit.

Et si le gardior tant dis com il aura la guard de tele terre, sostinges les
meisons, les viviers, les pars, les estans, les molins, and les altres chooses
qui apartient a cele terre de eissues, and de celle meimes terre: and rendra al
heir quant sera parvenus en plain aage sa terre tote estoree de charues, de
granges, solon coque li tens de la gaignerie requera, and les eissues de la
terre porront musurablement soffrir reisuablement.

Li heir scient marie sans desparagement cissi ne purquant que ainz que li
marriages seit fet, seit mostre al prochains del lignage de cel heir.

La Veve empres la mort de son mari namtenant and sans grevance ait son marriage
and son heritage, ne riens ne doinst pour son marriage, ne pour son doaire, ne
pour son heritage que elle and ses maris tiudrent, al ior de la mort del mari,
and seit en la maison de son mari puis quil sera mort xl. forz dedens les quels
forz li seit les doairez livrez.

Nule Veve ne seite destreite de sci marier tant dis come ele voldra vivre sanz
mari, ^ssi ne purquant que ele face seurte que cle ne se marira sanz nostre
otrei, se ele tinent de nos o senz lotrei de son Seignor de qui elle tient, se
ele tient dautrui.

Ne nos ne nostre Bailli ne seiseron terre ne rent del dettor pour aucune
debt tandis com sis chattels soffisent a paier la debt, ne si plege ne seront
destroit tant dis come le chevetaigne dettor soffira a la debt paier. Et se le
chevetaigne detor na de quei paier sa debt, respoigne li plege de la debt. Et
sil volent aient les terres, and les rentes del detter jusquil aient
restorement de la debt quil ont devant paiee pour lui; se le chevetaigne detor
ne monstre quil en est quitte verse cells pleges.

Se aucuns a emprunte as Ieus Id est Iui^s.
plus o meins, and muert devant quil lor alt pay lor avoir, ne croise mie la
debt tant dis com li heirs sera dedens aage, and se cele debt vient en nos
maius nos nen prendron que le chastel Id est, le capital, le principal.
que nos troveron en la charte.

Et se aucun muret, and deit debt as Ieus, sa feme ait son doaire, and ne
paiet nient de cele debt, and se li enfant qui remaindront del mort sont
dedenz aage, porveu lor seit lor estoveir raisnablement solonc le tenement qui
fu del mort, and del remanant seit paiee la debt, sauf le service des
Seignors, and en tell maniere seit feit de dettes que l'on deit a altres que a
Iues.

Leu ne mettra null escuage f. taille.
, ne aie aid.
en nostre Regne, fors par commun conseil de nostre Regne, fors a nostre
reimbre Id est, ad nostrum corpus redimendum si in bello capti fuerimus, ut
infra.
and a nostre ainzne fiz fair Chevalier, and a nostre ainznee fille marier une
feiz; and a cestes chooses ne face len aie se raisnable non.

En cele mainere seit feit days de la cite de Londres, and estre co la cite de
Londres ait totes ses ancienes costumes, and ses franchises and par mer and par
aigue.

Nos volons estre co, and otrions que totes les altres citez and li borc, and
les viles, and li port aient en totes lor franchises, and lor franches
costumes, and aient le commun conseil del Regne, de lay a asseeir altrement
que as treis cas qui sont devant dit.

E lescuage aseer ferous somondre les Arceveskes, les Eveskes, les Abbez, les
Comtes, les greignors Barons: chacun par sei par nos lettres, and estre co
ferons somondre en commun par nos Viscontes, and par nos Bailliz toz ceus qui
de nos tienent en chief a certain jor, co est al term de xl. jorz al mainz and
a certain lieu, and nomerons la cause en totes lettres de ceste somonse. Et
quant la somonse sera issi feite voist li afaires avaunt, au jor assign solon
le conseil di cells qui seront present; ja seit co^que ne seient pas venu tuit
cil qui furent somons.

Nos notrions a null des ore en avaunt quil pregne aie de ses frans homes fors a
son cors raimbre Vide supra.
and a son ainzne fiz fair Chevalier, and a sa fille ainznee marier une feiz,
and a co ne seit feit aie se raisnable non.

Nuls ne seit destreinz a fair grenor servise de fieu de Chevalieo o daltre
franc tenement, que tant come il tient and deit.

Li commun plait ne suient mie nostre cort, mais saient tenu en alcun certain
lieu.

Les reconussances de novele dessaisine de mort dancestre, and de darrain
presentment ne seiente prises fors en lor Contez and ceste maniere: Nos o
nostre Chevetains Iusticieres se nos fumes fors del Regne enveierons deus
justices par chascun Conte par iv, feiz en lan qui o quatre des Chevaliers de
chascun Conte esseuz par le Conte pregnent el Conte, and el jor del Conte, and
en certain lieu les devant dites assizes, and se les devant d^^es assizes ne
puent estre prises el jor del Conte, tant Chevaliers and franchement tenanz
remaignent de cells qui furent present al Conte en icel jor par qui puisent li
jugement estre fait sofisaument, solon co qui li afaire sera plus grant oplus
petit.

Frans hom ne set amerciez pour petit forfit fors solon la maniere del forfait,
and pour le grant forfait seit amerciez solonc la grandesce del forfait sauf
son contenement, and li marcheant ensemt sauve la marchendise. Li Vilaint
ensemt seit amerciez saals son gaagnage sil chiet en nostre merci, and nule des
devant dites merciz ne sera mise fors par le serement de prodomes and des leaus
des visnez.

Li Conte and li Baron ne seient amerciez fors par lor pers and solonc la
maniere del forfait.

Nus clers ne soit amerciez de son lai tenement, fors solonc la maniere des
altres qui devant sunt dit, and nun pas solonc la quantite de la rent de
Siglisde f. des Iglise, ou de Liglise.
.

Ne vile ne home ne seit destreiz a fair ponz a rivieres, fors cil qui
ancienement and par drect les devent fair.

Nuls Visquens ne Conestables ne nostre Coroneor ne nostre altre Bailli ne
tiegnent les plaiz de nostre Corone.

Chascune Comtez, Hundrez, Wapulzac, and Treingues, soient as ancienes fermes
sens null croisement, fors nos demeins maniers.

Se aucuns qui tient lai fie de nos muert and nostre Visquens, o altres nostre
Bailliz, monstre nos lettres overtes de nostre semonse de la debt que li mort
nos deveit, leissie a nostre Visconte o a nostre Bailli atachier and enbrever
les chatels del mort, qui seront trove el lai fie a la vaillance dicelle debt,
que li morz nos deveit par veue de leaus homes, eissi ne par quant que riens ne
seit oste jusque nos seit paiee la debt qui sera coneue; and li remanant seit
saissie as executors a fair le testament del mort: and sil ne nos deivent rien
tot li chatel seient otrie al mort, sauves les reignables parties de sa feme
and de ses enfans.

Se aucuns frans huem muert senz testament, li thatel seient departi par les
mains des prochains parenz and de ses amiss par la veue de seinte Iglise, sauves
les dettes a chascun que le mort lor devoit.

Nus de nos Conestables ne de nos altres Bailliz ne pregne les blez, ne les
altres chatels daucun, se maintenant nen pay les deniers, sil nen puet aver
respit par volente del vendeor.

Nus Conestables ne destreigne null Chevalier a doner deniers pour la guard del
Chastel, sil lavoit faite en sa propre person u par altre prodome sil ne la
puet fair par aucune reignable achaisun Id est raisonable occasion.
, and se nos le menons o enveions en ost, il sera quites dicele guard tant dis
cum il sera par nos en lost.

Nus Viscontes ne nostre Bailliz ne altre ne pregne les chevals ne les
charettes daucun franc home, pour fair carriage, fors par la volente de cel
franc home.

Ne nos ne nostre Baillie ne prendrons altrui bois a nos Chastels, o a nos
altres ovres fair, fors par la volente de celui cui sera li vois.

Nos ne tendrons les terres de cells qui seront convencue de felony, fors un an
and un jor, and adons les rendrons as Seignors des fiez.

Tot li Kidel seient dici en avaunt oste del tot en tot de Tamise and de
Medoine, and par tote Engleterre, fors par la costiere de la mer.

Li bries qui est apelez precipz des ci en avaunt ne feit faiz a null daucun
tenement, don't frans hoem peusi perdre sa cort.

Une mesure de vin seit par tot nostre Kegne, and une mesure de cerveise, and
une mesure de ble, eo est li quartiers de Londres, and une leise de dras teinz,
and de rosez, and de habergiez, co est deus aunes dedenz listes, and des peis
pois.
seit ensement come des musures. mesures.


Riens ne seit done ne pris des ci en avaunt pour le brief del enqueste de vie,
o de members de aucun, mais seit otree en pur don, and ne seit esconduit.

Se aucuns tient de nos par feuferme o par, sokage, and tient terre daltrui par
servise de Chevalier, nos n'aurons mie la guard del heir, ne de la terre qui
est daltrui fie par achaison de cele feuferme, o del sokage, o del borgage. Ne
n'aurons la guard de cele feuferme, o del socage, o del borgage, se cele
feuferme ne deit service de Chevalier.

Nos n'aurons la guard del heir ne de la terre dalcun, que il tient daltrui par
servise de Chevalier, par achaison daucune petite serjanteri, quil tient de nos
par servise de render saettes, o cotelz, o tells chooses.

Nuls Bailliz ne met des cien avaunt alcun a lei par sa simple parole, fors
par bons tesmoins amenez aice.

Nuls frans hom ne sera pris, ne emprisonez, ne dessaisiz, ne ullagiez, ne
eissillieze, ne destruiz, ne aucune maniere, ne sor lui n'irons ne
n'enveierons, fors par leal jugement de ses pers, o par la lei de la terre.

A nulli ne vendrons, a nulli nescondirons ne ne proloignerons dreir ne justise.

Tuit li merchant aient sauf and feur eissir d'Engleterre, and venir en
Engleterre and demorer,, and aler par Engleterre, par terre and par eaue a
vendre and a chater, sans to^es males totes par les ancienes drettes costumes,
fors el tens de guerre, cil ki sunt de la terre qui nos guerroie, and se tell
sunt trove en nostre terre el commancement de la guerre, soient atachie sans
damage de lor cors and de lor choseo, jusqu'il seit seu de nos o de nostre
chevetein Iustifier coment li marcheant de la nostre terre seront traitie, qui
donc seront trove en la terre qui contre nos guerroie, and se li nostre sunt
ilucke sauf, seient si lor sauf en la nostre terre.

Leise chacun des ci en avaunt eissir de nostre Regne and repairier sauf and
seur par terre and par eve sauve nostre fei, fors el tens de guerre par alcun
petit tens pour preu del Regne: Mais di co sunt jet te fors li emprisone, and
li utlagie solon la lei del regne, and la gent ki contre nos guerroie. Des
marcheans seit feit, si come nous avons devant dit.

Se aucuns tient daucune eschaette si come del honor de Walingeford,
Notingehan, Boloigne, Lancastre, u dautres echaetes qui sunt en nostre main,
and sunt de baronie, and il muert, ses heirs ne doinst altre relief, ne face a
nos altre servise, qui feist al Baron, ce cele Baronie fust en main del Baron,
and nos la tendrons en tele maniere que le Baron la tint.

Li home qui maignent fors de la forest, ne viegnent de ci en avaunt devant nos
Iustises de la forest par communes somonces, sil ne sont en plait u plege de
aucun ou d'aucuns qui seient atachie pour la forest.

Nos ne ferons Viscontes, Iustises, ne Bailliz, fors de tells qui sachent la lei
de la terre, and la voillent bien garder.

Tuit cil qui fonderent Abbeies, don't il ont charges des Reis d'Engleterre, o
anciene tenue, aiant en la guard quant eles seront voides, si com il avoit
devent.

Totes les forez qui sunt aforestees en nostre tens seient meintenant
desaforestees, et ensement seit feit des rivieres qui en nostre tens sunt par
nos mises en defens.

Totes les males costumes des forez et des Warennes, et des Forestiers, et des
Warrenniers, des Viscontes et de lor ministres des rivieres, et de lor gardes,
setent maintenant enquises en chascun Conte par xii. Chevaliers Iurez de meimes
le Conte, qui devent estre esseu par prodeshomes de meismes le Conte et de denz
xl. jorz apres co quil auront fette lenqueste, seient del tot en tot ostees par
cells meismes, si que jamais ne saient rapelees, eissi ne por quant que nos le
sachons avanto nostre Iustise, se nos ne sumes en Engleterre.

Nos tendrons maintenant toz les hostages et totes les chartres, qui nos furent
livrees des Engleis en seurte de pais, o de feel servise.

Nous osteron de tot en tot des baillies les parens Girard d' Aties, si que des
ci en avaunt n'auront nulle baillie en Engleterre, et Engelart de Cigoigni,
Peron, Guion, Andreu de Chanceas, Gion de Cigoigni, Gistrai de Martigni et ses
freres, Phelippe, Marc et ses freres, Gefrai son nevo, et tote lor siute, et
maintenant empres le reformement de la pais osterons de nostre Regne tos les
estranges Chevaliers, Aubelastiers, serjans, soldiers quo chevals et o arms
vindrent al nuisement del Regne.

Se alcuns est dessaisiz o esloigniez par nos, sens real Leal, ut infra.
jugement de ses pers, de terres, de chastels, de franchises, o de sa dretture
maintenant li rendrons, et le plaiz en commencera di co, adonc en seit fait par
jugement des xxv. Barons, don't len parole de soz en la seurt de la pais.

De totes iteles chooses don't alcuns fu dessaisiz o estoigniez senz leal
jugement de ses Pers par le Rei Henri nostre pere, o par le Rei Richart nostre
friar, que avons en nostre main, o altre tienent cui il nos c^vient garantir,
aurons respit jusqu'a commun term des croizier, fors que celes chooses don't
plaiz fu comenciez o enqueste fair par nostre commandment devant que nos
prissions la Croiz. Et se nos repairons del pelerinage o par avanture remanons
del pelerinage maintenant en frons pleine dreiture. Cest meimes respit aurons
et en ceste maniere de dreiture fair des forez desaforester, o que remaignent
forez que li Reis Henri nostre pere, o li Reis Richart nostre friar
aforesterent, et des gardes des terres qui sunt daltrui fie; que nos avons eues
jusques icy par achaison de fie que alcuns teneit de nos par servise de
Chevalier, et des Abbeies qui furent fondee en altrui fie que el nostre,
esquels li sires del fie dit quila droiture, et quant nos feron repairie de
nostre pelerinage, o se no remanons, nos enfrons maintenant pleine droiture a
cells qui sen plaindront.

Nuls ne soit pris ne emprisonez pour apel de feme de la mort daltrui, que de
sun marri.

Totes les fins et toz les amerciemens qui sont feit verse nos a tort et contre
la lei de la terre, soient tot pardone, o len en face par jugement del xxv.
Barons don't len parole de soz, o par le jugement de la greignor party de cells
ensemble, o le devant dit Arcevesque Stefne de Cantorbe sil I puet estre: et
cells quil vodra apeler od sei, et sil ni pora estre neien meins ne voist li
afaires avaunt senz lui en tell maniere que se alcuns o alcun des devant diz xxv.
Barons, seront en tell querele seient oste de cest jugement, et altre esteu et
jure seient mis a co fair en lieu de cells par le remanant des devant diz xxv.
Barons.

Se nos avons dessaisiz et estoigniez les walais de terre et de franchises, o
daltres chooses senz leal jugement de lor Pers en Engleterre, o en wales,
maintenant lor seient rendues, et se plaiz en sera comanciez selor en seit fait
en la March par jugement de lor Peers des tenemenz d' Engleterre solonc la lei
d' Engleterre des tenemenz de wales solonc la lei de wales, des tenemenz de la
March solonc de lai de la March, et ce meismes facent li walais a nos et as
noz.

De totes celes chooses don't alcuns des walaix fu dessaisiz, o esloignie senz
leal jugement de ses Pers par le Rei Henry nostre pere, o par le Rei Richart
nostre friar, que nos avons en nostre main, o altre tienent cui il nos covient
garantir, aurons respit jusqual commun term des Croisiez, fors de celes chooses
don't plaist fu commenciez o enqueste faite par nostre commandment devant que
nous prissions la Croiz, et quant nos serons repairiez o se par aventure
remanons de nostre pelerinage maintenant lor enfrons pleine dreiture solonc les
lez de wales, et les devant dites parties.

Nos rendrons le fill Lewelin maintenant et toz les hostages de wales, et les
chartres que l'en nos livra en seurte de pais.

Nos ferons a Alisandre le Rei d'Escoce de ses setors et de ses hostages
render, et de ses franchises, et de la dretture solonc la form que nos frons a
nos altres Barons d' Engleterre, se altrement ne deit estre par les chartres
que nos avons de son pere Willaume, qui fu jadis Reis d'Escoce, et co sera fait
par jugement de ses Pers en nostre Cort.

Totes ces costumes devant dites et les franchises que nos avons otriees a
tenir en nostre Regne quant a nos apartient envers les nos, tuit cil de nostre
Regne, et Clerc et lai devent garder quant a eus apartient envers les lor.

Et car nos avons otriees totes les chooses devant dites por Deu, et par
amandement de nostre Regne, et por mielz plaisier la descorde qui es comanciee
enter nos et nos Barons; nos voelliant que ces chooses seent fermes et estables
a tozjorz, faisons et otrions a nos Barons la seurte de soz escrite; co est que
li Baron essisent xxv. Barons del Regne telz quil vodrent, qui dient de tot lor
poer garder et tenir, et fair garder la pais et les franchises que nos avons
otriees et confermees par ceste nostre present Chartre, eissi co est a saver
que se nos, o nostre Iustise, o nostre Bailli, o aucuns de nos ministres
mesfaisons en alcune chooses verse alcun, o trespassions en alcun point de la
pais, o de la seurte, et nostre mesfais sera mostrez a quatre Barons del devant
dit xxv. cil quatre Baron viegnent a nes, o a nostre Iustise, se nos fumes fors
del Regne, et nos mostrent nostre trespassement, et requierent que nos faciens
amender cel trespassement senz proloignement et se nos namendions le
trespassement, o se nous sumes fors del regne nostre Iustise ne lamendra devant
xl. jors empres co que il sera mostre a nos, o a nostre Iustise se nous sumes
fors de la terre, adone li devant dit quatre reportent cele cause al altres de
celz xxv. Barons, et adone cil xxv. Baron a la commune de tote Engleterre nos
destreindront et greveront en totes li manieres que il porrout. Co est par
prendre chastelz et t^rres et possessions, et en queles altres maniers quil
poront, jusquil seit amend solone lor jugement, sauve nostre person et de
nostre Reine, et de nos enfans, et quant il sera amande il atendront a nos,
eissi come devant. Et qui vodra de la terre jurt que a totes les devant dites
chooses parsivir, il obeira al commandment des devant diz xxv. Barons, et quil
nous grevera ensemble oels a son poer, and nous donons comunement and
franchement congie de jurer a chascun qui jurer vodra, and ja ne le defendrons
a neis un, and toz cells de la terre qui de lor von gre voldront jurer as xxv.
Barons, de destreindre and de grever nos, nos les frons jurer oels par nostre
commandment, si com devant est dit.

Et se alcuns des xxv. Barons morra, o partira de la terre, o sera destorbez en
aucune maniere quil ne puist les chooses qui sunt devant dites poursivir, cil
qui seront remes des devant dit xxv. Barons, estisent un altre en lieu de celui
solonc lor esgart, que jurera en tell maniere com li altre ont fait.

Et en totes les chooses que li xxv. Baron devent poursivir se paraventure cil
xxv. seront present, and descorderont enter else d'aucune chose, o aucun de cells
qui seront somons ne vodront, o ne pouront estre present, seit ferm and certain
co que la greignor party de cells qui seront present porverra, o recevra
ensement com se tuit I aveient consenti.

Et li devant dit xxv. Baron juerent que totes les chooses qui sunt devant
dites, quil garderont feelement, and feront garder de tot lor poer.

Et nos ne porchacerons dalcun par nos, ne par altrui rien pour quei alcuns de
ces otreiemenz o de cestes franchises seit rapelez o amenusiez, and se alcune
tell chose sera pourchacie seit cassee, and vein, and ja nen userons par nos ne
par altrui.

Et totes males volentes, desdeigz, rancors, qui sont nees enter nos and nos
homes clers and lais, deske la descorde, comanca, avons plainement relaissiees
and pardonees a toz, and estre co toz les trespassemens qui sunt fait par
achaison di ceste descorde des la Pasche en la sezain de nostre Regne jusqual
reformement de la pais avom plainement relaissie a toz clers, and a lais and
quant a nos aportient lor avon plainement pardone and otrie di co lor avon fait
fair lettres de tesmoin overtes de Seignor Stefne l' Arceveske de Cantorbire,
de Seignor Henri l' Arceveske de Diveline, and des devant diz Evesques, and de
maistre Pandolf sor ceste seurte and ces otreiemenz, por la que chose nos
volons and comandons fermement que l' Eglise d' Anglet^rre soit franche, and
que li home en nostre Regne aient and riegnent totes les devant dites
franchises, and les deitures, and les otreiemenz bien and en pais franchement
and quittement, plainement and entierement a else, and lor heirs en totes
chooses, and en toz leus, a tozjorz si com devant est dit. Et si fu jure de
nostre part, and de la part des Barons que totes chooses qui desus sunt
escrites, seront gardees a bone fei sanz malengin. Tesmoig en sont cil qui sunt
devant dit, and mult altre.

Ceste chartre fu donee el pre est appelez Roveninkmede enter Windesores and
S^anes, le quinzain jor de juig l'an de nostre Regne dis and sept ans.

xxv. Barons solonc la form qui est escritte en nostre chartre des franchises,
o a celz quil auront a co atornez; et s'il ne volent jurer maintenant empres
quince jorz acompliz, puisque lor terres et lor tenement, et lor chatel seront
seisi en nostre main: faites vendre toz lor chatelz, et les deniers qui en
seront pris gardez sauvement a meter en lay de la saint terre de Jerusalem;
et lor terres et lor tenemenz tenez en nostre main jusquil aient jure, et co fu
pourveiu par le jugement l' Arceveske Stefne de Cantorbire et des Barons de
nostre Regne. Et en tesmoig de ceste chose nos enveons cestes nos lettres
overtes. Tesmoig mei meisme. A Odibaam le vint et septain jor de Iuig, lan de
nostre Regne dis et septain.

FINIS.
The ARTICLES upon which the Great Charter of King John was framed: Taken out
of a Manuscript of the Archbishop of Canterbury Fol. 14. The Original whereof,
with the Great Seal annexed, is extant in the hands of Dr. Gilbert Burnet, now
Bishop of Salisbury.
THese are the Particulars which the Barons demand, and the King grants, Signed
with King John's Seal.

Heirs of full age shall have their Inheritance after the decease of their
Ancestors, paying the Ancient Relief to be expressed in the Charter.

Heirs within age, and that have been in Ward, shall have their Inheritance,
when they come at age, without paying Relief or making fine.

The Guardian of an Heirs Land shall take the reasonable Issues, Customs and
Services, without destruction or waste of his Men or Goods. And if such
Guardian make destruction and waste, he shall lose the Wardship, and the
Guardian shall keep in repair the Houses, Parks, Ponds, Pools, Mills and other
Appurtenances to the Estate out of the Profits of the Land. And shall take care
that the Heirs be married without disparagement, and by the Advice of their
near Kindred,

That a Widow shall give nothing for her Dower or Marriage after the death of
her Husband, but shall be suffered to dwell in her Husband's House Ninety days
after his death; within which time her Dower shall be assigned her, and she
shall immediately have her Marriage and her Inheritance. The King nor his
Bailiff shall not seize any Land for debt, if the Debtors Goods be sufficient;
nor shall the Debtors Sureties be distrain'd upon, when the Debtor himself is
able to pay the Debt. But if the Debtor fail of payment, the Sureties, if they
will, may have the Debtors Lands, till the Debt be fully satisfied, unless the
Principal Debtor can show that he is quit against his Sureties.

The King shall not allow any Baron to take Aid of his free Tenants, but for
the Redemption of his Person, for the making his Eldest Son a Knight, and
toward the Marriage of his Eldest Daughter once, and hereunto he shall have
but a Reasonable Aid.

That none shall do more Service for a Knights Fee, than is due for the same.
That Common Pleas shall not follow the King's Court, but shall be holden in
some certain Place: And that Recognitions be taken in their proper Counties,
and after this manner, viz. That the King shall send two Justices four times a
year, who together with four Knights of the same Shire, chosen by the Shire,
shall take Assizes of Novel disseisin, Mordancester, and Darrein presentment;
nor shall any be summoned hereunto, but the Jurors and the two Parties.

That a Freeman shall be amerced for a small fault after the manner of the
fault, and for a great fault according to the Greatness of the fault, saving
his Contenement. A Villain also shall be amerced saving his Wainage, and in
like manner a Merchant, saving his Merchandise, by the Oath of good Men of the
Vicinage: That a Clerk shall be amerced according to his Lay-see in manner
aforesaid, and not according to his Ecclesiastical Benefice.

That no Town be amerced for not making Bridges nor Banks, but where they have
been of old time, and of Right ought to be.

That the measure of Wine, of Corn, and the breadth of Cloth, and the like, be
rectified, and so of Weights.

That Assizes of Novel Disseizin and Mordancester be abbreviated, and so of
other Assizes.

That no Sheriff shall entermeddle with Pleas of the Crown without the
Coroners; and that Counties and Hundreds shall be at the ancient Farms without
any Increase, except the King's own Demesne Manors.

If any Tenant of the King die, the Sheriff, or other the Kings Bailiff may
seize and enroll his Goods and Chattels by the view of lawful Men; but yet so
as that nothing thereof be taken away, till it be fully known whether he owe
any clear debt to the King; and then the Kings Debt shall be paid, and the
Residue shall remain to the Executors to perform the Testament of the Dead. And
if nothing be owing to the King, all the Goods shall go to the use of the dead.

If any Freeman dye Intestate, his Goods shall be distributed by his nearest
Kindred and Friends, and by the view of the Church.

Widows shall not be distrain'd to marry, if they are minded to live unmarried,
provided they find Sureties, that they will not marry without the King's
Assent, if they hold of the King, or without the Consent of their Lords of whom
they hold.

No Constable or other Bailiff shall take any Man's Corn or other Chattels, but
he shall forthwith pay for the same, unless he may have respit by consent of
the Seller.

That no Constable shall distrain any Knight to give Money for the keeping of
his Castle, if he himself will do it in his own proper Person, or by another
sufficient man, if he may not do it himself for a reasonable Cause. And if the
King lead him in his Army, he shall be discharged of Castleward for the time.

No Sheriff or Bailiff of the King, nor any other person shall take the Horses
or Carts of any Freeman to make carriage without his leave.

The King, nor his Bailiffs shall not take any Man's Wood for Castles or other
Occasions, but by License of him whose the Wood is.

That the King do not hold the Lands of them that be convicted of Felony longer
then a year and a day; after which they shall be delivered to the Lord of the
Fee.

That all Wears from henceforth be utterly put down in Thames and Medway, and
throughout all England.

That the Writ called Precipe be not from henceforth granted to any person of
any Freehold, whereby a Freeman may lose his Court.

If any be disseiz'd or delayed by the King, without Judgment, of Lands,
Liberties, or other his Right, he shall forthwith have restitution; and if any
Dispute arise upon it, it shall be determined by the Judgment of the Five and
twenty Barons. And such as have been disseiz'd by the King's Father, or his
Brother, shall have Right immediately by the Judgment of their Peers in the
King's Court. And if the King must have the Term of others that had taken upon
them the Cross for the Holy Land, the Archbishop and Bishops shall give
Judgment therein, at a certain day to be prefixed, without Appeal.

That nothing be given for a Writ of Inquisition of Life or Member, but that it
be freely granted without price, and be not denied.

If any hold of the King by Fee-farm, by Socage, or Burgage, and of any other
by Knight's Service, the King shall not have the Custody of the Heir, nor of
his Lands that are holden of the Fee of another, by reason of such Burgage,
Socage or Fee-farm: Nor ought the King to have the Custody of such Burgage,
Socage or Fee-farm; and no Freeman shall lose his Degree of Knighthood by
reason of petty Serjeanties, as when a Man holds Lands, rendering therefore a
Knife, an Arrow, or the like.

No Bailiff shall put any man to his Law, upon his own bare saying, without
faithful Witnesses.

That the Body of a Freeman be not taken, nor imprisoned, nor that he be
disseiz'd, nor Out-lawed, nor Exiled, nor any way destroyed.

Nor that the King pass upon him, or imprison him by force, but only by the
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

That Right be not sold, nor delayed, nor denied.

That Merchants have liberty to go and come safely to buy and sell, without any
manner of Evil Tolls, by the Old and Lawful Customs.

That no Escuage or Aid be laid upon the Kingdom, but by the Common Council of
the Kingdom; unless it be to redeem the King's Person, or to make his eldest
Son a Knight, or to marry his eldest Daughter once; and for these a reasonable
Aid shall be given. That it be in like manner with respect to Tallages and Aids
from the City of London, and other Cities that have Privileges therein: And
that the City of London may fully enjoy her ancient Liberties and free Customs,
as well by Water, as by Land.

That it shall be lawful for any Man to go out of the Kingdom, and to return,
saving his Allegiance to the King, unless it be in time of War for a short
time, for the common profit of the Realm.

If any borrow Money of a Jew, be it more or less, and die before the Debt be
paid, no Interest shall be paid for the same so long as the Heir is under age,
of whomsoever he hold. And if the Debt become due to the King, the King shall
take no more than what is contained in the Charter.

If any Man die and owe Money to the Jews, his Wife shall have her Dower; and
if he left Children, Necessaries shall be provided them according to the
quantity of the Freehold, and the residue shall go to pay off the Debt, saving
the Services due to the Lords. The like shall be observed in case of other
Debts, and when the Heir comes of age, his Guardian shall restore him his Land
as well stockt as he could reasonably afford out of the Profits of the Land,
coming in by the Plough and the Cart.

If any Man hold of any Escheat, as of the Honor of Wallingford, and
Nottingham, Bonon, and Lancaster, or of other Escheats, which are in the King's
Hand and are Baronies, and die, his Heir shall pay no other Relief, nor perform
any other Service then he should have paid and performed to the Baron, and that
the King shall hold such Escheats as the Barons held them.

That Fines made for Dowers, Marriages, Inheritances and Amercements,
wrongfully and contrary to the Law of the Land, be freely remitted, or ordered
by the Judgment of the Five and twenty Barons, or of the major part of them,
together with the Archbishop and such as he shall call to him; Provided that if
one or more of the Five and twenty have themselves any like complaint, that
then he or they shall be removed, and others put in their rooms by the residue
of the Five and twenty.

That the Hostages and Deeds be restored, which were delivered to the King for
his Security.

That they that live out of the Forest be not obliged to come before the
Justices of the Forest by common Summons, unless they be Parties or Pledges:
And that the Evil Customs of the Forests and Foresters, Warrens, and Sheriffs,
and Ponds be redressed by twelve Knights of each County, who shall be chosen by
the Good Men of the County.

That the King remove wholly from their Bayliff-wick, the Kindred and whole
Dependence of Gerard de Aties, that hereafter they have no Bayliffwick, to wit,
Engeland, Andr' Peter' Gigo de Cances, Gigo de Cygon, Matthew de Martino, and
his Brethren, and Gelfrid his Nephew, and Phillip de Mark.

And that the King put away the Foreign Soldiers, Stipendaries, Slingers, and
Troopers, and their Servants, who came with Horses and Arms to the Nuisance of
the Realm,

That the King make Justitiars, Constables, Sheriffs and Bailiffs of Men that
know the Law of the Land, and will cause it to be well observed.

That Barons who have founded Abbeys, for which they have Charters of Kings, or
ancient Tenure, shall have the Custody of them when they are vacant.

If the King have disseiz'd the Welsh men, or esloyn'd them from Lands or
Liberties, or of other things in England or in Wales, let them presently be
restored to them without Plea: and if they have been disseiz'd or esloin'd from
their English Tenements by the King's Father or his Brother, without Judgment
of their Peers, the King shall without delay do them Justice, as he does
Justice to Englishmen of their English Tenements, according to the Law of
England, and of Welsh Tenements, according to the Law of Wales, and of
Tenements in the Marches, according to the Law of the Marches. In like manner
the Welshman shall do to the King and his Subjects.

That the King restore Lewelin's Son, and all the Welsh Hostages, and the Deeds
that were delivered to him for security of the Peace.

That the King do Right to the King of Scotland concerning restoring of
Hostages, and his Liberties and Right, according to the Form of the Agreement
with his Barons of England, unless it ought to be otherwise by virtue of some
Deeds which the King has, by the Judgment of the Archbishop and others, whom he
shall think fit to call to him.

That all Forests that have been afforested by the King in his own time be
disafforested, and so of Banks, which by the King himself have been put in
defense.

All these Customs and Liberties, which the King has granted to the Kingdom, to
hold and keep for his own part toward his Men, all Clerks and Laymen of the
Kingdom shall observe and keep for their parts toward their Men.

This is the Form of the security for keeping Peace and the Liberties betwixt
the King and the Kingdom. The Barons shall choose Five and twenty Barons of the
Realm, whom they will themselves, upon whom it shall be encumbent, that with
all their might they observe and keep, and cause to be observed and kept, the
Peace and Liberties which the King has granted to them, and confirmed by his
Charter, to wit, That if the King, or his Justices, or Bailiffs, or any of his
Ministers, offend any Person contrary to any of the said Articles, or
transgress any Article of this Peace and Security: And that such offense be
made known to four of the said Five and Twenty Barons; those four Barons shall
go to the King, or to his Justitiar, if the King be out of the Realm, declaring
to him that such an abuse is committed, and shall desire him to cause it
speedily to be redressed. And if the King, or (if he be out of the Realm,) his
Justitiar do not redress it, those four Barons shall within a reasonable time
to be limited in the Charter, refer the matter to the residue of the Five and
twenty Barons. And those Five and twenty, with the Commonalty of all the Land,
shall distress the King all the ways they can, to wit, by seizing his Castles,
his Lands and Possessions, and by what other means they can, till it be redrest
according to their good likeing, saving the Person of our Lord the King, and of
the Queen and of their Children. And when it is redrest, they shall be subject
to the King, as before. And whoever will, may swear to put these things in
Execution, viz. To obey the Commands of the said Five and twenty Barons, and to
distress the King, to the utmost of his Power with them. And the King shall
give public and free Liberty for any man to swear that will, and shall never
pohibit any to swear. And all those of the Nation, who will voluntarily of
their own accord, swear to the Five and twenty Barons, to distress the King
with them, the King himself shall issue his Praecept, Commanding them to swear
as aforesaid.

Item, If any of the said Five and Twenty Barons dye, or go out of the Realm,
or be any other way hindered from performing these things, the residue of the
Five and twenty shall choose another, whom they think best, in his place, who
shall be sworn as the rest are. And in all matters referred to those Five and
twenty Barons, if they happen to be all present, and differ amongst themselves,
or if any of them being thereto appointed, will not or cannot come, what the
major part of them shall agree upon and enjoin shall be valid, as if all the
Five and twenty had agreed in it. And the said Five and twenty shall swear that
they will faithfully observe and keep the Articles aforesaid, and with all
theit might cause them to be observed. Moreover the King shall give them the
Securities of the Archbishop and Bishops, and Master Pandulphus, that he will
not obtain any thing from the Pope, whereby any of these Articles of Agreement
may be revoked or diminished. And if any such thing be obtained, that it be
reputed void and of none effect, nor shall ever be made use of.

THE GREAT CHARTER OF KING JOHN, A True Copy, from the Original French.
JOHN by the Grace of God King of England, to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Earls, Barons, Justices, Foresters, Sheriffs, Prevosts, Ministers, and all his
Bailiffs and his Lieges, Greeting. Know ye that We by the Grace of God, and for
the saving of our Soul, and the Souls of all our Ancestors, and of our Heirs,
and for the Honor of God, and the safety of Holy Church, and for the amendment
of our Government, By the Advice of Our Honored Fathers, Stephen Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of All England, and Cardinal of Rome; Henry Archbishop of
Dublin, William Bishop of London, Peter Bishop of Winchester, Jocelin Bishop of
Bath, Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, Walter Bishop of Worcester, William Bishop of
Chester, Benedict Bishop of Rochester, and Master Pandulph Subdeacon of our
Lord the Apostle, and of our Friend and Brother Anner Master of the Order of
Knights Templers in England; And by the Advice of our Barons, William Earl
Marshal Earl of Pembroke, William Earl of Salisbury, William Earl of Warren,
William Earl of Arundel, Alan of Galloway Constable of Scotland, Warin
Fitz-Gerard, Peter Fitz-Herbert, Hubert de Burgh Steward of Poictou, Hugh
Nevill, Matthew Fitz-Herbert, Thomas Basset, Alan Basset, Phillip d' Aubenie,
Robert de Ropelee, John Marshall, and John Fitzhugh, and by the Advice of
other our Lieges,

Have in the first place granted to God, and confirmed by this our present
Charter, for us and for our Heirs for ever, That the Churches of England shall
be free, and shall enjoy their Rights and Franchises entirely and fully: And
this our Purpose is, that it be observed, as may appear by our having granted,
of our mere and free Will, that Elections should be free (which is reputed to
be a very great and very necessary Priviledge^ of the Churches of England)
before the difference arose betwixt Us and our Barons, and by our having
confirmed the same by our Charter, and by our having procured it moreover to be
confirmed by our Lord the Apostle Innocent the third: Which Privilege We will
maintain: And our Will is, that the same be faithfully maintained by our Heirs
for ever.

We have also granted to all the Freemen of our Kingdom, for us and our Heirs
for ever, all the Liberties hereafter mentioned, to have and to hold to them
and their Heirs of Us and our Heirs.

If any of our Earls, our Barons, or others that hold of us in Chief by
Knight Service, die, and at the time of his death his Heir be of full age, and
Relief be due, he shall have his Inheritance by the ancient Relief; to wit, the
Heir or Heirs of an Earl, for an entire Earldom, C pounds; the Heir or Heirs of
a Baron, for an entire Barony, C Marks; the Heir or Heirs of a Knight, for a
whole Knights Fee, C Shillings at most; and where less is due, less shall be
paid, according to the ancient Customs of the several Tenures.

If the Heirs of any such be within Age and in Ward, they shall have their
Inheritance when they come of Age without Relief and without Fine.

The Guardians of the Land of such Heirs being within age, shall take nothing
out of the Land of the Heirs, but only the reasonable Profits, reasonable
Customs, and reasonable Services, and that without making destruction or wast
of Men or Goods.

And if we shall have committed the Custody of the Land of any such Heir, to a
Sheriff or any other, who is to account to us for the Profits of the Land, and
that such Committee make destruction or wast, We will take of him amends, and
the Land shall be committed to two lawful and good Men of that Fee, who shall
account for the Profits to us, or to such as we shall appoint.

And if we shall give or sell to any Person, the custody of the Lands of any
such Heir, and such Donee or Vendee make destruction or wast, he shall lose the
Custody, and it shall be committed to two Lawful, Sage, and Good Men, who shall
account to Us for the same, as aforesaid.

And the Guardian, whilst he has the Custody of the Heirs Land, shall maintain
the Houses, Ponds, Parks, Pools, Mills, and other Appurtenances to the Land,
out of the Profits of the Land it self; and shall restore to the Heir, when he
shall be of full age, his Land well stockt, with Ploughs, Barns, and the like,
as it was when he received it, and as the Profits will reasonably afford.

Heirs shall be married without disparagement; insomuch that before the
Marriage be contracted, the Persons that are next of Kin to the Heir, shall be
made acquainted with it.

A Widow after the death of her Husband, shall presently and without
oppression, have her Marriage and her Inheritance; nor shall give any thing for
her Marriage, nor for her Dower, nor for her Inheritance, which she and her
Husband were seized of the day of her Husband's death; and she shall remain in
her Husband's House Forty Days after his death; within which time her Dower
shall be assigned her.

No Widow shall be compelled to marry if she be desirous to live single,
provided she give Security not to marry without our leave, if she hold of us,
or without the Lord's leave, of whom she holds, if she hold of any other.

We nor our Bailiffs, will not seize the Lands or Rents of a Debtor, for any
Debt, so long as his Goods are sufficient to pay the Debt: Nor shall the
Pledges be distrain'd upon, whilst the Principal Debtor is able to pay the
Debt. But if the Principal Debtor have not wherewith to pay the Debt, the
Pledges shall answer for it: And if they will, they shall have the Lands and
Rents of the Debtor, till they have received the Debt which they paid for him,
if the Principal Debtor cannot show that he is quit against his Pledges.

If any Persons have borrowed Money of Jews, more or less, and die before they
have paid the Debt, the Debt shall not grow whilst the Heir is under age; and
if such Debt become due to us, we will take no more than the Goods expressed in
the Deed.

And if any die and owe a Debt to the Jews, his Wife shall have her Dower, and
shall be charged with no part of the Debt; and if the Children of the deceased
Person be within age, their reasonable Estovers shall be provided them,
according to the value of the Estate which their Ancestor had, and the Debt
shall be paid out of the Residue, saving the Services due to the Lord: In like
manner shall it be done in Cases of Debts owing to other persons that are not
Jews.

We will impose no Escuage nor Aids within our Realm, but by the Common Council
of our Realm, except for our Ransom, and for the making our eldest Son a
Knight, and for marrying out eldest Daughter once: And for these purposes there
shall but a reasonable Aid be required.

In like manner shall it be done within the City of London: and moreover the
City of London shall have all her ancient Customs and Liberties, by Land and
Water.

We Will moreover and Grant, that all other Cities, and Boroughs, and Towns,
and Ports, have in all respects their Liberties and free Customs.

And as for coming to the Common Council of the Kingdom, and for assessing
Aids, (except in the three cases aforesaid.) And as for the assessing of
Escuage, we will cause to be summoned the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls,
and the Greater Barons, each in particular by our Letters, and moreover we will
cause to be summoned in general, by our Sheriffs and Bailiffs, all that hold of
us in Chief, at a certain day, to wit, Forty days after at least, and at a
certain place: and in our said Letters we will express the cause of the
Summons. And when Summons shall be so made, business shall go on at the day
assigned, by the Advice of such as are present, though all that are summoned do
not appear.

We will not allow for the future, that any take Aid of his free men, but only
to ransom his Person, to make his eldest Son a Knight, and to marry his eldest
Daughter once; and for these purposes there shall but a reasonable Aid be
given.

None shall be distrained to do greater Service for a Knight's Fee, or for any
other Frank-Tenement then what is due by his Tenure.

Common Pleas shall not follow our Court, but shall ^e held in a certain place.

Recognizances of Novel Disseisin, Mordancester, and Darrein presentment, shall
be taken no where but in their proper Counties, and in this manner: We, or our
Chief Justice (if our Selves shall be out of the Realm) will send two Justices
through every County four times a year, who with four Knights of every County,
to be chosen by the County, shall take the said Assizes in the Country, at a
day when the County Court is held, and in a certain place; and if the said
Assizes cannot be taken upon that day, so many Knights and free Tenants of them
that were present in the County Court that day, shall stay, as may give a good
Judgment, according as the concern may be greater or less.

A Free man shall not be amerced for a little offense, but according to the
manner of his offense, and for a great offense he shall be amerced according to
the greatness of his offense, saving his Contenement: And so a Merchant saving
his Merchandise: And a Villain in like manner shall be amerced saving his
Wainage, if he fall into our Mercy: and none of the said Amercements shall be
affeered, but by Oaths of good and lawful Men of the Visinage.

An Earl and a Baron shall not be amerced but by their Peers, and according to
the manner of their Offense.

No Clerk shall be amerced but according to his Lay-fee, and in like manner as
others aforesaid, and not according to the quantity of his Church Living.

No Ville nor any man shall be distrain'd to make Bridges over Rivers, but
where they anciently have, and of Right ought to make them.

No Sheriffs, Constables, Coroners, nor other our Bailiffs shall hold the Pleas
of our Crown.

All Counties, Hundreds, Wapentakes and Tythings shall be at the ancient Farms
without being raised, except our own demesne Manors.

If any that holds of us a Lay-fee dye, and our Sheriffs, or other our
Bailiffs, show our Letters Patents of Summons for a Debt, which the deceased
owed to us, our Sheriff or Bailiff may well Attach and Inventory the Goods of
the Dead, which shall be found upon his Lay-fee to the value of the Debt, which
the deceased owed to us, by the view of Lawful Men, yet so as nothing be
removed till such time as the Debt which shall be found to be due to us, be
paid; and the residue shall go to the Executors to perform the Testament of the
dead: and if nothing be owing to us, all his Goods shall go to the use of the
Dead, saving to his Wife and Children their reasonable Parts.

If any Freeman dye intestate, his Goods shall be divided by the hands of his
near Kindred and Friends, by the view of Holy Church, saving to every one their
Debts which the Dead owed them.

None of our Constables, nor other our Bailiffs, shall take the Corn, nor other
the Goods of any Person, without paying for the same presently, unless he have
time given him by consent of the Vendor.

Our Constables shall distrain no man, who holds by Knight Service, to give
Money for Castle-garde, if he has performed it himself in proper Person, or by
another good Man, if he could not perform it himself for some reasonable Cause:
And if we lead him or send him into the Army, he shall be discharged of
Castle-garde for so long time as he shall be with us in the Army.

Our Sheriffs, our Bailiffs, nor other, shall not take the Horses nor Carts of
any Freeman, to make carriage, but by leave of such Freeman.

Neither our selves nor our Bailiffs shall take another Man's Wood for our
Castles, or other occasions, but by his leave whose Wood it is.

We will hold the Lands of such as shall be convict of Felony, but a year and a
day, and then we will restore them to the Lords of the Fees.

All Wears shall from this time forward be wholly taken away in Thames and
Medeway, and throughout all England, except upon the Seacoast.

The Writ called Precipe henceforth shall be made to none out of any Tenement,
whereby a Freeman may lose his Court.

One Measure of Wine shall be used throughout our Kingdom, and one Measure of
Ale, and one Measure of Corn, to wit, the London Quart. And there shall be one
breadth of dyed Cloth, Russets, and Haubergets; to wit, two Else within the
Lists: And concerning Weights, it shall be in like manner as of Measures.

Nothing shall be given or taken henceforth for a Writ of Enquisition of Life
or Member, but it shall be granted freely and shall not be denied.

If any hold of us by Fee-farm, or by Socage, and hold likewise Land of others
by Knight Service, we will not have the Custody of the Heir, nor of the Land
which is of the Fee of another, by reason of such Fee-farm, Socage or Burgage,
unless such Fee-farm owe Knight Service.

We will not have the Wardship of the Heir nor of the Land of any Person, which
he holds of another by Knight Service, by reason of any Petit Serjeanty, by
which he holds of us, as by the Service of giving us Arrows, Knives, or such
like.

No Bailiff for the time to come shall put any Man to his Law upon his bare
word, without good Witnesses produced.

No free man shall be taken nor imprisoned, nor disseised, nor outlawed, nor
exiled, nor destroyed in any manner, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn
him, but by the Lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

We will sell to none, we will deny, nor delay to none Right and Justice.

All Merchants may with safety and security go out of England, and come into
England, and stay, and pass through England by Land and Water, to buy and sell,
without any Evil Tolls, paying the Ancient and Rightful Duties, except in time
of War, and then they that are of the Country, with whom we are at War, and are
found here at the beginning of the War, shall be attach't, but without injury to
their Bodies or Goods, till it be known to us or to our Chief Justice, how our
Merchants are entreated, which are found in our Enemies Country, and if ours be
safe there, they shall be safe in our Land.

It shall be Lawful for all men in time to come, to go out of our Kingdom, and
to return safely and securely by Land and by Water, saving their Faith due to
us, except it be in time of War, for some short time, for the profit of the
Realm. But out of this Article are excepted Persons in Prison, Persons
out-lawed according to the Law of the Land, and Persons of the Country with
whom we are at War; concerning Merchants, what is abovesaid shall hold as to
them.

If any hold of any Escheat, as of the Honor of Wallingford, Nottingham,
Boloin, Lancaster, or of other Escheats, which are in our hand, and are
Baronies, and dye, his Heirs shall owe us no other relief, nor do us any other
Service, then was due to the Baron of such Barony, when it was in his hand, and
we will hold the same in like manner as the Baron held it.

Men that dwell out of the Forest, shall not appear before our Justices of the
Forest by common Summons, unless they be in suit themselves, or Bail for
others, who are attach't for the Forest.

We will not make Sheriffs, Justices, nor Bailiffs, but of such as know the Law
of the Land, and will keep it.

All that have founded Abbeys, whereof they have Charters from Kings of
England, or ancient Tenure, shall have the custody thereof, whilst they are
vacant, as they ought to have.

All the Forests that have been Afforested in our time, shall instantly be
Disafforested; in like manner be it of Rivers, that in our time and by us have
been put in defense.

All evil Customs of Forests and Warens, and of Foresters, and Warenners, of
Sheriffs and their Ministers, of Rivers, and of Guarding them, shall forthwith
be enquired of in every County by twelve Knights sworn of the same County, who
must be chosen by good Men of the same County. And within forty days after they
have made such Inquisition, the said evil Customs shall be utterly abolished by
those same Knights, so as never to be revived; provided they be first made
known to us, or to our Chief Justice, if we be out of the Realm.

We will forthwith restore all the Hostages and all the Deeds, which have been
delivered to us by the English, for surety of the Peace or of faithful Service.

We will wholly put out of Bayliffwicks the Kindred of Gerard de Aties, so that
from henceforth they shall not have a Bayliffwick in England; and Engeland de
Cygoigni Peron, Guyon, Andrew de Chanceas, Gyon de Cygoigni, Geffry de Martigni
and his Brothers, Philip, Mark and his Brothers, Geffray his Nephew and all
their Train: And presently, after the Peace shall be reformed, we will put out
of the Realm all Knights Foreigners, Slingers, Sergeants and Soldiers, who came
with Horse or Arms to the nuisance of the Realm.

If any be disseiz'd or esloyn'd by us, without Lawful Judgment of his Peers,
of Lands, Chattels, Franchises, or of any Right, we will forthwith restore the
same; and if any difference arise upon it, it shall be determined by the
Judgment of the Five and twenty Barons, of whom mention is made hereafter in
the security for the Peace.

As to all things, whereof any have been disseiz'd, or esloyn'd without Lawful
Judgment of their Peers, by King Henry our Father, or by King Richard our
Brother, which we have in our hands, or which any other has, to whom we are
bound to warrant the same, we will have respit to the common Term of them that
are crossed for the Holy Land, except such things for which Suits were commenced,
or Enquest taken by our Order before we took upon us the Cross. And if we
return from the Pilgrimage, or perhaps forbear going, we will do full Right
therein. The same Respit we will have, and the same Right we will do in manner
aforesaid, as to the Disafforesting of Forests, or letting them remain Forests,
which the Kings, Henry our Father, or Richard our Brother have Afforested; and
and as to Custodies of Lands which are of the Fee of other Persons, which we
have held till, now by reason of other Men's Fees, who held of us by
Knight Service; and of Abbeys that are founded in other Men's Fees, in which
the Lords of the Fees claim a Right: And when we shall be returned from our
Pilgrimage, or if we forbear going, we will immediately do full Right to all
that shall complain.

None shall be taken nor imprisoned upon the Appeal of a Woman, for the death
of any other than her Husband.

All the Fines and all the Amercements that are imposed for our use, wrongfully
and contrary to the Law of the Land, shall be Pardoned; or else they shall be
determined by the Judgment of the Five and twenty Barons, of whom hereafter, or
by the Judgment of the greater number of them that shall be present, or before
Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, if he can be there, and those that he shall
call to him; and if he cannot be present, Matters shall proceed notwithstanding
without him; so always, that if one or more of the said Five and twenty Barons
be concerned in any such Complaint, they shall not give Judgment thereupon,
but others chosen and sworn shall be put in their room to act in their stead,
by the residue of the said Five and twenty Barons.

If we have disseiz'd or esloin'd any Welshmen of Land, Franchises, or of other
things, without lawful judgment of their Peers, in England, or in Wales, they
shall forthwith be restored unto them; and if Suits arise thereupon, right
shall be done them in the Marches by the Judgment of their Peers; of English
Tenements according to the Law of England, and of Tenements in Wales, according
to the Law of Wales; and Tenements in the Marches, according to the Law of the
Marches: And in like manner shall the Welsh do to us and our Subjects.

As for all such things, whereof any Welshmen have been disseiz'd or esloyn'd
without Lawful Judgment of their Peers by King Henry our Father, or by King
Richard our Brother, which we have in our hands, or which any others have, to
whom we are bound to warrant the same, we will have respit till the common Term
be expired of all that crossed themselves for the Holy Land, those things
excepted, whereupon Suits were Commenced or Enquests taken by our Order, before
we took upon us the Cross; and when we shall return from our Pilgrimage, or if
peradventure we forbear going, we will presently cause full Right to be done
therein, according to the Laws of Wales and before the said Parties.

We will forthwith restore the Son of Lewellyn and all the Hostages of Wales,
and the Deeds that have been delivered to us for security of the Peace.

We will deal with Alexander, King of Scotland, as to the restoring him his
Suitors and his Hostages, his Franchises and Rights, as we do with our other
Barons of England, unless it ought to be otherwise by virtue of the Charters,
which we have of his Father William, late King of Scotland, and this to be by
the Judgment of his Peers in our Court.

All these Customs and Franchises aforesaid, which we have granted to be kept
in our Kingdom, so far forth as we are concerned, toward our Men, all Persons
of the Kingdom, Clerks and Lay, must observe for their Parts toward their Men.

And whereas we have granted all these things for God's sake, and for the
amendment of our Government, and for the better compremising the discord arisen
betwixt us and our Barons, We, willing that the same be firmly held and
established for ever, do make and grant to our Barons the scurity underwritten;
to wit, That the Barons shall choose Five and twenty Barons of the Realm, whom
they List, who shall to their utmost Power keep and hold, and cause to be kept
the Peace and the Liberties, which we have Granted and Confirmed by this our
present Charter, insomuch, that if we, or our Justice, or our Bailiff, or any
of our Ministers, act contrary to the same in any thing, against any Persons,
or offend against any Article of this Peace and Security, and such our
Miscarriage be shown to four Barons of the said Five and twenty, those four
Barons shall come to us, or to our Justice, if we be out of the Realm, and show
us our Miscarriage, and require us to amend the same without delay; and if we
do not amend it, or, if we be out of the Realm, our Justice do not amend it
within Forty days after the same is shown to us, or to our Justice, if we be
out of the Realm, then the said Four Barons shall report the same to the
residue of the said Five and twenty Barons, and then those Five and twenty
Barons, with the Commonalty of all England, may distress us by all the ways
they can; to wit, by seizing on our Castles, Lands and Possessions, and by what
other means they can, till it be amended, as they shall adjudge; saving our own
Person, the Person of our Queen, and the Persons of our children; and when it
is amended, they shall be subject to us as before. And whoever of the Realm
will, may swear, that for the Performance of these things, he will obey the
Commands of the said Five and twenty Barons, and that together with them, he
will distress us to his Power: And we give Public and free leave to swear, to
all that will swear, and will never hinder any one: And for all Persons of the
Realm, that of their own accord will swear to, the said Five and twenty Barons,
to distress us, we will issue our Precept, Commanding them to swear as
aforesaid.

And if any of the said Five and twenty Barons die, or go out of the Realm or
be any way hindered from acting as aforesaid, the residue of the said Five and
twenty Barons shall choose another in his room, according to their discretion,
who shall swear as the others do.

And as to all things which the said Five and twenty Barons are to do, if
peradventure they be not all present, or cannot agree, or in case any of those
that are Summoned, cannot or will not come, whatever shall be determined by the
greater number of them that are present, shall be good and valid, as if all had
been present.

And the said five and twenty Barons shall swear that they will faithfully
observe all the matters aforesaid, and cause them to be observed to their
power.

And we will not obtain of any one for our selves, or for any other, any thing
whereby any of these Concessions, or of these Liberties may be revoked or
annihilated; and if any such thing be obtained, it shall be null and void, nor
shall ever be made use of by our selves or any other.

And all ill will, disdain, and rancour, which has been betwixt Us and our
Subjects of the Clergy and Laity, since the said discord began, we do fully
release and pardon to them all. And moreover all Trespasses that have been
committed by occasion of the said discord since Easter, in the sixteenth year
of our Reign, to the restoring of the Peace, we have fully released to all
Clerks and Laymen, and so far as in us lies we have fully pardoned them: And
further we have caused Letters Patents to be made to them in testimony hereof,
witnessed by Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, Henry Archbishop of Dublin, and
by the aforesaid Bishops, and by Mr. Pandulphus upon this Security and these
Concessions: Whereby we will and strictly Command, that the Church of England
be free, and enjoy all the said Liberties, and Rights, and Grants well and in
Peace freely and quietly, fully and entirely to them and their Heirs in all
things, in all places, and for ever as aforesaid. And we and our Barons have
sworn that all things above written, shall be kept on our parts in good Faith
without ill design. The Witnesses are the Persons abovenamed and many others.

This Charter was given at the Meadow called Running-Mead, betwixt Windsor and
Stanes, the 15th day of June, in the Seventeenth Year of our Reign.

JOHN by the Grace of God King of England, Hampshire, and to the Twelve that
are chosen in that County, to enquire of and put away the evil customs of
Sheriffs, and of their Ministers, of Forests, and Foresters, of Warrens and
Warrenners, of Rivers, and of guarding them, Greeting. We command you, that
without delay, you seize into our Hand, the Lands and Tenements, and the Goods
of all those of the County of Southampton, that will not swear to the said Five
and twenty Barons, according to the form expressed in our Charter of Liberties,
or to such as they shall have thereunto appointed; and if they will not swear
presently, at the end of Fifteen days after their Lands and Tenements and
Chattels are seized into our Hands, that ye sell all their Goods, and keep
safely the Money that ye shall receive for the same, to be employed for the
Relief of the Holy Land of Jerusalem; and that ye^ keep their Lands and
Tenements in our Hands till they have sworn, or that Stephen Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Barons of our Kingdom have given Judgment thereupon. In
witness whereof we direct unto you these our Letters Patents. Witness our Self:
At Odibaam the Seven and twentieth Day of June, in the Seventeenth Year of our
Reign.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Case of Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. 4o.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland, in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. 4o.

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Desertion; or an Account of all the Public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called, The Desertion discussed, in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.

K. William and K. Lewis, wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings: And that
the matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France, for the Government of these Nations.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance, by a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

The Case of Oaths stated. 4o.

A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman upon the Present
Revolution, 4o.

The Advantages of the Present Settlement, and the great danger of a Relapse.

The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland.


