THE Restauratio^n OF THE JEWS: Or, A true RELATION OF THEIR PROGRESS and
PROCEEDINGS in order to the regaining of their Ancient KINGDOM.

Being the Substance of several LETTERS VIZ.

From ANTWERP, LEGORN, FLORENCE, etc.

Published by R. R.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, in the year 1665.

The Restoration of the JEWS, etc.
A Letter from Antwerp, October. (...). 1665.
SIR,
SInce the last I received from you, I have had occasion to speak with one that
is well informed of the proceedings of the Israelites; he tells me, That they
appear in great numbers in several places: The first mentioned appears in
Arabia, they are said to possess themselves in Meka; but at the first, the Jews
that lived amongst the Turks would not acknowledge them to be their Brethren,
but said they were a sort of Arabs, that lived in the Mountainous parts of
Arabia the Happy; but now they say they are Israelites, and sent by the ten
T^ibes to be their forerunners. Another Company are said to move from the East
and North East Country of Asia. The third and great Company in the Desert Goth
of Morocco, which is as I conceive, not far from Cape de Ver, but more within
the Land; they consist of 8000 Companies, the least of them contain 100 men,
and some of them 1000. A Jew that lives in these parts came unto Saley in
Barbary in August last, and taking the Book of the Law into his hand, did swear
by it, That he came lately from them, and had spoken with them, and saw them in
that number aforementioned, and that they are armed with Swords, Spears and
Bows, an^ no fi^e-Arms are found amongst them: This Jew did not unde^stand the
Language ordinarily spoken by them, but many of them spoke Hebrew, in which he
discoursed with them; their Leader is said to be a holy man, understands all
languages, and works Miracles.

This is by a Jew living in Saly, to his Brother in Holland, and upon that
Report which he received from the forementioned person who had been with them,
and is credited with those of his Nation* because he is a Rabby, and of much
reputation among them: They had many encounter with people in the way, and have
taken some places, none b^ing able to withstand them; they put all to the sword
except Jews, they rest upon the Sabbath day, and no fire is seen in their Camp;
their women and children stay some where behind them, and follow at a distance,
none are seen with them; they ^ig in a Mountain in the Desa^t for a Trumpet,
an^ sa^, t^^t when they find it, a^l Nations will be g^thered to them upon the
sound thereof.

In dispute with my Informer, I ra^sed many objection^ concer^ing the pl^ces
from whence they came, as also the m^nner of their coming, viz. B^ing in a
spirit of Judaism, in great power, led by a holy man, doing great mira^les, and
all things answering the description of the Messiah, they may exp^ct that it
would be a testimony that the Christians and other people and Nations should be
gathered in to the Jews, and not the Jews into Christ.

To the first he said, Those in Arabia are of the same company with them that
appear south of Morocco, and all of them seem to lie hid in the Inland Country
of Africa, extending them elves ove^ the vast Tract of Land comprehending all
between the two Tropicks, almost as far as the Cape of Good Hope.

He thinks them to be the white people of whom the Inhabitants of Guiny use
to speak, who will not mix themselves with their neighbors* nor have any other
commerce with them; they in the night bring Merc^andises to set places, and in
exchange to have salt and other n^cess^^ies as they want, but will be seen by
none; such as went from them, are one ^alf of their way to Meka; he thinks
they possessed the Arabians Country, and went out of Africa into America, by
the strait of the en^^y into the Red Sea; but whether by Boat or Miracle, he
knows not; those in the Ghost seemed to have lived in the North part of Asia,
toward the strait of Amion, from whence Manasses Ben-Israel come; though many
of them past into America; also he says, that they having suffered great
afflictions for the sins of the^r ^athers, are now comeout from Idolatry, to
live according to the purity and perfection of the Law, and shall from thence
be raised to the knowledge of Christ; he understands this of a Nation to be
born in a day, and their Co^ve^^i^n to be their birth: He thinks, that the
Law being t^u^ and good, and given them by God, it is suitable to his
proceedings amongst men, to give a testimony of his presence with those who
have not heard of a Christ, neither a^e of the posterity of those that slew
him, but of the ten Tribes formerly carried into Captivity, and that they are
thereby prepared to receive the Gospel; he further says, That all the Chu^c^es
called by the Name of Christians, are full of vanity, and that they must be
purified to whom Christ will teach his truth, and from them shall run a stream
overflowing the whole world, whereby the Powers of the world shall be
overthrown, and the right of Christ in and with ^is Saints shall then begin to
be established; He p^tches much upon 1666 and confidently believes, That all
the Prophesies of the Old and New Testament Centers in it, it being the time
that shall give beginning to that holy and Spiritual Kingdom. I have spoken
largely of this, believing you will be willing to hear what is related, and
upon what grounds.

The substance of a Letter from Legorn.
I Am glad you have heard some rattling of the dry bones of the House of Israel
since my last which has had more confirmation, not only from Legorn, but also
from Tunis in Barbary, from whence they write this year, that no Caravan is to
go to Meka, because we hear the Town is besieged, and from Jerusalem came this
week to our Jews, that there was good news; but what, they du^st not express:
and this week also some of our Christian Merchants have the like news from
Alexandria; the particulars of this news is, that the B^shaw of Alexandria with
a King of Arabia, having made up a Carivan o^ 60000 men, marched toward Meka,
and being but one days journey from thence, sent out a Troop to take notice how
the business stood; which Troop having seen this people lying in Tents about
the City and hearing that they professed themselves to be Israelites, reported
this to the Bashaw, who for all that resolved to march on with his Forces, and
coming within sight of the City, discovered an Innumerable multitude of people
getting ou^ of their Tents, whereupon the Turks give Fire and shot against
them, but after a little fighting, a pannick fear took them, and terror se^zed
on them and made them cry out, Who can fight with these people, seeing our
Arrows return back upon our selves! So the Turks le^t off fighting, and
returned home, and the Israelites into their Tents, without pursuing their
Enemies: this affront caused the Bashaw and the King of the Moors, throughout
all Egypt and Arabia, to impose on the Jews in all their Do^ini^n, heavier
taxes then ever there were five to one; in the interim the Bash^w to know a
right what people this was, sent to them ten Jews, who coming to them, sound
that they spoke Hebrew and that they were Israelites indeed; saying, they were
sent before to remain at Meka till their Pre^^ren came, for that the time was
now come that they should return unto their own Land of their Fore Fathers,
which others had usurped hitherto: another Letter says, that the Commander of
Meka sent 4 Troops to oppose these Israelites, but not one returned, and that
^ive^s Caravans were de^eated by them by that way. Of the 10 Jews 6 remained
there, and 4 only returned to Alexandria, from whence we have these ^idings.

The substance of a Letter from Florence.
This week there came Letters from Florence; si^nifying that the Court of
Florence was much amazed at the news of the Israelites, because they said that
the Emperor had written to the great Duke, that he was drawing his Army from
Germany, and had raised a great army, and was going to fight with this people:
In Florence they say, they are about 50000: and asking 4 of the Jews that were
sent thither, what they were; they answered, they did not know; but they said
themselves they were Jews: The Emperor wrote this to the great Duke of Florence.

There are more Letters from Legorn to confirm the former News, and they say
more, That the Turks were in a City near Meka, called Me^ai, from whence came
12000 Turks, who marched up against the Israelites, of which there was sl^^n
8000 of them, their own swords and Muskets turning against themselves: by the
next we shall hear more. From Legorn we are in expectation of very good news.

Another from Legorn.
YEsterday came a Letter from Alsasia Dipasi and Rapheck Supi, who writes, that
there is a B^^k arriv^^ from Alexandria, in which came dive^s Jews, that
brought news, that there was a great number of Soldiers in Tents near Meka who
would not suffer any to pass that way; and that from the City there went out a
great army against them, which received a great overthrow: hereupon the Jews
w^^e moleste^ by the increase of Taxes from 1 t^ 5 more then ^ormerly, which
being complained of, answer was made, that it was occasioned by the Jews, who
had betaken themselves to arm^: upon which reply they desired to send a
Messenger and accordingly sent away 10 persons, who when they came to the
Jewish army, were welcomed with great joy, feasting and an^^ating to an
indurance of their present burden without complaining of the new imposition
required from them, for that within one year, their enemies should become
t^i^utary to them.

Another from Amsterdam.
THe Is^^elites are in Meka, and their Tents are 15 Germane miles in length
from Meka* the Great Turk had a (...) that an Israelite had taken the Crown
from his head; which dre^m did so pe^plex him, that he did advise with his
Council to cut off all the Jews that were in his Dominions: but they to^d him
it was contrary to their Religion to do such an act, and to do it upon a dream;
if it we^e of God it would stand; if not, it would fall.

FINIS.

