REFLECTIONS ON MONSIEUR FAGEL'S LETTER.
SIR,
I Shall endeavor to answer yours as fully and briefly as possible.

1. You desire to know whether the Letter I sent you be truly Monsieur Fagel's
or not. 2. Whether their Highnesses gave him Commission to write it. 3. How far
the Dissenters may rely on their Highnesses word. 4. What effects it has on all
sorts of People.
Sir, Roman Catholics may be pardoned if they endeavor to make that Letter
pass for an Imposture, it is their Interest so to do, and they are seldom
wanting to promote that, let the methods be never so indirect which they are
forced to make use of: It does indeed spoil many hopeful projects of theirs.
But how any Protestant among us can really doubt the truth of it, is strange to
me. Some things carry their own evidence along with them, I take this Letter to
be one of that kind. I do not desire you to believe me upon my bare affirmation
that I know it to be genuine, (tho this be most true) but shall offer my
Reasons to convince you that it cannot be otherways.

First, The Letter is like its Author, the Matter is weighty, the Reasoning
sold, the Style grave, full and clear, like that of a Lawyer: It has an Air all
over, which as well shows the Religion and Temper of its Writer as the Matter
and Method of it do his Capacity and Judgment. Now all these Qualities make up
the Character of Monsieur Fagel.

Secondly, There are the same grounds to believe this Letter to be M. Fagel's,
as there are to believe any thing you have not seen, viz The constant
Asseverations of Persons of undoubted Credit that come from Holland, who all
agree in (...), and assure us of it. M. Fagel owned it to several English
Gentlemen, and many both here and in Holland knew two months ago that such a
Letter was written; a Forgery would before this time have been detected,
especially such a one as ruins the Designs of the Triumphing Party.

Thirdly, It was written by M. Fagel in Answer to Letters from Mr. Stewart,
sent by his Majesty's special Orders, and Mr Stewart had both an English and
Latin Copy sent him: Therefore the English Copy is not called a Translation,
but it is a sort of Original: for you are not to doubt but the matter was
ordered so, that her Royal Highness might peruse it as well as his Majesty.

In the next place you would know whether their Higresses gave Order to
Monsieur Fagel to write it.

I wish Sir, you would take the pains to read the Letter over again, and
consider who this Monsieur Fagel is; He is Pensionary of Holland, and first
Minister of State, raised to that Dignity by the Prince's Favor, he Answers
Letters written to him, which are ordered by His Majesty to be Communicated to
their Highnesses. In his Answer, he gives an Account of their Hignesses
Opinions about the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test; Matters of a National
Concern, and of the greatest Importance. Now you must have a strange Opinion of
Monsieur Fagel, if you think him capable of so great an Indiscretion (or rather
Imposture) as to write such a Letter of his own Head. The Letter it self
Demonstrates, that whoever writ it is no Fool, and the Circumstances I have
marked show that he is no Knave. And indeed the Substance of it is not new, it
only repeats to His Majesty the same Answer which the Prince and Princess had
formerly given to His Majesty's Envoy there.

In short, you may leave the whole Matter to this plain issue: if this Letter
be a false one, it will be disowned. if a true one it will be owned. Their
Highnesses love not to do things that will not bear the Light It is Evident,
they did not intend the Matter of it should be a Secret, having told it to
Monsieur D' Albeville, as often as he (in his Discreet Way) necessitated them
to do it. But how it came to be ^rinted, I cannot inform you justly; however
you shall have my conjecture.

I remember, as soon as it was noised about Town, that Mr. Stewart had received
a Letter of such a Nature from Monsieur Fagel, Care was taken, that the Writer
of the Common News Letters which are dispersed over the Kingdom, should insert
in them, that their Highnesses had declared themselves for the Repeal of the
Test. This Pia Fraus might, I suppose, give Occasion to the Printing of the
Letter, as the Wisdom and Policy of our Statesmen (in putting Mr. Stewart on
Writing such Letters) had procured it: I say Letters, for Mons^ier Fagel had
five or six on that subject before he answered, so unwilling were they in
Holland to return an Answer, since they could ^ot give one that was pleasing,
or to do any thing that looked like meddling.

The third Thing you desired to be satisfied in, is, W^^ther the Dissenters may
rely on their Highnesses Word. I am as apt to mistrust Princes Promises as you
are. But shall now give you my reasons, why I think the Dissenters may safely
do it. And at the same time, because of the Affinity of the matter, I will tell
you why I think we may all rely on their Highnesses for our Civil ^iberties, as
well as the Dissenters may do for Liber^^^^ of Conscience. Much of what I have
to say is equally applicable to them both, yet because I know you have had an
Account of Her Royal Highness, better than I can give you, I shall for the most
part, speak only of the Prince.

My first Reason is the certainest of all Reasons, That it will be His
Highnesses interest to settle matters at Home, which only can be done by a
Legal Toleration or Comprehension in Matters of Religion; and by restoring the
Civil Liberties of the Nation, so much invaded of late. That this will be his
interest is Evident, if his Designs lie abroad, as it is certain they do.
Designs at home and abroad at the same time are so inconsistent, that we see
His Majesty, though raised above his Fears at home by His late Victory; and
invited abroad, by all that can excite his Appetite for Glory, cannot reconcile
them: The truth is, one that would undertake it, is in the same Condition with
Officers that beat their men, to make them fight, they have Enemies before and
behind.

But you may happily Object, that Princes do not always follow their true
Interests, of which it is not difficult in this Age to give several Fatal
Instances. I Answer, That it is to be presumed that Princes, as well as other
men, will follow their Interests till the contrary appear; and if they be of an
Age to have taken their Fold, and have till such an Age kept firm to their
Interests, the Presumption grows strong; but if their Inclinations, the Maxims
of their Families, the Impressions of their Education, and all their other
Circumstances do side with their Interest, and lead them the same way, it is
hardly Credible they should ever quit it. Now this being the present Case, we
have all the certainty that can be had in such matters.

The Prince of Orange has above these 15 years given so great proofs of his
Firmness and Resolution, as well as of his Capacity and Conduct in opposing the
Grand Ravisher (I may add the Betrayers too) of Liberty and Religion, that he
is deservedly (by all Impartial Men) owned to be the Head of the Protestant
Interest: A Headship, which no Princes but the Kings of England should have,
and none but they would be without it.

Now one may rationally conclude, That when the Prince shall join to his
present possession of this Headship, a more Natural Title, by being in a
greater capacity to Act, he will not degrade himself, nor lay aside Designs and
Interests which ought to be the Glory of England, as they are indeed the Glory
of his Family, acquired and derived to him by the Blood of his Ancestors, and
carried on and maintained by himself with so much Honor and Reputation.

I might add here, That the Prince is a Man of a sedate even T^mper, full of
Thoughts and Reflection: one that precipitates neither in Thinking, Speaking,
nor Acting; is cautious in Resolving and Promising, but firm to his
Resolutions, and exact in observing his Word: Inform your self, and you will find
this a part of his Character, and conclude from hence what may be presumed from
his Inclinations.

Now as to the Maxims of his Family, let us compare them a little where it may
be decently done.

The French King broke his Faith to his Protestant Subjects, upon this single
point of Vain Glory, that he might show the World he was greater than most of
his Predecessors, who though they had the same Inclinations, were not Potent
enough to pursue them effectually, as he has done, to the everlasting Infamy of
his Name and Reign. The maxims of the French Kings have been how to outvie each
other, in Robbing their Neighbors, and Oppressing their Subjects by
perfidiousness and cruelty. But those of the Family of Orange, on the contrary,
have been to Rescue Eu^ope from its Oppressors, and maintain the Protestant
Interest, by Virtue, Truth, Honor and Resolution; knowing that such methods
are as necessary to make Protestant Princes and States flourish, as Vice and
Oppression are to maintain Popish Government.

No Popish Prince in Europe can pretend to have kept his Word to his Protestant
Subjects, as the Princes of Orange have always done to their Popish Subjects at
Orange, and elsewhere; and the Papists have often broke their Word to that
Family, and have been and are its declared Enemies; and though the Princes two
great Grandfathers, Admiral Coligni, and Prince William, were Assassinated by
the Authority, and with the Approbation of that whole party, yet it cannot be
made appear, that ever the Princes of that Family failed in keeping their Word,
even to such Enemies, or used their own Popish Subjects the worse for it, in
making distinction between them and their other Subjects, or influenced the
States to use theirs so: I say the States, who allow their R. C. Subjects all
the privileges of their other Subjects, only they are kept by a Test from
having any share in the Government, which is truly a kindness done them,
considering that ill-natured Humor of destroying all those that differ from
them, which is apt to break out when that Religion is in power.

Now the Church of England may justly expect all sort of protection and
countenance from the Successors, when it is their turn to give it, they have a
legal right to it, and Impartial Dissenters must acknowledge, that of late they
have deserved it.

But as for the Protestant Dissenters, I think no honest man amongst them will
Apprehend, that their Highnesses who keep their Word to their popish Enemies,
will break it to Protestant Subjects, tho differing from the public
Establishment.

The next thing I am to make good, is, That his Highnesses Education must have
infused such principles as side with his Interest: There must be a Fatal
Infection in the English Crown, if matters miscarry in his Highnesses Hands,
his Veins are full of the best Protestant Blood in the World. The Reformation
in France grew up under the Conduct and Influence of Coligni. Prince William
founded the Government of the Unitnd Netherlands on the Basis of property and
liberty of Conscience. His Highness was bred and lives in that State which
subsists and flourishes by adhering steadily to the maxims of its Founder.

He himself, both in his public and private concerns, as well in the
Government of his Family, and of such principalities as belong to him, as in
that of the Army, and in the Dispensing of that great power which the States
have given him, has as great regard to Justice, Virtue and true Religion, as
may complete the character of a Prince, qualified to make those he Governs
happy.

It does not indeed appear, that their Highnesses have any share of that
devouring Zeal which has so long set the World on fire, and tempted thinking
men to have a notion of Religion it self, like that we have of the Ancient
Paradise, as if it had never been more than an intended Blessing, but all who
have the honor to know their Highnesses and their Inclinations in matters of
Religion, are fully satisfied they have a truly Christian Zeal, and as much as
is consistent with Knowledge and Charity.

As to his Highnesses circumstances, they will be such when his Stars make way
for him, as may convince our Scepticks, that certain persons, times and things,
are prepared for one another. I know not why we may not hope, that as his
predecessors broke the Yoke of the House of Austria from off the Neck of
Europe; The honor of breaking that of the House of Bourbon is reserved for
him. I am confident the Nation will heartily join with him in his Just
Resentments. Resentments which they have with so much Impatience longed to
find, and have missed with the greatest indignation in the Hearts of their
Monarchs.

His Highness has at present, a greater influence on the Councils of the most
part of the Princes of Christendom, than possibly any King of England ever had.
And this acquired by the weight of his own personal merit, which will no doubt
grow up to a glorious Authority when it is clothed with Sovereign power. May I
here mention (to lay the Jealousies of the most unreasonable of your Friends)
that his Highness will have only a borrowed Title, which we may suppose will
make him more cautious in having designs at home, and his wanting Children (to
our great misfortune) will make him less solicitous to have such Designs.

But after all, it must be acknowledged, that in matters of his Nature, the
premises may seem very strong, and yet the conclusion not follow. Humane
infirmities are great, Temptations to Arbitrariness are strong, and often both
the Spirit and Flesh weak. Such fatal mistakes have been made of late, that the
Successors themselves may justly pardon men's Jealousies. A Widow that has had a
bad Husband, will cry on her Wedding day, though she would be married with all
her heart. But I am confident you will grant to me, that in the case of the
present Successors, the possibilities are as remote, and the Jealousies as ill
grounded, and that there is as much to balance them, as ever there was to be
found in the prospect of any Successors to the Crown of England, Now may I add,
To conclude the Reasons that I have given you, why we may depend on their
Highnesses, that I know considerable men, who after great Enquiry and
Observation, do hope that their Highnesses (being every way so well qualified
for such an end) are predestined (if I may speak so) to make us happy in
putting an end to our Differences, and in fixing the Prerogative, and in
recovering the Glory of the Nation, which is so much sunk, and which now (when
we were big with Expectations) we find Sacrificed to unhappy partialities in
matters of Religion.

The last thing you desire to know, is, What Effects this Letter has had. But
it is not yet old enough for me to judge of that, I can better tell you what
Effects it ought to have. I find the moderate wise men of all Persuasions are
much pleased with it.

I know Roman Catholics that wish to God matters were settled on the model
given in it; they see the great difficulty of getting the Test Repealed: And
withal, they doubt whether it is their Interest that it should be Repealed or
not: They fear needy violent men might get into Employments who would put His
Majesty on doing things that might ruin them and their Posterity. They are
certainly in the right of it. It is good to provide for the worst. A Revolution
will come with a Witness; and its like it may come before the Prince of Wales
be of Age to manage an unruly Spirit, that I fear will accompany it. Humane
Nature can hardly digest what it is already necessitated to swallow, such
provocations even alters men's Judgmen^s. I find that men who otherways hate
severity, begin to be of Opinion that Queen Elizabeth's Lenity to the R. C's
proves now cruelty to the Protestants. The whole Body of Protestunts in the
Nation, was lately afraid of a Pipish Successor, and when they Reflected on
Queen Mary's Reign, thought we had already sufficient Experience of the Spirit
of that Religion; and took Self-preservation to be a good Argument, for
preventing a second Trial. But now a handful of Roman Catholics, perhaps
reflecting on Queen Elizabeth's Reign, are not it seems afraid of Protestant
Successors. But if some Protestants at that time from an Aversion to the
Remedy, hoped that the Disease was not so dangerous as it proves. I am
confident at present, all Protestants are agreed, that henceforward the Nation
must be saved, not by Faith. And therefore I would advise the R. C's to
consider that Protestants are still men, that late Experiences at home, and the
Cruelties of Popish Princes abroad, has given us a very terrible Idea of their
Religion. That Opportunity is precious and very slippery, and if they let the
present Occasion pass by, they can hardly ever hope that it will be possible
for them to recover it. That their Fathers and Grandfathers would have thought
themselves in Heaven to have had such an offer as this is, in any of the four
last Reigns, and therefore, that they had better be contented with Half a Lorf,
than no Bread. I mean it will be their Wisdom to embrace this Golden Occasion
of putting themselves on a level with all other Englishmen; at least as to
their private Capacity; and to disarm once for all, the Severity of those Laws;
which if ever they should come to be in good earnest Executed by a Protestant
Successor, will make England too hot for them: And therefore I should
particularly advise those among them, who have the Honor to approach His
Majesty, to use their Credit, to prevail with him to make this so necessary a
step in favor of the Nation; since the Successors have advanced two Thirds of
the way for effecting so good and pious a Work. Then, and not till then, the R.
C's may think themselves secured, and His Majesty may hope to be great by
Translating Fear and Anger from the Breasts of His Subjects, to the Hearts of
His Own and the Nations Enemies.

But if an Evil Genius (which seem^ to have hovered over us now a long time)
will have it othe^wise; it I were a R. C. I would meddle no more, but live
q^iet at home, and Caress my Protestant Neighbors; and in so doing, I should
think my self better secured against the Resentments of the Nation, than by all
the Forces, Forts, Leagues, Garranties, and even Men Children, that His Majesty
may hope to leave behind him.

As for the Protestant Dissenters, I am confident the Body of them will
continue to behave themselves like men, who to their great Honor have ever
preferred the Love of their Country and Religion to all Dangers and Favors
whatsoever, but there are both Weak and Interested men among all great numbers;
I would have them consider how much the state of things is altered, upon the
coming out of this Letter, for if hitherto they have been too forward in giving
Ear to Proposals on this mistake, that they could never have such a favorable
Juncture, for getting the Laws against them Repealed; I hope now they are
undeceived, since the Successors have pawned their Faith and Honor for it,
which I take to be a better security (as matters go at present) than the so
much talked of Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience would be, though got in a
legal way; for our Judges have declared, That Princes can dispense with the
Obligation of Laws, but they have not yet given their Opinion, that they can
dispense with the Honor of their Word; nor have their Highnesses any Confessor
to supply such an Omission.

However it is not to be charged on their Highnesses, if such a Magna Charta be
not at present given them, provided the Test be let alone; but I fear the Roman
Catholics Zeal will have all or nothing; and the Test too must be Repealed by
wheedling the Dissenters to join with willing Sheriffs in violating the Rights
of Elections, which are the Root of the Liberties of England; a prudent way of
recommending their Religion to all true Englishmen.

But if any of the Dissenters be so destitute of Sense and Honesty, as to
prefer a Magna Charta, so obtained Void and Null in it self, to their own
Honor and ^onscience, to the Love and Liberties of their Country, to the
present Kindness of all good Men, and their Countenance at another time, and
above all, to the Favor and Word of the Successors, who have now so generously
declared themselves for them; We may pronounce, that they are men abandoned to
a Reprobate sense, who will justly deserve Infamy and the Hatred of the Nation
at present, and its Resentments hereaf^e^ Is it po^sible, that any D^ssenter,
who either deserves or loves the Reputation of an Honest Man, can be prevail^d
with by any pretenses of Insinuations how plausible soever, to make so Odious
and pernicious a bargain, as that of ba^ing a precarious pretended Liberty of
Conscience, at the price of the Civil Liberties of their Country, and at the
price of removing that which under God is the most effectual Bar to keep us
from the Dominion of a Religion, that would as soon as it could, force us to
abandon our own, or reduce us to the Miserable Condition of those of our
Neighbors, who are glad to forsake all they have in the World, that they may
have their Souls and Lives for a prey.

As for the Church of England, their Clergy have of late opposed themselves to
Popery, with so much Learning, Vigor, Danger and Success, that I think all
honest Dissenters will lay down their Resentments against them, and look on
that Church, as the present Bulwark and Honor of the Protestant Religion. I
wish those high men among them, who have so long appropriated to themselves,
the name and Authority of the Church of England, and have been made Instruments
to bring about Designs, of which their present Behavior convinces me, they
were ignorant, as I suppose many of the Dissenters are, whose turn it is now to
be the Tools.

I say, I wish such men would consider, to what a pass they have brought
Matters by their Violences, or rath^r the Violences of these whose Property
they were, and at length be wise; They cannot but be sensible of the Advantages
they receive by this Letter. I suppose they apprehend (I am sure they ought to
do it) that the Ruin of their Church is resolved on: But if the Dissenters
upon this Letter withdraw themselves, the R. C's have neit^er Hearts to keep
firm to to such a Resolution, nor Hands to Execute it.

Since therefore, They themselves, have unhappily brought their Church into
such Precepies by provoking the Dissenters, it is in a particular manner their
Duty, as well as their Interest, to endeavor to soften them, by assisting the
Letter, and promoting the Design of it.

But if the old leaven still remain, and they continue to argue as formerly, if
the Surplice be parted with, the Church of England is lost; if the Penal Laws
be repealed, the Test will follow: and comfort themselves with this most
Christian reflection, that the R. C. will not accept of what is offered them;
such men deserve all the misery that is preparing for them, and will perish
without Pity, and give thinking Men occasion to remember the Proverb, Beat a
Fool (or a Zealot) in a Mortar, yet his Foolishness will not depart from him.
But the Dissenters ought not to be much concerned at this, they have their own
Bigots, and the Church of England theirs; there will be Tools whilst there are
Workmen.

This is a time for Wisdom to be justified of her Children, when honest men
ought to leave off minding the lesser Interests of this or that particular
Church, and join in securing the common Interest of the Protestant Religion.
And to conclude, I would particularly beg of the Dissenters to make use of
their best Judgment on this so critical an occasion, which they will do in my
opinion, in keeping close to the contents of this Letter, by endeavoring to
obtain in a fair and legal way such a Liberty to all Persuasions, as is the
Natural Right of Freemen, and as our Protestant Successors declare themselves
willing to join in; and if those who have an equal, nay a greater Interest than
themselves, will not agree to such a Liberty, because they will be Masters or
nothing; the Dissenters will have the comfort of having discharged their own
Consciences, as prudent Men and good Chistians ought to do, and may safely
trust God with the Event.

Sir, I thought I had made an end, but looking your Letter over again, I find I
have forgot to an^wer a reason or two you give, why you doubt whether the
Letter be truly M. Fagels: You are informed (you say) that such and such Great
Men doubted of it; but some might as well pretend to doubt of the Truth of that
Letter, (tho they knew it to be true) as believe Her Majesty to be with Child,
almost before she knew it Her self; and that she was quick, when the Embryo, as
Anatomists say, is not much above an Inch long; I don't think that Popish
Successors, like certain weeds, grow faster than others. The Persons you name
may Trim, and presume on their Merit, least they might be thought capable of
Resentment. A dangerous Reflection. I say their Merit; you have seen a long
relation of the great services some (when they were in power) did their
Highnesses; it is bound up with a relation of the true causes of their
sufferings for their (or rather their Highnesses) Religion. You know even how
one of them the last Summer paid them his reverence with all the Respect and
Humility of a due distance, and with the same caution with which the Invincible
Monarch sights out of Cannon shot. But Sir though the character of a Trimmer be
ordinarily the character of a Prudent Man, there are times and seasons when it
is not the Character of an Honest Man.

I acknowledge that since their Highnesses Marriage, nothing has happened so much
for the good of the Protestant Interest as this Letter of M. Fagels, and if I
had been either the Writer or Adviser of it, I should be very proud of it, and
think the Nation much in my debt. But Sir that was not a very good reason to
make you doubt of it; for a good cause will have its time, tho not so often as
a bad one, which has ordinarily the Majority on its side.

I am confident at present we have all the reason in the world to expect it,
for my own part, though I am neither young nor strong, I hope to live to see a
day of Jubilee in England for all that deserve it; when honest men shall have
the same pleasure in thinking on these times, that a Woman happily delivered
has in reflecting on the pain and danger she was in. But Knaves shall remember
them, as I am told the damned to their Sins, Cursing both them and themselves.

Sir I am Yours.
January 12. 1688.

