THE LOVE of GOD, IS TO Gather the Seasons of the Earth; AND Their Multitudes
into PEACE.
In Opening the Scriptures, and the Mysteries of the Revelations to them, and
their Multitudes that they may come to Live in Obedience to the Gospel Power;
doing the Work of God, through the Son of Peace, which Son of Peace is Christ
the Lord.
THE Angel of Power, wh^^ I ^^ve with my Spirit, (Christ the ^^^d.) Dictates in
me; t^^^ is a necessity ^or ^ second Coming in Revel^^^^^, or the W^rld will be
Lost, in Re^ellion, ^here is a necessity, for a further Revelation of the
G^spel, which is Peace, in the Son of Peace; or the Dragon will yet further,
keep up his Reign: (...) a furthe^ ^^st^ucti^n in wars, and slaughters, to the
further confusion of Nations, and their Multitudes which fall, and are in the
Disobedience to the Gospel, which is Peac^, and are seen in the fall and false
Worship, ^^th to God and M^n; so that the examples of the Christian Faith,
which came for Peace, are useless to the waring World, both to the name
Christian, which ought to be Examples, till the Faith is Established; and by
such pra^^^ces, of the name Christians, the Wo^ld is kept in Darkness, to that
the name Turks, nor the name Heathen, are not ga^^ered home to the Faith of
Christian; and Peace of the Son of Peace; for wh^^h them, called ^^^stions, and
which makes a Profession if the Faith of of a Christian, must give an Account
off, (to the Powers above) which pretend to be Leaders and Teachers of the
People belo^, for Man is not to be Worshipped with Men's Lives under the Gospel,
but to love as Brethren, both Rulers and People, in their several degrees, and
Nations to be in unity with the Son of Peace, bringing their greatness, into
his suffering, for Peace and Love; and when the Nations are gathered into the
Faith, which gives Power, in the Son of Peace, and in the Faith of Jesus, which
came an Example of Peace; they will be peaceable, an^ the Christ in Faith will
be Established: But John in the Divine Nature saw, they Which came not to be
followers of the Lamb, fell with the Dragon: So this shows, there is but a
true Church or a False; of every Nation which is to follow the Lamb, or Worship
the Dragon, and to be a follower of the Lamb, ^eads to Worship him, that made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea and the Fountains of Water, and to give Glory to him.

And as there is one Glory in the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and
another Glory of the Stars: So the Glory of the Father, through the Lamb and
his followers, is powerful over the Dragon Spirit, and his followers;
notwithstanding it may yet be, through great Suffering; (for the Establishing
the Gospel universally,) the Lamb and his Followers are Redeemed from the
Earth, and are led in Peace and Truth, to Glorify him, that made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of of Water; and the Dragon leads his
Followers in Error, and slaughter, till their measure is full, to their own
Destruction, and are swallowed up in the Earth, they contend for; and God who
made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and the Fountains of Water, is Glorified in
their Destruction; and the Word of God stands for ever to the Faithful and
Obedient, that work the Work of God, In Peace to their Salvation; and the Lambs
Spirit cannot touch with the Dragon's Spirit, nor the Dragon's Spirit
overpower ^he Lambs Spirit, because God's Power in the Lamb, and his Followers
(Redeemed from the Earth,) gained the Victory over the Dragons Spirit, and the
Dragons Power and Spirit; to be in Subjection for ever, to Truth, the Word of
God; and when the Dragon is cast into the Earth, the record is; he joined with
the Beast rising up out of the Sea, and he persecuted the Church, called the
Woman, and in his Wrath, went to make war with the Remnant of the Seed, which
keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and to be
in Christ, brings Salvation; Rev. 12. c. 17 v. And the Church in Christ, be
first Born, has ever been powerful, with the Father, is the Witnesses before
the Law, and in the time of the Law, and in the Gospel bear Testimony. Heb. 12.
c. 23.28 v. c. 13.14 v. c. 11. 10 v. And Christ was with the Church, in the
Wilderness, and Sea; leading up the Flock, in Days of Old, and has appeared in
Man, for the uniting the Church, in the Peace of the Gospel, keeping the
Commandments of God, which God and Power, is from everlasting, to everlasting,
without beginning of Days, or end of Time, And to be of the Church, of the first
Born, is to be in Christ, and to be in Christ, is to be a Christian, and to be
a Christian, is to suffer Persecution, till the Church of Christ is Established
in Peace upon Earth, that both Rulers and People may Live, in Christ peaceable
Kingdom, for which Establishment, the Power of God in Man, has descended, and
is made manifest, that Nations should be Redeemed into Peace and Obedience,
following the Example of the Son of Peace, and the Church in Christ, are the
Worshippers in Spirit and Truth, of every Nation, and the D^sobedient, to the
Spirit of Christ, to gain the Earth, (which they must leave,) they follow the
Dragon, and Worship him with their Lives and Substance: As* John in the
Revelations, gives the Account. Rev. 13. c. 4 v. But them which fear God, and
work Righteousness, are excepted of every Nation, u^ited to him in the Peace of
the Son of Peace; as says Pe^er, of a Truth, I perceive, that God is no
Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him. Acts. 10. c 34.35 v. And where the fear of
God is in Truth, such their labor and travel is to Obey the S^n of Peace, and
where Obedience is to God, and the Lambs Peace, the Dragons nature is kept
down, and the Power of God will cast his power down, through Nations, which
follow the Example, and Obedience of the Son, which came to Manifest the way of
Peace and Truth, and such labor in the Obedience, and Heavenly War, as Michael
and his Angels did, against the Dragon and his Angels, and it was truth, which
overcame the Dragon in Heaven, and not Swords; and it is Truth, in the
Christian Faith, which must overcome the Dragon upon Earth, and not Swords. And
the Power of G^d was with his Truth, and cast the Old Serpent called the Devil,
and Satan with his Angels, from Heaven. And it is the Power of God which must
cast the Dragon, and Old Serpent out of Men's earth here and not Swords. And as
Nations keep to Truth, so to stand or fall to their own Master, notwithstanding
the Dragon had a Power with his Angels, yet the Power of God which is with his
Truth, is above the Powers of Darkness, and his Angels, and they were cast into
the Earth, and the Christians are to sit in the Heavenly place, with Christ
their Holy Head, which Power Descended and appeared in Jesus, to save Men's
Lives, and not to destroy Men's Lives, and that all should be gathered to God
both Jew and Gentile, and that all should come into the Spirit and Obedience of
the Son of Peace which bid Peter, put up thy Sword again into his Place, for
all they that take the Sword shall Perish with ^he Sword. Mat. 26 c. (...) v
And Genesis 9 c. 6, v. and Rev. 13 c. 10. v. And the Ministration of the Gospel,
shows Peace, to them in Christ, and that such as lo^^ their Christian liberty
of Peace, in the Glorious Liberty of ^^e Son of God, they enter Satan's Bondage
and Wars, and are not Redeemed from the Earth, they contend for, and fall with
their contending, to the destroying their Multitudes, and Liberties of Peace,
through the Son of Peace, sent an Example of Peace; and under the dispensation
of the Gospel, in the Gospel, in the Christian Faith, there is no Examples of
King-makers, or for Christians in the Faith, to pull down Kings, (for) when
Jesus perceived they would come and take him by force, to make him a King, he
departed again, into a Mountain alone. John. 6. c. 15 v. And he says to
Pilate, my Kingdom is not of this World, if my Kingdom were of this World, then
would my Servants Fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is
my Kingdom not from hence. John 18. c. 36. v But his Kingdom was, to bear
Witness to the Truth, for which cause Jesus declares, that he was Born to this
end, and caus^^ to bear Witness to the Truth, which Truth Pilate knew not, and
says what is Truth? but Truth reached s^ fa^ to Pilate, that he said to the
Jews, I find no fault a^ all in him: The Examples of the Gospel in Christ kep^
right on their way, and did not turn, to the righ^ hand, of to the left for
grandeur, but goodness, (...) they went through many Tribulations and
Suffering^ and with the Fathers and Prophets in the Faith, d^clared. Here have
we no continuing City, but we se^ one to come; Heb. 13 c.. 14 v. 11 c. 10 v. a
City, which has Foundation, whose Builder, and maker is God. And the
Christians now are to keep right on their way, to seek this City, which has
Foundation in the Truth, till they have made their Peace with God, in the
Spirit of the Son, that a seed in the universal Love, may be planted in the
Heavenly Cannaan, and Spiritual Jerusalem; and so to go on, to the perfecting
their Obedience, in the Faith of a Christian, and to show forth their
Obedience, whilst hear, for the gathering of more into the Peace of the Son of
Peace, notwithst nding it may be through great Sufferings, and Tribulations for
the sake of Peace and Truth, and that Christ's Kingdom of Peace, may be
Established in every Nation, that the other Sheep, which are not come, to be of
his Spiritual Fold, may be gathered to the Kingdom of Peace, and to Worship God
in Spirit and Truth, for such the Father seeks to Worship him, and these
Worshipers in the Power of Truth; the one Church in Christ is the way to the
Father, and the Churches of every Nation established by the Law, of Men, will
come to Nothing. It is the Church established by Grace, that will stand, of
every Nation; and the Dragons Power brought down by the Power of Truth. The
Dragon and Serpent, which is Lucifer, was once called the Son of the Morning,
and he was in Heaven as an Ang^l of Light, yet could not stand in a Presumtious
Spirit, but the Truth cast him and his Angels down, notwithstanding he was so
Powerful; amongst the Stars, Isa. 14 c. 12 v. His all drew the Third part of
the Stars of Heaven and did cast them to the Earth, in his fall, and Truth the
one Church, will yet disappoint him, and his Angels, and Stars upon Earth; let
the Profection be never so High, and the Name of Church never so great, ye^ God
will stand by his Truth, and will bring down every false Worshipper,
notwithstanding, Truth may and ye must suffer, till the peaceable Kingdom of
Christ is Established, and such as keep to the Spirit of Truth, will gain the
Victory with the Lamb, and they which abuse in Christ, the Light and Lif^, the
Truth and the way, are in the one Church, and they in the Light, keep out of
the Dragons ^^the, as they keep to Christ, the one Church in the Spirit of
Truth, which Truth is Revealed in the Lamb, and his Followers, and unites, in
the o^^ holy Building, with the Bride, the Lambs Wife, and with the Tribes, of
the Children of Israel, and the Apostles of the Lamb; so that the True Church
is signified by the Lamb, and his followers in Peace, from the false
Worshippers, the Dragon, and his followers, in Wars joined to Mystery Babylon,
which is recorded, sits upon many waters, upon a Scarlet Colored Beast, and
Mystery Babylon, Is full of Names of Blasphemy, and the Beast she sits upon,
having seven Heads, and ten Horns, which Horns, the Angel interprets to John
be Kings. Rev. 17 c. 12 v. And they Worshipped the Dragon, which gave Power to
the Beast, (with seven Heads, and ten Horns,) saying, who is like unto the
Beast, who is able to make War with him. Rev. 13 c. 4. v. 10. c. 13 v. and
there was given to the Beast, a mouth spaeking great things and Blasphemies.
And as the Waters signifies, Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues;
17 c. 15 v. So Babylon signifies, the false Church, guided by the false Spirit;
of every People, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, and to be brought
down, and sit in the Dust, and to have no Throne, as the Prophet Isaiah saw,
and sit silent, for as says the Prophet, speaking of the false Church, thou
shall no more be called, the Lady of Kingdoms, 47 c. 1. 5 v. Jer. 50 c. 1 v.
51. c 7 v. Rev. 18 c. 2 v. 14 c. 8 v. And to be guided by the false Spirit in
Worship, is called Whoredoms, as the Old and and New Testaments, and the
Revelations of the Angel of Jesus Christ, to John signifies, and John when in
the Spirit, saw Mystery of Babylon the great, her Name written (for
Destruction) the Mother, of Harlots, and abominations of the Earth, and I saw
the Woman Drunker, (says John,) with the Blood of Saints, and with the Blood
of the Martyrs, of Jesus. So it is plain, Babylon is a Mixture of Confusion (in
Worship) a people led by the false Spirit of every Nation, apart, which come
not to the Obedience and Peace in the Gospel, which the Father sent the Son of
Peace with, that the Dragon and his Power, and Worshippers might be brought
down, to have no further Place in the Heavenly Part, nor to draw the Stars of
Heaven to the Earth with his Tail, for the Dragon assuming a Power, in Heaven,
which did not belong to him, is cast d^wn and Men which the Dragon works in,
and they in a High Profession, in Religion, such assume a Power which does not
belong to the Christian Faith, to Persecute or to j^in in War, to kill or
destroy, and as the Dragon gained a Power over the Angels, and the Stars of
Heaven, as appearing as an Angel of Light; so Men in whom the Drag n works, and
they appear in a High Profession, in Religion, and perform some Religious
Dutys, it is such which draw Angelical Spirits to them which are off of their
Watch, and such Stars with their tail, (a Power which they have begotten in the
People through their great appearance and Bright^ess of appearance) to follow
them to their own Destruction, at the Dragon did the Angels and Stars of
Heaven; and did cast them to the Earth. So man in a degenerated State; is a
Tail to the Dragon, to draw degenerated Spirits to them, men which have been
Visited with an Angelical Spirit, and have Shined as Stars, but going from
their first love and Visitation, lead the People back again to their great
loss, and such can join with the Dragon, and War, and become as Lions and
Dragons, to the People of God; as Man in a degenerated State, is called a Lion
and Dragon, as Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and the King of
Assyria is recorded Jer. 50. c 17 v. 51 c. 37. v For in the 70 Years Captivity
of Israel, and Judah in Babylon, they were cruel to Israel and Judah; and the
People of God, owning the True God; were Obedient to the Word, which the
Prophet had spoken, and Worshipped the True God, which neither the King of
Assyria, nor Nebuchadnezzar did they were Worshippers of Gods, and formed Gods
to themselves, and Nebuchadnezzar was destroyed in the House of his God, by his
Sons, which were Idolaters, as himself was, and Nebuchadnezzar, King of
Babylon, is called the Hammer of the whole Earth; (but not a Hammer, in the
Work of Salvation, either for himself, or Multitudes,) as executing the
judgments of the Lord, and after to be cut asunder, and broken, and Babylon to
become a Desolation, among the Nations, that was once so great- Jer. 50 c.
23.31.15 v. Shout against her, round about, she has given her hand, her
Foundations are fallen, her Walls are thrown down, for it is the Vengeance upon
her, as she has done, do unto her. So Babylon was to be Destroyed, whose King
is called the Hammer of the whole Earth; when he had done his office upon the
proud, and in executing the Lord's Wrath, upon the Rebellious, to which he was
sent, then others was to be raised up against him, a mighty Nation, and Babylon
lamented: O thou that dwells upon many waters, abundant in Treasures, thine
end is come, and the measure of thy Covetousness. Jer. 51 c. 13 v. So one
Idolater, was raised to destroy another, in their Pride, when their measure of
Iniquity was full; as the Prophet Isaiah saw, 14 c. 5.6 v. and the Prophet
Ezekiel gives the account of God's Judgments upon the Prince of Tyrus, that had
employed the Wisdom given him, to gain Riche^, as 27 c. shows, and 28 c.
Tyrus is said to be Wiser then Daniel, there is no secret, that they can hide
from thee, 3.4. v. With thy Wisdom, and with thine Understanding, thou have
gotten thee Riches, Gold and Silver into thy Treasures, by thy great Wisdom,
and by thy Trafficks, thy Heart is lifted up, because of thy Riches. 12 v. take
up a lamentation upon the King of Tyrus, and say unto him, thus says the Lord
God; thou sealed up the sum full of Wisdom, and perfect in Beauty, 13 v. Thou
have been in Eden, the Garden of God, every precious Stone, was thy Covering,
14 v. thou art the Anointed Chureb that covers. I have set th^ese, thou wast
upon the Holy Mountain of God, thou have walked up and down, in the midst of
the Stones of Fire; thou wast perfect in thy ways, from the Day that thou wast
Created, t^ll Iniquity was found in thee, and 16 v. by the Multitude of thy
Merchandiz^, they fi^^ed the midst of thee, with Violence, and thou have
sinned; therefore, I will cast thee as profane, out of the Mountain of God, and
I will destroy thee: O Covering Cherub, from the midst of the Stones of fire,
thine Heart was lifted up, because of thy Beauty, thou have corrupted thy
Wisdom, by reason of thy brightness; I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay
thee before Kings, that they may behold thee, thou have defiled thy
sanctuaries, by the Multitudes of thine Iniquities, by the Iniquity of thy
Traffic; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee; and I
will bring thee to ashes, upon the Earth, in the sight of all them, that behold
thee, thou shall be a Terror, and never shall thou be any more. So it is plain
the Wisdom, and greatness, which God had given this Prince, he turned it into
Covetousness and Pride, and lost the Scepter of his Power, and cast out as
profane, of the Mountain of God, as not making a right use, of the Wisdom and
Beauty, God had given him, for himself, and Multitude, and this is agreeable to
the Parable of the unjust Steward; the Children of this World, are in their
Generation, Wiser then the Children of Light. Luke 16 c, 8 v. That is to gain
Riches and greatness in this World, and notwithstanding, it is said to the King
of Tyrus, behold thou art Wiser then Daniel, and that no Secret, that they can
hide from thee, yet Daniel's Obedience, out did Tyrus's Wisdom, and the Angel
of Power was great with Daniel, and the Angel tells Daniel, he is greatly
beloved of God, which is the best Riches, if there should be no Portion in the
Earth, but great and mighty Men were raised, and not being Obedient to the Laws
of God, keeping the Commandments, and the Day of his Rest, for their
Disobedience they were Raised, under the Law to destroy one another; because of
their Pride and false Worship, as the Prophet shows, Eze. 30 C. 6 v. and c.
31 v. ^ 32. and 12 18 v. and 35 c. 2.10 v.

But when the Spring of the Gospel appeared, the Examples of the Christian
Faith, United to the Spirit of God, and they left all to f^llow the Lord, and
they followed a peace^ble Savior, and a healing Physician, a feeder of
multitudes, who again in the Spirit of Prophecy (which is the Testimony of
Jesus, he discovered the works of darkness, and in the fear of the Lord, he
declared the Word of the Lord, and did the work of the Lord and was Obedient to
the Death of the Cross, and when Jesus ascended into Heaven, his time upon
Earth being short, the Angel of Jesus Christ, is sent to declare the Judgments
of God against Sin, and false Worship Rev, 9. C. 20.21 v. And that the works of
the Dragon, may be brought down, and made manifest, that the Lamb of Peace, may
gain the Victory over the Earth, in the Spirit of Peace, and Truth take place,
over the Dragons Spirit of Destruction and War, and before the Spring of the
Gospel, the whole World was in War, but at the Birth of Jesus, the Angel of the
Lord and a Multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising God, Proclaiming Peace,
saying, Glory to God in the, Highest, and on Earth Peace good will toward Men.
Luke 2 C. 13 14 v. and Jesus was raised an Example of the Christian Faith, and
the Lord sent forth a Great manifestation, of Peace through him, that it should
be obeyed, and yet the whole World is in War, after so great a manifestation of
Peace; and 1711 Year since, and a Light is now again sent forth to the Caesar's
of the Earth, and the Revelations Opened, as they never before this Day were to
any, and that the C^sars may come to see the Christian fa^^h, and that C^sars
Sword, should Cease; and according to the Example of the Christian Faith, to
suffer in outward things, for the Peace and Salvation, that is in the Gospel,
which Examples of Faithfulness, was for the Caesar's of the Earth, that they
might be Examples, to their multitudes, that the Peace of the Gospel, might
live in the Caesar's of the Earth, and Caesar's Sword to Cease, that Salvation
upon Ob^dience might come to Caesar, and their multitudes, in the place of the
Gospel, and that the Caesar's of the Earth should be Ex^mples to their
multitudes, as Cords to draw to Peace and Love, as Jesus was an Example to his
Diciples, and drew the multitude after him, and with Compassion feed them, with
a great Miracle the Loves and fishes, as showing the Power of God which is in
the Faith to the Faithful, and they which believed were feed, and healed: and
the Record is, there was a Temptation put upon that prepared Body: whether it
man lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar or not, now it must be considered, who it
was asked him, Tempting him the message of our Lord, being Peace to the World,
they were under the Law, and in the Destructive Nature, they Crucified him, and
although they had a call to the Christian Faith, yet they were not come to be
Christians in the Faith, and obedience of the Gospel, so that C^sar and his
Destructive Sword, and they were alike, and the Caesar's not come from under the
Law, but when the Caesar's of the Earth comes to be Christians, laying down the
Destructive Sword, in the peace of the Gospel, then the Image of Christ will
appear in them, and the Tribute demanded by them, and paid by the Multitude to
do good, and the Destructive Sword to cease, for the Appearance of our Lord, is
for Peace and Truth, and to save Men's Lives, and not to destroy them, paying a
Tribute as a Traveller through Countries, as in many places it is so, to pay
something for going over a Bridge, or through a Gate, after such an Hour, or
for the Mnuring of Countries, so that his paying such a Tribute then, and in
the time of Peace, is no example of upholding Caesar's Sword now, for it was a
time of Peace, when Jesus Ministered the word of God, so that paying such a
Tribute then or now, is no Example to the Christians in the Faith, and peace of
the Gospel, to uphold Caesar's Sword now, because the Life of that prepared
Body, was laid down, that Caesar should come to be a Christian, and the People
gathered into peace, and they which are Caesar's Friends must suffer, for the
word of their Testimonies, till Caesar sees the Christian Faith, and peace and
power of the Gospel, and in Spirit and Truth come to Christ, to Reign with him,
by Sufferings, first for the Peace, which is in the Gospel, which leads to the
Kingdom of Christ in Peace, and as to Tribute to Caesar, true Tribute is to be
paid to Caesar in Obedience, and for the uniting of the Christian Faith, and
Tranqu^lity of their People and Nations, that has not a sting, and a point of
a Sword at the End, such a Tribute was not paid by the Christians, under the
Gospel, but as a passenger in the Work of God, I say, that Tribute (o^ Custom)
Jesus paid for himself, and Peter as an Example of the Christian Faith, in
Necessary things, and Peace according to the Gospel, which is Peace and Good
Will toward Men, according to the Voice of the Angel of the Lord, Lu. 2. and 9
v. and 13 and 14 v. and the Heavenly Host, with the Angel, at the Birth of
Jesus, which Voice is to Caesar, as to their multitudes, for till the
Proclamation reaches into Caesar's Heart, the multitude is not safe, nor the
disciplined Christians as to the outward Life, if they follow the Example of
Jesus, and his Disciples, yet must be Obedient to the great Lord of the whole
Earth, for the sake of the other Sheep: not yet gathered into the peace of the
Gospel and Example of Jesus, who as the prophet gives the Account, and foresaw,
he had done no Violence, neither was any Deceit in his Mouth, yet was the
stroke laid upon him, Isaiah 53. and 9 v. and let it be considered by the
Caesar's of the whole Earth now, what Pharaoh Nebuchadnezzar, and Tyrus, and
Syrus, and Mount Sir, and Gog and Magog, were made great and Wise, for it was
to worship the True and Living God, and to do no Iniquity, and to keep the
Commands of God, but they forsook the Lord and his Commandments, (which to keep
brings forth Peace) and Iniquity and Pride was found in them, and this proved
their own Destruction one after another, when their measure was full, and
notwithstanding Nebuchadnezzar is called a King of Kings and the hammer of the
whole Earth, and the Servant of God, as executing the Judgments of the Lord, in
bringing down mighty Nations, Idolatrous Kings, I say which mighty Nations,
when their measure of Iniquity was full, after Isreal's 70 Years Captivity, was
raised up against him, to bring him down for his Evils, as he had brought down
others, in false Worship, so his being the hammer of the whole Earth, and
called a King of Kings, and a Servant of God, I say his Service was to destroy,
and not in the Work of Salvation, neither for himself nor his Multitude, and
Man in the destroying Nature is called a Dragon, which must be brought down,
before they can come to Peace, Ez. 29.3 v. Ps. 74 13.14. v. Is. 27.1 v. 51 c.
9. v. and when the Angel begins his Revelations to the Seven Churches in Asia,
he showed every one of the Churches, wherein they were Justified, and wherein
they acted against the Truth, and the Angel of Revelation shows the Angel of
the Church in Pergamos, where Satan's Seat amongst them is, seated they were
such as had held fast the Name of God, when the Faithful Martyr was slain
amongst you, says the Ang^l in the Word of the Lord, even in those days,
wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was Slain among you, where Satan
dwells, so that notwithstanding their high Profession, they held fast the
Name of God, yet Satan's Seat, was amongst them, and the Faithful Martyr Slain,
where Saten dwells, and yet the whole Church was not charged with this, but
some amongst you, where Satan dwells, and Satan Works most in them Powers,
which are degenerated from the Truth, and are in the Power, and Seat to Work
with him, in his Limited Power, for Satan had no Power nor Seat with the Lamb,
and his followers, nor with the great multitude, which no Man could Number, of
all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, which had the Voice, of
Salvation,; and came out of great Tribulations, Chap. 7 v. 9 14. And the Angel
of Revelation Charges the Angel of the Church of Pergamos, with a few things
(more) because thou have there them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who
taught Balack to cast a stumbling Block, before the Children of Israel, in
false Worship, to eat things Sacrificed, to Idols, and to Commit Fornication.
Number. 25 c. and Rev. 2 c. 13.14 v. And after this the Revelation gives the
account, that Satan is cast Down from Heaven, with his Angels and Stars. c. 12.
v. 3.4.9. Yet the false Spirit, which he had begotten, worshipped him upon
Earth, as c. 13 4. v, shows, and as the Lords care is over his Church, c. 14
v. 6. So the Angel having the everlastnig Gospel to Preach, to them that dwell
on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People, (has a
warning) saying with a loud voice, fear God and give Glory to Him, for the hour
of his Judgments is come, and Worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the
Sea, and the Fountains of Water, and there followed another Angel, saying,
Babylon is fallen, is fallen that great City, (and showing the cause for why
she fell) because she made all Nations Drink of the Wine ^f the Wrath of her
Fornication, v. 9. (and the Lords care is yet great over his Church, in sending
his Warning Angels, the Third Angel followed them, saying with a loud Voice, if
any Man Worship the beast and his Image and Receive his mark, in his forehead,
or in his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is
poured out, without Mixture, into the Cup, of his Indignation, and he shall be
Tormented, with fire and Brimstone, in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in
the Presence of the Lamb. (And as it is said Holy Angel^, these shows, the
Holy Angels, from degenerat^d Spirits, and fallen Angels, which once appeared
in an Angelical State in Heaven; but fell with the Dragon) and are become
Angels of Wrath. So in the Regeneration, and true Worship of God; there must be
no mixture, to Worship the beast nor his Image, nor receive their Marks, nor
is there any true Judgment where Satan's Seat is; but to be reproved, and as
Antipas was Slain, where Satan dwells, so John gives the account, the accuser
of our Brethern, is cast down, which accused them, before our God, Day and
Night, and here his Power is limited, to have no more place in Heaven. 12 c.
8.11 v, (the Brethren) they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of their Testimony, and they loved not their Lives, unto the Death, but in
faithfullness, the Life which is in God, is preserved for ever, and yet the
Angels are sent forth to call to the People of God, to come out of Babylon, and
not to fall, with her. 18 c. The Angel having great Power, and the Earth, was
lighted with his Glory, and he cried mightily, with a strong Voice, (saying,)
Babylon the great, is fallen, is fallen, and is become the Habitation of
Devils; (and showing the False Church, and Spirit of every Nation, and Church
apart,) and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful Bird, and 3 v. For all Nations have drank, of the Wine of the Wrath of
her Fornications, and the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication with
her, and the Merchants of the Earth are Waxed Rich, through the abundance of
her Delicacies; and this Babylon is yet to be Destroyed, a part of every Nation
and Church, and People joined together, from Generation to Generation, till the
Gospel take place, and the Powers of the Earth follow the Example of Jesus, and
seek the Peace of the Gospel, by Living in Obedience to it, and to Preach the
Gospel from Nation to Nation, by the practiseing part, for the Babylon, of
every Generation, it is Disobedience and Whoredoms, must be brought down, and
rewarded in Judgment, in every dispensation, and People; and the Kings of the
Earth, who have committed Fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall
bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her Burnings.
Eze. 27 c. 27.35 v. Rev. 18 c. 9.24 v. In her was found, the Blood of the
Prophets and of Saints, and if all that were Slain upon the Earth 35 v. And the
Riches of them which belonged to, and joined with Babylon is Named, and she
fell with her Riches, Gold and Silver and precious Stones and Pe^rls, and fine
Linen, and Purple and Silk, and Scarlet, and all Thin Wood, and all manner of
Vessels of Ivory, and all manner of Vessels, of most precious Wood, and of
Brass and Iron, and Marble, and Cinnamon, and Odours, and Wine and Oil, and
fine Flour and Wheat, and Beasts and Sheep, and Horses, and Chariots, and
Slaves and Souls of Men; (and let it be considered, the Slaugter of Men in the
Babylon, of this Generation of the World, how great it is:) 14 v. The Fruit
that thy Soul lusted after, are departed from thee, and all things which were
dainty and good, are departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at
all* and 19 c. And after these things, (says John.) I heard a great Voice of
much People, in Heaven saying: Alleluja, Salvation and Glory, and Honor, and
Power, unto the Lord our God; for true and Righteous are his Judgments, for he
has Judged the great whore, which did currupt the Earth, with her fornication,
and has avenged the Blood of his Servants, as her hand, and the Elders
Worshipped God, that sat upon the Throne, saying Amen, Alleluja, and a great
Voice came out of the Throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his Servants, and
ye thac fear him, both small and great. And when Babylon, the false Spirit, and
Church of every Nation joined together, John saw and the Angel gives the
account, (the Angel having great power, and the Earth was Lighted with his
Glory) Babylon was brought down, for all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the
Wrath of her Fornication, and partaking of her Sins, they were to partake of
her Plagues, and the False Church is represented, under the Name of Babylon,
and the Woman, and great City which Reigns over the Kings of the Earth, 17 c
18 v. 9 c. 20 v. Those under the Torments, were such as Worshipped Devils. 13
c. 4 v. John giving an account of them which Worshipped the Dragon, and beast;
8 v. all that dwell upon the Earth, shall Worship him, whose names are not
Written in the Book of Life, of the Lamb Slain, from the Foundation of the
World; and John calls the False Church, with its bottomless Evils, for there is
no place to set their Foot upon, when the Lord enters into Judgment, for great
Abominations committed; John calls the False Church, (as aforementioned,) the
Beast was taken, and with him, the False Prophet, that wrought Miracles before
him, with which he deceived them, that had received the Mark of the Beast, and
them that Worshipped his Image, and John saw the Kings of the Earth, and their
Armies gather together, to made War against him, that sat upon the House, (who
was that) his Name is called, Faithful and True, which will bring down Babylons
false Powers, of every Nation Joined together, out of the L^mb of Peace. c. 19.
and Universal Love, and the Angel standing in the Sun, he cried with a ^oud
Voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven; come and
gather your selves together, c. 19 v. 18. (And the Slaughter was great) that ye
may eat the flesh of Kings and the Flesh of Captains, and the Flesh of Mighty
Men, and the Flesh of Horses, and them that set on them, and the Flesh of all
Men, both free and bound both small and great: So here is a part which were as
dung, upon the Earth, and for the fowls to feed on (as in Slughters where
multitudes fall, they do) and as there is a Worm, which never dies. The beast
was taken, and with him the false Prophet, (as aforementioned) that wrought
Miracles before him, with which he Deceived them, that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that Worshipped his Image, these both were cast alive, into
a Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone; and the remnant were slain, with the
Sword of him, that sat upon the Horse, which Sword Proceeded out of his Mouth,
and all the fowls were filled with their flesh, so hear John saw, that
Judgment was severaly given, against the beast, and fall e Prophet; and the
Kings and Captains, and Mighty Men, and all Men, both Free and B und, both
Small and great; which Joined with Babylon, and under the Law, the Kings of
Babylon were Idolaters, such as knew not God, and were raised to bring down
others, in the Idolatries, going from the Law of Truth, in which themselves was
found, and with which the Prophets one after another, charges them Kings of
Babylon with, which is no rule for Christians, under the Gospel to war one
Nation with another, nor to join to such Powers as the Heathen do, to Worship
the Dragon, and receive his mark in war, and the Heathen is that Old Serpent,
called the Devil, which Confuses the World, to make parties, as in Heaven he
did. The Angels and Stars which he drew with his Tail, and his Angels was cast
out with him, and his Power Limited, to have no more place in Heaven, neither
in the Angels nor Stars, but if upon Earth he can draw them, which have an
Angelical, Spiritual Gifts and bring them to degenerate from their gifts, in
drawing one such through that one, he gains many more, which looks at that one
as an Example.

Therefore every one to your Watch, and pray to be delivered from his
Temptations, and come to Witness that Blessed Prayer, which is to say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be
done in Earth as it is Heaven, give us this Day our daily Bread, (that is every
Day our Spiritual Bread, that we may know our Life, and acceptance with and in
thee, and out of Saans Power when he comes to Tempt, either in himself or
through Instruments, so shall we in our Bodies, Witness a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, a new Creation, wherein dwells Righteousness) and to say forgive us
our Trespasses as we forgive them, that Trespass against us, for if ye forgive
Men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Fathers will also forgive you, but if ye
forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
Trespasses, (and the Exhortation is not to lay up for your selves, Treasures
upon Earth, where Moth and Rust does Corrupt, and where Thieves break through,
and Steal, but lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Mo^h
nor Rust does Corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through, not Steal) and
them which Witness a growth in the Prayer, which our Lord Christ teached his
Disciples to pray, they desire the Kingdom of God to come in Power and Glory,
and his Will to be done in their Earth, as in Heaven, and to be delivered from
the Evil of Temptation, and to know their Bread to come down from Heaven Day by
Day, to feed their Souls, and to live in Obedience to the Gospel, that his
Power may take place, and that God may be Glorified in every Power upon Earth,
to the Peace of their Salvation, yiedling Obedience to the Lamb of Peace, for
God will be Glorified either in Mercy or Judgment, and if the World will not
admit of a growth in the Christian Faith, then how shall the Kingdoms of this
World, become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ, which gives Peace, and
Man is to be a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, 2
c, 3. and 13 v. Is. 65.17. v. 66 c. 21. v. and Revelations 21 c. 1 v. and such
a Heaven, and such a Earth, will be far from Oppression, but till the Dragon is
cast out of Man's Earth, as he was cast down from Heaven, and Man to know a
Second Birth to be Born again, and Created a new, in the Spirit of Truth tell
this Spirit governs in Man, and in every Power, they will destroy in the Lion
like Nature, and the Bear and Wolfs Nature, and God will be clear of the
Gentiles, in manifesting the Mysteries of the Revelations, of the Gospel of
Peace, to them, and the Destructive Sword (not of the Gospel) and its Power and
Throne, seen from the Lamb of Peace, and his Power and Throne, the Lamb stood
on the Mount Sion, and with him the Hundred and Forty and Four Thousand, Chapter
14.1. v. which were redeemed from the Earth, and the great multitude, which no
Man could Number of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People and Tongues, stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, Rev. 7 c. 9 v. when the Dragon and
Beast, and their Worshippers were to be Tormented, and to have no rest Day nor
Night, and as aforementioned, the Lord will be clear of his Word, sent to the
Gentiles, and will call the Jews into the Gospel of Peace, and will Spirit
them, in his Work of Peace, among the Nations, and in the Revelations, there is
a Revolution showed by the Dragon, and Beast, the false Prophet, the false
Spirit, and Church to come upon the Disobedient Gent^les, as there came a
Revolution upon the Disobedient Jews, for their Rebellions, but a Remnant,
which see the Evil of their Disobedience, in the General were afflicted, and
Mourned, and these believed and rose w th Christ, in the Spring of the Gospel
notwithstanding they were cast out by their Brethren, but as says the Apostle,
whether shall we Obey, God or Man, Judge ye, and in this, they were to Judge
the Laws of Heaven, is to be Obeyed, before the Laws of Men, and the Laws of
Men with all Humility, which stand in the Christian Liberty of the Gospel of
Peace, and to War against him, that is Faithful and True. is to Disobey the
Laws of Heaven, when the Proclamation is gone forth, for Peace on Earth, Good
Will toward Men, and the Heavenly Host Witnesses, of the Proclamation for
Peace, and of which Proclamation for Peace, Praise and Glory to God, the
Shepherds gives the Account in Peace, Lu. 2 c. 14.15 v.

And that Peace may be Proclaimed throughout the World, is the Prayer of one
which is the least in the Family of Heaven, and desires to do the Will of God,
and not my own Will.

Elizabeth Redford.


