Joyful News from Heaven: OR, THE LAST INTELLIGENCE FROM OUR Glorified JESUS
above the Stars: Wherein is infallibly recorded, How that the Soul dies in the
Body; Also is discovered, I. What is that which sleeps in the dust. II. The
nature of its rest. III. The manner of its waking. IV. The mystery of the
Dispute between Christ and the Woman of Samaria, as touching the true Point of
Worship, clearly opened:
Wherein you have drawn up a Divine Charge against the Teachers of the
BAPTISTS, With all other Teachers public and private, for counterfeiting the
Commission of the Man Jesus, being therein convicted of Spiritual High Treason
against Christ the Great Commissioner of Heaven and Earth: With a True
Description of the Kingdom of Glory, prepared only for the Seed of Adam, that
blessed Seed of Faith; and a True Relation of the Kingdom of Darkness, prepared
for the cursed Seed of Cain, world without end.

Written by John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, the last Commissionated
Witnesses and Prophets of that only High, Immortal, Glorious God, Christ Jesus.

London, Printed by T. J. for Francis Cosinet at the Sign of the Anchor and
Mariner in Tower-street, at Mincing-lane end. 1658.

A Transcendent Spiritual Treatise
Upon several heavenly Doctrines, from the holy spirit of the man Jesus, the
only true God, sent unto all his elect as a token of his eternal love unto
them, by the hand of his own Prophet, beimg his last Messenger, and Witness,
and forerunner of the visible appearing of the distinct personal God in power
and great glory, in the clouds of Heaven, with his ten thousands of personal
Saints, to separate between the elect world, and the reprobate world, to all
Eternity: Containing those several Heads set down in the next Page following.

John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, the two last Witnesses and true Prophets of
the man Jesus, the only Lord of Life and Glory, sent by his holy Spirit to seal
the foreheads of the Elect, and the foreheads of the rep^obate, with the
eternal Seals of Life and Death, and suddenly after we have delivered this
dreadful Massage, this God the man Jesus, will visibly appear to bear witness
whether he sent us or not: ye that are the blessed shall patiently wait for the
truth of this thing.

If any of the Elect desire to speak with us concerning any thing written in
this Treatise, they may hear of us in Great Trinity Lane, at the Chandlers
Shop, against one Mr. M^llis, a Brown Baker, near the lower end of Bow-lane.

Printed for the Author^ and are to be sold by them at the place abovenamed.

I. Of my Commission received by voice of words from the spirit of the man
Jesus in glory. II. Of the last great deceiving Antichrist, and man of sin that
ever shall be. III. Of the unlawfulness for a spiritual Christian to war
with a sword of steel. IV. Of the creation beyond the stars, or of the other
side of the visible created heavens, were sun, moon, and star^, and shall all
vanish like smoke together to eternity. V. Of the creating of that reprobate
Angel Serpent that beguiled Eve, and became a man. VI. Of the eternal Creator
clothing himself with flesh, and so bec^me a pure man. VII. and VIII. Of the
creating of man, and the nature of holy Angels in their creation. IX. Of Elijah
the Prophet ascending bodily in heaven, to represent the person of God the
Father. X. Of all Prophets, or Priests, or Ministers in this world being false,
not knowing the true God; therefore not sent by the God of all truth, the man
Jesus. XI. Of all heathen Magistrates, and their heathen Prophets, false
worship or image. XII. Of the mortality of the soul, and how and when it
became mortal. XIII. With what bodies the elect and the reprobate shall appear
after death XIV. How the bodies and spirits of the world of the elest believers
shall be like unto the glorious body of God their ^edeem^r, in his glory to
eternity. XV. Of some difference between the glory of Men and ^ngels in glory
in the heaven above.
AN Epistle from the holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ the eternal Father,
written by the Lords two last witnesses and prophets, that ever shall declare
the mind of God the man Jesus, that was crucified without the gates of
Jerusalem: the Lord Jesus by us his poor despised messengers has sent this
Writing unto the Christian world so called. Wherefore we declare by virtue of
our Commission, given unto us by voice of words from the holy Spirit of the
Lord Jesus from the throne of his glory, to make known his prerogative will and
pleasure both to the elect world, and reprobate world, a little before his
glorious coming to separate between the two worlds, that whosoever despises
this Writing, whether he be a King, or a Beggar* by calling it blasphemy, or
heresy, or delusion, or a lie, or speaking evil of it in any kind whatsoever;
in so doing they have committed that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost,
or spirit that sent us, Wherefore in obedience to our Commission from the Lord
Jesus Christ, whom they have despised, and not us, we pronounce them cursed
both soul and body from the presence of the Lord Jesus, elect men, and Angels,
to all eternity.

John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, the Lords two last true Witnesses and
Prophets, spoken of in the eleventh of the Revelation, a little before the
coming of him that sent us, who is the Judge of both quick and dead.

FEbruary the 3.4 and 5. 1651. three mornings together, much about an hour,
the Lord Jesus, the only wise God, whose glorious person is refident above or
beyond the stars, I declare from the spirit of truth, that this Jesus from the
throne of his glory, by voice of words, spoke unto me John Reeve, saying; I
have given thee understanding of my mind in the Scriptures, above all men in
the world. The next words the Lord spoke unto me, were these, saying; Look into
thy own body, there thou shall see the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of
Hell: the Lord spoke these words unto me twice together. Again, the Lord spoke
unto me these words, saying; I have chosen thee my last messenger for a great
work, unto this bloody unbeleeving world. And I have given thee Lodowick
Muggleton to be thy mouth: at that very moment the holy spirit brought inot my
mind that Scripture of Aaron given unto Moses. Again, the Lord spoke unto me
these words, saying; I have put the two-edged sword of my spirit into thy
mouth, that whoever I pronounce blessed, through thy mouth, is blessed to
eternity; and whoever I pronounce cursed through thy mouth, is cursed to
eternity. When I heard these words, my spirit desired the Lord, that I might
not be his dreadful messenger. For indeed I thought upon the delivering of so
sad an unexpected message unto men, I should immediately have been torn to
pieces. Again, the Lord spoke unto me these words, saying; If thou do not
obey my voice, and go where ever I send thee to deliver my message, thy body
shall be thy hell, and thy spirit shall be the devil that shall torment thee
to eternity; then for a moment I saw this hell within me, which caused me to
answer the Lord these words, saying; Lord, I will go wherever thou sendest me,
only be with me. These were the Lords words spoken unto me the first morning,
and my answer unto my God; I being as perfectly awaked when he spoke unto me,
the Lord is my witness, a I was at the writing hereof. Again, the next morning
the Lord spoke unto me, saying; Go thou unto Lodowick Muggleton, and with him
go unto Thomas Turner, and he shall bring you to one John Taken, and do thou
deliver my message when thou come there; and if Lodowick Muggleton deny to go
with thee, then do thou from me pronounce him cursed to eternity. These words
the lord spoke unto me the second morning, and no more. The third and last
morning, the Lord spoke unto me these words, saying; Go thou unto Lodowick
Muggleton, and take such a woman along with thee; and then go thou unto one
John Robins, a Prisoner in new Bridewell, and do thou deliver my message to him
when thou come there. These were the Lords words the third and last morning,
and all the words in the Commission of the Lord spoken unto me; only this
message of the Lod extends in general to the whole world; because the elect
Jews and Gentiles are mixed in marriages through all parts of this Earth, for
whose sakes only we are sent. But as for those natural unbeleeving Jews, that
deny that God is come in flesh, those Jews shall never come to the faith of
Jesus, we are not sent unto these. The holy Spirit bears witness in my
spirit of the truth of that which I shall write unto you, that the first words
that the Lord spoke into me, the words speaking came into my spirit and body,
with such an exceeding bright burning glory of God like Majesty, that I did not
well know whether I was a mortal man, or an immortal God; so glorious are the
words of the immortal God, that the tongues of Men nor Angels can never
express it; my body also was changed at that time for a season in a most
dreadful manner to behold, of the which there be many can bear witness at this
time. Again, for your information that are spiritual, the Lord opened the
understanding of my fellow witness, and made him obedient with me in the
messages of the Lord, as Aaron^ understanding was opened, to make him obedient
with Moses in the messages of the Lord at that time; and the Lord has given
him as glorious testimonies by Revelation from his holy spirit many a time of
the full assurance of this Commission to be from the Lord, as ever the Lord
gave to Aaron to assure him, that Moses Commission was from the Lord; only
Moses Commission (he being the Lords first Commissioner unto men) was
manifested by natural signs visib^y upon the bodies of men and women: and on
the contrary; we being the Lords last Commissioners, our Commission is
manifested by spiritual signs, upon the invisible spirits of men and women*
because our message is all spiritual, concerning men and women's eternal weal or
woe in the life to come.

II. A Gain, That you that are elected unto eternal Glory, may understand
some thing of John Robins aforesaid; I declare from the holy Spirit, that this
John Robins was that last great Antichrist, or man of sin, or son of perdition,
spoken of by Paul the Apostle in the Thessalouians, who (as it is written)
opposes, and exalts himself above all that is called God; so that he as
God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God: This is he
that was to appear in this last Age, a little before the personal visible
coming of the Lord Jesus in the Clouds, with his ten thousands of Saints in
power and great glory, to separate between the persons of the true Christians,
whose weapons are spiritual Faith, that work by love and patience, with all
other such like heavenly virtues, from the persons of all lying Hypocrites, who
call themselves Christians, but they are indeed far worse then Heathens, by
killing their Neighbors with the sword of steel; therefore their damnation
will be far greater then the Heathens, in the day of the Lords vengeance.
Again, it would be too tedious to write unot you, wherein this John Robins did
appear to be the man of sin as before-said; so that the Pope is not the man of
sin, as men blindly imagine, for want of the spirit of the Scriptures: but on
the contrary, I declare from the spirit of the Lord Jesus, that all men that
call themselves Christians, and yet make use of the sword of steel, in any case
whatsoever, the Pope and those men are both Christians alike; therefore to be
an Antichrist, or a man of sin to oppose God, as before said, I declare from
the holy Spirit, that is, when a man does exalt himself in the place or person
of God, and does set up a worship seemingly, far more pure then the simple
plain worship of God, and to manage his design, he does show many great lying
signs and wonders, as this John Riobns did, to the amazement of many deceived
by him. It was a spiritual opposing of Jesus, which is the only God, by showing
of seeming spiritual lying signs and wonders, as this John Robins did, yea, he
showed such signs as the Popes could never show, nor never shall show:
wherefore that you that are the elect, may no longer remain in the dark,
concerning the last great spiritual Antichrist, I declare from the Lord Jesus
that this Jo. Robins did attribute to himself the titles of the only God: first
he called himself Adam, Melchizedeek: again, he called himself the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: Also, he held forth a Trinity of Persons; as
namely, Adam, Abel, and Cain: Again, he called himself the first Adam, saying,
after he had been five thousand six hundred and odd years in the dust, he was
risen from the dead to deliver his people; then he said, that Abel was his Son
Jesus, the second person of his Trinity: then he called Cain the Holy Ghost,
and this was his third Person of his Trinity. This Cain that was the seed of
the Serpent, or son of the Devil, this was his Holy Ghost. I could write very
much of his Trinity concerning his Wife Eve so called by him, and of a Jesus he
said should be born of her of his begetting, and of a Disciple of his that he
called Cain, to make up his counterfeit Trinity, but that it would hinder
things of more value: again, he declared, that he knew all Angels, their names,
and their natures; also he said, he had a power over all voices; also he said,
that he knew what the spirits of men spoke that were in the dust: again, he
said, that he was Judge both of quick and dead; again he said, that the Lord
Jesus was a weak and an imperfect Savior, and afraid of death; but he said,
that he had no fear of death in him at all; but this Cain has proved himself
an old liar, since his great blasphemy against the Lord Jesus: again, this John
Robins did declare, that he was to gather the Jews in all Nation^, and to lead
them into their own Land unto Jerusalem; with many more such like things
declared by him.

A for his lying spiritual signs and wonders, they were these and such like,
unto some that were deceived by him, he did present the form of his person
riding, upon the wings of the Wind like unto a flame of fire; also he did
present unto some in their beds a great light, like unto a flame of fire over
all the Room, that they have been compelled to hide their faces in their beds,
fearing they should be burned; but when they hid their faces in their bed, the
light did appear more brighter then before: also he would present unto them
half Moons and Stars, and sometimes thick darkness, darker then any natural
darkness whatsoever: also he did present his head only in the day time without
a body, to a Gentlewoman that I know in her Chamber; also presenting unto her
to deceive her, the forms of strance beasts, as namely Dragons, and such like.
Again, I declare from the Lord, that this John Robins did present the form of
his face, looking me in the face in my bed, the most part of a night, insomuch
that I cried in my spirit unto the Lord, and the Lord by his Spirit revealed
this great Antichrist unto me, to my exceeding joy, and his everlasting praise.
Much more might be spoken of his deceits in this kind; but now I shall declare
the manner of his being worshipped as a God, by those deceived by him: they
prayed unto him, and they fell flat on their faces and worshipped him, calling
him their Lord and their God; also he gave commandment to some of them, that
they should not make mention of any other God, but him on^y: also he gave
authority unto some of his Disciples, both unto men, and women* to change their
wives and their husbands, telling them that they were not united to their own
bone. This cursed Cain changed his own wife first, for an example, and called
her name Eve, telling his Disciples, that she should bring forth his Son Jesus,
and it should be caught up into Heaven; many of his Disciples following of his
cursed example, to their utter ruin, in this life and that to come: a so he
commanded his Disciples to abstain from meats and drinks, promising them that
they should in a short time be fed with Manna from Heaven, until many, a poor
soul was almost starved under his diet, yea and some were absolutely starved to
death, whose bodies could not bear his diet; for those that believed on him
indeed, they brought in their whole estates unto him; so that then he had full
power over their souls, and bodies, and estates, and he did plague their
spirits and bodies at his pleasure, in a most dreadful manner, if they were not
obedient to his commands, of the which I my self was an eyewitness. I could
speak more of this Prince of Devils, in this last age; but I know I have
written enough, for a spiritual Chri^^^an to discern something of this great
Deceiver in what I have written: when his wickedness was at the full, the Lord
Jesus sent me as beforesaid unto this John Robins to declare his wickedness
unto him, and immediately to pronounce him cursed in soul and body, from the
presence of the Lord Jesus, to all eternity; unto the which I with my fellow
witness were made obedient; then about two months after this sentence of the
Lord Jesus, this John Robins wrote a Recantation of all his seeming great
matters declared by him, and sent the writing to General Cromwell, and so
obtained his liberty, when he was out of prison, he gave all his disciples
about London the slip, and with what silver stead of building of Cities, he
went into his own Country, and repurchased his Land, but it was re-bought with
the innocent blood of many poor innocent souls, in the highest nature, that
ever any man gained such a sum of silver as he did.

III. A Gain, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that all those that bear the name
of Christians, and yet make use of the sword of steel to slay men, who are the
image of God, they are utterly ignorant of the true God, and man Jesus, and
enemies to his Gospel, that commands men to love their enemies; therefore their
fleshly reasoning causes them to forsake the Gospel of suffering the Gross of
Christ, and they apply themselves to the Law of Moses, to prove it lawful to
kill the Gospel of Jesus, instead of yielding obedience unto it. Unto you that
are chosen to work righteousness, I declare by revelation from the Holy
Spirit, that no spiritual Christian has any thing to do to meddle with any
Scripture from the Law, given by the hand of Moses, to prove it lawful to war
with the sword of steel, because it was lawful for the Nation of the Jews only,
by commission from the Lord, to war against all the Heathen Gentiles that
rose up against the Jews, because they worshipped the God of Israel, who was
contrary to the Heathen Idol-gods; and this war of the Jews was lawful until
God the Father became flesh, to reconcile both Jew and Gentile into that one
faith, in the body of his flesh, and no longer: Therefore since God became
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, sin only excepted, I declare from
the Lord Jesus, that they that are Christians indeed, they are not under the
Law of Moses, that is a Sword of steel, but they are under Grace, or the Gospel
of Jesus, that is the sword of the Holy Spirit, that makes all true Christians
to understand, that in this work their portions is to suffer all kind of wrong
from all men, and to return mercy and forgiveness unto all men, yea and to
forgive those that would kill them, because they know all vengeance is the
Lords, and he will repay it; therefore they dare not rob God of his glory.
Again when the Lord Jesus gave that new Law of love unto all his elect
believers, where he says it was said of old, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth
for a Tooth; but I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you. These be those Christians indeed that may be
called perfect; as their heavenly Father was perfect; the Lord Jesus, who did
all good, and suffered all wrong, yea, and laid down his life for that whole
world of his Elect, when they were all become his enemies. Again, I declare
from the Lord Jesus, that they that are new born by the Holy Spirit, they are
so far from killing, or consenting to the killing of any man, offensively, or
defensively, in their own behalf, or in the behalf of any other man, that
they are afraid of their own evil thoughts, and much more of evil words or
deeds, against God or men; because they know nothing but pure righteousness,
pure love without envy, and pure innocence shall reign in eternal glory with
the only eternal Father, the Lord Jesus; And on the contrary, they know all
man-slayers, under what pretense so^ver, and all Govertous, Idolaters,
Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, and all those that
vindicate unrighteousness, through the love of silver, in opposing of that
pure Law of love, that commands all Christians not to do as they are done unto,
that is the hypocrites righteousness: But on the contrary, to do unto all men,
as you would they should do unto you; this is the righteousness of pure faith,
which is the righteousness of God, which makes men to fulfill all
righteousness, for want of this, those unrighteous persons beforesaid must all
perish to eternity. Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that all those that
hate to yield obedience to this pure peaceable Law of love, proceeding from the
pure spirit of the Lord Jesus; I say in the great and notable day of the Lord,
by his decree, or by a word speaking from his mouth, they shall every one of
them rise out of the dust together; not with the same bodies they died, or fell
asleep in, because there was somewhat of God in those bodies, whilst they
lived, which perishes with them indeath; but the bodies which they shall have,
shall be in form of their former bodies, but they shall be fiery bodies, of
spiritual darkness, yea bodies of all unrighteousness, having all the
inwicked deeds of their former bodies conveyed into these bodiers, as fuel to
kindle the fire of new sorrows: In these bodies of Hell and utter darkness,
and their spirits in their bodies shall be all fiery Devils; so their bodies
shall be their Kingdom of Hell, and their proud spirits, that had pleasure in
unrighteousness, shall be the Devils, that shall be barred in close prisoners
within their bodies, from all motioning or thinking of any former comforts,
either spiritual, or natural, to give them any ease at all, because all time
is past; then as beforesaid shall their spirits and bodies burn together like a
flame of fire, that is all as dark as pitch, they never stirring from the place
of their resurrection, nor never seeing one another face^ more, much less
shall they see the face of God, just men, or Angels, to all eternity, and the
place of their eternal torment shall be upon this earth, where they acted all
their bloodshed, and all other unrighteousness. Then shall the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and all other natural lights in this lower creation or world; vanish or
go out like the snuff of a candle, giving no more light to eternity: then shall
this fruitful pleasant earth be like unto dry burning sand, the seas and all
rivers or springs of water being dried up for evermore, as if they never had
any being: this whole creation being turned into a chaos of confusion, without
form, and void of all light or sap, either natural or spiritual, to all
eternity, as beforesaid.

Again, I declare by Revelation from the Holy spirit, what was from Eternity,
before any creature was formed, that had any sensible life, either in heaven
above, or in this e^^th beneath; there were these two uncreated substances of
earth and water, with the uncreated spiritual person of God the Creator, in
whose glorious prefence these senseless substances of earth and water were
eternally resident, that the creator might create or form by his infinite
wisdom out of those dead substances, all variety of sensible living creatures
in his own time, for the setting forth of his visible glory to eternity. Again,
I declare by Revelation from the holy spirit, that the earth and the water were
both dark substances, having no light or sensible life at all in them, but the
person of the creator was infinitely full of all glorious lights and sensible
life to himself, both within and without. Thus it is clear there was death from
eternity, only it was not in a sensible form, as well as there was sensible
life, light, and glory, in form from eternity. Again, eternal life or God,
was a substantial form from eternity, but eternal death or darkness of earth
and water was substance without form, void of all spirit or life, so that life
or spirit only is all substantial form, and death or darkness only, is all
substance without form; so that life and death from ecernity are not bare
words, as blind hypocrites imagine, but the invisible creator of all life or
spirits, was a God of a glorious substance, a spiritual body, in the form or
likeness of a man from all eternity. Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus,
that the glorious sensible life or light in the person of the Creator, could
not possibly be known by Men or Angels, but by his creating or forming of some
creatures to live sensibly in death and darkness, shame and misery, and by his
creating other creatures in opposition sensibly to live in life and light, joy
and glory. Again, the infinite glorious prerogative power of the Creator, could
not possibly be known to any of his creatures, to make a distinction between
the glory of eternal life, and the misery of eternal death; but by his forming
of creatures of the same lump to be vessels of honor and vessels of dishonor
to eternity: but of the contrary, if the Creator without distinction had formed
his creatures to be all eternally glorious like himself, then the glory of his
prerogative power of infinite love or mercy, and infinite justice or wrath, and
all his infinite new wisdom increasing or flowing in his glorious person as a
fountain of living waters must in a manner have been shut prisoner in his own
person, and the creatures must have been all as Gods, instead of creatures, and
so the Creator would have had no glory in his Creation at all of the
prerogative power of his Godhead. Wherefore I declare by virtue of my
Commission from the only wise God and everlasting Father, the man Jesus in
glory, that all those that are made to yield obedience in love to the
prerogative power of God, are his Elect ones appointed for blessedness to all
Eternity; but on the contrary, all those that are offended at the prerogative
power of the Creator, and love to dispute against it, are all Reprobates, and
appointed to be cursed to all Eternity.

IV. AGain, for your Information I declare from the holy spirit, that the
Creation above or beyond the star of the holy Angels, who are spiritual
bodies, in their persons formed like men, and all other creatures that God has
made in the heavens above, of that substance of earth and water aforesaid, that
was from all Eternity, in the presence of his eternal spiritual person, I
declare from the Lord Jesus, that God the Creator has made that creation in
the heavens above, as visible to be seen, as this creation is seen in this
earth beneath. Again, I declare from the holy Spirit, that the glorious person
of the only wise God and eternal Father the Lord Jesus, is as visibly seen of
the creatures, where his person is resident, as a man is visibly seen of the
creatures in this earth beneath where his person resides: as for this creation
in the heavens above, it is to set forth the glory of his immortal person, that
all the creatures in his presence visibly beholding the glorious person of
their Creator, both holy Angels, and other creatures according to their wisdom
or understanding, might give him the glory of their eternal happiness of this
their creation: and on the contrary, if the Creator were not visibly seen by
the eyes of his creatures, then no creatures could possibly know him to return
any praise or glory unto him at all, for the happiness of their condition.
Therefore it is a cursed lying imagination for any man to think that the
glorious person of God is not as visibly seen of his creatures in the heavens
above, as the person of man, who is the image of God, is visibly seen of the
creatures in this earth beneath. Again, you must not think after a fleshly
manner, that the creatures above the stars are male and female for natural
generation, as they are in this creation beneath the stars: for a woman had
never been made but for generation, that the immortal God might have a woman's
womb in this world, to cloth himself with flesh, and that the Reprobate Angel,
which is the Devil, might have the womb of a woman to cloth himself with flesh
also, to bring forth Gods glorious design, between the seed of the Woman, and
the seed of the Serpent; wherefore I declare from the holy Spirit, that the
holy Angels, and all other Creatures that are in the presence of God in the
Creation beyond the stars, are all spiritual male creatures, never increasing
in their numbers, not being fleshly, desiring generation, but their spirits or
natures, instead of fleshly pleasures in generation, are full of spiritual and
heavenly joys, of a more transcendent glorious content within themselves, and
visible glorious contents in their beholding of the glorious face of God; and
the faces of one another, and the glory of that place they enjoy, the which
exceeding glory shines forth through that heavenly Kingdom, from the bright
burning glorious person of God the Creator, the Lord Jesus Christ, who alone
has all the glory of his Creation in the Heavens above, wherein dwells
nothing but righteousness in Glory.

Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that no man can understand, or know any
thing of these things that are invisible unto our natural eyes, but by the
Spirit of Revelation; therefore it is written, that faith is the substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen: again, it is written,
through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God; so
that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear; so that in
the Letter of the Scripture, it is clear to you that see by the eye of Faith,
that God has made or framed two Worlds, or two Creations which is all one; for
you know to frame a thing, or to make a thing is all one. Again, unto you it is
clear, there are spiritual visible things, in that world above or beyond the
stars, as well as here are natural visible things in this world beneath the
stars; because you may understand that this world, and the things that are
visible therein, were made or created out of that world which is invisible to
us, who are in mortality, but visible to those who are above in glory; so that
now, you that are appointed to enter with spiritual bodies into that glorious
Creation, or world beyond the stars, may understand a little clearer of your
inheritance in that Kingdom made without hands, or City eternal in the
Heavens, where you shall visibly see with your eyes the face of God, Men,
Angels, and all Creatures, in that creation above the stars, as you see the
face of man, and all other creatures in this creation beneath the stars, with
glorious new Songs of spiritual and heavenly praises unto a glorious God, to
all eternity. This proves the truth of these Scriptures, where it is written,
My kingdom is not of this world: and of this saying, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom: and of that saying, In my Fathers House, or Kingdom,
are many mansions: and of that saying, For thine is the Kingdom, the power, and
the glory for ever: and of that saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become
the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ: this world was the Heavens above;
and of that saying, nevertheless, we look for a new Heaven and a new Earth,
wherein dwells righteousness, and of that saying, He has made us Kings and
Priests unto God, and we shall reign with him upon the Earth. This is that
glorious new Heaven, and new Earth in the presence of God, above or beyond the
stars; but blind carnal hypocrites imagine, that Gods reigning with his Elect
ones, will be upon this bloody Earth, because they have no spiritual Eyes to
see or know that new Heaven or new Earth, above or beyond the stars, where
nothing but pure righteousness reigns in glory for everlasting, or world
without end, Amen.

5. AGain, concerning that Serpent before-said, so called of the Lord for his
subtilty; I declare by Revelation from the holy Spirit, that God created his
spiritual person more glorious then the persons of all the holy Angels that are
in the presence of God in Heaven, because this mighty Angel, by the wisdom and
secret Counsel of God, was to be as a God, to bring forth his seed, or
generaration of wise, and prudent, subtle Serpent men, and women to oppose the
Creator, and his innocent seed, or generation of simple plain-hearted men and
women, that are of the spirit of faith and pure love, with all other heavenly
virtues; for the nature or Spirit of God, is faith and love, and all other
divine virtues, infinitely living in his glorious Person, the which faith is
all power of righteous actings, naturally flowing from his pure spirit, as from
a pure overflowing fountain of living waters: but on the contrary, the nature
or spirit of this God-like Angel, and all the rest of the holy Angels in their
Creation, were pure reason, from whence naturally flows no good at all, but
what comes into them continually by Revelation from that pure spirit of Faith,
in the person of God their Creator; and this is that spiritual Manna that keeps
the holy Angels natures or spirits pure in the presence of God; for it is the
nature of that pure reason in the holy Angels continually to desire the
knowledge of that spirit of wisdom in the Creator that made them, and the
overflowings of that new wisdom in the spirit of the Creator by the decree of
God, it is that spiritual food that keeps the holy Angels pure in their glory,
or else not one of them could stand upright in the presence of God, not one
moment, but they would all become serpent-Devils, and fall down into this
earth, as that great Angel did, presently after the Lord withheld the
revelation of his glorious wisdom from him; then this Angel for want of his
spiritual food of revelation, that kept his spirit in obedience to his Creator,
presently his spirit began proudly to imagine and think high and lofty thoughts
concerning his own person, and great wisdom of spirit within him, wherefore
secretly he was lifted up in his spirit to disdain the persons and wisdom of
all the holy Angels, in comparison of the glory both of his person and wisdom,
pride being begun in him, Lucipher-like he soared higher in his pride, for he
thought both his person and wisdom to be as glorious, if not more glorious,
then the person and wisdom of the Creator, wherefore he being very proud of his
own wisdom, he imagined that if he had been the Creator, he would by a word
speaking have created Angels, and all other creatures without Earth* or Water,
as God made all things of; for his proud spirit thought he could by a word
speaking have created all creatures of nothing at all, therefore he counted his
wisdom, rather greater, and of a more higher nature to have formed all things
for a greater glory to himself, if he had been the Creator, then the Creators
wisdom in the things or Creatures formed by him; so imagining his wisdom above
the Creators, he thought himself more fit to reign over the holy Angels, and
all other creatures then the Creator; he being wise in his own conceit, became
an absolute Fool: for out of nothing comes nothing, and out of nothing comes no
form, or nothing can be formed; for to create or make a living form or creature
out of senseless matter or substance, of Earth or Water, by a word speaking, of
what nature or form the Creator pleases, whether contrary to his own nature
and form, of his own nature and form, this is the power and wisdom of my
Creator, the Lord Jesus; for he by his infinite glorious wisdom, by a word
speaking did create all living creatures in the two Creations or Worlds, of
unsensible Earth and Water, that was without his person from all eternity in
his presence with him, because his eternal glorious person you know, must have
a place of residence, therefore reason it self cannot deny the eternity of
Earth and Waters, and the person of the Creator; let it imagine never so much,
nor never so long: again, as beforesaid, when the time of this proud and lofty
Angels glory was by the decree of the Creator, expired in the Heavens above, to
the exceeding joy of all the holy Angels, unto whom the Lord revealed his
exceeding pride, the Lord then cast down this Angelical wise Serpent into the
Earth; therefore it is written, woe be to the Inhabiters of the Earth, for the
Devil is come down amongst you, this Angel that was cast into the Earth, is
that Devil beforesaid, and his nature or spirit of pride and envy, and all
other wickedness being changed, his names or titles are changed according to
the uncleanness of his nature, and now instead of the name of an Angel of
light, he is called an Angel of darkness, as in Jude; yea he is called a
Serpent, a Dragon, a Devil, Satan, or an unclean spirit, or that wicked one,
suitable to his cursed nature; but the Lord changed not the form or person of
this Reprobate lost Angel at all, but his names or titles only as beforesaid,
according to his nature.

Again, I declare by Revelation from the Holy Spirit, that that Serpent spoken
of in the Scripture that tempted the Virgin Wife Eve, he was a spiritual body
in the form of his person like unto a man; yea, I say from the Lord, that this
Angel-Serpent was more amiable or glorious in the form of his person to the
outward appearance of Eves eyes, then the Person of the man Adam was;
wherefore, by the prerogative power, and secret wisdom and Counsel of God, to
bring forth his glorious design, it was the outward comeliness of the Serpents
person, and his seeming wise and glorious God-like counsel, by the decree of
God, became a snare to deceive and overcome the innocent Virgin Wife Eve, as
many a poor innocent Virgin in these days are deceived and overcome, by the
outwa^d comeliness of men's persons, through their Serpent-counsels, and cursed
temptations; wherefore it is written, the woman was deceived, and not the man.

Again, I declare by Revelation from the holy Spirit, that when this
Angel-Serpent, by hi^ seeming wise God-like Counsel, had overcome innocent Eve,
as before-said; the very person of this spiritual Serpent Reprobate Angel,
entered into the body or womb of innocent l ve, and there he dyed, or was
changed from his spirituality, and immediately he quickened in her pure
undefiled seed, or nature all serpentine lust of all natural uncleanness;
wherefore, she being now naked from her former pure created Virginity,
presently she i^ full of natural lust after her innocent Husband, that had no
desire to a woman at all, therefore it is written, and she gave also unto her
husband with her, and he did eat; then were they both naked, from that pure
spiritual life of their virgin creation of God-l^ke content within their own
spirits, and in the room thereof they are both full of all natural lusts
whatsoever; they being both defiled with the spirit of the Serpent-Angel of
unclean reason and wicked imagination* and this was that cursed effect of their
becoming as Gods, knowing both good an evil, until they were both born again by
the spirit of Faith, to the full assurance of a more glorious Inheritance then
that which was lost through the eternal love of God to his lost Image.

Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that, that Cain that was the first born
of Eve, he was the very seed or spirit of that reprobate Serpent angel in the
body of Eve, and the first born child or son of the Devil, and so he became,
and none but he alone, that Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils, and the only father
of all those Angels of darkness spoken of in the Epistle of Jude, that are
kept or reserved in chains of darkness, of unbelief, unto the Judgment of the
Great Day.

Therefore, where it is written of the warfare between Michael and his Angels,
and the Dragon and his Angels, that Michael is the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, in
his Angelical believers, whose spiritual weapons are faith, and love, and
patience, and such like, unto the death, because they see a crown of Life, in
yielding obedience to the cross of Christ. The Dragon, that is the spirit of
cursed Cain in his persecuting believers, whose carnal weapons are swords and
guns, and all kinds of murdering weapons whatsoever, flowing from ignorance,
cursed covetousness, and vainglorious envy, selling their eternal birthright
for a mess of pottage, because the Lord Jesus has no delight in their
persons. Again, it is written, and the Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent
called the Devil and Satan, he was cast out into the earth, and his Angels were
cast out with him; that Cain before-said was that Serpent Dragon Angel, and his
Angels are that fleshly seed of his, or offspring or generation of serpent,
wise, prudent men and women that mind earthly things* These are those Serpent
reprobate Angels, that go upon the bellies of their spirits, and lick up the
dust of the earth all the days of their lives: that is, their spirits lick up
the gold and silver, and put it into a bag, for their generations, and this is
the food of their souls, and such like all their days. This is that spirit of
unclean reason and wicked imagination that was in Cain, and now is in all his
Angels, who are the Lords of this world, whose spirits wholly thirst after
things that perish, and they are never in their proper center, but when the
thoughts of their spirits are feeding upon riches, or honors, or friends, or
fleshly delights, or long life, and such like. This was the food of that
Serpent Cain, that slew his brother Abel, because he was more righteous then
he; and this is the food and no other of all those Serpent angelical men and
women, both great and small, that are the very sons and daughters of cursed
Cain, hating all spiritual righteousness in all spiritual Abels as he did.
Therefore as beforesaid, cursed together with that Serpent Reprobate Devil
their father Cain, from the presence of the Lord, just men and Angels, to all
Eternity.

VI. AGain, for your Information, in whose persons the Lord by his holy Spirit
delights to dwell: I declare by Revelation from the holy Spirit of the Lord
Jesus, a little of that wonderful unspeakable mystery of God the Father,
clothing himself, or manifesting himself in flesh: it is written, she was
found with child by the Holy Ghost Again, it is written, for that which is
conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost; and the Word became flesh; and behold a
Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call
his name Emanuel, which being interpreted, is God with us. Again, it is
written, For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the
government shall be on his shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end: From these
Scriptures, it is very clear in the bare Letter, unto you that see God by the
eye of Faith, that that holy Child Jesus, that was born of the Virgin-Wife
Mary, he is the only God and alone eternal Father unto you that have faith in a
personal God, or a God of one distinct person, and no more unto you alone, for
whom is prepared a Crown of immortal glory. I declare by Revelation from the
Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus, that the Holy Ghost beforesaid, was the Glorious
Person of that one only Wise God, and Everlasting Father, and Creator of all
things, that entered into the Virgins womb, and dyed, or changed his immortality
or spirituality in the body or womb of the Virgin, and immediately quickened or
conceived himself of the very nature or seed of the Virgin; a pure natural
child or son, in whom, as it is written, the fullness of the Godhead lived
bodily; so that as the Serpet-angel beforesaid, entered into the womb of the
Virgin-VVife Eve, and defiled her pure nature, or seed throughout, and dyed in
her womb from his spirituality, and quickened in mortality, and brought forth
himself the first born child or son of the Devil, and so he became the father
of an innumerable company of Serpent reprobate Devils of men and women; so in
opposition of that reprobate Angel, and Prince of Devils beforesaid, the
glorious person of the eternal God entered into the womb of the Virgin-Wife
Mary, and dyed in her womb from his immortality, and purified her nature or
seed throughout, that was unclean before, and quickened himself in pure
mortality, and brought forth himself the first born son of God, and the only
eternal Father of an innumerable company of elect sons and daughters purchased
by his own precious blood: Thus immortality dyed and quickened in mortality, and
this pure mortality dyed and quickened in immortality and glory again, in that
very same flesh or person that dyed, and now reigns in glory in the highest
Heavens, and the lowest hearts, God alone blessed to all eternity. Thus
Eternity became Time, and Time is become eternity again; for there is nothing
but an eternal immortal God, that is the Creator of all life, that can by his
own power, live and dye, and live again: But on the contrary, no creature has
any power at all, neither to live, nor to dye, but by the decree of the Creator
alone, the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus you that see by that single eye of Faith,
may understand in some measure the difference between the seed of the woman,
and the seed of the Serpent; for ever since the Angel-Serpent, by his wise
cursed Counsel, took possession of the Garden of God, the bodies of our first
parents. I declare from the Holy Spirit, that there is no Devil at all without
the body of man or woman, but what dwells within the bodies of men and women;
so that, that Devil so frequently spoken of in the letter of the Scripture,
that tempts men and women to all unrighteousness, it is man's spirit of unclean
reason, and cursed imagination, that unsatiably lusts after things that
perish; until the Holy Spirit of faith enters into the man, and purifies his
unclean spirit, and reveals unto his dark understanding spiritual and glorious
durable things, and that makes a man trample this perishing world, and all its
vainglory, under the feet of his spirit as dung, as it is, in comparison of
the glory that is to come, in that world above the stars that remains to all
eternity.

VII. AGain, it is written, a woman shall compass a man: that woman was the
Virgin Mary, and that man was God the Father. Again, it is written, a woman
clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown
of twelve Stars: this woman was the Virgin Mary beforesaid, and the Sun that
she was clothed withal, was the only begotten Son of God, the eternal Father
in the Virgins womb; and the Moon under her feet, that was the worship of the
Law of Moses; for she being clothed with the Sun, she was filled with the
Revelation of the everlasting Gospel of that Son within her, which was of a
more transcendent glory, than that of the Law: and that Crown of twelve Stars
upon her head, that was the twelve Apostles that sprang from her head Jesus, to
preach the everlasting Gospel of Truth and Peace unto his Elect: thus that
saying, that every seed shall have his own body, is a little more clear unto
you that have faith, in a personal God, then it was before: you may understand
that God the Father was a spiritual man from eternity, and that in time his
righteous spiritual body brought forth a righteous natural body, that the
Father to show forth his infinite love and humility, and to bring forth a new
transcendent glory to himself, might become a son, yea and a servant unto his
creatures, in the very condition of a creature for a season, that he might
exalt his elect creatures into the same condition of the Creator, in his glory
in the highest Heavens to all eternity, when the curtains of this lower Heavens
are drawn and vanished like smoke never more to be, time being past. Again, it
is written, he that has see^n me has seen the Father, and the Father lives
in me, and I live in him, and I and the Father are one: the only meaning or
mind of the Lord Jesus in those words is this; his Spirit living within his
body that was the Father, and his visible body that was the Son, both God and
man in one person, and so but one personal God, the man Christ Jesus, he
perfectly knowing himself to be the only God, he said unto the Jews, except ye
eat my flesh and drink my blood, you have no life in you: again he said, except
ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins: his very mind in those
words was this, except they did believe, that that very person of his, of
flesh, blood, and bone that spoke unto them, was the only God and eternal
Father, and alone Savior of all that were to be saved, and that there was no
salvation to mankind, but thus spiritually eating of his flesh, and drinking of
his blood, except they did thus own his person, to be their Lord and only
Savior, they must all die in their sins, and perish to all eternity, because
there is nothing but the precious blood of a God, can possibly cleanse the
spirit of man from the power of sin; therefore if the very Godhead had not
died; that is, if the very soul of Christ (which is the eternal Father) had not
died in the body, or with the body, to quiet or satisfy the cry of the guilt
of sin in men's spirits, all men would have perished to eternity; because the
spirit of unclean reason the Devil in man, whose nature is all sin, did reign
in the very bodies of the Elect, as their Lord and King, and they were free
from the power of righteousness, until the precious blood of a God, by the
Holy Spirit of Faith, was sprinkled in their consciences, that by the pure life
or spiritual love to God and man, they might break the Serpents head of sin, of
reigning any longer in them: but on the contrary, they that have no faith given
them, in the precious blood of God to cleanse their spirits from the power of
that Devil sin in them; their sins will be their Lord and King, and they must
perish together eternally as beforesaid; Again, by this time it is very clear
to you that have the faith of Jesus, that the Serpent Angel beforesaid was a
spiritual body or person in the form of a man, before he entered into the womb
of Eve, by that seed or son of his called Cain: Thus every seed or spirit by
the decree of God, brings forth his own body according to its nature or kind;
God the Father being a spiritual man from all eternity, in time begot and
brought forth himself a manchild in mortality, of all pure righteousness,
therefore he was called the express Image of the Father, because he was indeed
the very Father, and that made him say, be thought it no robbery to be equal
with God; and that was the cause that made him say, that all power was given
unto him both in heaven and in earth, because he knew perfectly that there was
no other God but himself to possess all power; and this made the Prophet
Isaiah to attribute the chief titles of the everlasting Father, unto the Son,
that was to be made of a Woman, or of a Virgin; because the Prophet knew very
well, that the Father and the Son was but one unseparable person in immortal
glory from all eternity, and so he knew they were to become in time, one
unseparable Person of all purity, in mortality: and I with him know from the
same spirits that revealed it to the Prophet long before God became flesh, that
that pure mortality, both spirit and body that died together, they did both
immediately quicken together, a new life in death, or out of death, and they
unseparably, both Father and Son in one person, did ascend together, into that
immortal glory that they possess together from all Eternity, and so they now
enjoy it again, in one transcendent glorious person, both God and man to all
Eternity.

This proves the truth of these sayings, Glorify me with the same glory I had
with thee before the world was; and of that saying, My glory I will not give to
another; and of that saying, Before Abraham was, I am; according to that saying
of God to Moses, when he bade Moses tell Pharaoh that I am sent him; and of
that saying. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God; and of that saying,
I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread
he shall live for ever; and of that saying, This is the bread which comes down
from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die; and of that saying, For
the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the
world; and of that saying, I am that bread of life; Again, Not that any man
has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the Father; and of
that saying, What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before; and of that full saying that proves Jesus to be the Father, He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not; and of
that saying, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God, the same was in the beginning with God, all things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. Whosoever is not
stark blind, by this Scripture must needs understand that there is no Creator
nor Father, but the man Jesus only, the Lord of life and glory; and where it
is said, through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of
God, so that the things that are visible or seen, were not made of things that
do appear; and of that saying, I am Alpha and Omega, I am the first and the
last, and behold, I create all things new; and of that saying, I am he that was
dead, and an alive, and behold I live for evermore. This was the man Jesus that
sat upon the Throne of the Father, with many other Scriptures too tedious to
relate, that prove clearly to all that are appointed to eternal glory, that
the Lord Jesus Christ that died without the gates of Jerusalem, is the only
God, and everlasting Father, and alone Creator of all things that were made,
both in heaven and in earth; Therefore I declare from the Holy Spirit of the
Lord Jesus that sent us, that whosoever prays in his spirit or tongue unto any
other God or Spirit, but unto my God the man Jesus, that sent me, he prays
unto a Devil of his own imagination, instead of a God; for that man Jesus then
to come, was David's only God and Savior: therefore he said, The Lord said unto
my Lord, sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
And this Jesus was all the true Prophets God in the time of the Law, and this
Jesus was the holy Apostles God, and all the Christians God in the time of the
Apostles Commission, or Dispensation, or Administration, that lasted about
three hundred years; and this glorious man Jesus, is my God alone, and the God
of all spiritual Christians in this last age, until he comes in his glory.

VIII. AGain, but some may say, if Jesus Christ be the only God and eternal
Father, who was that Father that he spoke so much of when he was in mortality,
where he said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; and Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit, and such like; To this I answer, by Revelation from
the Holy Spirit, that Eliah spoken of in the Law, that was taken up bodily by a
VVhirlwind into Heaven, where the likeness of a Chariot and Horses of fire
appeared to Elisha at his departure: I say from the Lord, that the body or
person of that Eliah was taken up and glorified in the Heavens by the Creator
for that very purpose that he might represent the person of God the Father for
that time or season, whilst God the Father went that journey in flesh as
aforesaid: Again, it is written, he shall give his Angels charge over thee;
those Angels were Moses and Eliah, who being both glorified, they did both
represent the Person of the Father, in the Heavens above the Stars, as they did
represent the Person of the Son and of the Father, when they were in earth
beneath the Stars; when Moses was upon this earth, he represented the Person of
God the Son that Lamb Jesus, that was then to come in flesh; in these things,
first Moses was called the Meekest man upon the face of the earth. Again, he
was a great Type of Christ in this, in offering up himself to be blotted out of
the Book of Life for the salvation of Israel, as the Lord Jesus became a Curse
for his elect Israel; likewise; Moses was a great sufferer at the hands of
Israel with much patience; as the Lord Jesus suffered with all patience at the
hands of his own People or Nation. Again, Moses was made an Angel of the
Covenant of the Law unto all Israel, as the Lord Jesus was made or became an
Angel of the Covenant of Grace or the Gospel unto all the elect Israel; so,
that whosoever despised the Law of Moses, was to dye a natural death without
mercy; as a Tie of the eternal death of all those that despise the Grace or
Gospel of Jesus; and in this he was a great Type of the Lord Jesus, when he
said, God should raise up a Prophet unto you like unto me, him shall you hear:
much more might be spoken of Moses representing of the Person of God the son,
but I suppose it is sufficient for any moderate man. Again, when Elias was in
this World, he did represent the Person of God the Father, in these things*
first in a God-like manner by commanding fire to come down from Heaven to
destroy his enemies, and it was so again by his commanding like unto a God all
the Priests of Baal, that were the National false Priests to be put to death,
for drawing the hearts of Israel from worshipping of the true God, and that was
a Type of the eternal perishing of all the National Priests of Baal in the
World at this time; who are Ministers of the letter only, but call themselves
Ministers of the Spirit, and yet the Lord Jesus sent them not: These are those
croaking Frogs that keep the people in darkness, unto whom the people give
their silver for naught.

Again, Elias by his asking of Elisha in a God-like manner, what he should do
for him before he was taken up from him, with his granting of Elisha a double
portion of his Spirit, if Elisha saw his departure from him.

Again, Eliah spoke in the Authority of the Father, when he told King Ahab to
his face, that it was he, and his Fathers house that were the troublers of
Israel, by their departing from the living God, with more such like actings of
his, after a God-like manner, showing clearly his representing the person of
God the Father when he was upon this earth; which was but a Type of his
representing the person of God the Father in the Heavens afterward; but some
may say, it seems very strange, the Lord having so many glorious Angels in his
presence, that he should pass them by, and take up a mortal man, or a
sinperson of God the Father, as beforesaid: To this I answer from the Holy
Spirit; all the Counsels of my God the man Jesus are quite contrary to man's
unclean reason; yea, and contrary to the pure reason of the holy Angels also,
that God alone may have all the glory, of the revelation of his unsearchable
Counsels of wisdom from his Elect men and Angels. Again, I declare by
Revelation from the Holy Spirit, that the man Adam in his Creation, was of the
very nature of spirit of Faith, with all divine virtues of pure love, patience,
meekness, and such like spiritual virtues in his spirit or person, which were
the very same divine virtues that lived in the spirit or person of God his
Creator; only in the person of God every spiritual virtue in him, was infinite
above all measure, but in the person of the man Adam, although they were the
very same heavenly virtues, yet in him they were in measure: thus man in his
Spirit was created like unto the Creator, of the very same Divine Nature; only
they differed in this, for the body or person of God was all spiritual or
heavenly, not subject to mortality; but the body or person of the man Adam was
natural or earthly, subject to mortality at the pleasure of the Creator; for,
if the body or person of the man Adam had been spiritual in his creation, as
his spirit was, then there would have been no difference between the person of
the Creator, and the person of the creature: Thus the man Adam was made like
unto God, a pure natural person, of all righteousness in mortality, like unto
the spiritual person person of God, which is all righteousness in glory.

Again, it is written, the first Adam of the Earth earthly; the second Adam,
the Lord from Heaven heavenly: Thus you that see by that single Eye of Faith,
you may know, that God became flesh or a man, as well as Adam, who was called
the Image of God, because God was a spiritual man from Eternity, as abundantly
beforesaid: Now you must understand the reason why Jesus the only God was
called the second Adam, was this; because the body or person of the Lord Jesus
was a pure natural body of all righteousness in mortality, just like unto the
body or person of the first Adam before his fall; only Christ the second Adam
had the spirit of Faith in him above measure, and the first Adam had the spirit
of Faith in him by measure, as beforesaid: again, the second Adam differed from
the first Adam in this, he being made a man of sorrows, but the first Adam knew
no sorrows before his fall; and why did he become a man of sorrows? it was to
redeem the Elect seed of the Spirit of Faith overcome in his image the first
Adam, by the Reprobate Angel-Serpent, as beforesaid. Again, as for the natures
or spirits of the holy Angels in their Creation, they were pure Reason, quite
contrary to the nature or spirit of Faith in God their Creator; only in their
bodies or persons they were spiritual or swift of motion, like unto the
spiritual person of God their Creator: but if the nature or spirit of the holy
Angels had been of of the spirit of pure Faith, as they were of pure Reason,
then there would have been no difference between the person of God their
Creator, and the persons of the holy Angels in their Creation, who are but
creatures as well as men; wherefore not the holy Angels, for they are not of
the nature of God, as it is written, he took not upon him the nature of Angels,
but the seed of Abraham: but Elias as beforesaid, by the secret wisdom and
counsel, and love of God unto man, above Angels, was exalted upon the throne of
glory for a moment, to represent the person of God the Father, and he was made
the protector of my God, when God became a child; and it was Elias by virtue of
his Commission, as a faithful spiritual Steward upon the throne of glory, that
filled the Lord Jesus with those great Revelations of his former glory, that he
possessed in the Heavens, when he was the immortal Father; and it was Elias that
spoke those words from heaven, saying* this is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; hear him again when Christ was transfigured upon the Mount, that
his garment glittered with the glory of his transfiguration: it was the visible
glorious appearance of the persons of Moses and Elias talking with him, that
were the instrumental Commissioners of that visible glory of the Lord Jesus
unto his Disciples, who said, Master, it is good for us to be here: for that
glory was so great, that they would have been building of Tabernacles for a
continuance in it. Again, I declare from the Lord, that Elias by virtue of his
Commission did fill Elect men and Angels also with Revelation to keep them in
obedience until the Lord Jesus was upon the Throne of his glory again; so that
when the Lord Jesus (who was an absolute creature, cried in his agony unto his
Father, and when he prayed unto his Father, that that Cup might pass from him,
if it were possible; it being a dreadful Cup for his innocent flesh and blood
to drink, he being as sensible of pain in his body, as we are in our bodies:
and when he cried out, saying, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and,
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: I say again from the Lord, that
Elias by Commission from this man Jesus, was that Father that he thus cried
unto in his mortality, Elias being then in glory; and the chief ground of all
those actions, and sufferings, and cryings out of the Lord Jesus in the
condition of a creature, unto a Father or a Creator, was to fulfill the
Scriptures foretold by his Prophets in the time of the Law: therefore he said,
Heaven and Earth shall pass, away, but my word shall not pass away: again, but
you may say unto me, did God the third day rise from the dead by his own power,
or by the power of his Deputy Elias? to which I answer, he by his own decree,
and spiritual compact with Elias, and by that spirit of Faith in his innocent
body, the which Faith died in his pure body, and quickened immediately and
brought forth at the appointed time, that natural innocent body out of the
grave a pure spiritual body, which naturally (at the time appointed) ascended
into glory; for, it was impossible for God by death to be held in the grave;
because his person being pure, his pure spirit and death could not remain
together, because there was no sympathy or agreement or union between them;
yea, they were so contrary, it was impossible for them to be together, except
one of them were absolutely extinguished; wherefore death being too weak, the
Lord Jesus, who is the only God of all created life, brake through death, and
hell, and the grave, and through all the sins of his Elect, by the shedding of
his most precious blood, and so entered into his eternal glory, that all those
that have Faith in his glorious person may be delivered at the appointed time,
from sin, hell, death, and the grave, and enter into eternal glory with him
when he comes in the clouds of Heaven.

Again, the reason why men's bodies in death, or after death, do rot or stink in
the grave, and come to dust, is, because there was sin in their bodies whilst
they lived, the which sin and death had a sympathy, and as it were a sweet
communion together, whereby death had full power as Lord and King to keep the
spirits and bodies in the dust, until the time appointed of the Lord of life:
but on the contrary, if men had no sin in their natures or bodies, they might
life, and die, and naturally rise again, by their own power, in their own time,
as the Lord of life did, whose body was too pure to see corruption.

Thus unto you that have Faith in the Lord Jesus, it is not strange, that Elias
should represent the person of God the Father, until the Lord Jesus ascended
into the right hand of all power and glory of his Father Elias again: then when
Jesus was set down in the Throne of the glory of the Father again* Elias then
as a glorified creature, did return all praise and glory unto the Lord Jesus
his Creator: so that now it is the Lord Jesus alone, by his holy Spirit, that
reveals all spiritual and heavenly wisdom to elect men and Angels; Elias
having now with exceeding joy, surrendered up his spiritual and glorious
stewardship of representing the person of God the Father, unto the right owner,
and sole Heir of Heaven, and Earth, and all therein is, the Lord Jesus Christ,
the eternal Father, God alone, blessed to all eternity: I know I have spoken
enough to the spiritual Christian of this Truth.

IX. AGain, I declare by Revelation from the Holy Spirit, that about this
fourteen hundred years there has not been one true Prophet nor Minister, sent
with a Commission from the Lord Jesus, to declare, or write, or preach the
everlasting Gospel of truth and peace unto his Elect: Wherefore I declare (by
virtue of my Commission, received by voice of words from the Lord Jesus) that
all the Ministry in this world, whether Prophetical or Ministerial, with all
the worship taught by them, whether invisible or visible to the people, it is
all a lie, and an abomination unto the Lord; both the Ministry and their
worship are as acceptable unto my God, the man Jesus that sent me, as the
cutting off of a dogs neck. Now unto you that discern truth from the Lord, I
shall give you light into this truth: first I declare, that all the true
Commissionated Prophets of the Lord, in the time of the Law from Moses unto
John the Baptist, with all the true commissionated Apostles and Ministers of
the Lord Jesus, in the Gospel, they had every one of them in their Commission a
power given them, to set life and death before men, or to declare blessing or
cursing unto men, which is all one, according to their administrations received
from the Lord. Again, I declare from the Holy Spirit, that the Lord Jesus did
purpose within himself, to send his Messengers three times to the world, and
but three times to this bloody unbelieving world, and no more, for a witness
or testimony unto them, and to make known unto his Elect, that he alone is the
only God and everlasting Father; wherefore you shall find it written, there are
three bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these
three are one: again, it is written, there are three bear witness in Earth,
the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit, and these three agree in one. Again, I
declare from the Holy Spirit, that those three in earth are the Lords three
dispensations given to his Prophets or Messengers beforesaid; the Water was the
Commissions of Moses, and the Prophet^ under the Law; the Blood was the
Commission of the Apostles, and those Ministers of the Gospel chosen by
appointment from the Lord; the Spirit, which is the third and last Witness, by
Commission from the Lord, are those two Witnesses spoken of in the Revelation,
prophesied of by John the beloved Disciple of Jesus, that were to come in the
last age, whose Message, or Ministry, or Prophecy, is all invisible and
spiritual, cutting off, or condemning all fleshly formal worshipping of an
invisible spiritual personal God, taken up by vainglorious men from the Letter
of the Scripture, which were the Prophets and Apostles Commissions, because
they want a Commission from the Lord.

Again, I declare from the Holy Spirit, the Lord spoke by voice of word, unto
his three Commissioners that he has sent unto the World; yea, I know God the
Father spoke unto Moses as a man speaks unto his friend, as it is written; and
I know, that God spoke unto the Apostles in the person of the Son, as it is
written, because I know the Lord Jesus spoke unto me in the person of the Holy
Ghost, or Spirit, as beforesaid; only, the two former Witnesses saw the person
of God in part visibly, but I saw the glory of his person invisibly, or within
me, because I am the Messenger of the Holy invisible Spirit.

Again, Concerning those three bearing Record in Heaven beforesaid; the meaning
of those words are this, God from Heaven, in a threefold name or title bear
witness by Signs and Wonders, unto his three Commissioners, according to
their several administrations given unto them, unto Moses and the Prophets;
this personal God bare witness in the name or title of the Father; unto the
holy Apostles God bare witness in the name or title of the Son; and unto us
his third last Messengers, God bears witness, in the name or title of the
Holy-Spirit, because our Commission is all spiritual, we have to do only with
the invisible spirits of men, concerning the eternal estates of men and women's
persons, in the great and notable eternal Day of the Lords account; therefore
instead of natural signs upon the bodies or persons of men and women, as in
the two former Commssions of the Prophets and the Apostles; the Lord Jesus
bears witness, that he has sent us, by spiritual Signs or Wonders, upon the
spirits of those that are sealed up through our mouths, unto eternal life and
unto eternal death, as many do bear witness, whose eyes are opened at this day
in England, in this great City of London.

Again, This is a true testimony unto you that have faith in the Lord Jesus,
that he has sent us by his Holy Spirit, because there is none upon this earth
that bears witness unto that man Jesus that was crucified at Jerusalem, to
be the only God and everlasting Father, but we only; as Moses, the Prophets and
the Apostles bare witness in their times unto this Jesus, to be the only God,
and alone eternal Father: but on the contrary, there is hardly a Minister in
the world that confesses an invisible God, but they preach unto the people
either a God of two Persons, or a God of three Persons, that is a Monster,
instead of one true personal God; or else they teach the People to worship an
infinite Spirit, that is every where, without a Body or Person; but he is fain
to borrow his creatures bodies to live in; that is a God of words only without
any form or substance, or an infinite nothing, that never can be comprehended
nor apprehended in the least by any formed creature, a cursed lying imaginary
God from man's own unclean blind reason, which occasioneth all kind of blood and
cruelty to be committed in this wicked world between man and man; for if men
understood indeed, that there is but one only wise God, and that this God is a
distinct body or person, then would men understand, that all those that are led
by the voice of the Holy Spirit of God, the man Jesus, to work righteousness
in their bodies, they lived in, they only shall appear with bodies of all
righteousness, like unto their God the man Jesus, visibly to behold face to
face the glorious body of the God of all Righteousness for everlasting world
without end.

Thus it is clear to the understanding of all those that are appointed to know
the true God, the man Jesus unto life Eternal, that there is no true Ministry
in the World, because they teach not the true God unto the people; therefore as
it is written, they are blind leaders of the blind, therefore they must needs
both fall into the Ditch; Oh! it is an eternal Ditch: These are those Merchants
of the Letter of the Scripture, that make the blind Nations their prey; these
are those ravening Wolves that come in sheeps clothing; these are those dumb
dogs in spiritual things, that bark a^ true Prophecy and heavenly revelation
that a man d^clares by Commission from the Lord Jesus; these are those that the
Apostle Paul complained on in his time, that bewitched the people to turn from
the spiritual Gospel to the legal form, who began by the Apostle in the spirit,
but were deluded by false Hypocrites to be made perfect in the flesh; these
were of those Hypocrites that were in Christ's time, who under pretense of long
prayers devour Widows houses; these are those hypocrites that are always
teaching of God what he should do for his own glory, when indeed it is their
own glory, (in lusting after things that perish) they desire, when they thus
pray, or preach, or prate; these are those bloody hypocrites, and workers of
iniquity, that the Lord Jesus will never own, because he never sent them.

X. AGain, I declare by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that there is no
Magistrate in this world, that bears the name of Christian, that has any
Authority or Commission from the Lord Jesus to set up any visible form of
Worship whatsoever, to compel the spirits or consciences of men to how down to
his image, that he had set up for his own glory, because ever since the Lord
Jesus ascended into his glory, he alone is the Teacher of all his Elect by his
Holy Spirit; it is truth, in the time of the Law, before God became flesh,
there were many Magistrates and Priests commissionated from the Lord, to set
up, and to declare the true Worship of God unto all Israel, and it was death by
the command of the Lord, if the people despised to yield obedience unto it,
because it was the Lords Worship and no^ man's worship, set up from his own
lying imagination, that would be a God, but he is a devil; for his creating of
a Worship to deceive the people without a Commission from the Lord, and by
taking the prerogative power and glory of God to himself, who will not give his
glory to another, as it is written; therefore in the Revelation, the Dragon
there spoken of, is the imagination of the Beast, and the Beast is the body of
the Magistrate, wherein that Dragon imagination lives; and the false prophet
there spoken of, is the Magistrates Priest, and the Image of the Beast, is that
false worship set up by the imagination of the Magistrate, and the
serpent-counsel of his false prophet or Priest, to deceive themselves and the
people with them; therefore it is written, And all that dwell upon the Earth
shall worship him whose names are not written in the Book of life, of the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the World: that is, all Reprobates, both rich and
poor, shall bow down unto that false, idolatrous worship, set up by Heathen
Magistrates, and their Heathen false prophets, the National Priests, who call
themselves Christian Magistrates, and Christian Ministers, and are blindly
called so by the people also: and yet both of these Devils together persecute
with the sword of steel all spiritual Christians under the name or title of
Blasphemers, Seducers, Heresy, Deceivers of the people, and such like; because
the spiritual Christian cannot bow down unto that carnal Antichristian formal
worship, set up by those carnal Magistrates, and their carnal Ministers
beforesaid, who being both lovers of the glory of this world, loving to be
honored as gods, for that cursed heathenish idol-worship from their own
invention set up to deceive themselves and those appointed to damnation with
them; wherefore the Dragon Magistrate, and the false Prophet his
Serpent-Ministers, that committed spiritual fornication together, and all those
of their own spirits, shall every one of them, in the day of the Lords
vengeance burn in their spirits and bodies together as a lake of fire: those
spirits and bodies that they shall appear with in the Resurrection, shall be
that lake of spiritual fire and brimstone, that by the decree of the Lord Jesus
shall burn together to all eternity; this is that giving her own blood to
drink, who eat up the innocent as bread, and thought they did God good service,
in shedding of the blood of the Lambs of Jesus, as their forefathers did; then
will these Scriptures be fulfilled, And those mine enemies that would not that
I should reign over them, bring them and slay them before me: And, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire; And the Carcasses of the Rebels shall be cast out, where
the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out; And Tophet is ordained of old
for the King; That Tophet is the body of man, and that King is the spirit of
unclean reason in man, for behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven,
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day
that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, and ye shall tread
down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet, in the
day that I shall do this says the Lord of Hosts; Fill ye up the measure ^f
your Fathers, ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers; how can ye escape the
damnation of Hell? for he shall have Judgment without mercy that has showed no
mercy; but the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers,
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, or Astrologers, and Idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death. Again, the bloody persecutors beforesaid, instead of
feeding and clothing the hungry Saint, quite contrary, they do not only take
away the food and raiment of the Lord Jesus, in his Elect innocent Lambs; but
they crucify the Lord of life afresh, in the shedding of the blood of his
Believers, because they yield obedience to the spiritual Law of faith and love,
or command of the Lord Jesus, either by Prophesying or writing, or speaking the
Truth by command from the man Jesus, who is the only spiritual Magistrate and
Minister unto all that are appointed unto eternal glory with him, in that
glorious Creation of that new Heaven and new Earth above the stars, when this
creation beneath the stars is utterly destroyed, and fitted only for
persecuting Dragon-Serpent-Devils to lament, howl, and weep to all eternity,
upon this earth, where the Saints by them were put to grief for a moment.

XI. BUt some may say unto me, do you not allow of the civil Magistrate to
govern the rude people? To this I answer; The Magistrate is very needful in
every inhabited Land, for the government of the People in all civil things, to
do equal justice between man and man: if such a Magistrate could be found, it
would be a rare thing. Again, I declare from the Holy Spirit, although the
Magistrate be but a heathen Ruler, as he is; wherefore Christ said of this
Magistrate, unto his Apostles, the Kings or Princes of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, and they that exercise Authority upon them, are called
Benefactors, but ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you, let him
be as the younger: yet I say from the Lord, the Magistrate bears not the
Sword in vain, but he is a type of the true spiritual Magistrate, that can do
nothing but equal Justice between the just and the unjust the Lord Jesus
Christ. Wherefore, all men ought to yield obedience to the civil Laws of the
Magistrate, either by executing of his Laws, or patiently by bearing the curse
of the Law upon their own persons, leaving all vengeance unto God, or else they
rebel against God, and they are in danger of an eternal curse, because the
government of this world and the glory thereof belongs only unto the wise and
prudent heathen Magistrates in this Earth, who are the very sons of Cain, that
old Serpent-Dragon-Devil, that slew his righteous Brother Abel, that he and his
Seed that are of his own spirit, might be the Lords and Rulers of this world
for ever; because Cain thought, and his dark Angels thinks that there is no
world at all, but this only; they have purchased the Lordship of this perishing
world at a dear rate, for it was the price of the innocent blood of righteous
Abel, it is their only heaven. Therefore let us that have received faith to
believe in the glorious person of the Lord Jesus, by his power patiently suffer
the cursed spirit of Cain in his heathen Magistrates, to shed all our innocent
blood, if our God will have it so, that they may fill up the measure of their
fathers sins, from the blood of righteous Abel and the holy Prophets, to the
precious blood of the Lord Jesus, and the holy Apostles, that our blood that
are the two last Witnesses and Prophets of the Lord Jesus, may make the last
persecutors of Christians complete Devils, with their Father Cain, who was the
first bloody persecutor of the first suffering Christian; therefore it is
written, that Christ was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, he being
slain in believing Abel. I say from the Lord, by the power of his Holy Spirit,
patiently let us yield up our lives with our God, unto those perishing gods
beforesaid; because we that suffer with him are appointed to enter into an
eternal Kingdom of glory in another world, hid from the wise and prudent Rulers
of this vanishing world, therefore it is written, which of the Rul^rs have
believed in him? again, as it is written, Why do the heathen then so furiously
rage together, the Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers take Counsel
together, against the Lord and against his anointed, or against his Christ.
Again, as it is written by Paul, howbeit, we speak wisdom among them that are
perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world,
that come to naught. Again, it is written, which none of the Princes of this
world knew; for had they known it they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory. Again, that world that we are to reign in* after we have suffered, it
was purchased also by blood, but it was the price of the precious unvaluable
undefiled blood of our God the man Jesus, who by his Holy Spirit that sent us
only, makes us willing to taste a little of his Cup that he so deeply drank
of: the servant is not greater then the Master, because we are to sit down with
him upon his eternal Throne of glory, to behold his face, in the presence of
all his holy Angels; then these Scriptures will be fulfilled, Blessed are they
which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Again, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the
Prophet^ which were before you. Again, Then shall the righteous shine forth as
the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Again, For the Son of man shall come in
the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall reward every man
according to his works. Again, Then shall the King say unto them on his right
hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world: Again then shall he say unto them on the left
hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels.

XII. AGain, I declare by Revelation from the Holy Spirit, that since the fall
of our first Parents, that the spirit and body of man are both mortal, and that
by the Decree of the Creator, the soul and body of man are both procreated or
begot together, and they are both of one nature, and so both but one Creature;
for it is the invisible spirit that lives in the seed and nature of man, that
by the Decree of God creates or begets that form of flesh in the person of a
man or woman according to their kind: and thus it is with this whole Creation,
every seed or spirit naturally, by the wisdom of the Creator brings forth their
own bodies or kind, whether Man, Beast, Fish, or Fowl, and all things else that
grows, naturally brings forth in their season according to their natures:
because the Creator by his secret Counsel and Wisdom decreed within his
glorious Person, before any thing was created or formed by him, that all things
or Creatures that should be created or formed by his infinite Wisdom, should
bring forth their own bodies or kind only, and no other for ever: therefore,
when men and beasts seeds, are unnaturally mixed together, contrary to their
kind the Lord discovers them both to their destruction, and his glory.
Wherefore, I declare from the Lord Jesus, and it is a cursed Imagination in any
man to think when men die, their spirits may go into other forms and bodies,
contrary to their own natures or kind; as many a cursed lying Atheist prates,
that denies the Resurrection of men's bodies, through the love of some dark
fleshly lust they live in: They are in spiritual darkness, understanding
nothing of the power of God, and so erring, not knowing the Scriptures, as it
is written, nor the power of God; therefore, it is a common thing for these
blind Atheists in their discourse, to say, when men die, their spirits may, or
do go into a Horse, or into a Root, or into a Flower, with many more such like
cursed expressions, they being more ignorant, if it be possible, of the Lord
Jesus, through the love of fleshly pleasures, then the brute beasts; therefore
they reason against their own reason, and say, this Creation or World had
never any beginning, nor never shall have any ending, two cursed lies.

Again, They call perishing nature God, or Creator, saying, God is all things,
and all things is God: Thus these blaspheming Devils, liken the incorruptible
Spirit of God the man Jesus, not only unto the unclean spirit and cursed
imagination living in the body of corr pt man, but unto the spirits of unclean
beast, and creeping things, as those Atheists in the time of Paul: These are
those who received the truth to prate of it only, but not in the love of it
having pleasure in unrighteousness, therefore given up to strong delusions to
believe a lie, that they might all the damned, then these Scriptures will be
fulfilled, He made all things for his own glory, and the wicked for the day of
wrath. Again, He shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance upon them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus christ: Again, But these as
natural brute beasts made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things
they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption: Again,
Ha^ing eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling
unstable souls, an heart they have exercised with covetous p^actises, cursed
children, which have forsaken the right way and are gone astray, following the
way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness: Again,
Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering stars, to whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever: Again, And also Enoch the
seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, behold, the Lord comes with
ten Thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him.

XIII. AGain, Unto you that see by the Eye of Faith, from the Lord, I shall
show you that general Error amongst men, concerning the spirit of man in death;
some say the spirit dies not at all, but immediately goes into Heaven or into
Hell and the body goes to the dust only; others say, the spirit dies not, but
goes into another form either of man, or some other creature as beforesaid;
others say, or think all men's spirits go into a Hell or Purgatory when they die
for a season; others blasphemously say, that the spirit of man is God, and that
the body only dies and turn to dust; these say also, God is an infinite Spirit,
and all spirits came from his Spirit, and so return into his spirit again;
others say, the spirit and body, or think it turns to dust for ever: indeed,
almost all men are in darkness, because they walk by thinking only about
things of eternity; but about things that perish, they think them hardly ever
sure enough unto them: wherefore unto you, whose bodies are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost; from the Lord Jesus, I shall declare unto you the truth of this
secret; you may know, that the spirit is nothing at all without a body, and a
body is nothing at all without a spirit; neither of them can live or have a
being without the other: you may know it is the spirit only in the body of man,
that li^es, and speaks, and walks, and works, and eats, and drinks, and dies;
for the spirit is a natural fire of Reason, which is that life of light, heat,
or motion, that as a ^re kindles life and strength through all the flesh or
body of man; only the principal part of the understanding of this natural fire
of the spirit of Reason, lives in the head of man; because that is the glory
of the man; so that the spirit or soul is the man, although it cannot possibly
be without the form or body: wherefore when man dies, and turns to his dust, it
is that natural spirit of the fire of Reason, that was the life or spirit of
the body that dies, or is quenched, and goes out within the body, as fire
goes out in an Oven that is closed; so does the spirit of man die within his
body from all sensible life, heart, or motion, until the visible coming of the
Lord of life in the Clouds of Heaven at the last day: therefore it is written,
Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, when the Lord spoke those
words, he did not speak to the flesh or outward form or body of the man, but he
spoke to the inward spirit or soul that understands the words of a spirit:
again, it is written, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death:
that is, if thou through disobedience to my command, do forfeit the image of
thy Creation, then thou shall see mortality or death within thy own body both
spiritual and natural, and the fear of eternal death also. Thus it is clear to
you that believe in the Lord Jesus, that the spirit of man dies and turns to
dust within the body; because nothing can possibly die, but it must first live;
so likewise, nothing can possibly quicken or live again, but that which is
absolutely dead, or dust, or asleep, void of all motion, heat, life, light, or
sense being utterly annihilated to its self, and all other creatures, only
being alive in the memory of God, that God alone the man Jesus might have all
the Glory in the new creating of Mankind at the last out of dust, as he had in
creating of man at the first out of dust, according to that saying in the
Revelation; Behold, I create all things new, in answer to that Creation in
Genesis: Thus it is with the grain or body of Wheat, except it dies, it never
comes to perfection, but abides alone in the dust for ever: But on the
contrary, if the spirit of life which is in the body of Wheat does absolutely
die within its body, then by the decree of God, it quickens out of death unto a
new life immediately, and brings ^orth a glorious Resurrection in due season,
of many bodies in the same form, like unto that which died, of the very same
nature: Thus it is by the decree of the Lord Jesus, with the natural spirits of
all the Elect; first they are dead in sins and Trespasses, before they are
capable by the spirit or truth to live in righteousness; so likewise, the
spirits of men and women must be absolutely dead, when they fall asleep in the
dust, or else they were never capable to rise again, neither in glory nor in
shame; so that by the decree of God, all life, both spiritual and natural, must
first enter into death, that through death, or in death, they may quicken a new
life of a glorious increase, both spiritual and natural; so that death in its
place is as useful for the Creators raising of glory to himself as life is in
its place; this proves the truth of these Scriptures, He poured out his soul
unto death: again, The soul that sins shall die: again, He c^yed with a loud
voice, and gave up the ghost: again, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
die the death: again, His soul was made an offering for sin: again, He was put
to death in thy flesh, and quicked in the spirit. I know I have written enough
to satisfy (in the proof of this truth) all spiritual Christians.

XIV. AGain, it is written, and those that sleep in Jesus shall rise first;
that is, those that fell asleep in the believing of the visible coming of the
glorious person of the Lord Jesus in the clouds of Heaven in power and great
glory, their bodies shall be raised first out of the sleep of death, because
they were united by faith unto the person of their Lord Jesus, who was the
first that ever rose from the dead by his own power, who raised life in death
or out of death; therefore he was called the first fruits of the resurrection,
or of life from death: again, you that see by faith may understand, that not
the same bodie^ that died or fell asleep shall appear any more at all, then the
body of wheat does as beforesaid, which Paul fitly compares together in their
resurrection, where it is written, but God gives it a body as it pleases him,
and to every seed his ^wn body, that is as beforesaid, that grain or body of
wheat that died, quickened a new life out of death, and brought forth in a
glorious manner in due season, many bodies of the same form of that that dyed,
and yet that body that died appeared no more: so likewise it shall be with all
that died in the faith of Jesus, not the same bodies or persons they lived in,
and died in, shall appear again any more, but that spirit of faith mixed with
pure love, and all other spiritual virtues, that were in their former bodies,
by the which they died unto the power of sin, and lived unto the power of
righteousness, that divine seed of faith sowed in the former body died with
the first body, and immediately quickened a new life out of death by the decree
of the Lord Jesus; for you know there is no time now unto God, nor unto them
that are dead, and so brought forth a spiritual body in its ^orm like unto that
in the dust; yea of a body of pure righteousness, the same nature of that holy
spiritual faith, that raised it out of death; yea, a glorious body, brighter
then the Sun in its strength, and as swift as thought, yea, bodies of such a
bright burning glory, that no persecuting Canaanites can behold and live,
because our spirits and bodies according to our faith, and shall be made like
unto the glorious body of God the man, Jesus, the which no man in mortality
with his natural eye, can behold and live: then shall all the Elect in the
twinkling of an eye, both those that slept in the dust, and those that are
alive at that time, whose bodies also shall be changed like unto those that
slept; then I say, they shall all ascend together as one body, to meet their
Head, the Lord Jesus in the Air; and with their King they shall enter into his
Kingdom of eternal glory, where that new Heaven and new Earth are beforesaid,
there with holy Angels to behold the glorious face of the only wise God, and
everlasting Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, with new glorious songs and praises
unto their Redeemers that was dead, as it is written, to redeem us by his
precious blood from eternal death; and now behold be lives for evermore,
therefore we eternally live with him.

XV. AGain, I declare by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that when the Elect
are thus glorified, they are absolutely of the very same glorious nature both
in spirit and body as God is; as God and they were both of one nature in
mortality, sin only excepted: wherefore as the spirit of faith and love,
infinitely in the glorious person of God, overfloweth as a fountain,
continually with revelation of new Heavenly wisdom, from whence flows new joys
and glory to himself, and the holy Angels; so shall every Believer according to
his degree in glory, be as a Well springing up unto everlasting life, of
revelation of new wisdom, from whence flows new joys and glory within his own
person, like unto his God; only they shall naturally return the glory and
praise unto their fountain the Lord Jesus, for this their exaltation upon the
glorious Throne of his own likeness; for it is the righteous actings and
sufferings that was in the innocent body of the Lord Jesus when the was in
mortality, that by his infinite wisdom is made naturally that glorious fire to
kindle new Revelation of Heavenly wisdom with in his body, for the increase of
his glory to all eternity as beforesaid; so likewise all those righteous
actings and sufferings for truth sake, that were acted and suffered in our
former bodies, by the appointment of our God, shall be conveyed into our new
spritual bodies, that are like unto our God, and shall be that glorious fire
naturally to kindle revelation of new wisdom, from whence flows glorious new
songs and praises unto our Redeemer the fountain of all our glory, for
everlasting world without end, as abundantly beforesaid; then shall these
Scriptures be fulfilled, to him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in
my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
throne: Again, and he that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to him
will I give power over the Nations, and be shall rule them with a Rod of iron,
as the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers* even as I received
of my Father; and I will give him the morning star: Again, him that overcomes
will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and
I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God,
which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God, and I will
write upon him my new name: Again, he that overcomes shall inherit all things,
and I will be his God, and he shall be my son: Again, henceforth I will not
drink of this fruit of the Vine, until that day I drink it new with you in my
fathers Kingdom: Again, and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness,
and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth:
Unto him that has loved us, as washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

XVI. AGain, from the holy Spirit, I shall show you the difference between
elect men and Angels in glory: the Angels natures or spirits being pure Reason,
they must always be supplied by Revelation from the spirit of faith in the
person of God, to keep their spirits in pure obedience unto their Creator: but
on the contrary, the Believers Spirits being of the very same divine nature of
God, they are but one voice or spirit, speaking all pure obedience within
themselves unto their Redeemer, to whom alone be all Glory and praise from my
Spirit, with his Elect men and Angels to all eternity.

FINIS.
A Letter presented unto Alderman Fouke, Lord Mayor of London, from the two
Witnesses and Prisoners of Jesus Christ, in New gate, as an eternal witness
unto him; with a Declaration unto the Recorder Steel, and the Lord Chief
Justice Rowles, with the whole Bench and Jury; and in general unto all Civil
Magistrates and Juries in the World. John Reeve, and Lodowick Muggleton, the
two last Spiritual Witnesses, and true Prophets, and only Ministers of the
everlasting gospel, by Commission from the holy Spirit of the true God, the
Lord Jesus Christ, God and man, in one Person, blessed to all Eternity.
BY virtue of our Commission received by voice of words from the glorious mouth
of the only true God upon the Throne of Glory the Lord Jesus Christ; we shall
make manifest unto men, what the foundation is of the power of the Civil
Magistrate, and that he ought not to meddle with spiritual things, which God
has reserved himself, not allowing any man to touch them upon pain of eternal
death, but those only by him anointed for that purpose: First, we declare that
the Scriptures were given by Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; therefore except
the Magstrates were inspired with the same Spirit as those that speak the
Scriptures, they ought not to judge any man by them, but ought rather to yield
obedience themselves unto. Holy Writ, or they must perish to eternity. Again,
we declare from the Holy Spirit, that since God became flesh, no Civil
Magistrate has any Authority from above to be the Judge of any man's faith,
because it is a spiritual invisible gift from God, that gives a man assurance
of everlasting life; but the Magistrates Authority is to judge the Civil Laws
of the Land, which is grounded only upon Reason; but the things of Eternity
are from God, who is from Eternity to Eternity, therefore Faith is the Evidence
of things hoped for, and reason is judge of things that are visible: As for you
that are skilful in the Law of Reason, as soon as you hear an Action to be a
breach of the Law, you understand presently what punishment belongs to the
Fact; therefore the Apostle says, the Magistrate is the Minister of God for
good to them that do well, and a terror to the evil doer: Again, we declare
from the Lord* that no Magistrate by his power from the Law of Reason, ought to
usurp the Law of Faith into his Authority, because the Law of Reason is utter^^
ignorant of the Law of Faith, the one being carnal, and the other being
spiritual; therefore what Magistrate soever takes upon him to be the judge of
us, who are the Messengers of Faith in the true God, they are enemies to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and shall surely perish to eternity: Again, from the Lord
Jesus we forewarn you that are Magistrates, before it is too late, that you
tread not in the Lord Mayors steps, presumptuously to take upon you to judge
this Commission of the two edged sword of God put into our mouths, which if you
are left so to do, it will cut you in sunder from the presence of our God to
all eternity; for our God is a consuming fire, who did pronounce us cursed to
eternity, had we not obeyed his voice; therefore we perfectly know who ever is
left great or small to speak evil of this Commission, which God has put unto
us, by calling it blasphemy, delusion, a devil, or lie, in so doing, they have
sinned against the Holy Ghost, and must perish soul and body from the presence
of our God, Elect men, and Angels, to all eternity; for God has chosen us two
only, and has put the two edged sword of his Spirit into our mouths, as
beforesaid, that whom we are made to pronounce blessed, are blessed to
eternity, and whom we are made to pronounce cursed, are cursed to eternity, and
this power no mortal can take out of our hands, neither will out God any more
give such power unto men whilst this World endures: Therefore you that are
Judges of this Earth, be wise and learned and meddle with those things which
you know in this World only, and call not your God to account at your bar; for
who ever arraigneth a Prophet at his Judgment Seat, it is all one as
arraigning his God, for a Prophet comes in the name and power of his God;
therefore he that despises the Prophet, despises him that sent him. Again, we
declare from the Lord Jesus, if any Magistrate pretends to be a Preacher of the
Gospel, he having no Commission from our God so to do; if he preach any more
after we forbid him, then we have full power to pronounce the sentence of
eternal death upon him, and it is so unrevocable: Again, we declare from the
Lord Jesus, that the cause why so many Magistrates and Ministers must suffer
the vengeance of eternal death, is because with one consent they fight against
the true Messengers of God, with the temporal Law invested upon them by men:
Again, woe would have been unto U^ (...) we had come in our own name; but we
know that God sent us, as sure as he sent Moses, the Prophets, and the
Apostles, and that great Authority, as to be Judges of blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, we only are invested withal: Wherefore you Magistrates that are
not yet under this sentence of eternal death from the Lord Jesus, our counsel
is, if you desire blessedness in the life to come, that you would not meddle to
be the Judges of spiritual things, knowing you have no Commission from the
Lord; remember the counsel of Caiphas the High Priest, if it be possible, and
prevent the Lord Mayors eternal curse.

SIR,
THe 15. of September, 1653. you may remember by virtue of your Warrant we
were brought before you, not being guilty of the breach of any civil Law, the
man Jesus our only God, elect men and Angels, will bear us witness too: but
we being accused of words only in relation to a Commission received from our
God by voice from Heaven; it was your pleasure to commit us unto Newgate, as
the only offenders in this world, notwithstanding I gave you a full account of
the Lord Jesus speaking unto me by voice of words, three morning together,
commanding me to deliver this his wonderful and strange message unto
Magistrates, Ministers, and people, concerning his blessing or cursing them to
eternity, according to their obedience or disobedience unto this dreadful
message of the Lord: and Sir, you may remember that I told you, that (...)
desired the Lord Jesus that I might not be his messenger of such sharp tiding
unto men; and but for this my desire the Lord Jesus by voice of words did say,
that my body should be my hell, and my spirit should be the Devil that should
torment to eternity, if I did not obey his command, in declaring his pleasure
unto men: and who was I, poor mortal clay, that I should withstand the great
and glorious Potter of Heaven and Earth, the Lord Jesus Christ my God alone
blessed to all eternity?

Again, Sir, You may remember, you did ask us diverse questions concerning our
God, and our answer unto some of your questions were judged as blasphemy; but
we told you that you had no Commission from our God to be the judge of
spiritual things, that are eternal in the world to come; but you by Commission
from men are the judge of temporal things, only in this perishing world: and
we only are the judges, of spiritual things, that are eternal in the world to
come, by a Commission from the Throne of Glory, from the glorious mouth of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Sir, if there were any spark of heavenly light shining in your understanding
from the Holy Spirit of Christ Jesus, then you should know in due time that
what I have been made to write in this paper, is as true as God is Truth; but
now it is too late, your time is past, because my God has no delight in your
person, therefore he has left you, as he did King Saul, to commit that
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, or Spirit that sent us: First, by
your denying the Lord Jesus to be the only God: Secondly, you may remember,
like a cursed Blasphemer against the Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man in one
person blessed to eternity, you denied that ever the eternal God became flesh,
man, or creature, or that God is in the person of a man at this time in Heaven
or Glory.

Again, Sir, you may remember when you were questioned by us, what your God
was; your answer was, that he is an infinite Spirit* but you could not describe
him to be in any essential form or person: Truly I do not marvel at your
ignorance, because you are the seed of the Serpent Reprobate Angel that was
cast out of Heaven, reserved in Chains of darkness or unbelief, that you may
worship a God of words only, instead of the true personal God, until the
Judgment of the great Day: my God, the Man Jesus in glory has given you your
portion already, the penny of this world, your souls chief delight: make your
life that is put a moment as pleasant as possible you can, seeing it is all the
Heaven you are like to enjoy, as sure as there is a God.

Again, Sir, this I know, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that in the world
to come, you shall never see the glorious face of our God the Man Jesus:
because before many Witnesses you said that God has no face at all. Sir, once
more unto your own person, because you have blasphemed against the glorious
person of our only wise God the Man Jesus, and against the Sacred Scriptures
that renders all glory from elect men and Angles to him alone, both in Heaven
and in Earth, and against the Holy Spirit that sent us, and for your unjust
committing of us unto your prison of Hell, to satisfy the malice of cursed
accusers of your spirit, that you might prevent (if it were possible) the very
purpose of God: Wherefore in obedience unto our Commission received from the
Holy Spirit, from the presence of our only wise God and everlasting Father, the
Man Jesus, elect men and Angels, we pronounce you cursed and dammed soul and
body to eternity: this is a seal unto you from the Lord Jesus, and a warning
unto all persecuting spirits; until the great and notable Day of the eternal
vengeance of my God, then shall your own body by your prison of Hell, and your
Angelical proud and envious spirit shall be the Devil that shall burn within
your body more intolerable then any natural fire in this World, and your body
shall burn more fiery then any natural brimstone; your spirit and body being
barred close prisoners together in utter darkness, never seeing the face of
God, men, or Angels, nor your own face or person, for everlasting, as aforesaid.

FINIS.

