LONDON's REMEMBRANCER.

A CALL AND PATTERN For TRUE and SPEEDY REPENTANCE.

BEING An ABRIDGMENT of those many severe SERMONS, By Thomas Reeve, B. in
Divinity. ENTITLED GOD's PLEA for NINEVEH:

The only seasonable Work that can be done in this day.

Jer. 18 7. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil way, I will repent of the
evil that I thought to do unto them.

Sam. 3.12 -- When I begin, I will also make an end.

LONDON, Printed for Th. Dawks, 1683.

This is Abridg'd.
The Author's DEDICATION. To the Religious Citizens of LONDON, who are sensible
of the Sins, and do suplicate for the Safety of their CITY.
Honored Sirs, and Citizens of a famous City, etc.
I Call you out to a new Merchandise, many of you have been negotiating in most
of the known Cities of the World: but did any of you yet Trade at Nineveh? Let
this be your Empory, buy up her Commodities, and set up an Exchange of her
Wares: others may call upon you to traffic elsewhere; I direct you to this
City. Some of Nineveh's Ashes, Sackcloth, men with new lips, feet and hands,
would be more useful now, than all the precious Rarities the richest Marts can
afford: Nineveh is the Place, the way is beaten: you shall never repent of the
Journey, it is a renowned place: in whose Ruins, you may find Treasure enough to
redeem you out of the present hazards, and to prevent future Miserys. Indeed, I
lay your Sandals before you, yet be not discouraged, ye shall go but like
Merchant-Adventurers; if ye be Industrious ye may drive a very advantageous
Trade, and come home laiden with the Riches of the same; linger not, set forth
speedily, and make a quick return, and Millions shall bless you: quarrel not
who shall go first, but walk peaceably, and God Almighty prosper you: Apply
your selves to the right work, and fall to right down Christianity; let him be
the best Man which can be most Zealous in this Religious Service. It Is hard to
build a City, and 'twill be as hard to preserve it: When a City is grown crazy
with Sin, they must be Master-Workmen that repair its decays, or keep it from a
Downfall: be never so well prepared, your Task requires almost Angelical
puri^y and perfection to discharge: Consider what ye are to do; to wring a
Spear out of the Almighty's Hand, to turn back an Host of Judgments upon their
March: appear in (...) 2. complete Harness, and quit your selves like men. But
by what Citizens shall this (...) done? By them that are truly Religious, and
are sensi^le of the Sins; and do supplicate for the safety of the City: I Must
have such as have the Sins of the City smarting upon their Hearts, and the
safety of the City, ecchoing in their Lips. I take no delight in hearing
Citizens commended for exterior things, such are The conspicuous Persons which
are perspicuous in Graces, and the Eyes that see them bless them for their
Piety, whose chief Mart is in Heaven, and Trade for such Riches as excel all
the Treasur^s of Egypt, whose Hearts are knit to the City, and whose Tongues
are soliciting for it, which weep over the Sins of the City, and would even
sacrifice themselves in Expiatory Dutys, to prevent Judgments from it: Pardon
me, I judge not the City by Furs and Gold-Chains, etc. These have no place, but
only the feeling Conscience and fervent Soul: the rest I might send to C. M.
Coriolanus, who in the greatest necessity never tendered the welfare of the
Inferiors, but looked only to provide for his own Greatness and his great Ones:
and held the poorer Citizens to sad sufferings, lest being supplied with what
they wanted, they might be enabled to call him and the rest to account for
their Injurys. Having taken upon me a dolorous Service, to whom should I apply
my self, but to the true Mourners in Jerusalem? yes, there are sins in the
City, and these sins do threaten Judgments; All ye which do face the one and
fear the other, let me entreat You to sigh and sacrifice with me, that the City
being penitent, neither the Peril nor perishing of the City may be dreaded. To
obtain this Blessing, I confess, I have (as I can) sanctified my self with some
solemn Resolutions: I desire you to enter into the same Vow with me, not to
desert the City with your Repentance and Devotion, till a discharge be brought
out of Heaven, and the City settled in a Condition to be spared. I hear a loud
speech, what is not this City able to do? I wish it may be able to examine amd
to extricate her self: I cannot but love your City for her Breast, that she
proved such a kind Nurse to them which had neither Milk nor Maintenance, when
upon the Death of their Mother they were as exposed Children. I thought once to
have called in all the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation to join in this Work:
I would have Invited the Reverend of the Clergy to have assisted in this
Religious service, I would have drawn in all the Civil and Common Lawyers to
plead in Heaven for this City. I would have summoned in all the Physicians to
have administered a sovereign Potion to this City: I thought to have sent down
to all the Citys in this Kingdom to have repaired hither themselves, or send
faithful substitutes, their Conversion, to officiate for the City in her
greatest peril: for seeing this is the Metropolis, why should not all the
Daughters do their Duty to their Mother, and wait upon her with their Prayers,
Tears, Humiliation and Mortification? yes, they here vending all their
Commoditys, and buying their principal Wares, it is convenient should bless her
with their Repentance, which has blessed them with Revenue. But because the
most proper Cure is that which is personal, (people being able to prepare their
Antidote) therefore ye knowing both the Malady and the Medicine, what need I
trouble others? when ye are able (if ye will) to do the work your selves, and
to be your own Physicians. And now I have left you in your own Hands (setting
Life and Death before you, Oh that I could speak to the City in general, that
as ALL Nineveh, so ALL your City would be unanimous to unite their Repentance
to keep often a Judgment. But I see such a Complicated Disease of bad Opinions,
and such (...) Cakexy of evil Life amongst you; some only magnifying the
Virtues of the (...) others going on in an Insensibility of any thing, that it
is either Sin or Danger, that* despair to find the generality apprehensive
either of Disease or Cure. I remember that Calcedon was called, the Town of the
Blind, because they would not suffer an experienced Workman to build their
Houses: and so, such a blind City shall I leave you, if I set on Work half
sighted Architects, who can neither see Errors, nor forsee Hazards. Therefore I
do set-by all the Humorous and Vicious amongst you, and apply my self only to
those that are truly Religious, which have the most Conscience to discover sin,
and the most Remorse to reconcile an offended God. It is a singular Work, and
there must be singular Agents in it. It is That great City, and it must be that
Great or Good party which must invert the state, and avert the Judgment of the
City: Lord, who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring
forth the Children of Israel out of Egypt? Exodus 3.11. So, who am I, that I
should summon a whole City to Repentance, and bring such vast numbers out of
the bondage of their Corruption and Destruction; Yet God has given the Motion,
and he may by such a Stammering Tongue make his Message effectual, who knows
but this Cake of Barly-Bread may overturn the Medianites Tent? That this Lump
of dry Figs may heal the Soar? That this Clay and Spittle may open the Eyes of
the Blind? Bring forth your Repentance? and what may not such an Hester
appearing do to reverse a Decree? God is not so offended with the City, but
Repentance can end the distaste. I set before you Nineveh, not half so glorious
in being Potent, as being Penitent. Jonah does denounce a Judgment, God does
pronounce a Pardon; the Prophet must not spare, and yet God does spare. The
Prophet has Threatened them into Repentance, then God does not Threaten but
Comfort, not adjudg and accurse, but accept and acquit: Repentance does renew
the People and revoke the Sentence. The Prophet was very opposite to it, but
God does bring in very apposite Reasons to satisfy his Contradicting spirit.
God does plead for the City, and does plead against his own Prophet. This is
the Dilemma how the Prophecy may stand and the City may stand: The Prophecy is
obeyed, and therefore there could be no overthrow, there was Repentance and
therefore there could be no Rejection and Revenge; this is the middle way,
which God does make use of to answer the Dilemma. God will not approve of his
Prophets, if they do not proclaim Judgment. Tho the Prophets must thunder, yet
God does keep the thunderbolt in his own hand. A sinful people must be warned,
a penitent people must not be destroyed. This is one of the Riddle's of God's
Mercy, which Jonah not being able to unfold, God does expound it: does God show
Jonah how he could prophesy no less, and yet how he himself could spare no
less? Should not thou thus cry? should they not thus reform? should I not
thus spare? God had taught Jonah many things, and now he does reveal to him the
Aenigma of his merciful Justice, how Justice and Mercy may meet together in the
same subject without Violation to either: The Prophet was in great blindness
concerning this secret, and the City had like to have paid dearly for his want
of understanding, but God satisfied the Doubt and saved the City. Oh that we
could see such a Riddle in your City, and thus explained. Jonah [now] does cry,
but is God believed? the overthrow is proclaimed, but do Men fly from it? the
City is warned, (...) is it humbled? it is threatened, but shall is be speared?
Oh that the Citys willful Im^^^ ^^^ncy, after millions of Cries, should not be a
greater Riddle, how it can be speared, (...) Gods inclination to Mercy after
serious Repentance, is a Riddle, fully expounded before, and half expounded
now, that the City may be spared. As intelligent as this City does seem to be,
I wish it could answer one Question, Is it Nineveh? Is there expression; or
almost expectation of such humbling? for this end is this C^y sent forth (...)
this time] and Oh that the Prophet might only cry, or so cry, that he might cry
up a (...) ^ineveh! Be not deaf but open the Ears of others, that ye may not be
my Patrons only, (...) of the City, not of her sins, but of her Repentance. If
ye fail in this work, the City (...) past Remedy. Be as penitent as you can,
and diffuse Repentance to others, have ye bur^^^^ed Consciences? draw others to
fell the weight of those guilts which may sink them into Ruin. The City is in
Peril, what is the Preservative? Policy may invent much, but I know none but
that of Repentance. To prevent a general Overthrow, shall we ever see a general
Conversion? What will Men leave their Seats of Honor, and apply themselves to
Sick-cloath, Ashes, Fasting, mighty Cries, turning from their evil Ways, and
from the Violence of their Hands? Oh that we could see such a beautiful City to
honor our Nation, and to bless it self. But I fear this is but a City of
Desires, and that it is not harder to build up Jerusalem to her first Glory,
than to raise up such a City amongst us; every Stone in this City may sooner be
altered, and new-laid, rather than Men's Minds and Consciences. I doubt whether
penitent Duties were ever truly intended amongst us, and I am very jealous
whether ever or no we shall see them really expressed. Men can rather shoot the
Gulf; climb the Alps, go a pilgrimage over the whole Earth, than repent: All
the Difficulties which ye ever met with, are not like this Straight. I confess
here does appear to be much Religion in the City, but what Repentance is there?
or if Repentance, is it that of Nineveh? No, here are Sins enough to overthrow
a City, but is there Repentance enough to have it spared? The Earth never saw
greater Provocations; but when shall it be said, Heaven never saw greater
Propitiation? People are much for Paterns, but not for Imitation ( Unless it be
of that which is wicked, as Swearing, and Whoring, etc.) wise Men may devise
Forms, but where are the virtuous Men that will conform to them? No, as a Beast
neighed to Alexander's Horse which was painted, but the Spectators expressed no
such Repect to Alexander's Image it self: whereupon Apelles said, That he had
painted the Horse better than the Prince. So Bruites will be more affectionate
to those things which do resemble their Nature, than we to those things which
should direct our Manners. Here is a choice Picture, Nineveh limmed out with
Tears and Graces, and a Frame made for it, even this Record in holy Scripture:
but when shall we behold the Parallel? Oh Citizens, and Religious, though you
have some Skill in Painting, yet can you draw Nineveh to the life, in orient
Colors amongst you? No, were it to preserve the City from Fire and Sword, yet
will ye readily be thus abased and changed? ye may be, but it will be with a
great Difficulty. For the present, what Signs are thereof such Prostration;
Consternation, Renovation? No, they which have committed horrible Sins, may
rather have Forms of seeking God to confirm themselves in these Wickedness,
than many here which are liable to eminent Dangers, have any evident
Expressions to fall to the Earth, or to look up to Heaven to avert Vengeance.
Can these Bones live? O Lord, thou know, Ezekiel. 37.3. There is nothing
impossible to God, but this is almost incred^^ (...) to the present View. For I
see that Men have not learned Nineveh's initiating, (...) less her completing
Graces; they are not yet come to her Trepidations, Percussions, Astonishments,
Humi-cubations Macerations, Syncopes of Grief, Paroxisms of Conflicts,
gravitoned Accents of Prayer: No, people nourish the Flesh, catch at the World,
follow Modes, temporize with Changes, and leave Perils to the Venture, and
Judg^ments to the Chance: Happen what will, they have not so much as a wrimpled
Brow, or a trembling Breast: A Stork will fly faster from a cold Country, or a
Beast from a naked Sword, than these from Plagues and Punishments. When shall
we see these two essential parts of Repentance amongst them, The turning from
their evil Ways, an^ from the Violence of their Hands?

1. Their Evil ways do seem to have a Mist upon them, they have not Eyes clear
enough to see them, or Hearts tender enough to lament them: though they have
strayed far enough from the prescript Rule of Obedience, and never a precept
warranting their lawless Paths, yet they tread on, and consider it not, the
Ignis Erraticus has lead them aside, and lay not to Heart over what Rocks and
Precipices they do pass: Oh that there should be such Declinations under the
directing Ordinances; or such Footprints amongst instructed Christians! No man
says, what have I done? Many a Man says, what may I not do? People look upon
their Faces, but seldom on their Consciences: This clasped BOOK has not been
opened to view every leaf, nor this deep Well searched to the bottom these many
years. Oh! how much Hyprocrisy, Apostasy, Bribery, Flattery, Blood, Blasphemy,
Southsaying. Sacriledg have been past over without the least check or fret. If
any Sins come under their Discovery, they are the sins of the Age, or the sin
which Malignity have doomed sins, but they have neither Eye, nor Tongues, nor
Hearts, to spy out to speak out, or reflect upon their proper sins; though they
be as bitter as Gall, as red as Scarlet, as venomous as the poison of Asps, as
black as Satan, coming forth with a Steem of the bottomless Pit; yet there is
neither Sensibleness nor Conscientiousness of them: they are their proper sins,
and as they have given them Conception and Birth, so they bestow Education and
Maintenance: they may have a street-cry, or pulpit noise (sometimes) but the
sound is gone so soon as received; they deny them, conceal them, extenuate them
and justify them; yea some are so impudent as to deride them: Fools make a mock
of Sin, though it be to dance before a Calf of their own making, to triumph
over a captivated Sampson, or to quaff in the Bowls of the Sanctuary, or to
present John Baptist's Head in a platter, or to cry Hail to the King of the
Jews, when he is leading away to be crucified. These, or the like, are the
Expressions which they do make to their Sins, rather than look aghast upon them,
loath them, bleed under them. How many Sinners have ye yet seen, that though
they have done things contrary to the Torch Light of Nature, and Sun-Light of
Scripture, the Tenor of their own Oaths, and the Terror of a Catholic Church
condemning them, that have yet blushed, sob'd, or rung a hand, or bended a knee
for them? No, they have done them, and stand up in the defense of them; after
productions they do bestow upon them protection. Now if People will not discern
their Sins, how will they ever disclaim them? if they will not look upon their
evil ways, how will they ever turn form their evil ways? what little
likelihood, what small hopes of Conversion and Reformation?

2. Turning from the violence of their hands; is a thing as improbable: For,
are there any gentler or juster times to be expected? Will Men pare their
Nails, soften their Palms? No, I don't see so much as sense of Jnjury, or a
shame of Oppression. Not so much as an Adonibezek's remose for Cruelty,
Threescore and ten Kings have I, etc. Nor an Ahab's fright upon a Bloody Fact,
to be confounded so, that, etc. People do not so much as question their
Estates, which they have gotten by forged Cavillation, or ask forgiveness for
their wrongs, or make restitution for their ill gotten goods: much less will
desist from their damnifying Courses. Tyranny does flow in with a high ^age.
The Earth is covered with violence; as it was in the day^s of Noah, Genesis 6.9 A
man would think that Aegypt's iron Furnace, or Babylon's iron Yoke were am^ngst
us. Here is digging of Pits, taking up all with the Angle, swalowing People
alive, as the Grave, eating Fruits without Money, breaking the Arms of the
fatherless, affl^cting Gods Heritage, the Rulers being as roaring Lions (as the
Scripture says) and the Judges as the Wolves of the Evening, devouring with
such Fury that they leave not the Bons till the Morrow. Some groping for Bribes
with Felix: Some requiring men's right Eyes to condescend to a peace, with
Naash: Some pronouncing sentence of death upon a framed Information, with
Jezabel's Judges; Some not being ashamed to run greedily after the Error of
Balaam for Reward: How many Houses are build with crying Stones, and cemented
with bloody Mortar? The Times are full of much Fraud and Force, Invention and
Circumvention, Domination and Conculcation. Men enjoying Preys with as much
Satisfaction as Birthrights, and possessing Rifles with as quiet a Conscience
as just Earnings. Oh! when will the Whip depart out of this City? when will the
wild Beast's teeth fall out of their heads? when will the Hammers leave
beating? or the Millstones leave grinding? when will Repentance so reduce this
City to Equity, that there need neither Tribunal to rectify Injuries, or Pulpit
to touch Conscience for Extortion? People in general will scarce take notice of
their Cruelty, much less will they take away the Crime; they will scarce feel
their rough hands, much less will they turn from the violence of their hands.

Thus then you see, how the City is in a dangerous deplorablestate, full of
stupendous sins, and yet full of stupid Impenitency; a professing City, and
yet far from Evangelical Purity: How then may the City Walls shake, and every
Citizens Heart be daunted, expecting some exemplified Judgment, for these
enormous Transgressions? Will God ever be dared with challenging Trespasses, or
mockd with phannatick Formalities? will the noise of the Sermon-Bells, or the
sound of the Gospellizing Tongues be able to pacify an incensed God? No, he may
seize you in your Streets, where you are defying him in your full strength; or
take you at Church, where you are deluding him (perhaps) with Temple-Cheats.
Who ever resisted the Lord and prospered? God may send the Flood, when thou art
in the midst of thy Quaffings and Dalliances? Fire may come from Heaven, when
the Sun is shining brightly in thy streets: A great Cry may be heard in the
midst of the City at Mid Night, when thou art supposing neither the Slaughter
of the First nor First born; the Avenger of Blood may pursue Thee, and pluck
Thee out of the Cities of Refuge: God may slay thee whilst thou art laying hold
on the horns of the Altar. Has not God destroyed as mighty a people as you?
yea, the Amorites were potent, yet when their sins were full, they were emptied
out of their Nation. Has not God ruined as religious places as yours? yes; Go
ye now to my place which is in Shiloh, where I set my name first, and see what
I did to it, for the Wickedness of my people Israel. Jer. 7.22. Yea, go to
Jerusalem, how was that Fortress of the Earth demolished, yea that City of
Oblations made a Sacrifice to the Justice of a provoked God. Oh therefore be
not confident, neither upon your own Prowess nor Profession; for it is neither
your formidable Chivaldry, nor form^l Religion, which will privilege you or
protect you; but it is your Repentance must shield you, and shelter you. See
then what must save you, and what is your only Preservative. There are a great
Company among you, famed for Par^s, and magnifyed for Piety; to You I write,
You I summon, entreating You by all the Worth that Your Names are embelished
with; and adjuring You by all the Orthodox Truth, which ye seem to have
reserved out of the defection and declension of the Times, that You would first
go a Circuit through your own Consciences, and then that you would walk the
streets, and go from one end of the City to the other, and observe the Face and
Fate of the City; that you would take notice of the Maladies and Ulcers of the
City, and consider what prognosticating Symptons there are of an Emigration and
Exanimation. Oh feel the weak Pulse of the City, toutch her cold Lips, and
behold her grisly Cheeks; look upon the present Dangers and Disasters,
apprehend what a Flag of Defiance is hung out upon Earth, and what a Sword is
bathed in Heaven. Can such Sins, and the Citys Safety, such Impenitency and the
Citys Impunity long stand together? Fear ye not some Plague? Some general
Massacre, some Coal blown with the Breath of the Almighty, that may sparkle and
kindle and burn you to such Cinders, that not a Wall or Pillar may be left to
testify the remembrance of a City? They whose Judgment was not to drink of the
Cup, have assuredly drunk it off, and shall thou altogether go unpunished? Jer.
49.12. May not the Vial of red Wine be reserved for the Lips of this City? Is
there more Sin, and shall there be less Justice? Vengence deferred is not
recalled, a forbearing God may double his dismaying and cofounding Strokes. Oh
therefore mark the bad Crasis (i. the Complexion or Mixture of your natural
Humors) and the sad Crisis (i. the time of Conflict between Nature and
Diseases) of the City. Help at an Exigent, Repent when there is nothing but
Repentance left for an Antidote. Repent truly, lest your Repentance prove a
Scandal and a Curse: Repent thoroughly, lest one unmortifyed sin frustrate the
virtue of a Humiliation; repent timely, lest not knowing the time of your
Visitation, the Blessings you wish for be hid from your Eyes.

1 Repent for your-selves. For, as the pure minds had need to be warned, so the
pure Consciences had need to be cleansed. The best of you, I fear, have not
past through the Puddle without some Filth sticking upon your Skins: therefore
search out your Spots and leave not a Stain to be an Eyesore to Heaven. Weep
out all your Contaminations, pray away all your Pollutions, purge away all your
Defilemens, have an hour in a day, a day in a year for strict and solemn
Repentance.

2. Repent to teach others Repentance. When thou art converted, confirm thy
Brethren. When ye are quickened yourselves with Repentance unto Life, propagate
it (if possible) unto Multitudes, that it may be said, Behold here am I, and my
Children. Let your beleiving in God beget faith in others, your standing up
from your Seats, excite others to rise; your empty Bowels, provoke others to
fast; your stripped Backs, cloth others in Sackcloth; your moist Eyes, set
others on weeping; your confessing Lips, stir those Tongues in other Men which
have be silent these many years; your making Reparation for Errors, cause
others to deface the Memory of foul Facts with oppsite Virtues; your mighty
Cries fill the City with Eccho's of Devotion; your turning from your evil Ways,
change the Steps of others from Exorbitancy; your purging your hand from
Violence, procure Oppression to ache in the Joins of there is Men's Fingers; Do your
Closet-work well, and be exact in your Street-work: Repent, and make a whole
City propense to Repentance.

To some I might say, Have ye not heard of Repentance? Do ye not know how to
repent? Do ye not understand the Effects of Repentance? Have ye not seen Fruits
of Repentance? Can ye not repent? Will ye not repent? When did ye ever repent?
When will ye at last repent? Oh that ye were as eminent in Repentance as
Nineveh! Oh that ye could be rid of the Libertines and Hypocrites amongst you,
and that there were none but Penitents in the City! Oh that ye stood upon equal
Numbers, that ye were but the third, the twentieth, the fiftieth, the hundred
part of the City: that, there but a common Hall of you, that ye did but equal
the number of the Officers or Watches in the City: that ye were but enough to
take the Frowns out of God's Forehead, the Menaces out of his Cheeks, to retard
his Feet, to bind his Hands, to put Audience in his Ears, Compassion in his
Eyes, Reconciliation in his Breast, Pardon in his Lips; to keep his Trumpeters
from the Gates of the City, or his Troopers out of the Streets of the City: Oh!
Religious Citizens, try the Compleatness of your Numbers, and the Perfection
of your Gifts. Be not blind under so many Greivances, deaf under so many
Warnings, sleepy under so many Judgments. Believe not your Politicians, if they
tell you your City is in no Danger: Believe not your Pulpits, if they preach
you up to be pure enough against God's examining Justice; believe not your own
Consciences, if they persuade you, that you are prepared sufficiently against
all Accidents. Consider how many are wit-foundred with Humors, which stare
upon themselves as if Heaven must look upon them with an enamored Eye? how hard
is it to get People to confess that there is a guilty Nation, or a sinful City?
howsoever that They are the peccant People, or that God should visit a Place
for their Impieties: Oh! behold, how many things there are to tempt you to
Security, to cauterize you in Sin, and to stupify you to Repentance. And as
ever you would seem to have risled your own Hearts, dissected your own
Consciences, to have sent the Intelligencer into the City, to have heard the
Cries of your Abominations at Gods Judgment Seat, to have seen the Armies which
are raised in Heaven to assault you: Oh, think upon the City with dismayed
Hearts, look upon the City with weeping Eyes, turn aside to bemoan apparent,
Perils, and fall upon your Knees to mitigate deserved Vengeance: Oh bring forth
all the Water in your Heads to extinguish Wrath, kindle all the Fire in your
Lips, to put a Heat into congealed Pity: stretch forth all the Manacles in your
Hands, to chain such an Adversary. Think, that ye have read Scriptures with
reckless Eyes, if ye have not found out Curses against such Sins; that ye have
frequented Sanctuaries like fruitless Hearers, if they have not taught you
Repentance for such Sins; that ye have searched your Consciences with
partiality, if the Sense of such Trespasses do not drive you into Passions;
that ye were terrifyed with your own Exigents, if it does not perplex you to
see a City at such a Dysaster. Make an Experiment of your own Contrition, try
how you can humble your-selves, to keep the City from Confusion and Curse; cut
of your own Fore-skins, and do your best to circumcise others; rend your own
Hearts, and make a Wound in your Brethren's Breasts, till the Blood come: If
there be but one Remedy, leave all other Medicinal Applications, and fall to
Repentance; or use all other Exercises but as Ingredients, to be infused into
that Catholicon. Repent heartily, repent eminently, that Angels may rejoice
over your Conversion, and God himself may look out at his Court-Gate, and say,
Behold another Nineveh. Oh think not of the World, think upon Judgment, mind
not too much Preferment, mind Atonement; look not upon the Splendour of the
City, look upon the Horror of the City; eye not your Guardians, eye your Enemy.
Carry the Threatenings of God's Laws in your Ears, and the Perils of the City in
your Breasts; let your Hearts ache, and your Lips quiver. The Lion has roared,
who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophesy. So long as
People are settled upon their Lees, think that there is some emptying of the
Vessel at hand. When you are laid in your Beds, suppose that a punishing God
may awaken you; when you are at your Feasts, that Vengeance may bring in the
Voider; when you are selling your Wares, that the last Bargains are even
making; when you are telling your Thousands, that ye are but pursing up for the
new Receiver; when you are looking out at your Doors, that ye are ready to be
plucked over your Thresholds; when you are coming from your Sermons, thae the
time is at hand when your Temple-Doors shall be locked up. Expect every hour
when your Bells shall ring awk, when a shreick Trumpet should be blown in the
Streets, when nothing should be heard among you but tumult, distraction,
wailing and crying, alas, alas! Would you shun this? can you prevent it? then
know, that ye must not only remember the City in the Morning, nor mention it at
Night, but consider how low ye must stoop, what Abjects ye must turn, what
Mediations ye must use, what Castigations ye must endure, what strange B^cks
and Bowels, Loathings and Lamentings, Debatings and Debasings, Cleansing of
Consciences, and Cleansing of Estates, Transformings and Translatings there
must be before the Breach can be repaired. This is your Work, act like expert
Artists, Master-workmen. Religious Citizens, fly from all Pleasures, contemn
all Honors, be Strangers for a time to your own Chairs, Cook-rooms, etc.
Converse rather with biting Hunger than sumptuous Banquets, bitter Cries than
musical Instuments, till ye have dispatched that Service which will secure your
Goods, your Blood, your City. Oh! they must be prime Penitents which are to be
employed in this peerless Duty, they must have Nineveh's Plaster, to heal this
festering Wound; they must have Nineveh's Solicitor to procure Peace in this
Court: They must write out their Repentance in Nineveh's capital Letters to
have it legible in Gods Eyes. Oh ye Citizens then, gather together, and see how
many Penitents there are amongst you; or, let the Penitents stand apart, and
mark what Qualifications they have. The Penitents are the best Citizens, and
the best Penitents are the true Ninevites. If there be a Number amongst you
with Nineveh's Art they may have Nineveh's Success, they may bury all Fears in
the Ash, heap, and shift often all Miseries in the Sackcloth; they may fast away
all Perils, and pray away all Judgments: God will not turn upon the City with
Fury, if they turn from their evil Ways, nor stretch out his avenging Hands, if
they turn from the Violence of their Hands. Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and forsake his feirce Wrath, that we perish not not? These Penitents
may send Word to Heaven, that God may forbear smiting, for they have smitten
themselves with Repentance: They may convey News to all their Enemies upon
Earth, that they may stay at home, for Repentance has reared up their Walls,
higher than the Clouds which n scaling Ladder can reach, and mounted Ordnance
for them upon their Towers and Fortresses, which will shoot and Assailants to
Death, farther than the Spires of their Steeples can be seen; yea, dispatch
away Messengers to all Plagues and Judgments, that they are not to come nigh to
the City, for Repentance has gotten a Warrant of Remove to carry them beyond
the Seas. Do you thus Repent and you are as safe as Nineveh, God will be your
Pleader against all your Adversaries (were it Jonah himself) multiply Reasons
for your Preservation; he will draw Pity toward you from the most flin^y
Hearts, however his own Breast shall flow with Combassion; ye shall be precious
in Eye. he will forget nothing that may be incentive for sparing, not the
Greatness of the City, not the Multitude of the Persons, nor the Plenty of the
Cattle: Should I not spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are more than
Six-score Thousand Persons, etc. I have shown you the right way to Safety, walk
in it, and you are gone beyond Danger, ye are the the City to be spared.

Thus leaving my Motion to your Consciences, I rest;

The serious Monitor of your Repentance, and the earnest Petitioner for your
Safety. THO REEVE.

ERRATA.
PAge. 7. line. 2. after Heaven, add and can do more. l. 7. r. it is. l. 16 r.
insensible. p. 11. l. ult. r. they will. p. 15. l. ult. r. into. p. 17. l. 28. r.
Drunkenness for Thirst. p. 36. l. 24. r. draws. p. 42. l. 13. add the. p. 48.
note, The Plague. p. 55. l. 28. r. and.

The CONTENTS.
GOD a Pleader for his Saints. Page I. Au. Caesar pleading for a Soldier. ib.
The Qualification of true Repentance, in 18 Particulars. 2, 3. etc. Threatenings
should awaken greatness. 3. Greatness no fence against Vengeance. 4. Nineveh's
King first puts on Sackcloth. 5. The Power of Prayer. 6. Oppression cease, to
prevent Judgments. 7. Repentance continues the City's Charter. 8. Nineveh
beleiving the Prophet, is spared. 9. Foolhardiness the way to Ruin. ib. The
Pit is filld with persons of high Birth. ib. The English addicted to Gluttony.
10. If Heart changes, every thing changes. 11. A City is an Attrictive of pity.
12. GOD the Cities Friend. 13. A City a place of honor on 8 Accounts. 14. A
City should be a place of Example. 15. A City a Pattern of Holiness. 16.
Reproof, those delighting to destroy Citys. 17. -- to men's blindness and
stupidness. ib. God no Enemy to Greatness. 18. Such as God has made great,
ought to be great in thankfulness. 19. Look back to your Beginnings. 20. Great
Penitents are to save a City. ib. Several famous Citys in the World, yet all
short of Nineveh. 21, 21. Nineveh emulated by Semeramis, her Original, Valor
and Death. 24, 25. Ninevehs Excellencies. 26. The Excellency of London above
other Cities, 28. Discord of Citizens brings certain Ruin to both Parties, 29.
Prodigious Sins another way to ruin Cities. 30. Conquered Citizens most
miserable. 31. Conscience then a Sufferer too. 32. Judgments marching rank and
file, bring ib. Fire. 33. Massacres, 34 35. Popery. 36. Repentance represents
to God every thing in us that should draw Compassion. 37. Cleopatra's Pomp to
meet M. Anthony. 38. God a diligent Observer of the Penitent. ib. Sin will
bring Confusion upon a City, if the Walls were Brass, and Guards Anakims. 39.
Happiness Carries Propriety with it. 40. Greatness consists not in bare Titles.
41. Present Bliss the Honored Bliss. ib. God continues as well as conveys
Blessings. ib. Phillip K. of Macedon, making his Oration to his Soldiers,
standing upon a Sepulcher, 'twas looked upon as ominous. 42. Man made by
Deliberation. 43. Macrinus's Son born with a Crown. ib. Men the Treasure of a
C^ty. 44. Sinners worse than the filth of a City. ib. Sacking Cities not so bad
as slaughtering Citizens. 45. The Lives of the Vanquished are not at the Mercy
of the Conqueror. ib. Dire Exampl. of Cruelty at taking Cities ib. A great
Blessing to abound with people. 47. Bless God for preserving you from an other
Plague. 48. Plagues can depopulate Kingdoms. ib. The Terror of the Plague. 49.
Numbers should be a Motive to Compassion. a destroyer of Multitudes cruel. 50.
God is exeact in numbering, he knows the Thousands, and the Surpluss. ib.
Therefore chide gently with Providence 51. Dare not to sin against so knowing a
God. ib. God knows his Elect. 52. Man a wanting Creature. 53. God glorious in
Extremities. ib. Poland miraculously delivered from the Heathens invading them.
ib: God does not discern where Man dot not discern. 54. A door of Hope for
impotent Persons. 55. Compassion for the impotent. ib. Physicians Eminent, seve
rall^ contriving to prevent the Plague. 48. Severe Censures have made the World
a slaughterhouse. 55 Christianity (I doubt) has not sanctified Judgment
Seats, Blood under Tribunals does cry. 56. What justifiable Ignorance is. ib.
Reproof for them that sin against their own Discernings. ib. Infants and simple
Men are highly cared for by God. 57. The Necessity of Childrens Education. 58.
The great returns Persons have made their Tutors. 59. Infants rightly baptized
have certain salvation. ib. We should be tender of wronging Infants. ib.
Lycurgus's uprightness to an unborn Infant. 60. Orphans outcry against unjust
Execut. 61. The highest of Cruelties to kill Infants. 62. Innocence ground of
divine Comiseration. ib. God will conceal nothing that may tend to the
advantage of his Saints, And also. 63. God a Restless Advocate for his Saints.
ib. Reproof for a Politician vaunting himself. 64 God is most passionate for
Mercy. ib. Envy an incorrigible Sin. ib. God is compassionate to the very
Beasts: And much Cattle. ib. A d sobedient people cursed in the increase of
their Kine. 65. Tame Beasts forsaking Pastures, and Wild Beasts running in the
Streets ib. Men draw in Traces for want of Cattle. ib. Man a Right to the
Creature. ib. Commiseration to Cattle taught to Men. 67. He is a beast that is
barbarous to his beast ib. Plenty of Cattle an eminent Blessing. ib- Gods
bounty in small things conspicuous. 68. Where there is much Cattle there God
expects much Commiseration. ib. There should be much Circumspection in ordering
a great Estate. ib. Men have not a escape Goat to take away the sins of the
People, but they have a Kid to send to an Harlot. ib. A Herod will perjure
himself at a Strumpets Motion, and behead a J. Bap. too. ib. Several ways the
Devil prevails with Men to abuse Cattle. 69. Where much Booty is, will be much
spite. ib Pompey's Rich Spoils. ib. Rape gives no just possession. ib. Q.
Fabius and Alcibiades, etc. not suffer the Soldiers to plunder the Citizens.
ib. Pekah King of Israel, conquering Ahaz King of Judah, is severely threatened
for purposing to keep under the Children of Judah: etc. ib. The Authors
pathetical Persuasions to Repentance backed with all manner of Reasons: He
greives that the City should lose it self for want of a proper Duty,
Repentance. ib. Nineveh forthwith repented, what not you? ib. Lucius Silla
blushed to see Pompey a young man ride in triumph before him ib. Sudden
Judgment should affright and afflict you. ib. Alexander Severus did cut in
sunder the sinews of a man's hand because he falsely represented a case to him,
and will false Repentance go unpunished? 72. Many wish your destruction, and
are sorry they cannot make you miserable. ib. Their Hearts boil, Brains works,
Mouths foam. ib. Enemies in the City. ib. The sins threaten more Calamities
then all the implacable Adversaries. ib. The Dangers apparent, the Misery will
be unspeakable. ib.
THE LONDONERS Looking-Glass: Or, PATTERN for REPENTANCE:
Jonah, 4.11. And should not I spare Nineveh, that great City, wherein are more
than sixscore Thousand Persons, that cannot discern between their right Hand
and their left, and also much Cartel?


GOD and the Prophet are here in earnest Dispute: Jonah raging and God
reasoning; Jonah full of Passion and God full of Compassion; Boni viri
Lachrimabiles, good Men should be ready to melt at Judgments: Jonah was first
unfaithful, and next impatient: Ah Jonah! what thy God gentle and thou cruel?
Nineveh's Repentance in the time limited, prevented its Destruction: God has
no Sword for the yielding, but the obstinate.

How many Prophets have not been so successful in forty Years, as Jonah was in
forty Days? God will not remain dumb in the case of his Saints, but he will be
a consulting and a conferring God, both give reason and have reason for them:
he will plead with Cain for Abel's Blood; with Abimelech, for taking away Sarah
from Abraham; with Ahab for wresting away Naboth's Vineyard.

As the Faithful have the Arrows of Gods Deliverance. 2. King. 13.17. So they
have the Argument of his Justification. When a Soldier desired Aug. Caesar (as
his Gracious Emperor) to Plead for him at the Bar, he said no, but I will allow
an Orator: I thank thee not for this, said the Soldier, for at the Battle of
Actium. I fought for thee with my own Hands, and not by a Deputy, etc. At which
August^s blushing, rose from his Imperial Seat and opened the Soldiers Case,
and freed him. God will not leave his People to Substitutes, but will be heard
himself.

For Application.

1. This shows the Saints Case is never desperate, God is their Pleader; what
can all the Politicians and Crafts-Masters, of the Word do against them? wicked
men perish by their own Inventions, how many men lie buried in the Ashes of
their own mischievous Contrivements? Ye Righteous, though ye be even made a
Spectacle to the World, Angels and Men, and accounted a People which have lost
their Graces and their Wits, matter it not, so long as you have Gods
Confutation: How is the Ministry the Scoff the Age being neither fit to stand
in the Gap, nor to stand above Ground; not to break Bread, nor to eat Bread;
not to be Eyes to the People, nor to enjoy the Eyes in their Heads; let us
order them out of their Livings, drive them by Droves out of their Cures, lock
up all their Pulpit-Doors against them? Let us be quiet under these Clamours,
let us not fear to wander when God is our Guide:

2. But does God plead, so we should plead; happy is he which does mingle Tears
with Mourners, which does search out the Perishing in Prison, which is the
Shield of the Distressed, nay, the Orator of the Afflicted.

Many Heathens have passionately sought the preservation of Just Persons; yet
We rather supplant than support, destroy than defend them, plot than plead. Are
there not those that instead of building a Tower, they will dig a Pit for their
Friend; instead of studying out terms for Preservation, they lay in wait as
they that set Snares. O where is the Just Man's Guardian? Where is the good
Angel that does attend upon the Distressed? no, Misery has no Champion,
Innocence no Advocate* How ill do such deserve a Protecting God, or a
Justifying Redeemer? Who shall sweeten your Sorrows, or plead for you at Gods
Throne?

This shows that the distemper of Sin is not easily cured, nor the malady of
Error remedied easily: Sampson's strength can scarce break these Cords; O
therefore beware how thou do open thy Doors to Sin, they must be pregnant
Arguments which must Confute an habituated sinner.

Some possibly will say, how shall we be Penitents? that is, answer Nineveh's
Penitential Work? would you know this? view the Original, and you shall find
them penned down in the Catalogue.

1. Hearing God in his Messengers; for Nineveh is Converted by Jonah's
Preaching: People usually find the way out of the World by the light of the
Ministry, by the beat of that Drum they repair to Gods Muster: Faith comes by
Hearing, Romans 10.17. as if the Ear were the Clicker-Gate of Salvation.
Preaching is the power of God to Salvation. Romans 1.16. and the savor of Life
unto Life. 1. Cor. 2.16. Thou may Eternally starve in thy Tent, if thou do
not go forth to gather this Manna.

2. Not to be too curious in our Counsels. Nineveh does accept of Jonah for a
Prophet, though by Nation a Stranger, and a man opposite in Religion.

3. Enduring sharp Doctrines. Jonah come not Flattering, but with a mouth full
of Menaces: Yet forty days, etc. He that cannot hear of Threatenings, will
hardly hear of Reformation; it must be much knocking to break a Heart of
Adamant: St. Peter must lay Blasphemy and Bloodshed to the charge of the Jews,
before they will be pricked to the Heart.

4. They Apprehend Danger* So the people of Nineveh believed God: when the
Heavens write out our Judgments in Capital Letters, shall we not read our own
condition? etc.

5. Not delaying Repentance. Nineveh was a City of three days Journey, and Jonah
had but, as it were, just entered the City, and what a new Face is there
instantly to be discerned? Jonah's Cries are heard, and the City is Converted.

6. Sin has its stirring motions. At Jonah's Sermon, there was not only the
shaking of Ears, but shaking of Limbs, the Cry will not suffer them to receive
the Message upon their seats, but they are forced to stand up to it; It Is not
enough to see God angry, and not to pacify his displeasure; No, this is but to
take notice of the sadness of the times, or to receive the bruit of impending
Misery; we are to do something to avert the Punishment.

7. Greatness is not thought on; This Cry does not only make the Ears of the
vulgar to tingle, but the Consternation is entered the Palace; he that sat on
the Throne and did wear the Robe, is made to forget both his Throne and Robe,
he not only moves with the rest; but rises with the first; for, Word came to
the King of Nineveh, and he arose from his Throne, and laid aside his Robe. The
mightiest should have their Judgment frays and shiver under Gods threatened
Plagues; Is there any Antidote against Caesar? Any preservative against Divine
Wrath? No, Gods Lightning strikes upon the highest Mountains: What is a Throne
to him that has built his Stories in the Heavens? What is a Throne to him that
is clothed with Jealousy as with a Garment? Can a Golden Scepter fright away
Judgments, or all the Jewels of the Crown, redeem a man from Vengeance? No, God
takes King by the Collar, and hurls them under his Feet. -- That great Pharaoh
that asked, Who is the Lord that I should hear his Voice? shall hear 'ere long,
who is Pharaoh? -- Oh, that many were not enclosed in their own Fat, and
infatuated with their Chariots of Glory, as if they would outrun and out-ride
all Misery; like Charles the 8th. of France, because they have great Riches to
trust to, they distrust not to be happy against Accidents; those fat Bulls of
Basan which graze in green Pastures, never look that they shall be taken by the
Horns and Flayed; those Leviathans which swim in the Ocean of Greatness, never
expect that the Harping Iron shall be darted into their sides, that they shall
be played with like a Bird, -- These never rise, forsake the Throne and cast
away the Robe; its a hard thing to see these Chuffs tremble, or to let fall an
Eyelid, or to bruise the Breast before a mortifying Preacher: Pashur, that is
a Governor never thinks he shall be a Slave, and that his Name shall be Mager
Missabib, fear round about. There lies hid a kind of Sorcery in the Throne,
the Robe is a kind of Enchanted Vesture; how many might have sat in Heavenly
places in Christ Jesus, were it not for this Throne; and might have been
arrayed in fine Linen, which is the Righteousness of the Saints, had it not
been for this Robe! Do we not see that great Men contemn all Doctrine, and
scorn Devour Messengers; if an Eliab does reprove such, he is made to fly the
Country; if a Jeremiah deliver his Errand freely, it is enough to have his
Prophecy cut in pieces with a Penknife. If Cyril meddle with the great Juliar,
he shall be hewn asunder, and his Liver eaten up by the Heathens, p. 79. If
Ignatius reprehend Bardas for his vicious life, he shall be locked up in a
Sepulcher for many years, afterward banished, and at last slain. The
high-brest Worldlings cannot endure a Check; the Throne and the Robe make men
conceive themselves superior to all Reproof, how do they snuff and snarl, fume
and rage, show their Tusks and put out their Stings, look like Leopards, and
sparkle like Basilisks, if they be rebuked or threatened? A Jonah's cry fills
all the Country with Tumults, they storm upon their Throne, and Vow by their
Honors they will be revenged; one had better anger all the Witches and
Conjurers, provoke all the Centaurs and Minotaurs in the World, than menace
this haughty spirited Generation; the Devil has his strongest Chains upon the
rich men's Heels; he is most Prince where disdainful men sit on the Throne, or
wear the Robe. Have Rich men no Souls to save? or will Riches secure them
against Divine Vengeance, cannot God cast down thy Throne? and tear in pieces
thy Robe? smite thee upon the Throne? and strip thee naked for all thy Robe? is
a Golden Nightcap a Headpiece? or a Velvet Jacket a Breast Plate against his
Judgments? why then does not Greatness stoop as well as Poverty? etc.

8. An Humble Dress: for the King does cover himself with Sackcloth; What
shall a King put on Sackcloth? and shall we put on Silks and Sattins, Cloth of
Silver and Gold? What be as Sumptuous as Lords, as Gorgeous as Princes? and yet
is this dread of Judgments? dismayed Repentance? oh feat Converts, oh spruce
Penitents? where there is humiliation for Sin, there must be a mournful habit:
else 'twill be said, Thy spirit is not very sad, thy dress is so trim; loose
attire shows a dissolute mind; Penitents are not busy in Haberdashers, Mercers,
Feather-makers or Perfumers shops: No, Micah does appear stripped and naked, 1.8.
Isaiah does go barefoot, 20.2. the Israelites do not put on their Ornaments
nor best Garments, Powder, Wigs, Spangles, Cuts, Jags, Frizles, Crispings,
Purple and Crimson are fitter for Swart-rutters and Ruffians, than for true
Penitents. If there were no other Provocations in the Land, yet there were fuel
enough for consuming Judgment in peoples excessive and unlimited Pride; our
patch't faces are enough to make us Monsters in Gods eyes, our long Tails to
sweep all Blessings out of the Nations: if one should search the Wardrobes,
Cabinets, Complexion-Bottles, a man would wonder that the flying Book of Curses
had not already lighted upon this exotic Island, or that this Theater of
Vanity were not burnt down with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven; [What would
this good man have said if he had lived in this Debauched Generation, this Age
of Whoring, Swearing, Cursing, Perjury, an Age wherein Godliness, i.e.
God-likeness is perfectly hated; and those most like the Devil only in esteem
and repute] See the Postscript.

9. An High Abasement; the King does not leave his Throne to take up an
inferior Chair, but he sat upon Ashes. O therefore upon the day of thy
Repentance, let high Birth, high Crests, high Looks, high Titles, all elate,
inflate, lofty, stately, imaginating, ingrandising preheminencies and
privileges be forgotten, and count thy self the Bran of the Bolter, the
sweeping of the Floor, a scuttle, a span-full of Ashes; you see how the King of
Nineveh by this loud cry of Jonah makes Ashes his Penitential Stool.

10. A restraint of Delicacies. A Fast is proclaimed and kept; when men are
preventing a Shipwreck, quenching a Fire, pacifying an incensed God, and
averting Judgments, they have no time to Carouse, etc. Esther and her Maidens
fasted three whole days together; when we are Petitioning for Mercy we must not
come with Meat sticking in our Teeth, nor belch in Gods face with our full
Stomachs, when we are begging for our Lives; No, hollow Cheeks, sunk Eyes,
gnawing Bowels, macerated Sides, fainting Spirits, are better than swollen
Faces, swallowing Throats, reaking Stomachs, eyes starting out with fatness.

11. The whole strength is engaged, all go to the work, Kings, Nobles,
Citizens, and all sorts of Men. Where the Danger is common, there should be an
unanimous prevention.

12. A memorable thing done in Repentance, the Ninevites made their Beasts to
fast and wear Sackcloth. Profaneness can bring forth Prodigious things, and
shall Repentance bring forth no eminent thing?

13. An anguish for Sin. Every Street of the City does Proclaim her Mourner.

14. An acknowledgment of Sin, chapter 3. ver. 8. This must not be a formal
Repetition of Error in general, but every Trespass which does come to our
Knowledge must be rehearsed upon our Tongues end; oh, therefore unravel your
Lives, sweep the hid corners, rake the Canels, lay open the secrets of your
Heart and Lives, disburthen your Consciences, let the festered Corruption run
out at the mouth of the Wound, speak out the Errors, and tell all the Crimes in
Gods Ear.

15. Reparation for Sin. The Ninevites had offended God many ways, and now they
bring the opposite Virtues, they return back to God what is his own as well as
they can, and clear the Arrearages, etc.

16. Devout Supplication; they cried mightily unto God. The Penitent must not
only be sollicitous, but a Solicitor. How many have Filed off the Fetters of
their Sins, escaped out of the Keepers hands, shut up the mouth of Hell, and
stood spotless among the pure Angels by the benefit of Prayer; Moses by lifting
up his hand struck down the Amalekites; Hezekiah by crying to him that lived
between the Cherubims, fetched an Angel from Heaven, to destroy a Hundred Four
Score and Five Thousand in a Night; Asa, but by saying, Help O Lord, we rest on
thee, and are come out against this Multitude, dispersed an Army of Ten Hundred
Thousand; [and I am confident as great things may be done in this Age, by
Prayer, for the people of God, as has been done in any since the Creation;] a
Christian is never higher than when creeping upon his Knees, not stronger than,
when he is stretching out his hands toward Heaven, by looking upwards than
others can do by Plotting beneath. The People of God count Prayer their chief
Engine, the effectual fervent Prayer of the Righteous avails much, Nineveh
cried mightily.

17. Renovation of Life. Repentance without Reformation is a mocking of
Almighty God, is like running into the Pesthouse where we first got our
Plague Sore. Henry the Fifth cast off his old Companions when he began to
Reign; Isaeus, when a rare Lady was showed him, and asked whether she was not
fair, and fit for his Dalliance, he answered, I know not, for I have given over
to be guided by my Eyes: What do thou Repent, and keep thy Whore in thy
House? What, wilt die in her Arms, and yet be counted a Penitent, a Godly
Person, etc.

18. A Reformation of Oppression. Nineveh had been a Cruel, Bloody City, and
remembered how many there were that could accuse them of Cruelty and Tyranny,
that is a formal Repentance, where men are sensible of their damnifying
injurious Courses: Oppression is of a Scarlet Hue, it is put among crying Sins;
shall God remove Judgments when men are removing Landmarks? Shall God cast
away his Rod, when men are chastising with Scorpions? He must not expect to
taste of free Mercy that eats others Fruits without Money; It Is in vain for any
to Sigh for Compassion, when the poor Cry for Vengeance, which swallow up
People as the Grave, Prove. 1.12. which Groundsel their Estates with Damages,
Roof them with Detriments, Plaster them with the Brains of Widows, and Hang
them with the Skins of Orphans, etc. He that is the Pleader for the Poor, will
not be the Patron of Oppressors; till they have cured their Blood-shorten Eyes,
let them not look up to Heaven for Pardon.

Application. 1. This does show that Mercy is the Privilege of the Penitent.

2. Where there is great Provocation, there may come a Pacification.

3. This does show that Pacification is to be resolved on, not according to
Profession, but Repentance.

4. This may shame our Perverseness and Obstinacy, What, Nineveh the Mistress
of Witchcraft, which was mad upon her Idols, and built Altars to shameful
things, does she Repent? and not we who pretend to have the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ? Was Nineveh spared,
and must we be Judged? has the Idolater more propensity to Repentance than the
Christian?

5. This does show the Excellency of Repentance; is not that a rare Virtue that
has qualified Nineveh to be spared? yes, all her Pomp, glorious Walls,
sumptuous Palaces, Riches, melodious Music, Conquests abroad, Triumphs at
home, Street-Lustre, Court Splendour fall short of the Magnificence of
Repentance: Oh, the beauty of these Ashes, the fineness of this Sackcloth, the
Nourishment of this Fasting, the Music of these Cries; her Habit, Heart and
Spirit changed! When the King is Chief Mourner, the Nobles, Citizens and Beasts
fellow Mourners with him, and nothing but sitting upon Dung-hills, Sighing like
Distracted men, Groaning like Dying persons, counting Plagues their Doom, and
Hell their just Desert: True Penitents abhor themselves, History tells us, That
Solomon, King of Hungary caused himself to be five times dragged through the
open Streets in detestation of his Sinful Life. N.B.

6. This puts us upon Trial, whether we that would be a Pardoned people are a
Penitent people, Repentance saved their Laws and their Lives, That kept the
Crown upon the Kings head, the Nobles in their Courtly Equipage, the Merchants
in their Splendour, it prevents Detriment, it ratifies Liberties, confirms their
Immunities, renews their CHARTER, they are still Proprietors in all their Fees,
Lords of all their Royalties, and by Repentance thou have saved a flourishing
City, etc. thou did make them cry mightily that no other Cries might be heard
in this City, but those of Devotion; 'twas Thou that taughtst them that Secret
and Mystery how to prevent eminent Dangers; all this it did for Nineveh, oh
that I could say it would do as much for London; if ye are as Penitent as
Nineveh ye shall be as prosperous as Nineveh; it is true, ye have lived in the
Lords eye, but ye have sinned before the Lord exceedingly, ye tread upon Gods
Ground, but ye have polluted the Lords Land, turned Bethel into Beth aven, a
House of Prayer into a Den of Thieves; ye are rather Jesreel than Israel, Sodom
than Nineveh; you would be Reprieved, but where are your Qualifications for a
Pardon; you may match Sins with Nineveh, (nay Sodom it self) but can you match
its Repentance; No, see how you can clear your selves upon Trial. Look over the
former heads viz.

1. Nineveh heard Gods Messenger.

2. Nineveh was not curious in its Counselors, a Stranger was received.

3. Nineveh does endure sharp Doctrine.

4. Nineveh does apprehend danger; for they believed God, they verily thought
the state of their City was near Destruction, at the brink of Ruin; but we
defy such Seditious Preachers, Tumultuous Prophets; Calamity is but their
Jealousy, Peril but their Peevishness. We are a Righteous people and not to be
punished, a formidable people, and not to be frighted; they are a scandalous
and audacious people which terrify us with Judgments; we have Spears enough (as
the French King said, having 200000 Soldiers at his Heels,) to uphold the
Heavens if they should fall; This is the Confidence and Fool-hardiness of this
Age, though the Clouds gather yet we think of no Storm; though the Ship leaks
we think of no Wreck; though the House be on Fire, yet they stir not, our Ditch
is the Sea, none can swim over to us, all our Ports are locked [ But Treachery
can fill us with a foreign Enemy, and lay open our Ports to them, etc.] none
can force an entrance; Dangers are but the Melancholy Apprehensions of
Malcontents, or Dreams of Lunatic Teachers.

5. Nineveh does not delay Repentance, but how do we weary God with
expectation, etc.

6. Nineveh had stirring motions, Jonah but delivers his Message, and there is
Honor given to it, for the King of Nineveh rose up: but when will we stir or
descend a Degree, our proud heart cannot shrink up? etc. when sad Tidings was
brought to Job he rose up, but no news or need will make us stir, We sit in the
seat of the scornful, or like Babylon, sit as a Queen, as if we should see no
sorrow, we are negligent in things most important.

7. Nineveh does not think of Greatness, for the King is first in the action;
but alas, our Great ones are such good Leaders, they must have the Path beaten:
Greatness, which should be exemplary, thinks it self exempted; those which
should be in the Front come in the Rear; it is a rare thing for an Obadiah to be
one of Gods Nobles, or for a Daniel to open a Window toward Jerusalem; The
Lions Whelps are a long time before they come to their Feet, they do not stir
under a Month, nor walk under seven: The Devils Prison is filled with Persons
of high Birth and Fortunes, he has honorable Slaves, they go in Scarlet, wear
Gold Chains, ride in Coaches, Whore Swear, Ram and Damn and Drink Health's at
norate, etc.

8. They have an Humble Dress, the King puts off his Robe, he and the whole
City puts on Sackcloth we are so far from Repentance at heart, that we have it
not on our Backs, if we are Penitents, We are spruce ones.

9. Nineveh has the height of abasement, they sat upon the Ash heap; but we
upon the Bullion-heap, or Bullet-heap, or Building-heap, we think of great
things rather than Confusion; we never dissemble more than when we talk of our
weakness; we will not think of the Ash-heap, because we imagine all the Flames
of Divine Vengeance cannot turn this Nation into a Bon-fire, or Burn us to
nothing, etc.

10. Nineveh had a restraint of Delicacies, for they neither did eat Meat nor
drink Water. Cato told Julius Caesar, That he only came Sober to Destory the
Commonwealth, but we cannot come sober to preserve the Commonwealth; we
cannot shut up our mouths to fence out a Judgment, nor loose a Meals Meat to
obtain a Blessing. 'Twas truly said by Jovius, That the English Nation above
all others upon Earth, was most addicted to the Throat; if a true account could
be brought in for one years Table Expense in this Nation, what a large Bill of
Fare would there be? I doubt whether the Spanish Indies would defray one years
Charge: Oh that we could send the Glutton and Wine-bibber out of the Nation,
then there might be some hopes of Sacrificing a true Sin-Offering, we are too
lusty and vigorous, too full fed and drencht in Liquors to Repent; true
Repentance must be lean and meager, etc.

11. They put their whole strength to the work; but we think a small company
will suffice to do the Church work, a few are enough to prevent Judgments, and
preserve the Land.

12. They had a memorable thing to testify their Repentance, for they made
their Beasts to fast. What do we do to the honor of Repentance? we are for the
via trita, the beaten road.

13. They had an Anguish for Sin, the whole City is a Mourner; but we are the
joyous City, the Tabret and the Harp do not depart from us.

14. Nineveh confesses her Sins, but alas our Mouths will not open; no man
says, What have I done; we rather hide our Sins than bring them to light; we
love not to show our Rags, tell our Debts, or open our Sores; no, we will
Plead Not Guilty, and be pressed to Death, rather than confess the Indictment,
Peccavi, I have sinned, is too big a word to get out of a Sinners mouth; we
desire powerful Teaching, Thundering, etc. but we would have it against others
Sins, and not our own, etc.

15. Nineveh made some Reparation; he that had seen Nineveh in Pomp and Pride,
Crisped and Curled, Bathed in Pleasures as a ruling City, but now as a ruful
City, dejected, ashamed, blushing, pronouncing her self unmeet to be seen or
known, fitter to pine above ground, or to rot under ground, than to draw Breath
above ground, he would think Nineveh was about to make amends for all her
excess; for every strip of this Sackcloth, every handful of the Ash-heap, the
Bowels griping for Food, the Beasts lowing for Fodder, do testify Nineveh to be
a most satisfying Creature; O Londoners, how long will it be before ye be
brought to make this Reparation for Sin; Another Life does require another
Diet; when our Hearts change, every thing about us should have a change; I know
there is no compensant satisfaction of Justice for Sin, but of hatred against
Sin; not as a cause of reconciliation, but as a sign of Detestation; not as a
cleansing from the Curse, but as a horror of the Trespass, not as an Instrument
of Justification, but as an Adjunct of Mortification not to procure Innocence,
but to declare Humility, and shall we renounce Sin without smiting it at
parting, or give it a farewell battering; there is nothing more offensive to
Sin than to see it self abased, and its opposite in its place; there is no
Repentance without a Holy Revenge, which is making a Reparation.

16. They had devout Supplication; they cry mightily; we must not look for
mighty Comforts without mighty Cries. God sits on his Throne, but none make
Addresses to him.

17. Nineveh has a Renovation of Life. Let them turn every one from their evil
ways: but alas, He that was filthy is filthy still, not one Tract altered: some
amazement, no amendment; a little Humiliation, but no Reformation. We would
rather Teach Repentance, than Practice it, what VVhoremonger has yet unclapsed
his hands with his Whore, etc. were there ever so many Unregenerating Sermons,
the Moors are black still: Time-may turn, there may be several variations in
humane affairs, but not in humane Actings: Men are resolved and settled, they
will not turn from their evil ways. Who has believed our Reports, etc. was ever
so many Alarums, sounded, and so few mind it? many may watch over Souls, but
who wins Souls. Faith and Repentance are the two great Lights of the Church,
but now Eclipsed.

18. Nineveh was touched with Oppression, for it is not barely said, Let every
one turn from his evil way, but likewise from the violence of his Hands. If God
should demand (according to Law) hand for hand, Exodus 21.24. what a dismembered
Nation would there be! the hand of the Avenger would pursue too many: Whether
they wash them, yea or no? I know not; sure I am their hands are full of Blood.
Thus at large you have seen Nineveh's Repentance. O that Face could answer Face
in the Water! ye have acknowledged Sin, but do you come with Mineveh's
Confession: ye have been soliciting Heaven, but did ye ever awaken God with
Nineveh's mighty cry. We are immured, little hopes of a Jail-delivery.

Now we come from the Name of the place, to the Nature of the place, That Great
City, wherein, etc.

God himself does produce Reasons why he should spare Nineveh, and that because
it was no Family, or Village, or Borrough, but a City; and no obscure City, but
a vast, large, great City; there are three things considerable, the subject,
City; the attribute, Great; the eminency, That.

That Great City. 159
For the subject City, hence observe, That a City in it self, is an Attractive
of Pity. Gods great Providence is seen in the greatest things, what more
Beautiful than a City? There is a great weight in the name of a City; all Men
are carried to a City (as to a place of the greatest honor.) Solomon compares
the strength of Affection to a strong City. Prove. 1.8.19 And Isaiah says, That
there are houses of Joy in the joyous City, Isai. 32.13. Yea, God does Animate
Jeremiah to deliver his Message with Confidence, for he had made him like a
fenced City. Jer. 1.18. What offerings were there appointed to be at the
Building of a City? Ezekiel. 4.8. and what Solemnities were there used, at the
Dedication of the Wall of a City? Nehem. 12.27. God himself, as he would not be
without a Law, an Ark, a Tabernacle; So he would hot be without a City, which
is called the City of God; yea, how dear a City is to God, may appear by the
name of it in Hebrew, which comes from a word, that signifies to stir up; as if
God by the name of a City, were stirred up to provide for it: Indeed he keeps
the City, and his Eyes are toward the City. And it is Graven upon the Palms of
his Hands.

1. A City is a good resting place.

2. Citys are places of meeting; for the seed of the City is as the Gravel.
Esai. 48.19. It does multiply Merchants like the Stars of Heaven, Nahum. 3.16.

3. Cities are places of order, they are not VValls, but Laws that keep Cities.

4. Cities are places of Arts and Sciences: In the Country are Herdsmen, but in
the City is the cunning Artificer.

5. Citys are Conspicuous: a City set upon a Hill cannot be hid, God does land
his Judgments upon the Shore-side; and does make them take a long March through
the Country before they do pitch down their Tents, dig Trenches, lay straight
Sieges, and set up scaling Ladders against the City. Indeed if a City does live
out of Fear, live in pleasure, dwell carelessly, if the Harp, Viol, Tabret,
Pipe, and, the Wine, be in their Feasts; if they deride and defy Judgments,
then God may fray the City in the midst of her Jollity, Case up her Musical
Instruments, bring in the Voyder to her sumptuous Banquets; turn this Dancing
City into a sorrowful Lady; yea, make this Melodious City a Ramah, wherein
there shall be nothing but Mourning and VVeeeping, and great Lamentation;
instead of the Mirth of the City, and its Jollity, the cry of City shall go up
to Heaven. 1 Samuel 5.12. If a City wax proud, insolent, and daring, it shall
know, neither Gates, Bars, VValls, Towers, impregnable Castles, or Millions of
Armed Men, can or shall secure her; Gods confounding Judgment shall pull down
the most potent and haughty City. A City of perverseness shall be a City of
Perplexity. Ezekiel. 9.9. Then the City shall be smitten. Ezekiel. 33.24. Laid
desolate Esa. 27.10. Made a Den of Dragons. Jer. 10.22. A defenced City shall
be made an heap, Isaiah 25.2. Yea, God will set his Face against the City for
Evil, and not for Good, Jer, 21.10.

Application, 161
This shows that God is the Citys Friend; yea, the City has not such a Patron
as this Preserver of Men. Except the Lord does keep the City the Watchman
waketh hut in Vain. Psalm. 127.1.

1. Trust not in your Marshals or Magistrates, these are but your Dij
Medioxumi, middle Gods; ye have the Lord God Almighty to rely upon; what need
the City fear any thing if God be their Friend? though Friendship sometimes is
dangerous, Men care not how they sell their Friends like Commodities they have
no use of, or make spoils of them, as spend-thrifts do of Estates: the
perfidiousness of Friends is such, that it is a snare to be familiar: But God
will give his own Weapons to the City to fight with, as Hercules gave his Bow
and Arrows to Philoctetes his dear Friend. God will go through all extremitys
with his City, it is no easy matter to persuade a City out of Gods Favor; he
will rather show her the Accusations brought against her to testify the
Confidence of his Love then make her away upon Suggestions and Informations. It
must be a high thing that can dis-unite God and his City; God will search
strictly before he will separate. He does so love a City that he would not ruin
Sodom before he had examined it; ten Righteous might have at last preserved it,
it was burnt to Cinders for want of Saints, and not for want of a Compassionate
God. God so loves a City, that he gives Laws for its safety, Deuteronomy. 20.10. When
thou come nigh to a City to fight against it, then proclaim Peace unto it: Woe
be to him that does make a breach, or shake a Stone in the VValls, or shed a
drop of Blood, or rifle an innocent Tradesman, till Conditions of Peace be
offered. So that if God be your Friend and restless grievances han't provoked
him to be your Adversary, you may Trade freely, rest quietly, fear no
molestation neither at the Custom-House or Council Chamber. Zac. 8.4.5. There
shall be old Men and old Women in the Streets, and every man walk with his
staff in his hand for very Age, the streets of the City shall be full of Boys
and Girls playing in it. God will lead them out of Doors in the daytime, and
put them to bed at night, keep the Keys of the City and set Guards over them;
serve God and he will not only give you a Charter, but be the City
Standard Bearer and Champion. Whosoever will not spare, HE will spare, because
it is a City, should I not spare Nineveh a City.

2. This shows that a City in it self is a place of Honor; do men cast contempt
on that which God himself does magnify, will God spare Nineveh because a City,
and shall not a City be thought worthy of an excellency; else we correct Gods
Heraldry, and strive who shall be the best Judges about Titles of Honor, let
none deprive the City of its Cap of Maintenance, or abuse the Furred Gown, for
a City is the most principal thing of all things which can be constituted by
Man's Reason, says Aquinas: it is an ignoble spirit to vilify that which God and
Nature has dignified. If a Man, would commend a place, it is enough to say, It Is
a City. Kindness may be in the Hind, but the Breath of a Citizens Lips is
Courtesy, etc.

II. A City is a place of Honor, because Men there get Estates in a more noble
way than other Men, as in Merchandising: Diodorus says, several Kings have been
Merchants, and Merchants must be supposed to get their Means in a splendid way,
for Princes would never spot their Courts and soil their Robes in meddling with
sordid Callings.

III. A City is a place of Honor, because there is a daily Mart, where by
Exportation and Importation it does supply other Countries, and store it self
with all manner of Necessaries.

4. A City is a place of Honor, because multitudes live there with a unanimous
Expression, yea many hundred Thousands linked like persons of one Tabernacle,
many a Family not so combined as a City, therefore called a Society, or
Corporation.

5. A City is a place of Honor, because of Buildings; Houses and Riches are
given of the Lord. Art can present the Eye with no more pleasing object than
the sight of a City. Princes thought they could never set out their Royalty
better than in building Cities, as Asher in building this Nineveh. Genesis 10.11.
and Nebuchadnezzar, Babylon.

6. A City is a place of Honor, because there are Liberties; the Apostle says
ye are Citizens, with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. by that he would intimate that
Citizens had great Immunities.

7. Because there are degrees of Honor: The Livery, the Benchers, the Gold
Chains. St. Paul says, He was a Citizen of no mean City. Acts 21.29. It means,
it had no mean Government and Jurisdiction to belong to it.

8. A City is a place of Honor, in respect of large Payments; now in defraying
Tributes and Customs, who exceeds the Citizens?

III. This shows, That as a City is chief, so it should be chief in commendable
Demeanor. A City should be a place of Example, the great Idea from which all
round about should be effigiated, the Prototype by which all adjacent places
should be stamped: Does not a Citys Virtues diffuse virtue: when it was asked
why Peloponesus was so good? It was presently answered, That Aegina the head
City nourished up none but good Children: See how much good one City-Example
will do for Virtue, and may not one City-Example do as much Evil for Vice? Yes,
the City does sell her Examples, as well as her Commodities, and her Sins as
well as her Wares; yea, the quick Trade does run in Crimes, and she sends down
them by wholesale into the Country: this Plague in the City infests the whole
Nation: a whole Land may curse a City for bad Presidents: If the City be full
of perverseness, Ezekiel. 9.9. the Disobedience will spread to all parts. If the
City be bloody, Nahum. 3.1. its enough to sell Chopping-Knives to their
Customers elsewhere. What pure Worship will be left in the Land, if the chief
Citys of the ten Tribes set up Golden Calves, the whole Religion will seem to
be nothing but a Bleating Crib to the Honor of these new Deitys; people far
and near will Swear by the sin of Samaria. The Lust of Corinth made all Greece
a Brothel-House: the Intemperance of Plintine turned Egypt in a tippling Booth:
Sidon first found out fine Silk, and it corrupted all Nations with gaudy
Attires. Guarde, Jesdi and Hispaa, being accustomed to lie with their Sisters
and Mothers, it taught all Parthia Incest. Ye, see a Citys bad Examples is like
a Gangreen, it will not rest where it begun, but infects all the Members, and
at last the Vital parts.

This in general, but particularly, As God has made you a City, so do you
principle out Goodness to the Land: what a shame is it for the sowrest Fruit to
grow upon the top Branches, the worst Scholars to be in the upper Form? what
shall the Men in Russet teach Thee in thy Furs? the Leathern Girdle, the Gold
Chain? the Swain, the Citizen? etc. A Citizen should show his Customers the
best Patterns of holy Life, and open the Pack of Religious Presidents: a City
should be the Burse of Virtuous Demeanours: Oh therefore has God given you
Honor, maintain it, let the Wheel of Virtue stir here, and the Morning Star of
Grace shine here: let not the miery way be cleaner than your Paved-streets, and
the Thatched shuds be neater then your Tiled Houses: Let not the Countryman
when he comes among you be loathed with your Intemperance, or recoil at the
Sight of your Fraud, or blush at you Neutrality, or deride your Pride, hiss at
your Malice, frieze at your Indevotion, ^or drop down dead with seeing the
Blood of Oppression sprinkled on the Stones in the Street: Prepare choice
Sights for the Country man's Eyes, that he may go home and say, I have seen the
Phoenix of Religion, the Paradise of Piety, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the
Suburbs of Heaven; I have learned Grace out of every Citizens Mouth, and bought
Bargains of Sanctity at every Shop, enough to stock my self and supply my
Neighbors; thus ye shall see your selves a flourishing City, when ye are as
full of Professors as ye are of Traders, of Saints as Merchants, when you have
Traffick'd for Godliness at every Port, and fetched home the true Pearl further
then the Indies: Remember, To whom much is given, much will be required. You
should have a Priority of Duty, because ye have a priority of Dignity. A City
should serve God before others, because God would spare a City before others,
should I not spare Nineveh.

IV. This shows that if God will spare a City, because a City, that the City
should spare it self; nor suffer her immunitys to be infringed, when she can
preserve them, nor her Rights to be be injured, when she can vindicate them.
This were for a Citizen to dig down the Wall of its own City, and to unbody its
own Corporation.

V. This Reproves them, that instead of sparing, take delight to destroy Citys.
Oh, what Thunder claps come out of many Men's Mouths to shake down such glorious
Ornaments? What Furnaces do there burn in many Men's Breasts to consume such
Ensigns of Art, and Architecture? Can they not walk freely in the World unless
they stamp down Citys under their Feet? Do they desire to Shine in the World
like Blasing Comets? Or to Scorch all before them, like Brands taken out of the
Infernal Pit? How justly might they Crouch for a piece of Silver, which care
not in an humor to melt away the Riches of so many Ages? How ill do they
deserve an House to hide their Heads in, which care not in a hellish Fury to
expose so many Citizens to the bleak Air? Should I not spare Nineveh a great
City.

VI. This further shows, That a City is at the Height of Impiety, when the Time
of her fate and fall is come. Such have rejected all warnings, we are a very
urging People that have lost the Benefit of a sparing God. Do Judgments
Threaten the Nation? Oh, then that I could shake Men into an apprehension of
their manifest and monstrous Guilts; Do ye dread any charging Plague; Then why
do ye not find out your challinging Sins? Do your Ears Glow, and do ye suspect
no bad News? Do ye seem to see nothing but Rods, and Rasours, and Yoaks and
Fetters; and yet are ye so Blind that ye can see nothing of the violating of
Gods Laws? Must God lock up your Doors before you will consider what bad
Tennants ye have been? Must he pluck away all your Wares before you will
consider the Sins of your Trading? Have ye lost your Ears your Eyes, your
Tongues, your Wits, your Consciences? Do ye dance upon your Thres-holds, when
ye are ready to Stagger with amazement? Do ye walk with stretched out Necks,
when your Necks are ready to stoop down with the weight of Judgments? Do ye add
Thirst to your Drunkenness, when the Cup of Astonishment is ready to be put to
your Lips? Do you scorn the Menaces of Scripture, when all the Curses that are
written in the Bible, and those which are not written are ready to fly in your
Faces? do you abuse Sermons, when the Pulpits shake before dropping? You have
often said the City must suffer, and that the end of all must be dismal? Do you
say it, and not fear it, or fear it, and not flee from it? O if thou had
known it, in this thy day, etc.

GREAT. 181
This Attribute Great, is next to be discoursed, Observe: That Greatness in it
self is precious in Gods Account: How can the great God, but affect that which
is great. Great is the highest Title of Honor that can be given to the most
flourishing Princes upon the Face of the Earth; as the great Mogul, the great
Cham, the great Turk: to be great then is of high esteem among Men, and is it
not as highly prized by God Almighty? No marvel if God does so plead for the
preservation of Nineveh, for it was no vulgar City, but a Great City: Yes, the
greatness of it was a great inducement to God to restrain the imminent Danger
of it: 1. Because it had been long in coming to that greatness; Men rise by
degrees, and so do all other things: As an Elephant (as some say) is two years
in bringing forth; an Oak is a hundred years in grouth, the durable Marble
lies many thousand years before it be hardened, etc. 2. Because of its long
standing, it had continued in that flourishing Condition for above a thousand
years. God that would not have us remove ancient Bounds, will not be ready to
deface that which is ancient; Age is a Crown of Glory. I might add, and show
you that God would spare this great City, because of the great Misery that
should happen upon the fall of such a great City; for what a loud shreik must
be heard from the Lips of so many perishing Souls: and likewise from the great
Repentance that had been expressed in such a vast City: Oh, the Sea of Tears that
had dropped from the Eyes of such numerous Penitents: But I have shown you the
speciousness and spaciousness of the City, and this was expressed to prompt God
to spare it, even because it was Great, should I not spare Nineveh that Great
City?

Application. 184
1. This shows God is no Enemy to Greatness; I accuse not Riches, but him who
uses them ill. I know there is a Mammon of Unrighteousness, but that is, when
they are in the Hands of evil Possessors, I know our Riches may eat our flesh
like Fire, but it is when Injustice and Usurpation has turned them into
Firebrarnds. Sin Damns every thing to us, Grace makes every thing a Blessing,
make good thy Tenure therefore, and fear not thy Freehold. A Saint may enjoy a
great Mansion, a great Castle, a great City. Conversion is a just owner,
Repentance has the lawful Demise of all copious Revenue. Be Penitent and be
Potent; be as Nineveh, and fear not thy great City; forget not thy Sackcloth,
and thou needst not fear losing thy Scarlet: Now ly upon thy Ash-heap, and
afterward if thou will ly upon thy Bed of Down; fast now, and eat Delicates
hereafter; cry mightily now, and sing joyfully at some other times: forbear
violence, and let thy Hands be filled with abundance. Seek the Pearl, and wear
Jewels: the Saint is the true Landholder upon Earth: Wicked Men have Riches by
Permission, the Godly by Commission, the one by Possession, the other by
Promise; for is not his Covenant past, and his Patent Sealed to the Righteous.
Sir, rise then as fast as thou can, so long as fraud does not promote thee:
Let thy House be stately, and thy Chamber large; so long as thou do not build
thy House by Unrighteousness and thy Chambers by Wrong, Jer. 22.13. Serve God,
and thrive under so good a Master. Let not thy Obedience run at a low Ebb, and
then let thy Prosperity rise as a Flood. God will not be offended at thy
greatness, for he does plead for Greatness, should I not spare Nineveh a great
City.

2. This shows there will ever be degrees of State and Condition. Every one
ought to be content with his Condition, every one does not carry a Governor
about him, nor does find a Ruler in his Scabbard; he is not Skinned Prince, nor
does bring a Scepter out of his Cradle; much less can Crown himself with the
Principle of Equality: In all Ages there have been, and to the last there will
be Orders and Degrees: Yea, to the Worlds end, we shall see the Noble and the
Ignoble, the Potent and the Impotent, the needy and the full, etc. Should I not
spare Nineveh a great City.

3. This does exhort every one to be sensible of his greatness: what has God
raised thee, and art thou silent under such a liberal Benefactor? What art thou
great only in Ostentation or Haughtiness, and not in Thankfulness: where is thy
Praise for such Preferment, thy Sacrifice for such Greatness: the Ox knows
his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: but God has raised up Servants which
know not their own Master, and kept Pentioners that understand not the Royal
hand of their gracious Prince: As noble as many would seem to others, yet they
are base to God: we are Men's humble Servants, and thrice bound; but we are Gods
very insolent Servants, and scarce once Twisted: Oh, what are the Ties and
Bands of Blessings, Ingratitude is branded upon our Brows, Breasts, Eyes, Ears,
Lips and Lives, where is there Promotion and Devotion, Favor and Zeal joined
together? No, oh ye great Men, ye are the great Dis-esteemers, and Disparagers
of Mercies, a Non-Magnifying, a Non-Glorifying Generation, you cannot see
Favors at Noontide, nor speak of Mercies when every Corner of thy House is a
Pulpit, where you have Domestical Chaplains to Preach unto you Gods Blessings:
why are you thus Blind and Deaf, would you weep for want of Mercies: force not
God to cry. Hear O Heaven, and harken O Earth, as if YOU were Monsters: be not
too great for thy Maker; say to thy self, as Crysostome once said to Gaynas, a
Captain, Bethink thy self in what poor attire thou did once pass through
Histria, and how richly thou art now Apparelled; so consider the simple Weed
once upon your Back, though now you have change of Apparel, had you always such
Shops, such Ward-Robes, such Cupbords of Plate, such Jewels, such Honors, have
you forgot your beginnings: how many pieces ye were worth when ye were first
Sworn Freemen: O staring Eyes, infatuated Brains, look back, search out your
selves, to the first year, nay first change of the Moon, when prosperity crept
out upon you; and set down every penny you received out of Gods privy Purse:
you are ignorant Men to imagine that your original began at your selves, that
your Prudence and Deligence has advanced you: say with David, Who am I, O
Lord, and what is my House, that thou have brought me hitherto. 2 Samuel 7.18.
It Is hard to fetch Praise out of Preferment, Gratitude out of Greatness, etc.
Should I not spare Nineveh a great City. 191

4. This shows what great endeavors there ought to be used in preserving this
great City. God does look that the Citizens Fervor should be answerable to his
^itty. (Oh it is a great City, and how many great Sins are to be expiated, and
what great Penitents must there be to preserve it. Oh it is a great City, and
what a great Trespass offering must there be made for it? Set the whole City
before your Eyes, and see how you had need to set the whole strength to
anticipate and repel Vengeance, lifting up her hand to strike: Plead earnestly,
or the Cause is lost, administer the best Physic or the Patient dies: he that
does pray but faintly, teaches God to deny, he that does mediate remisly does
but prepare God to reject: when I see how earnest. Men are on other (sometimes
little) Attempts, and how languishing we are in matters of the greatest
Concern, how do I think Men have the least care of their Souls and the Church:
Oh, that this great City had but as much Service and sedulity bestowed upon it,
as a great Project or Fancy; we have Brains and Arms enough for other business,
but for the Citys preservation, we have neither Pregnancy nor Proness, we think
to save so great a City without laying both Shoulders to her Support, or
calling for the two Master-Workmen Body and Soul, to do their utmost for her
Preservation, this great City has not so much regard shown her, as a great
Beast, or a great Picture: Oh, how tender we are of these, how negligent of
This: we walk in the City, and discern no Breaches in it, gaze upon it, and
behold not its side cracking: All Nations admire our City, but we slight it and
neglect it; we have neither affection to her Welfare, nor compassion over her
Ruin, yet forty days and Nineveh shall be distroyed, let it be destroyed, for
we wont keep it from sinking, or burning, who is frighted at Gods Threatenings?
etc. when I read what great things Heathens have done to pacify the Gods, I am
astonished to see with how cheap Sacrifices we would procure an atonement for
the City: Oh, the City does look pale, fetch Blood into her Cheeks by your
Pity, the City does crack, prop her up with your Petitions, it is sick cure her
with your Conversion. I have no Martial Tongue to wish you to Fight and Kill,
but I desire you to Plead and Pray, bring forth your right Artillery, the stout
Hands I call for are Supplicating Hands, the bright Harness I require, is the
complete Armor of Righteousness, not Field but Temple-Ammunition I press for,
no Camp but Closet-Ordnance, oh that the Penitent were discharging with his
Eyes, and the Supplicant shooting with his Lips: Oh, that our hearts were edged
with Repentance, and our Tongues sharp pointed with Devotions, the Soldiers I
desire are Intercessors, the Captains I long for are Advocates: Oh, that I
could gather the Company together, summon all the Trained Bands, see them all
stand in Battle-Array, and say to God Almighty, oh cast away our Sins, and
rinse us not in Vengeance, for it is a great City, for then multitudes must feel
thy Displeasure, many must be soaked in ruin, if thou put the Cup of
Astonishment to our Mouths, vast numbers must be drunk with this fatal Bowl: Oh
bring forth your strongest Shore to under-set this Building, and with your
whole Estate redeem this Jewel. Oh Citizens where are your City Bowels, City
Groans, City Cries? Oh the great Pride, Riot, Lust, Oppression, Malice,
Perfidiousness, Apostasy, Heresy, and Blasphemy of this City, does require a
Catholicon and Composition of all Penitential Ingredients to purge out the
several noxious humors out of this diseased Body; great Sins and great
Judgments do necessitate a great Repentance: Broken Hearts, trickling Eyes.
penitent Petitioners, where shall feel, see or hear you? are ye at ease in
Zion, when the Gates of Zion are ready to lament? Are ye asleep with Sampson,
when the Philistines [Gods Judgments] are upon you? O no, sigh in the Temple,
that you do not Sob in the Street, groan in your Closet, that you do not roar
in the Fields, wash the City in Tears, that it be not washed in Blood.
Remember, that it is a great City, and in great Danger, and therefore express
great Humiliation: if you have any Remnant of Grace, any Reverence to Gods
Laws, any Sense of Sin, any dread of an Omnipotent God, consider and correct,
try and cleanse, weep and reform: God would spare, if ye would but prepare for
Mercy: but ye must be fervent Petitioners and Solemn Converts, for it is a great
City that you wish to be spared. Should I not spare Nineveh that great City. 196

THAT.
For Eminency THAT, That is the Paragon and Gem of Citys: Here I might have run
over all the World, and give you an Account of all the Famous Citys that have
been therein, and of all the glorious Excellencies of each of them. Yet was
there ever any greater than, Nineveh? No, former times had not its like, nor
latter time its equal.

1. Had not former times Thebes in Egypt, that opened an 100 Gates. Corinth,
that with her strong Castle built upon the Acro-Corinth, was called one of the
Fetters of Greece. Telesine which contained in it once 16000 Families.
Carthage, which was 21 Miles in compass Babylon, which amazed Alexander to see
her stately Walls, her pensil Gardens, which seemed to hang in the Air, her
artificial Groves, where Trees seemed to grow without any Earth about them, her
lofty Castle and miraculous kind of Bridge built over the Euphrates. Rome, which
was built so loftily, that Augustus Caesar was forced to make a Law, that no
Man should build above 70 foot high: which was so large, that it contained in
it 7 Hills, 37 Gates, and 400 000 Men under the Cense; and so full of rare
Spectacles, that it was accounted an earthly Bliss to see Rome in her flower.
As former Ages had none, so neither have latter times had Citys to stand in
Competition with Nineveh, I confess one may read of excellent Citys in these
days: viz. Odia in Siam, it is said to have above 40 000 Familys. Calecut, in
Malavar, does stretch out three Miles by the Sea-shoar. Mandao is so large, and
so full of Provisions, that it maintained a siege 12 years against Miramudus
the great Mogul. Cambria is reported to have in it 800 000 persons. Nanquin
has in it, besides a large number of people 10 000 Ships, which are able with
the Mariners that go in them to make a goodly City, Quinzay, honored with
12000 Bridges, and a Lake in the midst of the City of thirty Miles compass,
with two Islands wherein are gorgeous Houses and magnificent Palaces. Grand
Cair, as some write, has in it 18000 streets, so that Selimus the great
Conqueror was three days going through it: and had such a number of people,
that they counted it nothing to lose, every seven years in a great Plague,
300000 persons. Hispua called new Casbin, which the proud Persians call half
the World, the compass whereof cannot be rid about in less time than a whole
day. Musco that Wooden City has sixteen Churches, and the Princes Palace with
17 Turrets, three great Bulwarks, and 25000 Soldiers for a constant Guard.
Cambalu (the Seat of the Crim Tartar, who is called the Shadow of Spirits) is
28 Miles in compass, and has in it a mighty confluence of Merchants, in so
much, that it is said, There are 10 000 Carts to have come formerly every year
laden with Silks from China; and besides other Inhabitants, it is said to have
15000 Astrologers in it. Vienna famous for beautiful Temples, stately
Monasteries, and a magnificent Palace for their Emperors, but it has no great
quantity of Ground, nor multitude of Inhabitants, but as the Court does
replenish it. Paris, 10 Miles in compass, has lofty and curious Buildings, and
600 000 Citizens, besides Soldiers and Scholars, of which last there are a
multitude, by reason of their 55 Colleges. Constantinople, where the spread
Eagle was first plumed, and flew out of her Nest, into the Imperial Arms: and
not only here began to look toward the East and West, but chiefly because when
Constantine had resolved to build a glorious City; and had laid the Foundation
in Asia, (some say in three several places:) the Eagles would not suffer the
Workmen to go forward, but took up their Tools in their Bills and Claws and
carried them to Byzantine, where this once Famous City was built, and something
sightly still, be it but for the Mosques, State-houses, Almshouses and the
Seraglio. Tlascalan, the goodly City in Guastacan of large extent, so much
shining afar off, that Ferdinando Cortez, thought, at first sight of it, that
it had been built of pure Silver. Cusco which has in it one of the goodliest
Market places in the World, decked with rich and sumptuous Buildings, for every
Courtier was commanded there to build a Palace, the whole City seeming to be
nothing but one large Chest heaped with Silver and Gold Imperial. And now I
have thus done, I must bring you back to Nineveh and say, That none of these
Citys in their greatest Glory is able to equal Beams of Majesty with Nineveh.
1. It was called Megalopolis, the great City, the original says, A City to God,
or, a City for God. as if fitter for God than Men to dwell in. 2. It Is That
great City, from the duration of it; what City upon Earth, had such an
uninterrupted Felicity as Nineveh? Some say for 1500 years, others for 1400 all
agree for above one Thousand. 3. For the vast Wealth it had, for Bilesus
(joining with Arbaces) being present at taking and burning of it, begged of
Arbaces, (after sacking and rifling it) to have barely the Ashes of it to be
bestowed upon him, which was freely granted, he got thereby an incredible
Estate, being an hundred Millions of Talents of Gold, and a Thousand Millions
of Talents of Silver, besides the Heaps of such Coin as was gathered up in the
several corners of the City. 200

Well then let it be for that great Treasure the great City. 4. For the great
Emulation that was born against it, for many did malign the honor and
greatness of it: among the rest Semeramis: This Semeramis from being a base
Child (as some say) from being an exposed, Child, as most averr, by the Mercy
of Shepherds, was taken up and fostered till ripe years, and then appearing to
be a Peerless Beauty she was presented to the Viceroy of Syria, who being rapt
at the sight of her, received her both Joyfully and Thankfully, and Married her
to his Eldest Son Menon. The Vice Roy being summoned to wait upon Ninus in an
expedition, He, with his Son and Daughter went together (according to Custom)
into the Wars; Ninus, casting his Eyes upon Semiramis thought her too rich a
Jewel for a Subject to use, wrested her from Menon, (who strangled himself,)
and made her his Bride, being fonder of her then all the other Beautys which
were his Lust-Baths: Semiramis seeing she had the Victor in Fetters, made use
of her opportunity, secretly envying Nineveh's glory, and ambitious to do
something that should out-beam Niveveh; she begged leave to build a City her
self, her Prince not being able to deny her any thing, granted her Suit, and
furnished her with Treasure; she instantly pitched upon Babylon, and thought to
make it the Mirror of Architecture, and the Nymph of Citys, the Walls indeed
were esteemed as one of the Wonders of the World. But because she saw she had a
restraint in her boundless desires so long as Ninus lived, she presented
another Petition, viz. That he would give her leave to step out of his
Bedchamber into the Throne, and Reign as an absolute Prince for some short
time: some say, but for one day, others for two, and others for five, Ninus
being infatuated with passionate Affection, granted it. Oh prodigious new
Prince! what mischief may be perpetrated in a little space, for Semiramis,
before the last Minute of her stinted Government, got her Husband to be made
away: Well, she being foot-loose, wading through her Husbands blood she
dedicated all her Husbands Treasure to the shrine of Babylon. But because vast
expenses will drain even Princes Coffers, she finding a decay of Riches, goes
forth to dig the Gold Mines abroad; Mustering an Army, she marches forth with
such a Besom of Soldiers, that she was able to sweep all the Earth as she went;
In this Expedition she Conquers the Ethiopians, and so returning back with Fame
and Spoil; she invades the Sagdians, H rcamans, Parthenians, Arachosians,
Araspians, Parmisedans, and many more Kingdoms; where being Victorious she
brought home the Wealth of all these Countries, as a present to Babylon. And
when all this was spent, she carries her Purse abroad again to be filled; Her
next Trace was to India, and there she carries such a vast Army, that not
Tamarlain, Cignis, Pompey the great, Augusius the mighty, the great Cham, the
great Turk, the Mogul, the Emperor of China, Metuzama, Atabaliba, no not Ziba
the Eth^^pian, or Xerxes himself, nor any I could read of ever, appeared in the
Field with such Pomp and Power, for she had in her Camp three Millions of
Footmen, five hundred Thousand Horsemen, and a hundred Thousand Chariots, as
many Camels whereupon Men rid with Swords of four Cubits long, and as many
Camels and Horses to bear Burdens, and go upon Errands, and as many Elephants,
which some say, were natural, others, artificial; and two Thousand Ships
carried upon Camels Backs to convey her Soldiers over Rivers; others say there
number were ten Thousand; with this formidable Army she passed the River
G^^ges, and entered Staurobates's Dominions, defeated him and harressed his
Country: some say the contrary, but it is a groundless assertion, for the
current of all ancient Writers avouch, That she conquered Staurobates. She dyed
at Bactria, where she being warned by the Oracle of Jupiter H^man, That the
time of her Death drew nigh, she called all her Captains and Commanders about
her, causing them to Swear Allegiance to her Son, and so resigned up the Empire
to him; the EPITAPH she caused to be Engraven upon her Tomb was, Here lies
Semiramis the Great, whosoever will open this Tomb, shall find Treasure enough;
which Darius (some say Cyrus) attempting, he found nothing but a Paper with
these Words, If thou were not a bad man, a d insatiable after G^ld, thou
would not have disturbed the Sepulcher of the Dead. So long as Semiramis sat
on the Throne and Reigned and Fought for Babylon, it had her Eye, her Tongue,
Head and Hand; yet once an undutiful Handmaid, for she rebelled once against
her, the news coming to Semiramis while she was Combing her Hair, she took it
so offensively, That she Vowed n ver^ to dress her Head, till she had reduced
her to Obedience, which she really performed; for half Dressed as she was, she
marched away, and laid such a straight Siege to the City, that she brought down
her haughty Spirit, and forced her on her Knees to beg Pardon: Having thus
humbled her and severely chastised her, setting up her Picture in Brass, with
her Hair disheveled in Memory of that Rebellion; she renewed her affections to
her, making her the Minion of her ^avour; and yet notwithstanding this
Munificence and Magnificence with which she was thus adorned she fell short of
great Nineveh: for Nineveh had fifteen hundred Turrets, Babylon but seven
hundred, Nineveh four hundred and eighty Furlongs in compass, Babylon not above
three hundred and eighty; Nineveh in breadth one hundred and ninety Furlongs,
Babylon not above one hundred; Nineveh a City of three days Journey, Babylon
(as far as we can read) not a days. Besides the largeness of the Streets and
the beauty and numerosity of Buildings in Babylon were nothing comparable to
those in Nineveh, so that though Babylon was fair, yet not able to match Faces
with Nineveh; No Babylon was a great City, but Nineveh was That great City.
Though Babylon exceeded Nineveh in strength of the Walls, and in the Bridge
over Euphrates which was five Furlongs long; and in two Palaces; yet it was not
half peopled so much as Nineveh: Quintus Curtius says, That but ninety
Furlongs of it were Built, the rest was for Vinyards and Tilth to maintain them
in a siege. 203

5. That great City. Strabo says, It ruled far and nigh, within Euphrates and
beyond Euphrates: Car Stephanus says, That under three days a Man could not
have the full sight of it through Streets and Lanes, it was the most peopled
place in the World, and the most delightful place to behold. Arias Montanus
says, That the Walls were an hundred foot in height, and so broad that three
Carts might go a-bredth on it: It command d the whole Earth.

Obs. That Eminency has an eminent respect with God Almighty, he is loath to
pull down a City, which he has suffered to rise up to the height of Greatness.
Our Savior wept over Jerusalem, not for its Forts and Towers, but because he
was to shed the first Tears, and Jerusalem was to weep her self Blind, yea
Dead: Jerusalem had been the Cutthroat of the Prophets: The Stones of
Persecution will be the Stone-heap that will crush the Head of a whole City
with direful Curses. Ephraim had been another famous City, and how is God
pained to the Heart to behold Ephraim in Danger. Hos. 6.4. Oh Ephraim, what
shall I do unto Thee! Ah, and when God is constrained to be rough with him, as
if a Father should tear out the Bowels of his own Heir; Is Ephraim my Dear Son?
is he my pleasant Child? since I spoke against him, I earnestly remembered him
still, therefore my Bowels are troubled for him. Oh Ephraim how shall we part?
what shall I do unto Thee. Micah 6.9. The Lords Voice cries unto the City.
What is this Cry, to call-in Invaders to assault it, or Conquerors to Fetter
it? No, to call up a prudent Person to acknowledge the kind Founder: But what
need of this Cry? what great need? for the City is ready to be carried to the
Correction House, to be lead to the Whipping Pillar, for there is a Rod
prepared, and a hand lifted up to strike, Danger indeed! what shall procure
Deliverance? is there any means left to keep the City from the Lash? Yes, says
God, if the City has but a good Ear, it need not fear its Back, it shall not
suffer if it do but harken, nor feel the Rod, if it do but listen to the Rod;
therefore hear the Rod, and who has a^pointed it. It Was said of Titus that
noble Emperor, that he had rather per^sh himself then destroy. So God will as
soon part with his Essence as his Compassion. See how he expostulates with
Jonah about Nineveh, he would spare it because it was eminent, it was that
great City, should I not spare Nineveh that great City?

1. God will spare Nineveh that great City, to teach the World that things of
Eminency are to be prized. What strange Eyes are in your Heads that cannot see
Beams in those things which excel all other as far as Light does excel
Darkness? Shall not that be valued which is invaluable? Then ye are not to be
valued: whatsoever is excellent ought to be looked upon with an Eye of
Reverence. Epithaniu^ B^ of Ticinum, when Theodoricus took the City, was so
regarded by the barbarous Soldiers (though of a contrary Judgment) that they
used him with all Civility, whilst they stayed with him, and wept at their
departure from him. Shame to them which abuse that which is precious, and can
honor nothing but what is contemptible.

2. God will spare Nineveh, to show that his Mercy is not to be limited: Jonah
was for destroying it above all places because it was that great City full of
Sin and Provocation; but God would have it spared because it was full of Danger
and had most need of Mercy: There are Men liberal in their Judgments, that we
may say to them, as Diogene^ said to one in the like kind: How long is it since
thou came out of Heaven; where these Men have Liberty, many a wicked Man
shall be saved, and the Godly condemned.

3. God would spare Nineveh, because he desired to be honored in a great
Preservation. God would be abundant in Goodness and Save by a great
Deliverance, not spare a particular eminent person, or a distinct eminent
Family, but that great City, that upon a^l the Glory there might be a defense,
this is the Triumph of Divine Favor, and the Trophe he aims at: when great
Countries, great Nations participate of his Mercy, that it may be said, here is
Gods Banner displayed, and his Buckler hung up: That he might be honored with
an Eminency, he will spare with an Eminency. Should I not spa^e Nineveh That
great City.

Application.
The Excellency of London above other Citys.
1. This does show the Happiness of this Place, for are ye only a City? no, a
City with Eminency, the greatest of the Land, the greatest of many; what are
Amsterdam, Hamborough, Quinborough, nay the Royal Citys of many Countries,
Stockholm, Copinhagen, Vienna, Rome it self to you? Yours is such a City, as
it is fit only to be shown upon Holy Days. This City for Courts of Justice does
seem to be a grand Tribunal: for Provisions for the Poor, a wide Hospital; for
Warlike preparations, an admirable Arsnal: for much Trading, a stored
Warehouse; for beautiful Building, a gorgeous Palace; for means of Salvation,
the Temple of the Earth: it is a renowned City: looked upon as the Stage of
Wonders: consider the several Jewels locked up in this Cabinet: I fear you
darken your own Splendour, and diminish your Portion, you mind not her daily
Commodities landed at your Stairs: oh you know not the price of your
City-Sword, nor the worth of the Cap of Maintenance, etc. God might give this
City to new Dwellers, that might say, Their Lot is fallen to them in a pleasant
Land, or create new Members of this Corporation, that would sing a Hymn to him
for such variety of Blessings: alas, ye possess much, ye prize but little, ye
are more successful than sensible: Oh consider in what an Eden God has placed
you: ye are not only a City, but above many Cities in the World. Ye may be
called That great City: Should I not spare Nineveh that great City.

2. This shows, that the City is eminent with God if Ye do not withdraw his
Affections from it; he does prize the City because its That great City: the
City cannot be too great for God, if it be not too great for your Selves; he is
satisfied with your large Circuit, if ye do not cast your selves out of your
own Walls: Make him Chief over the City, and hold it in Fee under him as long
as you will; do but true Homage to him, and he will deliver back again to you
your Sword and Mace, and Keys to keep for many Ages; if ever ye perish your
Blood be upon your own Heads: Thy Destruction is of thy self O Israel: Misery
will never come from Gods Justice, but from your own Wickedness: his Rod will
never be felt till the Scorner does call for Stripes: yet so lie loves your
Pavements, if ye don't break them up; he delights in your Buildings, if ye
don't pollute them; he rejoices in your Treasures, if ye don't forfeit them: Ye
are blessed, why are you sick of your own Felicity? Do ye wish well to the
City, or desire to continue its Eminency? No, Methinks I see you bring
^ick-axes to dig down your own Walls, and spring Mines to blow up your own
Houses, and kindle Sparks that will set the whole City in a Flame from one end
to the other, what means the City-Jars, Differences and Distinctions of each
other by several Names: these if Wisdom prevent not will bring ruin to a City,
for a City does signify no more, nor less, than the unity of Citizens, and
indeed if it want unity, it is but a Tumult, a wresting place, a pitched Field,
and not a City; the Towers are then undermining, and the Walls shaking and
falling. A Miserable thing it is, when their Tongues are divided, and there is
a strife in the City, Psalm. 55.9. Scornful Men ( i.e. Turbulent and Factious)
bring the City into a s^are, then is the City becoming a City of Destruction.
Epictetus said well, That discord is the wit-foundring of a City: Diodorus
makes a sad relation concerning the Citizens of Argos, falling into Dissentions
and Distractions about Superiority, which caused such a woeful face of Misery
and Desolation, that no man lived in safety, for many were Tortured to Death,
and others cut their own Throats, that they might not be ^ortured; yea, certain
Orators arising, so stirred up the People against the Rich, that no Man of
Wealth was secure, thirty of them were questioned, tortured and slaughtered at
once, and after that two Thousand and two hundred; afterward the Orators out
of Remorse refusing to accuse any more, the Rage fell upon them, and they were
Murdered and Perished among the rest. The Citizens of Constantinople falling
into Contention in the seventh year of ustinian giving their popular pledge to
raise Partys; what Troubles did there break forth? Citizens were Banished,
Houses Burnt, the Temple Defaced, and the uproar nor allied until three
Thousand were Slain: when Carthage was divided how soon did it come to be an
enslaved City. Discords of Citizens have ever been Ominous and diverse times
fatal. [ Beware O London.] Oh this Unity does carry in it an universality of
Felicity, it is the Basis and Battle-ax to a City. Has God Built this City for
his own Service and Worship? No, it seems to be a Bear-Garden, or a Nest of
Cockatrices: Oh the hideous noises, the filthy smells, the dung-heaps the
execrable Sins that are committed in this City! It seems to be nothing but a
fenced Vale for Miscreants, and Anak ms to shelter themselves in; to speak
modestly I wont show you the Faces of the Monsters or hol^ up the Gorgons Head
in your sight; but I will say in general, That Gods Name is Dishonored, his
Truth Corrupted, his Deity Blasphemed, his Laws Violated, his Messengers
despised. Prayers but Customary Gales, Praises but Ditties of Humor, Sermons
but Notional Speculations, Sacraments but badges of affected Community; the
Saints Weep, the Poor Cry, and the Oppressed Roar Grace is turned into a
Vizard, and Religion into refined Policy; and, if I should reckon up all, here is
enough to bury the ancientest Family in Oblivion, to shake the greatest City in
the World into scattered Stones, to cast Adam out of Paradise again, and to
throw the Angels out of Heaven, if they were in the greatest brightness: Oh
then that ye are the Contrivers of the fall of so great a City! Is it nothing
that you be held the Conspirators against the safety of the City? Yes, Cilicon
that deluded the City of M^l^tum with continually saying, All things are well,
tell he had delivered it up into the hands of the Priennenses: Zenias that
carried all fair to the City of Elis till he had brought it under the
Lacedaemonians: Doryl^us Tacticu^, which betrayed Eupator in his head City:
Baditzes, that when the Saracens were ready to depart from Amorium, sent a
sec^et Letter to tell them, that if they would renew their Assault in such a
place, they might easily enter; which they did, and put the City to Slaughter:
all these are branded with Infamy, for seeking the Destruction of their own
Citys: How much more then you, which by your Prodigious Sins are plotting
greater Treachery against your City than these? For they brought but Armed Men
into the City, but your Sins are ready to bring down Hosts from Heaven, yea to
fetch Angels from above to be revenged on you for all your execrable Sins: If
the City does fall, we know whose HANDS to charge for the pulling it down: Not
the Hands of Justice, but the Hands of Transgression that are guilty of this
Fact, they are your Provocations and Abominations, that neither Profession nor
Pulpits can restrain: no Popish TRATORS nor Treacherous Friends are like your
proditorious Sins, those call in Gods Judgments, open the City Gates, put Arms
into their Hands to slaughter on the right hand and on the left; yea, so inrage
them, that they will not leave wasting till they have left the City level with
the ground: the City has been great, is great, and may be great if your selves
don't conspire against its Greatness: God would not destroy Nineveh because it
was that great City; Should I not spare Nineveh that great City? 216

3. This shows the horror of the Citys desolation, if ever it does happen to
perish: for it is That Great City, and it will be that great Casualty: Oh, the
Dream be to our Enemies, and the Interpretation to them that hate us. Lot the
Woman called Wickedness, which does sit in the midst of the Epha rather fly
into Shinar, then take her flight to this City, and here rest upon her Base.
For if the City come to be Visited, there are not Tongues enough in the City to
utter all the Miseries that such Judgments will bring upon us: The M sery of
the City when Judgments approach.
Our Cheeks may look pale, our Eyes drop, and our Hearts tremble at the
apprehension of such a fatal day: Sure I am Troy will fall from her very
Culmen, it is Ilium the great, and great will be the Infelicity of such a
Curse, 'twas Troy novant, it is Troy le Grand, and it will be Troy le Extinct.
Do Citys fall with a small Crush? No, Let me carry you to the broken Walls, and
lead you through the Ruins of other Citys. Heli^^olis, once a City beautiful in
Buildings is now razed, not a foot-step to be seen either of its City or Temple
Thebes destroyed all but one Port Sidena utterly ruined, and a Curse laid on
all Men, by Cressus, that should offer to rebuild it. All the Citys in Phocis,
in the Holy War, wasted by the Amphyctions: I might show you the like of Troy,
Carthage, Cyropolis, Myrenae, Alba, and many other glorious Citys laid so
desolate that it would be hard to find a stone of the old Foundation: And well
were it that the Rage had but extended to bare Walls, but Citys and Citizens
often perish together, The Misery of po^r Conquered Citizens.
the Walls of Stone and the Walls of Flesh had the like Battery, the Pick-ax
and Hammer brought: forth for the one, the Sword and the Pole-ax for the other:
oh what Murders and Massacres have happened at the destruction of Citys. The
Citizens of Eretria being enclosed as it were in a Net, were all put to the
Sword. The Citizens of Scotussa (in Thessaly) being called forth into the
Market to hear the Laws of Conquest; the Elder Men were made away by Bow-men
and Dart-men which lay in Secret: the Young Men hewn to pieces, and the Women
and Children sold for Slaves under the Crown, as they call it: the City of
Sybaris in Greece Which had once twenty five Citys under the Jurisdiction of
it, and led out above an hundred Thousand Men against Crotoniates, being at
last taken by their Adversarys, were for the most part drowned by the River
which they let into the City, and those which escaped that Death perished by
the Soldiers Swords and 'twas well they suffered but a common Death, for in
many places they were put to Death with Torture and Extremity. M. Fluvius by
the Counsel of Pollia, did not only kill the Tusculanes, but whipped them
grieviously, and then struck off their Heads with an Ax. The ^ocrenses first
defiled the Bodies of their Captives with Lust, then they thrust Needles into
their Fingers-ends, keeping them in pain; then they beat them to Death in a
Mortar, and cast them into the Sea. Lucius Cataline was wont to destroy his
Enemies first by breaking their Arms and Thighs, then by cutting off their Ears,
then by plucking out their Tongues, paring off their Noses, and tearing out
their Eyes, and at last by beheading. Henry 6. Conquering the Sicilians, did
seith some to Death in hot Cauldrons, others he fried to Death, others he sewed
up in Sacks and threw them into the Sea; he put Brazen Crowns on the Heads of
some full of Nails, some he set upon a Brazen Chair made red Hot, some have
been so Savage to their Enemies, that they have sown them up in the Bodies of new
slain Beasts, and there let them lie tell they have rotted and been devoured by
Beasts: some have tied hungry Vultures to the heels of their Captives, which
might eat out their Bowels by pieces, and have sprinkled the Faces of their
Hospital Gods with the Blood of their slaughtered Enemies, as if they had done a
most pious work, and did offer a most pleasant Sacrifice; and they have
consecrated their Instruments of Cruelty, calling them Holy Swords and Sacred
Spears: Nor will they spare your Goods, no these were the foments of the War,
the leading-staff of the March; ye are the Drudges, they are the Heirs: Are not
these the common Accidents upon rifling Citys? When Mahomet the Great, did win
Constantinople, he was astonished at the Wealth he did meet withal, and it is a
Proverb among Turks, that if any grow suddenly rich, They ^av^ been at the
Siege of Constantinople. These are the Ruins of Estates, upon the loss of
Citys, the Keys wrested out of their Hands, their Treasure scattered, and the
rich owners must then wander about for relief to beg and kiss the feet of their
Adversarys.

And happy were it the Misery of taking Citys would end here, The w^rst of
Miserys, is Conscience becomes a sufferer.
but after all, CONSCIENCE comes to her punishment, this also must be made a
Captive and wear the Slaves Chain: Men are not only locked out of their Houses,
but out of their Temples, not only their Goods are gone, but they are deprived
of the PEARL; their Liberties are not only lost, but their Freedom of the
Ordinances. Pure Doctrine, pure Worship, and Faith are in bondage, and the Soul
is inthralled A whole City in Phrygia because it would not change its Religion,
was compassed about with Armed Men, her City and Citizens both burnt to Ashes.

In the City of Alexandria, Julian coming to take Possession of it, and because
the Christians would not turn Heathens, his Soldiers wounded most, stoned some,
strangled others, some were slain with the Sword, others crucified; friend
spared not friend, nor Brother his Brother, nor Parents their own Children.
Hunerick was no sooner Conqueror, but in all the Citys he conquered, he
commanded alteration of Religion, and not being obeyed, he instantly Banished
five Thousand Bishops, Priests, and Men of all Orders: 'twere infinite to
relate the Cruelties and Tortures that Citys have undergone in point of
CONSCIENCE, when they come under a Conqueror. It is a thing so evident,
Records need not be scarch'd to prove that Conscience has been an old Slave
upon such Accidents: That Men who will not permute a God, and suffer their
Faith to be new stamped, must either run or dye for it 220

N. B. Oh, if ever your Sins bring in Gods Judgments into your City marching
Rank and File, see the variety of Sorrows, you must weep under. As happy as ye
seem to be, ye must have another Face of Wretchedness amongst you; whatsoever
your present Comforts are, yet Then nothing but Exigents and Dysasters: The
Fire time.
your Looking-Glasses will be snatched away, your Mirror cracked, your Diamond
shivered in pieces, this goodly City of yours all in shreds; ye may seek for a
Threshold or Pillar of your ancient dwellings, but not find one; all your
spacious Mansions, and sumptuous Monuments are then gone, not a Porch,
Pavement, Seeling, Stair Case, Turret, Lanthorn, Bench, Skreen, Pane of a
Window, Post, Nail, Stone or Dust of your former Houses to be seen. No, with
wringing Hands you may ask, where are those sweet places where we Traded,
Feasted, Slept? where we lived like Masters, and shone like Morning Stars? No,
the Houses are fallen, and the Householders dropped with them: we have nothing but
naked-Streets, naked Fields for shelters; not so much as a Chamber to couch
down our Children, or Repose our own Members when we are spent or afflicted
with Sickness. Woe unto us, our Sins have pulled down our Houses, shak'd down
our City, we are the most harborless people in the World, like Foreigners
rather than Natives; yea, rather like Beasts than Men: Foxes have Holes and
Fowls have Nests, but we have neither Holes nor Nests; our Sins have deprived
us both of Couch and Covert: we would be glad if an Hospital would receive us;
Dens or Caves shelter us; the bleak Air or cold Ground are our only Shades and
Refuges. But alas! this is but the Misery of Stone-work, of Arches, Roofs. What
will you say when you come Skin Work? Arms, Necks, and Bowels?

A Massacre.
May not your tender persons be touched? Yes, ye which have walked in State may
then run the Streets in Distraction: ye which have searched out others with
severity, may be plucked out of your Corners With rigor; ye which have been
bowed to, may then bow your Knees for Mercy; with one Leg or half an Arm, ye
may beg the Preservation of the rest of your Members; What Inventions shall
ye then be put to, to secure your Lives? what perhaps would you not give to
save your selves? and your Tears it may be will not secure you, nor your Gold
redeem you; but your Veins must weep as well as your Eyes, and your Sides be
watered as well as your Cheeks: when your Sins shall shut up the Conduits of
the City, and only your Liver Conduit to run; when they allow you no showers of
Rain, but showers of Blood to wash your Feet; when you shall see no Men of your
Corporation but the mangled Citizen, nor hear no noise in your Streets, but the
cries, the shreiks, the yells and pants of gasping dying Men: when among the
throngs of Associates not a Man will own you, your Friends hide their Head, and
your Servants flee from you: when your Kindred are slain in one place, your
Wives in another, your Children in a third, and your selves at last, it may be
cut in two, to increase the number of dead Carcasses: when, as populous as you
are, you shall be but numbered to the Sword, as puissant as you are, the Valiant
shall be swept away: As fine fed as you are, you shall be fed with your own
Flesh and made Drunk with your own Blood: when your Trespasses have been so
outrageous that Vengeance does deny you a being, that you are thought fit for
nothing but to be killed in the places where you committed the Crimes, and to
suffer the pains of Death within those Walls which you have cursed with your
Sedoms Faces and Egyptian hard-Heartedness: when your Politicians can no longer
help you, but must have their subtle Brains dashed in pieces with yours, nor
your Lectures no longer save you, but you must meet at the Congregation near
the Shambles: when this great City shall be but a great Chopping-board to
quarter out the Limbs of Sinners, or the great Altar whereon a whole City is to
be Sacrificed: Oh, doleful day of new painting your Walls, new paving your
Streets, new summoning a Common Hall, when all are called forth to nothing but
to the derision of the insulting Adversary, to have your Breasts to try the
points of Spears, your Sides the keeness of Swords, your Heads the weight of
Pole-Axes, and Bodies to be made Foot-stools, and your Dead Careasses steppings
for truculent Foes to trample upon: when there will be no pity upon the Aged,
nor compassion for the Young, but heaps upon heaps, tumbling of Garments in
Blood, and Swords made fat with slaughter: Oh, see what a crimson City crimson
Sins will make: Or, if you escape the dint of the Sword, and your Lives be
given you for a prey, shall not your Goods be a prey? Yes, some may be reserved
out of the greatest MASSACRE, when Men are weary of Killing, a Retreat may be
sounded, and Men called off from the Slaughter, yet can ye challenge your old
Houses? or bring your Keys to your old Chests? No, your Titles gone, your
Interest lost, you have Sinned your Selves off your Propriety, the Enemy is now
Housekeeper and Land-holder, all is forfeited to the Sword: farewell
Inheritances, Purchases, Leases Jewels, as ye have gotten these perhaps
unjustly; so they shall be taken away unjustly; violently gotten, and violently
they shall be taken away: Vengeance from Heaven will have satisfaction for all
your fraudulent Bargains, cruel Pawns, extorting Mortgages, blooding of
Widows, skinning of Orphans: or, as you have used your Goods for Pride and
Bravery, so you shall see all your Gallantry and new Fashions plucked from you:
others shall spruce up themselves in your Dresses, and your selves glad of the
worst filthy Garment ye left behind; or perhaps of a cast Garment of your
Enemies: and though God took you out of the Mire, you never plucked out others
which stuck in the same Extremitys: you have forgotten your own beginnings: a
great Company of these the City has, that the Poor and the suffering Gospel
can thank them for little succor and Sympathy. They which would grasp all,
shall loose all: they shall be driven to live upon Alms, and to go among the
tattered crew. They shall wish they had but one spare Bag, which all the cries
of the Distressed could not make them open; or, that they had but a few of
those Mites which all the Tea^s of Necessity could not make them to scatter
abroad; no, they would trust nothing in Gods hand, and God will shut up all
Hands and Hearts against them: They had no Compassion, and no Eye shall pity
them: if they be not slain in the heap, yet they do but Live to see their own
Misery: Their Sins have made them Bankrupts and ruined them: Oh that the loss
of Money were the greatest mischief, but there is a Treasure of greater value
in Danger, CONSCIENCE is ready to be rifled; there is not an absolute Conquest
made till the inward Man be in Fetters: Thou must be a Slave in Principles: oh,
it is a hard thing to be a Jew inwardly.

P^p^ry s^^^^p.
Thou must then bear the Fruit of the degenerate Plant, or strange Vine, pour
out the Drink Offerings of other Sacrificers, follow the Sorcery of the
Mistress of Witchcraft, or learn Magic with them that are brought up in the
Doctrine of Devils: you must limp with this halting Age, fit thy Mouth to
shout, That great is Diana of the Ephesia^s; thou must taunt thy Father, spit
in the Face of thy own Mother, hiss away all thy true Brethren: like the Jews,
thou must soon learn the Language of Canaan and Ashdod; if they come under
another Lord, the Citizen is a double Slave both in Soul and Body. Though there
are many which perhaps care not what become of Conscience, so that they can but
keep Walls, Skins and Purses, they would pawn their Souls to any Broker, they
have a Religion fitted for any Age or Accidents: yet they to whom Religion is
dearer than their Eyes, and the purity of the Gospel then the Lifeblood, is not
this an heavy Judgment? (and what shall a Man give in Exchange for his SOUL.)
It Is a Mortal Wound to have the Soul stabbed. Oh Miserable Age! if this hour of
Temptation should come upon you, that Me^ should be led away with the Errors of
the Wicked, and make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience: yet this it
will be, there will be no safety for incontaminate Faith; thou will be a
Nicodemus; or, if with Daniel, thou do pray publicly toward Jerusalem, thou will be cast into the Lions Den: thou will be a complicated and complete Slave,
a Slave in thy House, Person, Estate and Conscience: Oh, therefore if it be
possible, shut the Gates before Judgment does enter, or meet thy Enemy afar
off, before he draw nigh to the City: for if Tears, Prayers and Reformation
does not stop his Passage, here WILL be variety of Misery, you see, at his
subduing the City: There must be an eminency of Repentance, or there WILL be an
eminency of Wrath; it will be That Great Visitation, for it is that great City,
should I not spare Nineveh that Great City?

4. This shows, that as Eminency is dear unto God, so it ought to be unto us:
Oh, that God should spare a City that is Eminent, and that we will spare
nothing that is Eminent: that Eminency should beget in Us the greater Envy: Oh
tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Askelon, lest the
Daughters of the Uncircumcised Triumph, lest Rome say, That her Inquisition or
Stakes could not make a quicker Dispatch of eminent Protestants than our
Differences or Passions.

5. This does show, that we ought to aim at Eminency, we should look to be of
the new Corporation, to be Citizens with the Saints and of the Household of God.
Oh, what Magnificence to such a Professor? What Citizen like such a Saint? what
are all these glorious Structures, to the lively Stones of Gods Building? what
is the Magnificence of a City to the Prerogative of Adoption? No, the Robe of
Righteousness does excel all the Mercers Ware, an Ingot of Grace, the Wealth of
your City: what Conspicuousness like that of Religion? what Eminency like to
that Regeneration? No, if you want your Christian Interest, ye have only
Parchment Privileges your Happiness goes not beyond your City-Walls: The
Savor of Life to Life is not to be bought among all your Perfumers, nor the
true Pearl from your Jewellers. Oh that I could prevail with you to take the
City Oath, and make you true Freemen in Heaven, otherwise your Tenure is but a
painted Portal, and that your Heaven is in an Exchange: ye are never
Enfranchised till ye have Liberties of Redemption, nor right Traders, till ye
are making Bargains at the free Mart of the Spirit: nor wealthy Citizens till
ye have the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Oh then that you
would ^emove your Traffic, have your (...) your City Commerce, or Conversation
in Heaven, Bags that Wax not old, a stock of Grace, these are greater Riches
then the Treasures of Egypt; think your Security consists not in Bulwarks or
Citadels, but in Towers of Religious Constancy, that ye might say, our VValls,
Spirits, Consciences and Conversations are remaining firm: that your
Conversation might be so Celestial, that the people might be drawn to bless you
while Living, and to bewail you when Dead: Think not of the first Builder of
your City, but think of that City whose Builder and Maker is God. Oh, remember
that this City, has Keys too, for without are Dogs: oh happy thou that do go
in this City Livery, that art a prime Citizen in this Corporation: Should I not
spare Nineveh that great City? 229

6. This shows that Repentance does present to Gods Eye, every thing in us
that might draw Compassion: Nineveh being Penitent, God has before him all the
Motives that might incline him to spare it: It was a City a Great City, That
Great City: That as the Woman from the Wall had variety of Arguments why Abel
should be spared; and the Woman of Tekoah why Absalom should be called from
Banishment; and Bathsheba why Solomon should Reign, so Repentance does exhibit
to God all instances, impulsions, instigations, extimulations that should make
God propence to Favor; Repentance is copious in setting out a Penitent with
all his Adjuncts and Appurtenances, Inserences and References to make him
acceptable. Polycrates (presenting the Mother of a Soldier that dyed in the
Wars, to a Citizen) used these Terms, I give this Mother to thee to maintain;
and then all the Services of the Soldier were repeated. Pompey at his Triumph
(which was the greatest I ever read of) had every thing brought in that might
express the glory of it: viz. his Victory over several Kingdoms, that he had
Conquered a Thousand Castles, nine hundred Citys, eight hundred Pyratical Ships
and that in Asia, Africa and Europe; yea, that he had done such wonders, that
he seemed to Trymph over all the World. And Cleopatra when she prepared to
meet Mark Anthony* had all her princely Pomp described, viz. That she Sailed
down the River in a Bark overlaid with Gold, the Oars being pure Silver, the
Cables of Silk, the Sails of Purple, the Odors so costly, that they perfumed
the Bank sides with sweet smells; her Maids of Honor attired like Nymphs, and
her self sitting under a Tent of Gold, seeming to be the very Deity of Beauty.

But nothing does so delineate and decipher a thing as Repentance does all thy
Motions, Affections, Preparations, Passages and Perfections. God observes a
Penitent, and does exarate, and can enumerate all his Manifestations; he has
Bottles for thy Tears, Files for thy Petitions. VVitnesses for thy Vows, Bags
for thy Alms, and Books for thy Actions. Oh Penitent, then see how God does
look upon thee, look through thee, search and mark thee: Oh, if thou would be
seen with comfort and completely, turn Penitent, for Repentance is never out of
Gods clear distinct and district view: here his Eye is piercing and fixed: the
Publican no sooner approaches to God, but his distance, his dejection, his
blushing, his knocking, and his humble Tone is taken notice of; the like of
Josiah and Hezekiah, all their many humble Passages are taken notice of: though
Ahab did but act his part. God is privy to the least Address and the smallest
Expression that ever thou did make. when thou did desire a Union with him:
God can repat to thee thy checks, thy conflicts, thy groans, thy protestations,
thy supplications, thy fruitfulness, thy fervency, thy watchfulness: Repentance
cannot be rejected, God has all things under his Eye: Should I not spare
Nineveh that great City.

7. This does show, That no Earthly Eminency is certain: for God once spared
Nineveh that great City, but now that great City is wasted. Pappas says, That
Repetance at Jonah's Preaching saved Nineveh an hundred years, but afterward
being puffed up with happy success, it felt an avenging God. Cartwright lately
traveling those parts, says, he saw some pieces and broken VValls of it. The
most Judicious VVriters hold, that after Arbaces had taken it from
Sardanapalus, it continued under the Medes in some flourishing condition till
the time of Gyaxares, son of Phraartes, who began to destroy it; and Astyages
his Son levelled it with the ground. Oh then, what stability is there in any
earthly greatness? That great City, has had both her Obiit and her Funeral.
Oh, that our Hearts could trample upon the Earth as our Feet do; that our
Consciences could renounce the World, as well as our Profession does; how many
great Familys have we seen decay? how many great Citys have we found laid in
the Dust? Baldness is come upon Gazah, Jer 47.5. Yea, Nineveh that was the
Crown Imperial of the whole World, has now lost her Diadem, that great City
has not one of her Thousand five hundred Towers, or one of her splendid
Palaces to be seen. Oh, then why are ye enamoured upon your beautiful Empress?
Do you dwell in the enchanted City? Or, are you out of the dint of Vengeance?
Do you not fear Judgments? what should make you so confident? Nineveh's Circuit
was more large, her Walls more strong, her Streets more populous, her Treasures
more abundant, her Dominions more ample than yours, then why may not you drop
as well as Nineveh is fallen? Are your Sins less? No, you have four Sins within
your Walls (and yet I will except, Fraud, Pride, Partiality and Bribery) that
shall justify Nineveh from being the more Guilty Sinner: Four Sins? what are
they? I know you are good at asking questions, and apter to sciscitate than to
eliminate; therefore, because I have often heard you told of these things, and
yet could never see you blush, but rather rage; not softened with ministerial
Zeal, but rather hardened; therefore I shall not speak where the Lord has
commanded to keep silence, Amos. 5.13. nor throw abroad his Pearls, but where
he has directed me to cast them, nor impart his Holy things, but where he has
enjoined me to give them, Mat. 7.6. If you command the Prophets saying,
Prophecy no^, Amos 2.12. and the time be come about, that no Man must strive
nor reprove one another, for the People are as they with strive with their
Priest, Hos. 4.4. then why should we reiterate that which we have had Preached
upon the House top? and made plain upon Tables? and for fear I should be
charged to bring in a railing Accusation: I shall say only as Michael did, the
Lord rebuke thee. But these Sins are such, That if you had Walls of Brass, and
Guards of Anakims, they will make every beam of the House, and stone in the
Building cry out Confusion to you; and nothing but Conversion will save you;
and I doubt whether I shall see Nineveh's Repentance among you! Oh, that The
Jonah were born that would cry effectually in the Streets! Oh, That the
Auditors were yet so prepared, that they could listen to a Message from Heaven
with Nineveh's Ears! Oh, be ye smitten to the Earth, wallow in the Ash-heap,
weep till ye cannot shed a Tear more; reform, till there is not a Sin left for
Conscience to turn new spy unto; and so may Repentance be your Preservative, a
kind of Guardian Angel to the City and with Nineveh be spared; and if spared, I
wish ye not to be secure; for if you Fast, and fall to your old Riot; or put on
Sackcloth, and change this for new Fashions, etc. the renewing your former
Sins will but renew former dangers, therefore your Repentance must not only be
fervent, but firm; not only unfeigned but unchangeable: Remember Nineveh, she
humbled her self, and was Pardoned, she repented, and was spared; but she
repented but for a time, and was spared but for a time: she turned to be
Nineveh the Wicked, and she happened to be Nineveh the Miserable.

Third general.
Wherein are more than sixscore Thousand Persons, which cannot discern between
their right hand and their left, and also much Cattle.
We are come to the Description, wherein are more, etc. observe herein these
two particulars.

1. The principal Commoditys, wherein are sixscore thousand persons, which
cannot discern between their right hand and their left. 2. The less principal
Commoditys, and also much Cattle.
1. For the Principal Commoditys, in which these parts are considerable.
1. The Receptacle, wherein. 2. The Season, are. 3. The Treasure, Persons. 4.
The Quantity, sixscore Thousand. 5. The Surplus, more. 6. Qualification, which
cannot discern, etc.


1. For the Receptacle, wherein.
Elsewhere had been no Credit to Nineveh, but that Nineveh had these choice
things, this is the Honor, wherein. Obs. That Happiness must carry with it an
Appropriation; the Appropriation is the Approbation of it: what matter though
Thousands be recorded for fortunate Persons, if thou be not in the
Catalogue? neither Welfare nor Honor, Law nor Gospel, peace of Conscience,
nor Joys of Heaven are useful to us, if we have not a proper Title to them:
Therefore be not mistaken, you see 'twas Nineveh's Happiness to have this
Felicity with a restriction, or in the proper ubi, wherein.

Application,
1. This reproves such who know Blessings only by hearsay; is not this a
wandering kind of Comfort, to see fullness abroad and want at home? Psammenitus
told Cambyses, Domestical Miseries are greater than can be expressed by Tears.
Oh, Let us not be given too much to visit the state of others, but let us
observe our own Condition, whether the right Blessing be in the right place.

2. This shows that some enjoy distinct felicity: for though this were not to
be seen elsewhere, yet in Nineveh it was to be found, wherein. It was L.
Minutius only, that got the Golden Bullock: and Zelislaus that had by Bodislaus
the third, the Golden Hand given him for his Valor: Particular preheminencies
happen as God does command the Blessing. Oh then, be privy to your own
Privileges, use not things conferred as if they were inbred.

3. This shows Greatness does not consist in bare Title, but in effectual
Demonstration, for Nineveh is not only that great City, but that great
Receptacle, wherein. Woe to them that are only voiced up to be Great, but
setting aside their own Tumor, and the peoples Rumor, there is no greatness
to be seen in them: shall these go for great Professors? No, great Impostors:
great Expressions must justify great Titles.

Are.
2. The Season, Are, wherein are; not there were, but are. Obs. Hence, that
present bliss is the honored Bliss: what Beauty's in a consumed thing? That is
true Happiness which is come to no Diminution, or abatement, where the Spring
does not fail: where the Might and Magnificence, Honor and Splendour of a People
is as apparent as ever; when not former but present times do shine with bright
Felicity, wherein are.

Application.
1. See here the Stableness of Gods Providence, it is as easy with him to
continue as to convey a Blessing. Nineveh had been and still is happy wherein
are. Would we not fly from God, he would never be weary of spreading his Wing
over us; would we not cast off his Protection, we might continually take
Sanctuary in him. I AM THAT I AM, immutable invariable: Ever to stand and never
to fall, is a Divine and Miraculous thing: yet this might be our fixed State,
if we would perpetuate our Obedience.

Be persuaded to preserve your Felicity, we are not quite deprived of
Blessings; No, wherein are. What? are and are not? are we weary of VVelfare?
loath Manna? Yes, we are satiated with Comforts, we do what we can to grieve
Providence and exasperate a Blessing God, we make Gaps in our Hedge drive away
Angels from Watching over us, and force God to turn his Back upon us, etc. Oh,
the horrid Sins which are committed amongst us, as if we would invite in
Devils, and make this land a Cage of unclean Spirits! We are sick of our
happiness and doubtless desire a change. It Is said of Alexius Comnenus, that
when, upon day of his Inauguration, he subscribed the Creed in a slow trembling
manner, it was an ominous sign to all, what a wicked Man he would prove, and
how the ruin of the Empire was at hand. Philip the last King of Macedonia,
before the great Battle with Flaminius, stepped up upon a Sepulcher to make an
Oration to his Soldiers, it foretold the bad Event of the Fight; so we who have
trod upon so many dead Heads of famous Martys, which at first conveyed to us
our Faith and Worship: it is a kind of Prediction, that this at last will befall
our Church. Is this the way to preserve Blessings? No, oh why shall we compel
happiness to swim over Sea, and carry so many Blessings a-long with it, as we
would be glad with wringing hands to recall: Oh, I speak in a timely hour, your
Sins I hope have not made God to abhor the excellency of Jacob.

3. This may teach us Constancy, is Providence Constant, and not Obedience? Is
God unchangeable in Mercies, and not we in Sincerity? Is there any thing more
injurious to God, or scandalous to Profession than Inconstancy: the firm
Christian is the memorable Christian: oh therefore preserve your Religion, as
you would your Fathers Inheritance, as you would your Eyes; why should you not
be as firm in Faith, as God is in Providence: he gives Blessings and does
continue them. Nineveh is as rich in them as ever, wherein are.

Persons.
3. We come now to the Treasures, Persons. Obs. That These Persons are the
Worlds perfections. Man was made little lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8.5. If
they were Intellectual, he was Wise; if they were indeficient, he was immortal;
If they were bright, he was shining; Crowned with Glory and Honor; if they had
Heaven, he Paradise; if they had Revelations, be Mysterys: if they had Joys, he
Ravishments, etc. Take Man according to his proper Nature, and lie is a rare
Creature, and so as a Quintessence extracted out of the Virtue of the whole
Creation: He was made by Consultation, the rest of the Creatures God made by
his Authority, there was but a Fiat, let there be made, and every thing
received a Being: but Man was made by Deliberation, Faciamus Hominem, let us
make Man, as if there were so many Secrets and things of Consequence to be
considered in Man, that the Wisdom of the whole Deity was summoned to conclude
upon them: he was made a Lord. The Son of Macrinus is said to be born with a
Crown on his Head: Sure I am Man at first was constituted a Prince. Scanderbeg
('it is said) came out of his Mothers Womb with the shape of a Sword in his Hand;
but Man carried the commanding Sword for all Creatures were made subject to
him. Man was made to be the draught of Gods own Face, or the Creature wherein
the Creator might seem (if it were possible) to be effigiated or represented:
Let us make Man according to our Image and Similitude: Aug. Caesar seemed to
carry spots like Stars upon his Breast. Pythagoras had a Thigh like Gold, and
was every where so Beautiful that his Scholars thought him to be Apollo. Magnes
of Smyrna was so comely that he was carried from City to City to be seen; the
Magnesians were so taken with him, that the very sight of him bereft them of
their Judgment. Antinous a Bithinian, was so admired by Adrian the Emperor for
his rare Features, that at his Death he built a Temple for him at Mantinea a
City in Egypt, and stamped his Image upon his Coin. Demetrius Poliercetes was
so surpassingly fair, that his Physiognomy could not be taken by any Painter.
But what are all these to amiable Adam? when God had viewed every thing he had
made, he only said, It was good; but so soon as Man was Created, it is said, God
saw every thing he had made, and behold 'twas very Good, Genesis 1.31.

Application.

1. This serves to exhort Man to know his Excellency. Man, if thou do oppose
God and despise thy Superior, I know not how to make thee mean enough: But if
thou do submit to God and honor thy Superior, I know not how to make thee
great enough.

2. This does serve present to the City Treasures, these living Souls are your
lasting Excellencies; it g ieveth me to see with what wonder ye look upon other
things, and with what contempt upon your Citizens, with what care ye preserve
other things, with what disdain ye overlook these in their Extremities; with
what violence ye do push at these with Thigh and Shoulder, and beat them to
pieces. Is there a more dying groan than for the neglect of these living Souls?
Is there a shriller yell among you than the passionate Cry of the Oppressed?
Let there be less Pride and Cruelty, and more Charity and Equity. The Blessings
of a City, are the Persons of a City, wherein are Persons.

3. This does exhort these Persons, that seeing they are Treasures they do not
diminish their own Worth. Oh, that ye should live to the Honor of the City,
and that ye live to the Ignominy of it: the Mire in the Streets is not worse
than the filth of your Behaviors, that the great Blemishes within the Walls
are the Skars of your Conversations, your LUSTS, Riots, Pride and Profaneness do
more shame the City, than all your Sinks and Dung-hills in it: do you look to
preserve the City? No, you go about to drown it, for there is a Ditch of Sins:
oh, it is a dangerous thing to a City, when Sin does walk up and down the
Streets with a Sodoms Face, Guilt appearing in open Sight with an impudent
Brow. It Is better to be defiled with Dirt than Sins. Oh, why do you scatter
abroad your horrid Crimes? and fill every Corner with your Abominations, are ye
the Credit of the Corporation? No, when the City does present you, it does but
show her own Infamy and Disgrace; your vicious behaviors, are worse than if
there were breaches in your Walls, your Buildings half Levelled, etc. if ye
were Virtuous, the Innocence of your Lives would more adorn the City than the
beautifying the Gates, for the City does shine only in the presence of Saints.
Oh, therefore, leave no Stinks behind you, but perfume every place you set your
Feet: your mortifyed Demeanours, and gracious Fruits do bring Fame and Renown
to your City: what is your City-Sword, Seal, Hall, Bench? No, these are but
dumb and dead Ensigns, the Honor of a City is in the Citizens, the Persons,
wherein are Persons.

4. Let this serve to fright Men from Bloodshed; Sacking a City is nothing
like Slaughtering of the Persons. If Men be of such value, they should not be
hewn down like Brambles, nor butchered like Oxen: let shedding of Blood be in
the most sparing manner: Oh, those cursed Cains, Doegs, Abimeleches, Hazaels
and Herod's, how detestable are they both to God and Man? These, suppose stain
of Blood is gone so soon as they have Sheathed their Swords; and the noise of
Murder is stilled, so soon as they have struck down their Enemies speechless.
No, God will make a strict Inquisition for Blood, that God which requires
Blood at the hand of every Beast, Genesis 9.5. doubtless he will not spare Man for
it. He that says, Thou shall not Kill, and that his Image is in every living
Person, Genesis 9 6. will teach Thee what it is to Kill men in a Fury, and to
deface his Images, as if thou were but battering down Pictures; just Wars are
lawful, but barbarous Executions are devilish. Even in the heat of Battle Men
should Kill with a desire to preserve Life. It is one of the Aenigma's of
Profession, so to constitute War that there be no culpable scruple in the
close. Sure I am, there must be a full Authority, a just Cause, and a right
Intention, so that it must not be ex odio out of hatred: and how is that but
out of hatred, if a Man should shed one drop more than what is necessary, out
of Insolency and Blood-thirstiness? the lives of the Vanquished are not wholly
at the Mercy of the Conqueror, he had need distinguish well between a Conqueror
and a Cutthroat A vindicative War is lawfulest; so that a Man must take heed
he be not a too severe Righter of his own Injurys, he ought to be satisfied
with the Victory, and, as much as may be leave Revenge to God. The Authors, and
principal Executors in an Injury ought to be Slain, but not the generality
which are drawn in to be Parties: Killing is only allowed against obstinate and
desperate Adversaries, for the Community cannot be touched without the hazard
of many Innocents, says St. Ambrose: Conquest then must end with the least
damage of Enemies and Inhabitants. Molina holds, a Christian taking a
Christian Captive cannot sell him to make him a Bond-Slave: Now if Liberty be
so much tendered, how much more Life? Oh there is not a more Crimson Sin than
when Blood touches Blood, Hos. 4.2. that is, that there is no end in
Bloodshed; when Blood is poured out as Dust, and Flesh as Dung, Zeph. 2.17.
When Widows are increased like Sands of the Sea, Jer. 15.8. When a Land is
soaked with Blood, Isaiah 34.7. What dreadful Examples of Cruelty do we meet
with in Ages: Plutarch tells us, That Pericles extirpated the Calcidences and
Estiences. The French, after the defeat at Thermopyl^ (as Pausanias says)
destroyed the Callienses to a Man, plucking the Children from their Mothers
Breasts, and Killing them, tearing in pieces the Marriageable Virgins; so that,
happy were they that could get a French Sword to dye upon, to avoid further
Torture. Totila (as. Gregorius Turon reports) flaying quick Herculanus,
Bishop of Perusium, and cutting off the Heads of all the Citizens. Syll^.
slaying 12000 in one City of Preneste. A^^ila 30000 at the Sacking of Rome.
Abderamen 100000 at one Battle in Gall cia^^ Mari^^ was so busy in Killing his
Countrymen, that he wished himself to be the only Roman to be left alone.
Hannibal was so eager in destroying Flaminius and his Soldiers, that he felt
not an Earthquake that happened in the time of the Battle. Don Pedron the
cruel* making Spain in his time a Charnel-house, full of nothing but dead Men's
Bones. Mahomet the Great, causing the Streets and Temples of Constantinople to
swim in Blood. Selim the Turk Killing the Persians so without Mercy, that he
built a Tower barely of their Heads. Oh, these Men, if 'twere in their Power,
how would they exanimate Nature? Dis people the Earth, and leave the world as a
Wilderness Wounds are their Feats of Activity, Blood their Cordial, crying
Groans their Music, ghastly Faces their Looking-Glasses, shivered Bones the
Relics of their Puissance, and Carcasses the Emblems of their Glorious
Tryumphs: I do account such Praises? which have Blood for the ground of the
Ditty but sad Honors, these things may be famous amongst Pagans, but doleful
accidents amongst Christians: But we that have such Commands for Love, should
either Sheath up the Sword in Affection, or go to War in Tears: Whence comes
Wars, but from Lusts? and are Lusts justifiable Pleaders at tho Throne of God?
Is there a Judge? Is the Reckoning hastening? and will Blood be one of the most
Criminal Guilts at that Tribunal? Then how ought we to Skreen our Souls
concerning the stain of Blood? he which has slain his Brother, how shall he
show his Face before that Father? How will the Lives of Men go at an high Rate
at that day? when God prizes the chief Treasure of a City to be these Persons.
Wherein are Persons.

Sixscore Thousand.
4. The quantity of the Treasure, 120000. So many there were in the Minority of
years, how many then were there of Riper Age? Obs. That a great Blessing to a
City, is, to abound in People. for a true City is a numerous Multitude. It Is a
glorious thing when a City does pass Arithmetic. This is to be a City with an
Excellency. Nineveh's fame and felicity is here described to be great, that she
can reckon by her Thousands, even six score Thousand.

Application.
1. This does serve to present to you your Life-Blessing: are ye nor peopled?
Yes, the City of Numbers, every Street, every Lane stored with Inhabitants,
that it seems to contain a World within her Walls. Ar^^^rica in France was so
thinned after Maximians War that it was afraid that the Country should be
drained of the old Inhabitants. After the Battle of Cann^, Rome was so desolate
that it was enforced to raise up an Army of Slaves; but these Fears are not
come upon you: but the Lord your God has blessed you, and ye are as the Stars
of Heaven for Multitude, yea, that ye are a great People that cannot be
numbered. Ye know your Bounds, but do ye know the vastness of your Inhabitants?
Ye have the double Blessing amongst you, the Blessing of the Basket, and the
Store, Deuteronomy 28.5. and the Blessing of the Breast and the Womb, Genesis 49.25. What
a large Ordinary is this City? what a spacious Bedchamber? what a Spring of
People is there here? The Breath of Life never stirred quicker in such a
quantity of Ground: Nature here does show her Organizing Art, and this is one
of her gendring Receptacles. The Myrmidons were so many, that they were said to
be begotten of Pismires, this City does so abound with People, that it may be
called one of the Ant-heaps of the Earth. Living Persons do here so abound,
that they seem rather to be struck out then brought forth; their increase is so
plentiful that they come up like Spring-flowers to garnish the City, or that
they were rained down from Heaven. Oh, Look about you, and see, if these
persons be your Treasures, how fast your Mint does go* and what incredible
heaps ye have in banks, ye are the Skinned and Fleshed City, the true
Corporation indeed, for here are enough to make up not only a body Politic, but
a Republic of Bodies: if all your Bodies should appear at once, you would scarce
have street-room enough; they would adorn the City more than Hangings of Arras,
at your Public shows: your Suburbs do vy Multitudes with the City: But are the
People Treasures? are you affected with these Treasures? Have ye done honor to
the Lord of the Mine, that the City is sprinkled, scattered, heaped and wedged
with these Treasures? Did all the Bells in the City ever Ring, the Trumpets
Blow, and the Wind Instruments play, I mean your thankful Lips make Melody to
the Lord for the People? No, I doubt, ye have forgot your People, that though
they daily Face you, and their Clappers strike in your Ears, yet that ye are
both Blind and Dumb in extolling God for this favor. What Hecatombs have ye
ever offered for this numerous Blessing? Have ye ever sung Hosannah in the
highest for this high Mercy? I question whether ye have an Altar in the City
for this Service: for that Persons in great Multitudes are a great Blessing, ye
may see it here by Nineveh, who had it mentioned as her great Felicity to
reckon Persons by Thousands, wherein are six score thousand Persons.

2. This shows your present Blessing, that you are preserved in your Thousands.
Ye are yet a populous City, and the Lord God (if it be his Blessed Will) make
you a Thousand times more as you are; Deuteronomy. 1.11. But if the Arrow that flies
at Noonday should glide among you; A 2d. Plague.
how many wounded Breasts would there be? If Hippocrates were among you with
his precious Odours and sweet Ointments to perfume places. If Mindererus were
shooting off Guns in every Street to dissipate the Air. If Quercitan and Avicen
were prescribing the strictest Rules of Diet; if Galen, and the whole Tribe of
the most expert Physicians that ever lived, were teaching you to make Pills.
Electuaries, Pomanders, Cordials, etc. to make new Fires and Fumigations of
Storax, Calamint, Labdanum, and an hundred other Materials to expel ill scents;
yet they may be all ineffectual to prevent that irresistible stroke. For I am
not yet resolved, with Vido Vidio, That Kindred take the Infection sooner from
one another than from Strangers, because of the assimilation of Blood; nor with
Minderer us, that Virgins are more subject to it than married Women, because
the Spirits are fluid and retained, and so apt to putrify: nor that a Man being
well Dieted may escape Infection; because Socrates (if it be true) lived in
many Plagues, being a Man of high Temperance. But I hold, that a Plague is the
Hand of God, as David called it, and the Sword of the Lord, as Chron. 21.12 So
that, when, where, or by what means God will strike is uncertain; but it is
certain wheresoever God does lift up his Hand, he will strike home. Is there
any thing more terrible than the Pestilence? No, it is the noisome Pestilence,
Psalm. 91.3. and if this stench come up into your Nostrils, ye are gone: it is a
Weapon so sharp, that it is able to leave a Nation without an Heir, for I will
smite them with the Pestilence, and d^s-inh^rit them, Numb. 14.12. If this pale
Horse come to Neigh in our Streets, he will dash many Thousands into their
Graves. Numb. 16.49. 14700 dyed in one Plague; and Numb. 25.9. 24000 dyed in
another. And 70000 dyed in a third, 2 Samuel 25.15. The Ectenae a people of
Boeetia, with their King were all destroyed with a Plague, so the Hyantes and
Aeones came in their stead to people the Land At Rome in the Reign of Commodus
there dyed for a great while 2000 Men a day. In Africa there dyed in one Plague
1100000. Under Gallus's there dyed so many in the East, West, and South, that
many Countries seemed so destitute of Inhabitants, and for a long time remained
uninhabited: which occasioned St. Cyprian to write his Book de Mortalitate. In
this City how often have there dyed ten and twenty thousand in one Plague. In
Edward the thirds time, in the space of one year, there were buried in one
Church, commonly called Cistertians, above 50000 persons (how many then were
buried elsewhere?) And may not the like happen again? God's hand is not
shortened: there are now more people among you, and more sins. If the Pestilence
does once discharge, how many will be slain at one Shot? it will chase men out
of their Dwellings, as if there were some fierce Enemy pursuing them; and shut
up shop-doors, as if Execution after Judgment were served upon Merchants: There
will then be no other Music than doleful knels, nor no other Wares carried up
and down but dead Corpse, it will change Mansion houses into Pest-houses, and
rather gather Congregations into Churchyards than Churches: the Markets will
be so empty, that scarce Necessaries will be brought in: a new kind of Brewers
will set-up, oven Apothecaries to prepare Diet-drinks: People are afraid to eat
Meat, lest they should eat it out of infected Shambles; or to wear Raiment,
lest it should be stitched up with the Plague: they shall lie down without the
least Spot seen upon them, and rise up with GOD's Tokens upon them, yea, with
the Carbuncle scalding in the Flesh like a Fire-coal: They shall walk well out
from their Houses, and drop down before they get home again. In the time of a
Pestilence, Fly quickly, go far, and return slowly; every Disease turns into
the Plague: Come not nigh thy soundest Friend within the distance of two
Cubits, nor within the distance of infected Persons, the space of six Cubits:
beware lest the Wind blow upon thee from him, or lest there be any Sun, Fire,
or Odors betwixt him and thee. If thou be well, eschew thy dearest
acquaintance; if thou be sick thy dearest Acquaintance will flee thee: A
Lord shall scarce have a Page, a Lady a Chambermaid, to wait on them: a Brother
will scarce look on his Sister, a Husband on his Wife, or a tender Mother on
her darling Infant: a Beggar will not wear thy Marriage Suit, if given him; nor a
Porter be hired to go on thy Errand* though thou would give him a Lease for
life, for his Journey: Thy Gold is left to the Justice of a Servant, and thy
Breath is left to the mercy of a Nurse: thou art dead whilst thou art unburied;
and thou art buried without any but Bearers to go along with thy Hearse. Of all
Miseries the Pestilence is the fray, of all dreadful things which can happen
upon Earth, this is the horror Oh that ye would cleanse the Streets with
Repentance, that This Infection might not breed in your Sins: Purge the Air
with Obedience, that your Purity might preserve you from This Contagion: above
all, feel the Plague of your Hearts, that you may not feel this Plague in your
sides: A Pestilence would scatrer you, thin you, and carry you by heaps under
ground. Yet, every Housekeeper has a Family about him the streets swarm with
Inhabitants. Oh know it is a Bless to be able to number by Thousands. Wherein
are more than six score thousand.

3. This does show, That Numbers should be a Motive to Compassion: Unkind is He
that would grieve the Generallity, Cruel is He that would destroy a Multitude,
which can scramble over heaps of slain Bodies! It was the Voice of a Monster,
that wished Rome had but one Neck: Onademus of Chios having suppressed his
Enemies, his Friends wished him to expel every one that were opposite to him,
out of the City: No, said he, They are too many to be too harshly used; I am
afraid, said he, That if I should be thus rid of all my Enemies, my Friends
would fall out among themselves. When Lucullus took Amasi^, it grieved him that
the Soldiers had fired the City; but he preserved the Citizens, that so many
might not be exposed to the Fury of Soldiers.

See here how general Misery has drawn Commiseration from generous Spirits:
and indeed, there can be no greater Act of Nobleness, than to detest to be
Author of a public Calamity: [Oh that this consideration might powerfully
stick upon all such who have an envious Eye on miserably dejected LONDON] It
was the solemn Petition of Moses, to God, That he would not kill all the People
as one man, Numb. 14.15. Merciless then are Their Eyes, and savage Their
Bowels, who can ruin Multitudes: It was forbidden by the Law, to destroy the
whole Nest, Deuteronomy. 22.6. Oh, therefore, let the Faces of a Generallity aw you;
Be amated at horrid Attempts wherein Multitudes are concerned, Tremble at
MASSACRES. Should not I spare Nineveh, etc.

More.
3. As to the Surplus, More than six score Thousand; Observe, That God is exact
in accounting. He knew all the righteous persons that were fit to enter into
the Ark: he knew all that did not bow to Beal; he knew all the Thousands, and
the surplus of them that were in Nineveh. That there were six score thousand
and more Should not I spare Nineveh, etc. Application. This serves to exhort
you to a Confidence in God, in all Extremities: for, he which knows every
particular Creature in so great a City, he knows also every particular Accident
which happens to us: Be not like Porus King of India, who took his Conquest by
Alexander so heavily, that though he had his life given him, yet he would not
for a great space eat any meat, suffer his Wounds to be dressed, or be persuaded
to live: So if we be but crossed in our Expectations or designs and cannot enjoy
that Liberty and Fullness we had, we would starve upon Accidents, or suffer our
Wounds to rankle: Oh, sigh gently, speak softly, chide not with Providence,
roar not under Casualties, fret not your selves into your Graves, etc. Remember
ye have suffered nothing but what the Wisdom of God held convenient, and the
Providence of God is able to return double. Moses fled for his Life, and kept
sheep, yet afterward became a mighty Ruler. What? do you suffer any thing out
of Gods sight? No, his Ey is upon all your Trials, all your Miseries are scored
up in Heaven: He keeps a Catalogue of all your sufferings: Oh, therefore take
Courage, witness Patience, express Confidence: why should you be a fainting
people under a knowing God? when you are ready to complain, murmur and vex,
restrain these distempered Passions by remembering you have a seeing and a
searching God, that has taken notice of all your Sorrows, reckoned up all your
Losses, Injuries Indignities and Extremities; you know not better how many eyes
you have in your head, nor how many fingers you have upon your hands, than he
can bring-in a full Account of your Distresses: That he is an observing God,
See here in Nineveh, he can number out to her all her Thousands, and the
Surplus. Wherein are more.

2. This may serve to repress Sin; Oh, that you dare trespass against so
knowing a God: You know there are a Company of men who are all for Secrecy,
saying, Who shall see? Psalm. 64.5. yea, setting their Mouths against Heaven,
saying, How does God know? is there Knowledge in the most High? But these shall
suddenly hear God thunder and tell them, These things have thou done, and I
kept silence, then thou thoughtest wickedly, that I was such a one as thy self,
but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thy eyes, etc. God
could tell Adam of eating the forbidden fruit, Cain of murdering his Brother,
Saul of sparing Agag, David of slipping into his Neighbors Bed, and covering
the foulness of that guilt with the skin of a dead Husband; Asap^ of trusting
in his Physicians, Hezekiah of showing his Treasure, The Scribes and Pharisees
of their secret Lusts, which deserved stoning, etc. What do think of drawing
a Curtain before Heaven? and to steal lewd Attempts by casting Mists before
the Eyes of the Al seeing God. As he knows his own Decrees, Honor, Laws, so he
does know all thy Trespasses, Will ye force the Queen before me? so, will ye
violate Laws in the Lawmakers Presence? What despise God's sight, contemn his
very Eyes? Oh, consider this ye that forget God, which invent and attempt
horrid and prodigious things, as if you would exclude God out of the Room: No,
no, you cannot, he s in the midst of your PLOTS, and the great Notetaker of all
your Passages. If the man that hid himself in a Cave, that Hercules might not
see him, one day seeing him pass by the Caves mouth, at the sight of him fell
down dead (then ye which tremble so much (as ye must do, if ye be not Atheists)
at the thoughts discerning God) then when you see him with guilty Eyes, and he
look upon you with Eyes like a flaming fire, how shall you see him with
amazement? ye that now dread not Gods Eye, shall then call to the Rocks to
cover you, and the hills to fall upon you. Is God ignorant of your Crimes? No,
he can reckon up Errorus and Additions, for he numbers Nineveh, and the
Surplus, wherein are more than six score thousand persons.

3. This does show, That if God be skilful in numbering a City, he is as skilful
in numbering his Elect. If Anthony the famous Egypitan could say all the Bible
by heart, and yet never learned Letters; If Cytus said it was a shame for a
General not to know the Names of all his Commanders, as well as a Surgeon of
all his Instruments. If Franciscus Cardalus Narniensis could rehearse two whole
Pages backwards and forwards, after once reading to him, then doubtless the
omnipotent God knows all them that are dear to him his Elect; no man does
forget (the never so old) where he laid his Gold, much less does God where his
rich Treasure is: all the Miseries upon Earth, nor all the Devils in Hell cannot
wrest one of these out of God's hand.

6. For the Qualifications. Which cannot discern between the right hand and the
left.
In which words are three things considerable 1. A Defect, which cannot. 2. The
Determination, Discern. 3. The Degree, Between the right hand and the left hand.


1. For the Defect,
Which cannot. Observe, That some things carry an Impotency in them. Man is
such a Creature that he can but act pro virili, according to his Power, Lucifer
is quite flagg^^ by endeavoring to ascend higher than an Angelical wing could
carry him. Adam brake his neck upon the Banks of Baradis^ by attempting to
attain that Wisdom which was inhibited to his natures there are many things
which are beyond Man's list and boundary. Which cannot.

Application,

1. This shows, That man is a wanting Creat^re; he drops out of his Mothers
Womb like a Lump of Indigencies.

2. That Negatives for a Time, do deprive us of all Power: But

3. It shows the strength of a Saints Confidence; Our Arm is weak, happy are
they that lean upon the Arm of the Lord. Oh how glorious is God in Extremities,
how wonderful in Exigents. Rabsha^^h threatened the Jews, that if they would not
yield, he would make them eat their own Dung, and drink their own Water;
Hezekiah cried out, This it the day of Trouble, Rebuke and Blasphemy! How did
God in one night free the City of all Dread: and lead back this insulting Enemy
with a look in the in Nostrils. When Asah had nothing but Heavenly Aid to
depend upon, saying, Help, O Lord our God, for the trust in theo. God disperse
an Army of Ten hundred thousand. When Jehosaphat feared and even fainted saying
O Lord God, pi^^ thou not judge them, for we have no might against the great
Comp^ny (...) our against us, neither known what to do, ba^ our Eyes (...)
unto thee. How did God clear the Coasts of that formidable Army, without giving
a stroke, for ye shall not need to fight at all, go down only to see the slain
and take the prey; for God made Divisions between the Moab^es, Amonies and
Ed^mites, that they destroyed one another: in so much that Jehosaphat came but
forth to see their slaughtered Bodies, and to take their rich Spoil and were
three days in gathering i^ and could not carry it all away. 2 Chronicles. 20.25.
When the Barbarians b^ak in with great Power against Theodosius, whose chief
strength was Prayer; how did God on a sudden strike dead Ruges their Captain,
and consumed the rest of their Army with Pestilence, and sire from Heaven. When
the ^^^anians and the Jazi^es (then Heathens) brake into Vi^^^, with such Fury
that they wasted a great part of the Country, and taking a multitude of
Captives insomuch that ^^^us Niger e'end of paired to oppose them, how did God
by the Apparition of Michael the Arch Angel, so animate him and his Soldiers,
that a very small Army fought against the successfully, yea, he stirred up the
Captives to break off their Chains, and fight magnanimously; and the Women
which they had taken prisoners, frighted them with shouts, and their own Dogs
which they brought with them, welcomed the Polonians, and flew on their
Masters, and by multitudes, worried them to pieces: [VVhat sudden, amasing and
confounding Disappointments have the implacable Enemies of GOD's People found,
when they have just brought their infernal Contrivances to perfection; and
destroyed them in a Moment: nor has God, either in Scripture or History, used
one Method twice: What his next means or Method will be, the one to their
everlasting Comfort will find, while the other to their eternal Confusion
feel.] Oh then when our hearts tremble under Miseries, and our Eyes are dimned
with continual weeping, what an excellent thing is it to wrap up our selves in
Gods Providence: He is powerful when we are impotent. He can, when we cannot.
Which cannot.

Discern. 269

2. Which cannot Discern. Observe, That God does not discern where man does not
discern: i. e. God will not inflict Judgment where men want Judgment: he counts
it no Reason to judge them that are destitute of Reason: he is so far from
punishing such, that he is pleading for such. All by the Necessity of the
Precept (if they be of ripe years and have evident Manifestation) are bound to
know those things which are revealed in Scripture to be true; but by the
Necessity of the Means they are chiefly bound to know but such things as
Principally and Essentially belong to the Redeemer and Redemption,
Justification and Sanctification, and such as are the necessary, constitutive,
Parts of Salvation: The Catholic Faith they must not be ignorant of, but the
Scholastical, Problematical, Polemical Faith they are not absolutely enjoined;
for if a man should oblige illiterate and undisciplined men to the Mysterys of
the Trinity, the secrets of the Hypostatical Union, the Modalities of the
Mediatorship, the speculations of Christ's Passion, the Intricacies and
Scruples of the Resurrection, with varieties of Notions in this kind, this
Obligation would be sued out against so many Nonsolvents, that not only a
Capias might be served upon the third Part of the Laity, but a great Company of
the Clergy might be carried to Prison with them. All the Difficulty I know does
lie in this, To know what an Entire Faith is Justice has no place where man
has no Power, unless by his own default he has lost it. How does God plead
here for an ignorant people? God cannot but spare where men cannot discern.
Should I not spare, etc.

Application.
This opens a door of Hope in the Valley of Achor, for impotent persons to
enter by, or to show God on his Mercy-Seat shining with a Face of Grace upon
all truly disabled persons: he has no Wrath against them that know not how to
provoke him. There is an Abridgment of Christianity which every one must learn,
viz. To know God and our selves* which short Lesson we must be exact in, for by
the knowledge of thy self there is distilled into thee the Fear of God, and by
the Fear of God there is distilled into thee a Love of the Promises: if thou
know not thy self, there is nothing but Pride; if thou know not God,
there is nothing but Despair: and having got this Compendious Divinity, and all
things necessary for this prime Art, where high, sublime things may be
dispensed with, if we have not Means, Opportunities, Qualifications and
Endowments to attain them: The Substance we are tied to, but not the
Apurtenances: especially where God denies Faculties; Therefore, if thou
understandest Necessary Faith and Duty, trouble not thy self if thou can not
understand Mysteries: for God does not judge the Ignorant but plead for them:
Which cannot discern.

2. This might serve to spring Compassion in men's Breasts toward the Ignorant:
Tully never got more Credit than by defending the young Noble men of Rome, for
not performing all things according to Martial Discipline. Oh, Severe Sentences
has made the world a Slaughterhouse: Damasippus killed the Citizens of Rome
like Sacrifices, because Marius jun. did but tarry alittle among them.
Usuncassan killed his Son Masubius, tho young and not capable of Treason
because he suspected, in time, he would take part with his Mother Thodosius
jun. sending an Apple (which cost him an hundred pieces of Silver) to his
Empress; and she sending it to Paulinus, and he presenting it again the
Emperor; he thinking there was too much Familiarity between Paulinus and the
Empress, took off Paulinus's head. Domitian executed Hermoge^es Tarsensis
because he put strange Pictures in a History; and crucified the Artists that
drew them. He also destroyed Metius Pompusianus because he kept but a Globe of
the World in his House, and had certain Orations taken out of Livy of Kings and
Captains. By an ancient Law in Rome, Virgins were note to be put to Dea h while
Virgins: Therefore this Emperor caused th Executioner to deflour them, and
then execute them: guiltlessness was no Protection. Oh that Christianity had
taught us more Justice: Are there none in our Land, though Christian, that dye
upon Suspicion, and suffer for such things as they know not of; are not many
made Transgressors for a Word: or, if some do transgress, is not a Community
oftentimes endangered, which never heard or knew any thing of the Design:
Christendom is large, and it seems to teach all the World Truth, but I doubt
all her Pulpets have not sanctified the Judgment seats: the Souls under the
Altar do cry, and the Blood under the Tribunals ^o cry: If so? What is this but
to turn Judgment into Gall? Am^s 5.7. O let the Judge pity, let the Jury tender
all them that are not conscious of the Fact: Let the Foxes and the Tigers be
destroyed, but slaughter not the innocent Lambs.

3. This shows what is justifiable Ignorance, viz. That which cannot discern;
not that which may and will not, but that which would, but cannot discern:
There is a difference between them that understand not God's ways, and those
that desire not the Knowledge of his ways, Job 21 14. between those which are
deprived of their sight, and those which close their eyes. Take heed how thou
do drink thy damnation draught out of this enchanted Cup.

4. This does reprove them which sin against their own Discernings, which can
discern, and do discern, and yet their words are stout against God, Oh, If
wilful Ignorance be a sin, what is wilful Presumption? What as bright as a
Scraphim in Knowledge? and as black as Beelzebub in Behavior? if I know any
thing, This is the Sea of the Scornful: the Conscience feared with a^ hot Iron,
with such it is enough to deserve Fetters, to urge Scripture. Oh, Adulterers and
Adulteresses, Blasphemers, Epicures, Oppressors, Persecutors, Tyrants, hear
afar off the last Trump blowing; behold at a distance, the sign of the Son of
man appearing in the Clouds; set up Christ Jesus is Tribunal in your
Consciences, before you make your Impartial Account before that white Throne Oh
that you would not pluck your Eyes our of your heads whilst you are living,
that you would not draw up the Sentence in Self damning Letters, that you would
not begin Dooms day in Covictions, If our hearts condemn us, God is greates
than our hearts, and knows all things. If the man be spech less, the next
words are, Take him, bind him hand and foot, and throw him into utter Darkness.
Oh that I could warn you from these gilts, and separate you from presumptuous
sin: What will you say, when 'twill be urged, That you knew both the Crime, and
the Curse? Ye did discern. Thoughs accusing are unanswerable Witnesses. If ye
were blind, ye should have no Sin; bu^ now ye say, We se^: therefore your sin
remains. They cannot desire better Light; no, they say, We see; nor wish for
a better Interpreter, for Christ has spoken to them: The knowing Sinner is a
prodigious Sinner; a fighting Conscience is more terrible than a Goliath to
encounter with: God has no Mercy for obstinate Sinners, which do commit Sin
though they do discern it: no, he will only spare them which cannot discern.
Should not I spare, etc.

Between their right hand, and their left.
3. We come now to the Degree, between their right hand and their left. By such
are understood Infants. Besides men of ripe Age, and intelligent, there are six
score thousand, and more of other men, -- So that Infants and simple men are
highly cared for by God, says Chelmannus. Simple men we had before, and now
God does proceed to Children, which cannot discern between the right hand and
the left. This Observation naturally arises from the Text, That Knowledge is
incompatible with Infancy, for they cannot discern between the right hand and
the left. As the man is so is his strength, Judge. 8.21. so, as the Child is, so
is his Judgment. We to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, Eccl. 10.16.
i.e. when he does want not years, but wisdom: which intimates that a Child is
not come to years of Discretion. I confess, I have read, That the Son of
Craesus, spoke at six Months, and saved his fathers life: and, That Sigebert,
the Son of Dugobert, the fortieth day after his Birth, being baptized by
Amandus, plainly answered, Amen. And that Anno 1117. there was an Infant lying
in the Cradle, made a long continued Speech to his Mother busied in her Family
Cares, wishing her not to be too intent upon worldly things, for God was ready
to be revenged on the world instantly, if, etc. But these things were done by
miracle, and not by ordinary course of nature. Petrarch gives solid Comfort to
a Parent bewailing the death of his Infant, wishing him not only not to be
dismayed, seeing his Child had escaped these afflictions, but chiefly to
rejoice, because the state of a dying Infant is without any Danger: for, says
he, An Infant cannot perish shamefully, which does depart without sin. What
Sin can they have that have not Knowledge? They are so far from that, that they
know not the place of their Birth, their Fathers door, the parts of their Body,
nor the right hand from the left. Should not I spare Nineveh, etc.

Application.

1. This shows That Wisdom has a diminutive beginning.

2. This shows how necessary the strict Education of Children is: for is it not
fit to provide much for them which by Nature do enjoy so little? If thou
would have them either Sages or Saints, prepare them a Brain stock, and a
Conscience-Livelihood, else thou may leave them too much thy own, and let
them shift in the world like unprovided Children with their simple Naturals:
the breast is not more necessary than Instruction. Indeed the Parent should be
the grand Tutor to his Child: The Egyptians would suffer their Children to
learn nothing but of their own Parents. Agasicles being demanded why he would
not resort to Philopanes to learn Philosophy? No, said he, my Father is able to
instruct me in this, and it is most convenient for him to give Wisdom, who gave
Nature. Where Parents have been diligent herein, what eminent Children have
they left behind them: Cambyses teaching his Son Cyrus, how did he become
afterward the wonder of the World? Nicon, a Mechanic, but withal a very
learned man, teaching Galen Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and other liberal
Arts, how did he afterward excel, and was esteemed the Prince of Physicians.
Aristippus was so well instructed by a prudent She-parent, that he was
Sir-named the Mother-taught: and he made such a rare Disciple of his Daughter
Arete, that when he was dead, she was able to keep up his School, and read
Lectures. Pythagoras was such a Schoolmaster to his Daughter Dama, that she
excelled in all Learning. Such Ornaments may Children prove if Parents
themselves can bestow good Education upon them. But if Parents cannot do this
themselves, let them not neglect at the dearest rate to buy this abroad, it is
the best purchase you can make for your Children: a Will cannot give such
Legacys. Oh bring thy precious stones to these Lapidaries to be filed, and thy
costly new-woven Cloths to these Dy-fats, to receive their Tincture. Remember
Solomon hdesired Wisdom more than Riches and Honor, its price is above the
choicest Rubies: therefore, fill thy Son's Brains rather than his Purse:
provide thy Son Wisdom rather than a Manor house, or multitude of Tenants:
yea, go one step further, Furnish him with Grace, thou give him none of this
by Nature; no, The natural man perceives not the things of God, Therefore, if
thou have Grace thy self, communicate it to thy Child: be ever imprinting in
their minds Divine Precepts, and ingraving their Souls with celestial
Characters. But if thou have not so much Judgment thy self, think not only of
the Fencing-Master, Dancing-School or Artillery-Ground, but settle thy Son
under some Religious Divine, to purchase the Pearl, to have his Wits exercised
in Scripture, to have the Eyes of his Understanding opened: that thy Child may
be able to take the Latitude of Christianity, yea, to comprehend the length,
breadth; hight and depth of Christ Jesus. What are all the Maxims of the Earth
to the Mysteries of the Kingdom? no, Redemption, Justification, Adoption,
Regeneration Faith, and to know a Right in the Tree of Life, excel all the
Speculations that the double refined Wits of the times can teach otherwise. Oh
then, that many men think their Children should get these things only by
sitting under a Pulpit, or learning a public Catechism, but not by making an
absolute Schooling of the study of Virtue: No, people think that these things
are to be taught at any rate, and in any time; they let them learn other things
without these, or these with other things; they allow not their Children time
nor means to make Grace a Trade: Seven years, is for a Calling, but I hear of
no such Apprentiship merely to learn Religion: They have a strange saving way
in pious things: their own Consciences costs them little at the Pulpit, and
they are as thrifty Husbands for the Souls of their Children in matters of
Grace: the conscionable Divine has few Disciples of this nature; the Fencing,
Dancing, and Musick-Masters, shall be preferred before him in Fees. Therefore,
if you would have them serve God, train them up at the greatest Expense under
them which may institute and precept them in the Principles of true Godliness.
History abounds with examples of the good effects hereof. And, for hamane
Learning I fine many liberal; Q. Fulvius gave his Master Ennius a whole City:
and Achilles gave his Master Phaenix, half his Kingdom and half his Honors: So
among Christians, I find for the learning Religion and Grace; Gracian gave unto
Ausonius many presents, and amongst the rest, a picture with his Fathers Image,
set with precious stones; telling him, He had paid but what he ought, and that
he ought more than he had paid: and Matthias Corvinus (that renouned Prince)
bestowed the whole Country of Veredarium upon his Master Joannes Vitesius: and
infinite other Examples are to be produced on the same Account. Therefore if
thou love thy Child's Soul as well as his Body, provide some Master workman
to lay the Foundations of Grace and Holiness.

3. This shows, that Infants rightly baptized have undoubted Salvation: for if
Baptism does take away Original Sin, what other Sin can be laid to their Charge.

4. This does serve to exhort all to tender the Estate of Infants; for, who
should not do justly with them, that understand not their own right? If thou
ought to open thy mouth in the case of the dumb, then much more for them
whose Tongue-strings are not unloosed to plead their own Cause; if thou oughest
to be Eyes to the Blind, and ^eet to the Lame, much more to them: Is there a
more honorable thing than the Patronage of Infants, and the Protection of
Fatherless Children Thus David tenderly regarded his friend Jonathan's
Children; and Mordical took the care of his Kinswoman Ester upon him: And
Lycurgus having, by his Brother, the Government of Spata left to him, till his
Heir unborn, came of Age: tho the wife of the Deceased offered to destroy the
fruit of her Womb, if he would marry her, and take the sole Government upon
himself: yet he accepted not of it but in show, wishing her not to endanger the
fruit of her Womb; but suffer her self to be delivered, and send the Child to
him, and he would soon make it away: the Birthday being come, and the Child
sent to him, in stead of murdering it, it being a Son, he presented him to the
Spartans, saying, Behold your King! naming him Charilaus; and stoutly defended
his Right against his Mother, and Leonidas; Thus did he, and thus ought all
just men to do, for Infants, as the Civil Law terms them, are Miserabiles
personae, i. e. Creatures which deserve the greatest Pity: they are called
Orphans, persons deprived of all Help: and who should not support the weak, or
help the helpless? But where are these kind Friends or Foster-Fathers to be
found? All relations of Amity will not bind men to express these faithful
respects: The Parent upon his Deathbed is not troubled more with his Pangs of
Death, than with vexatious Cares to whom to commit his Children; he is afraid of
his most intimate Associate, he does dread his nearest Kinsman, as well he may:
for what fidelity is to be found amongst ^amiliars or Allies? if the Father
does entrust these, they may keep the Children, but they will make themselves
the Heirs: the Father does put the Moth into the Garment, the Wolf into the
Fold. Oh the poor Remainders that will be left after such sharp Teeth! they
will eat out his Estate, his Posterity, his Name. What incredible
Disbursments, what large Bills are brought in at the end of the Term? What
restless Molestations, what Chargeable Suits must the Heir meet with before he
recover his Right? A Captain will as soon deliver up a Castle, as these an
Executorship; these Devils when they have a long time possessed such a Body,
they will not be cast out without rending and tearing: Does the Father choose
these for Executors? he had as good send his Children to the Mortar, to the
Millstone, to the Shambles to be chopped to-pieces, to the Furnace to be burnt: Oh
the sad Cries and Groans of oppressed Infants and injured Orphans. Oh that ever
we were born, for, to what were we born? We can but look upon our Fathers
Means, for so much is gone to bind out the Executor's Son, so much to marry his
Daughter, so much to purchase such a Manor, and so much to buy such an
Office, etc. he trusted, oh that he had distrusted; he put Confidence, oh that
he had had timely Diffidence: his Funeral is past, oh that we had been buried
with him; we waited on him to his Grave, oh that we had been nailed down in his
Coffin with him: Alas! We are not our Fathers-Heirs, but still his Mourners;
our Funeral-tears must never be dried up, we must always go in black; our
Father had a House, but left the Key with others, and his Children cannot get
Entrance; the Executors sit on the Bench, we may lie in the Clink; he lives in
a Lordship, we in an Almshouse; we might have been a Wonder, are now a Warning;
we might have been a Splendour, are now a Terror; Oh, let all Parents quake at
the choice of such Trustees, and all Orphans tremble at the Thoughts of such
Executors; we can but seal up our sense of such Perfidiousness with Cries and
Curses: Is this only a Passionate complaint? Are there not bleeding Instances
to be produced? yes, most wonderful precedents. Demosthenes had a large
Patrmony left him by his Father, his Tutors so perverted the benefit, that what
through Covetousness and Carelessness, at last there was not enough to pay his
Schoolmaster. But there is no need of Examples, when every Country and Court
cries out of false Executors. The Father may bequeath what he will, at last
there is nothing found of the Goods, but in the Inventory; or of his Estate, but
what is in Bills of laying out: the Orphans comes out of their hands, so full of
stripes, as if they had lived in some Correction-house, they must redeem
themselves as if they were some Slaves of Algier. No year of Jubilee can set
them in their just Possessions, nothing but the day of Resurrection to repair
their Damages. We are the Land sprinkled with Orphans Blood: Oh that such men
should call themselves Christans! is the like Injustice among Turks? Oh that
these should ever hope for, or speak of Heaven: for if no unclean thing can
enter into the new Jerusalem, not these surely so besmereed with Blood! How
will these look their dead Friends in the face at the last day, whose harmless
Infants they have worried? how will they meet these Orphans at Gods
Judgment Seat, whom they have shouldred at many a Tribunal? Oh the criminations
of the Parents, and the execrations of the Children will draw a confounding
Sentence from such a Judge! Is it not shame to crush Spawns? to crop Buds? tear
up roots of new sown Corn? to damnify or destroy them who have neither Wit nor
Reason to apprehend an Injury. And is it not so with Infants? Yes, they have so
little Judgment, that they know not the right hand from their left. Which
cannot discern, etc.

5. This shows, That seeing God would spare the lives of Children, because they
were undiscerning Creatures, that it is the height of Cruelty to spill the Blood
of Infants: for though it is a heavy thing to kill Champions, yet it is a sadder
thing, when Children are dashed in pieces at the head of every Corner of the
streets, Nah. 3.10. When Children are brought forth to the Murderer, Hos. 9.13.
Pharaoh was not a worse Butcher than to kill Children: Herod's shambles were
not filled with worse meat than the Limbs and Quarters of slaughtered Infants.
Oh! the Murderer fights with Infants as if he were fighting with Giants; or
furiously knocks down Children that cannot stand on theirs legs; that he must
have Childrens soft flesh to set his rough feet upon: that the City, he
thinks, does not echo rightly, till it be filled with the shreiks of
Infants; that the stones don't shine bright enough for his barbarous Eyes, till
they glitter with the Blood of Infants: Is this Chivalry? is this Prowess and
Puissance? what to blow the Trumpet over slain Children? Is It not immortal
Honor to strike them that cannot hold up a hand against you? or to shed the
Blood of them whose harmless breast never thought of Enmity? Take heed of any
crying sin, especially of the blood of innocent Infants. Alas, how can these
offend you? what, kill persons in a Gallantry? Devils may, Christians should
not: these cannot be guilty of grievance, nor offer a distaste: rather destroy
them that can discern, but not these that cannot discern between the right hand
and the left.

6. This shows, That the ground of Divine Commiseration is Innocence: He that
would be spared, must be as guiltless as the Infant, to discern no more of evil
motions, than the child does of the Motions of the Body: We are commanded,
concerning Malice, to be as Children: oh glorious thing to come to Self-denial:
to feel as little Man about us, and as much Infant in us as may be: if we would
be Penitents, we must carry only the Law of Sin, and not the Love of Sin in our
Members; we must have another sap running in our Branches, we must be like the
winnow'd Wheat, and refined Gold. Should not I spare, etc.

And also much Cattle.
These are the less principal Commodities: Three things are considerable in
them: 1. A gracious Enlargement, And also. 2. A strange Subject, Cattle. 3. A
considerable Plenty, Much.


1. For the great Enlargement,
And also. God had said much before, but he had not said all: the Expression
had been large, and yet God is not at his last. If Jonah's hard heart did not
yet relent, God will try another softning, he will not keep back an Inference,
not loose a Motive, no he had another Clause yet behind, And also. Observe, God
will conceal nothing which may tend to the Advantage of his Saints, behold how
he values these! he favors them, and there is no end of his Affection; as he
had never looked enough upon them, so he had never spoke enough for them; God
will not only appear in the Case of his Saints, but he will maintain their
Cause: 1 King 8.45. never shut up his lips, till he has convinced, evinced,
and brought off his Saints clear; God will so argue for his Saints, that he
will wrest them out of the hands of their Enemies: God will find new Proofs,
search Records, examine Evidences, insist upon Circumstances to acquit the
Faithful, Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods elect?

Application.
1. This does serve to show the benefit of a Divine Ingratiating. Since thou
were precious in my eyes thou were honorable: Isai. 43.4. So honorable that God
will be a restless Advocate for his Saints, not only look upon them, but stand
by them; not only at first, or for once, but never take off his hand till
perfected his work: He will contend with the whole Earth for them: God will
weary the quarrelling World, and make them desist from opposing and molesting
before he will give over answering and confuting: as in Prosperity there shall
be a succession of Blessings; so in Protection there shall be a continuation,
concomitation and connection of Arguments; Reason upon Reason, God will be at
first entering of the Suit, and last hearing in Court, God will never leave his
Clients, till he has brought all things to a happy close: the Wicked may be
violent at first, but God will hold them so long in debate, that at last their
edg shall be dull d: why then are we dismayed that God's first Arguments do not
take? if God has not yet disputed us out of Danger, has he no more
Disputations behind? Yes, he will use his demonstrative Reasons, and search all
his Topical heads that he may be Victor for his Saints: when God has alleged
many things, he has an Enlargement still in store. And also.

2. Let this daunt the Politician, who carries it high, and soars in the
Admiration of his contriving Brain: as if Nestor were not his Match, nor
Ulysses his equal: oh how he is enamored upon his Projects and Idolizing his
Designs: here I am prevalent, there I am successful, what cannot I do by my
ingenious head: I carry a Senate House about me: People don't know what a Spawn
of choice Maxims are conceived in this Belly, what a Covey of rare
Disquisitions can fly out of this Brain: how many Jewels are in this Cabinet?
how many stars do shine in this Firmament? I can speak like a Prophet,
interpret like an Angel, every point of Wind may be found out, but not the
gales of my Resolutions: the hight of the stars may be taken, but no
Jacob's-staff nor Astrolabe can take the Altitude of my sublime Conceptions: I
leave no Foot-prints of my Intentions for men to discern; no, the Age is at a
loss to think to find out me in my Form, or to follow me in my leaps, and
various jumps, races and traces: I but take heed; see that this be for just
ends, happiness of the Church, and the Glory of God. Procure things honest in
the sight of all men, Romans 12.17. Deliver a City by thy Wisdom, Eccl. 9 15.

3. This does show, That God is most passionate for Mercy; ye never find God
does argue for Justice as here he does for Mercy: no, he will reason and
enlarge for Mercy: Mercy pleases him, it is his delight. God has many
Attributes, but Mercy holds the Scepter. How is God desirous to show Mercy?
how is he angry when he cannot show Mercy? he comes leaping over the
Mountains, Cant. 2.8. Currit dum succurrit, but he does not make such haste
when he should execute Judgment; no, what a going down, examining, parlying and
expostulating is there, before he will pour Vengeance upon Sodom it self.

4. This does serve to show, That Envy is one of the most incorrigible sins,
for Jonah is spiteful, and with what a difficulty does God reclaim him? he is
forced to use Argument upon Argument, and at last to put in an Enlargement; And
also

Cattle.
2. Now let us come to the strange Subject, Cattle: Numquid de bobus cura est
Deo? Has God care of Oxen? so, are Cattle a Subject for the only wise God to
discourse of? yes, he gave them life, and the lives of them are tender to him.
Hence observe, That God is compassionate to the very Beasts. They had their
distinct Creation, for, God said, Let the Earth bring forth the Living
Creature, Cattle, creeping things, and the beast after its kind, Genesis 1.24. as
if the Earth were not complete without this Furniture: sure I am, they were
snatched out of the general Deluge, and put into the Ark as a special Treasure,
Gen, 7.2. The Murrain of Beasts was one of the Plagues of Egypt: and does not
Amos join the death of Beasts with the destruction of Men? Yes, the young men
have I slain with the Sword, and taken away your horses, 4.11. God does
threaten this as one way whereby he will be avenged upon a Disobedient People,
that they shall be cursed in the Increase of their Kine, and the Focks of their
Sheep, Deuteronomy. 28.18. This made Habaccucks belly to tremble, his lips to quiver,
and rottenness to enter into his Bones, That the fl^cks should be cut off from
the Fold, and that there should be no Herds in the stalls, 3.17. Without Cattle
the whole earth does languish, the Prejudices are many if Beasts be wanting. A
Horse is prepared for Battle, Prove. 21.31. There would be but a thin Table:
without these he cannot eat of the Fat, nor scarce cloth himself, our Shops
would be ill furnished without them: Have not the noblest Presents been usually
tendered in Beasts? Yes, Cornelus Cossus gave to P. Decius the Tribune, an
hundred Bullocks, one white one having its horns tipped with Gold, as a
gratification for defending the Roman Army from the Sabines: and Canutus sent
to Lotharius the Emperor, as a Testimony of his royal Respect, a goodly Horse
shod with Gold. Seeing by the light of Scripture and of Nature, Beasts are so
commodious, No Marvel God puts an additional Motive, to preserve this City for
Beasts. Should I not spare Nineveh wherein are -- and also much Cattle.

Application. 318
1. This does show, That we should honor God in his Blessing of Cattle: for
should we not spy where God does spare, prize that which he preserves? Yes, If
our tame Beasts forsook our Pastures, and ran into the Woods; and the wild
Beasts forsook our Forests, and came running into our strets, as they did in
Germany in the year 1086. Or, That men were forced to draw in Trace, to plow
the Lands, or to be yoked in Carts to carry up and down our Commodities; as it
happened in those dismal Civil Wars under Uladislaus the III. King of Hungary,
we should then think Cattle a rich Possession. Alexander was so touched with
the loss of a few Horses, which the Mardi took away from him in the Rear of his
Army, as he marched into India, that he threatened to burn down their Woods,
destroy their Country, and kill them to a man, if they were nto restored.
Ulysses, when he had lost a few Mares, sought all Greece to regain them, and
when he had found them, buile a Temple to Diana for them. The serviceable Beast
was so precious to ancient times, that they knew not how to give honor enough
to them: Solon commanded all the People to sacrifice to the Gods, for the use
of the Ox, and made it as capital a Crime for any man to kill a Bullock, as to
slay a Man: Oh, let us not visit our Stalls without a Meditation, nor walk in
our Pastures without a Contemplation.

2. This shows, That man is a Stipendary: he is not perfect, he does live much
by supply, he is the best of the Creatures, but he is not a Complete Creature.
Man was born naked, that out of a sense of his Necessity he might have daily
recourse unto his God: he carrys his Beggars-wallet at his Back: Man would be a
Proprietary, he is but a Stipendary. Has God need of any Cattle? No, thou art
the Cattle-Eater, and Cattle-user, he spared them for thee. Yea, 'Twas not
enough that he spared the persons, unless he spared the Cattle. And also cattle.

3. This shows, That man has a right in the Creature: why may not a man
participate of that which God does set apart for him? Every Creature of God is
good, if be received with Thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4.4. A Church Constitution may
out of Ecclesiastical prudence, but not absolute Necessity, forbid the use of
such things, but otherwise the Creature is thy own. And also Cattle.

4. This shows the dignity of the Creature, for Cattle must have some
Excellency in them when God would spare them, not only Persons, but Also Cattle.

5. This may serve to strengthen your Christian Dependence upon God Almighty,
for he cares for you; for he cares for Cattle: He that feeds the Ravens,
and clotheth the Grass, will he not feed and cloth you? What a turbulent and
impatient People are we in Adversity? like Domitian, after eight months thunder
at Rome, he was so distracted with it, that he cared not though the
Thunderbolt were in his sides. Come out of this Swoon ye fainting Creatures?
If Mordical be of the Seed of the Jews thou shall not prevail: if it not of
God, it shall not stand. God can send a terror amongst the Midianites, he can
put an hook into the nostrils of Senach^rib. God will pity his Saints, for he
pitys Beasts, he will spare his Church, for he does spare Cattle. And also
Cattle.

6. This does serve to exhort Man to maintain his Priority: for God does first
name the Person before he names the Cattle. Oh then, that that which is but put
in the Additional, should exceed that which is placed in the Principal! thus
the Servant should be better than the Master; that the greatest Brightness
should not be seen in him which is the Image of God: it is a shame and scandal
to man when he must be sent to learn his Duty of the Creature, as, Go to the
Pismire, o thou Sluggard, etc.

7. This does serve, To elevate man, to aspire after his high Preferment: here
thou art but spared, and the Beasts spared for thee: but is there no greater
happiness to be attained to? Yes, thou art not only set forth to be an Heir of
the Creatures, but to be a Coheir with Jesus Christ.

8. This shows, That we should express Commiseration to Cattle; seeing God will
spare, why should not we? Yes, Spare them, 1. By respective usage; The just man
is merciful to his Beast, he is a Beast which is barbarous to his Beast: feed
it neither under its necessary Allowance, nor work it beyond its strength?
Where shall the dumb Creature be righted? God has a Bar for this oppressed
Creature, and the right Beast (even the savage Master) shall one day meet with
a Pound and a Scourge. 2. Spare the Cattle by moderate use* tho man has a
right to the Creature, yet he has no Empe^y over it: he may participate of it,
but not riot upon it: enjoy it for necessity and delight, but not for his
Excess and Surfeit. 3. Spare the Cattle by avoiding Merciless Destruction: It
is the hight of Outrage to make sport and pastime with the spoil of Cattle:
yet how many of these horrid Practices do we meet withal in Histories. Phero,
because a woman's urine could not cure his blind-eyes, he fired the Town Gleba
rubra, and destroyed all the Cattle. Alexander, in revenge of a Wound he had
received before Cyropolis, leveled the City to the Ground, and made a miserable
Spoil of the Cattle. Well these things may satisfy Fury, but will they be
acceptable to the just God? Men should spare Cattle, because God would spare
Cattle. And also Cattle.

Much.
3. We come now to the considerable Plenty, Much. Observe, That Plenty of
Cattle is an eminent Blessing. Job was herein blessed, viz. with 7000 sheep,
3000 Camels, 500 yoke of Oxen, and 500 she-Asses, Job 1.7.

Application.
This does show the Sweetness of Abundance, to have much in any thing there is
much favor; Every man does live, but he that injoyeth this has the more of
life in him: For, though the life of Man does not consist in the abundance
which a man does possess, yet the life of man is much sweetened by such
abundance; seeing without Estate no necessary thing can almost be performed: Oh
then how infinitely are we bounden to God, that he has given us not only
Competency, but Sufficiency; not Subsistence but Plenty. Much Cattle.

2. This shows, That Gods Bounty in small things is conspicuous, for God is
here affectionate and compassionate to much Cattle.

3. This shows, that where there are much Cattle, there should be much
Commiseration. Have you no Calf to kill for a Traveller, as Abraham did? no
beast to set a wounded man on, as the Samaritan did? what use them only for
your Pomp and Voluptuosness? then it is Pity God should spare you any thing,
that can spare nothing for others: where there is much Cattle, the distressed
should get a Taste out of your Abundance.

4. This serves to exhort you, To be very circumspect in ordering a great
Estate; where there are much Cattle, there is much danger. Here are much Cattle
in the City, are all right ordered: No, whereas thou should have a escape Goat
to take away the Sins of the People; or, a Colt to lend to thy Savior: thou
have a Kid to send to thy Harlot, as Judah had: or thou may ride Post upon
some Creature with Letters to the high Priest to persecute the Church, as Saul
did: where there are much Cattle; there may be many Abuses: How does the Devil
employ his Soldiers? A Pharaoh, he can employ to make the people whom he
spights, to sigh under heavy Burdens: and he can make Ahab sick for Naboth's
Vinyard: he can lure an Absalom to pluck the Crown from his Fathers head: and
to commit the most detestible sin that ever the Sun beheld, to lie with his
Fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel: an Ahaz he can make restless
till he has corrupted Religion, even set up an idolatrous Altar by the Altar
of the Lord: an Herod he can prevail with to perjure himself at a Strumpets
motion, and behead J. Baptist, whom not long before he had heard with reverence
Oh, what will not wealth make men do? who have gored the world more than these
fat Bulls of Basan? Oh, mighty men fear no Laws, dread no Pulpits! the most
unnatural things do not daunt them, the most odious things do not shame them!
to secure themselves, and to satisfy their Lust, to pollute the Earth, and
blaspheme Heaven: they have much Cattle, and they will use them as they please.
Wealth makes this City insolent: he that has but one Kid, or Lamb, would be
careful how he imploys them: but the much Cattle being the Surfeit, begets all
manner of Diseases in people: Some of your Cattle have been bestowed in Gifts,
think of your first Presents, Some have been spent in Entertainment: and have
ye had noble Guests? No, consider what Spots are in your Feasts: Some Cattle
have traveled for it: and have none but good Riders backed them? No, I doubt
Zidkijah has rod one, to Ahab heartning hm to fight against Ramoth Gilead: and
a Balaam has rode another, to curse the People of God: an Achan has rode a
third, to catch the Babylonish Garment, and the wedg of Gold: a Jehu has got
on the fourth, to knock down Baal's Altars, to keep up Jeroboam's golden
calves: a Haman has leaped the fifth, to get a cruel Decree signed to put all
the Jews to death. But, perhaps, he that sits in Heaven, will not suffer
their design to take place: but there has been some fruitless Journeys, tho
there has been old riding for it.

5. This may serve to persuade all persons to forbear from Injury, where
Cruelty may cause great Detriment: there is much Spite born against those
places where there is much Booty; the humor of the Age is to be thrusting their
hands into heaps, and to carry away rich Plunder, To leave a Land which is as
Eden before them, like a wilderness, Joel 2.3. and to find out as a Nest the
riches of a people, etc. that as Lucullus when he took Tigranocerta, he carried
away 8000 Talents of stamped Coin: and, as Belisarius overcoming Gilimer the
Vandal, he carried away from Tricaranum in Africa, such infinite sums of Money,
that such heaps were never seen before at one time: and Pompey from his
Conquest in Asia brought home Tables of pure Pearl, Moons of Gold, and Cups of
Myrrh, and a Closet of exact Gem, and a apiece Mountain set with Hearts,
Lions, huge Apples, and a large Vine of Gold, and the rare statues of Mars,
Minerva and Apollo of the same Metal: so our Bullys would be fingring such
preys, and be at the like Riflings: But is Rape a just Possession? No, the
Quarrel had need be very just, else the Depredation is utterly unlawful: the
power of the Sword is not always a justifiable Judge, it may bring-in Conquest,
but not always Right to sacking; therefore Q. Fabius would not suffer the
Soldiers to touch any thing of the Citizens; saying. It Is enough, we have
subdued them, let us leave the Gods offended to these Tarentines. Aristides
overcoming the Persians at Marothon, tho there was plenty of Gold and Silver,
would not himself, nor suffer his Soldiers to touch any thing. Probus
Augustus, in all his many Conquests took nothing but Dart and Arms. Charles the
V. at the Battle of Pavy, would suffer his Soldiers to take no Spoil. But for
men of the same Religion, in Opinion, is a sad thing, that if Battles be
fought, Victory should not satisfy, But that they should carry the Vanquished
to Dungeons, and make a general stripping amongst them, I find the contrary in
Scripture, for when Pekah King of Israel had conquered Ahaz King of Judah, and
had taken of all sorts, 200 000 Captives, and much Spoil, and carried them to
Samaria: But the Prophet reprehends him sharply: saying, Because the Lord your
God was wrath with Judah, he has delivered them into your hand, and ye have
slain them in a Rage which reaches up to Heaven; and now ye purpose to keep
under the Children of Judah, and Jerusalem as servants and handmaids unto you;
But are there not with You such SINS, against the Lord your God? Now therefore,
hear me, and deliver the Captives again, which ye have taken prisoners of your
Brethren, for the fierce wrath of the Lord is toward you; wherefore certain of
the Children of Ephraim stood up against them which came from the War; and
said, Bring not in the Captives hither, for this shall be a Sin upon us against
the Lord; ye intend to add more to our Sins, and to our trespass, though our
trespass is great, and the fierce wrath of God is against Israel: So the army
left the Captives, and the spoil before the Princes, and all the Congregation;
and the men which were named by name, rose up and took the Prisoners, and with
the spoil clothed all that were naked amongst them, and arrayed and shod them,
and gave them meat, and gave them drink, and anointed them, and carried all
that were feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the City of
Palmtrees, to their Brethren, so they returned to Samaria, 2 Chronicles.
28.9.....15. According to this famous Precedent, use Favor and Tenderness to
all of your Family (as 'twere) and Faith, of your own Region and Religion: and
though they may fall under your subduing hand, let them not fall under your
spoiling hand: Though Brothers may fall out with each other, and there may be
trying of Masteries, yet not binding of hands, and carrying him away Slave, or
picking his Pockts, and leaving him a Beggar: I see it in Practice, but I find
it not a Scripture; for this were not to defend a Right, but to destroy an
Interest: and not to fight for conscience or conquest, but covetousness and
cousenage: oh it is a dreadful thing to vanquish, and undo, to subdue and
subvert: to make an absolute waste in a day, nay, an utter ruin in an hour:
No, thou should show more equity, because thy Brother had once Ability: and
express more compassion because there was one much Cattle. And also much Cattle.

Thus you have seen many things concerning a City, Infants and Cattle (possibly
such as you never heard of before,) sure I am there is neither of these but have
something memorable in them. If the stone called Cappotes whereupon Orestes
sat when he was recovered of his Madness, was laid up, and preserved to
Posterity? then how much ought this place to have an everlasting Record? where
so many things have been free from impending Ruin. Nineveh was famous; what
should I do, in conclusion, but look about for the City? I cannot find the same
City, but shall I not the like? Nineveh is fallen, but can it not rise out of
the Ashes? Oh that I should lose the City for want of due search, or that this
City of yours should LOSE it self for want of a proper Duty: Can ye not change
the name of your City? yes, Strasburgh was once called Silberthal, but being
made the Exchequer of the Roman Tribute, 'twas called Argentina; so, cannot ye
for that remarkable Accident in the Text (REPENTANCE) part with your own Name,
to be called Nineveh? Is it Impossible to make you such a City? what does
hinder? give me but your Affections, set but your hearts to the Work, and the
City is raised in an Instant, change but your Consciences, and ye shall
presently change your Name: Oh Argentina, oh Nineveh, When shall I see thee?
why should I not forthwith see thee? If ye love a Sermon, if ye love your
selves, if ye love Safety, ye ought to do THIS: for, it is not this great City
of yours, not the multitude of your Persons, nor the plenty of your Cattle
which will make you HAPPY: unless Nineveh does enclose all these, I mean unless
Repentance does give you Title and Testimony, Safeguard and Security. Have
Nineveh's Target, and fear no Darts; have Nineveh's Propitiatory, and fear no
avenging God. Will you alter your Name? change your Lives? Prepare such a
Mercy-Seat to appear upon within your walls? Oh that ye can think of Nineveh,
and not be ashamed of your selves: Nineveh was Heathenish, you are Christian:
Nineveh had but one Prophet, ye have had many; Nineveh had the Cry but of one
day, or a few days, ye have had the Cries of many years; yet when will ye match
Nineveh in Attention, Submission, Ashes, Sackcloth, Fasting, Prayer and
Reformation: Lucius Sylla an old Dictator blushed to see C. Pompey, a young man
to triumph before him: so, may not you count it a high^d sparagement to you to
see Nineveh, but newly entered into Religion (a very Tyro) to ride in the
Tryumphant Chariot before you which are grown grey-headed under profession: ye
would be spare, but when will ye seek God with Nineveh's penitent Heart? Oh,
let sudden JUDGMENT as much afflict you and affright you: remorse as much
humble you and change you, as they did Nineveh: as Plato was called Socrates
jun. because he so much resembled his Master; so ye, for resembling this City,
may be called Nineveh the younger, If your Peril be as great, let your
prevention be equal, else in coming short in Pacification, ye fall short in the
Preservation; for can God and ye, tread the same ground, if ye walk by his side
as Enemies? No, if ye rend away from God by Disobedience, he will pluck you off,
though you were as a signet upon his right hand: Where is Capernaum, lifted up
to Heaven in Privileges? Where are the 7 Golden Candlesticks? We have had
personating men long enough, when shall we have true penitents? Alexander
Severus did cut-asunder the Sinews of a man's hand, which did present him with a
false Brief of a case, and do we not fear punishing for offering to God a
counterfeit Repentance; will ye dissemble to the last, and jeopard the ruin of
a whole CITY? How far (can you imagine) that ye are off from the collusions of
Justice? every Corner of your City does seem to tremble under the voice of a
threatening GOD: Oh, your Sins do cry and Vengeance is awaked with the Voice of
them, the Heavens are offended with you, and the Earth does seem to rise up in
tumults amongst you: There are MANY which do WISH your Destruction, and are
sorry they cannot make you the Miserable of the Earth: they consult sad things
concerning you: yea, conspire against you night and day, their Hearts do boil,
their Brains do work, their Mouths do foam, and they would willingly be
stretching out their hands to shake you and shiver you: Ye have Enemies within
your City, ye have Enemies in your own Consciences, your sins do threaten MORE
Calamities to you than all your inveterate and implacable Adversaries which you
have upon Earth: how can you oppose such irresistible forces? No, no, though
you had Guards of Giants, and every common Soldier were an Ashibench, (the
head of whose Spear weighed 300 shekels of Brass) yet your Sins will beat you
down before your Enemies: Oh, stand up in your own Defense, open the right
Arsenal, Have the Armor of righteousness on the right and on the left; use
Nineveh; Weapons to fight This Battle, Vanquish all your sins by crying louder
for Mercy, than they do for your Ruin: escape Vengeance by flying from your
Provocations, before Indignation has attached you: your City is Threatened,
take heed you do not sleep out the hour of your Security. Presumption may
subvert, let Contrition deliver you: the time may be short, the Work is great,
the Danger is Apparent the Misery will be unspeakable: pluck down your
haughtiness, surcease from Obstinacy: your City walls do shake, let your Hearts
shake, your Buildings are loose upon their Foundation, groundsel them better by
Mortification: ALL your Goods are ready to be SACRIFISED to Vengeance; bring
forth your Sin-offering before the sparks have taken fire: If there be any
listening to a Warning, credence of Threatening, obedience to Counsel, foresight
of Danger, sting of Guilt, or obligation to Duty, PITY the City, and PETITION
for the City, shed Lakes of Tears of the City; wear Sackcloth, lest you go
NAKED, Fast, lest you STARVE, sit upon the Ash-heap, lest ye be brought to an
Ash-heap; creep upon your Knees, lest ye do creep into Corners; shut up your
selves in your Closets, lest ye be shut up in Dungeons; fly to Heaven, lest ye
fly OUT of the Land; Confess your Sins, lest Justice do read the Bill to your
Faces; Condemn your selves, lest ye be sentenced without Reprieve; Look upon
your Errors with Passions; be humbled with Conflicts; repent with Agonies;
appease with Fire; reconcile with Ropes; weep with Torrents; pray with shrieks;
cleanse with Nitre; attend at the Court of Audience; lay it out at Gods
Judgment Seat; wash in Jordan, till the Leprosy be departed; wrestle with the
Angel till ye have got the Blessing: Leave not one greivance in Heaven to
prosecute you; not one Injury upon Earth to accurse you; be perfectly renewed,
that you may be perfectly secuted. Thus, if I can now leave you with bleeding
Hearts, sobbing Breasts, suppliant Tongues, abased Bodies, frayed Souls,
purified Consciences, and rinsed Conversations, ye are Nineveh, and your City
may yet prosper. For you see how God pleaded out his Case for Nineveh, and
freed his Clyent; the City was humbled, and preserved; REPENTANCE prevented her
overthrow; not a man was smitten though there were multitudes of Persons; not a
Beast was destroyed, though there were much Cattle. Go, and do thou likewise;
Do likewise, and enjoy likewise. Oh, that I could be such a Jonah to you! that
I could cry out, Such a City! That I could make you thus to believe GOD, and
serve GOD; your Humiliation should free you from all Horrors; your Dejection
from all Dangers; your Devotion and Reformation from all Exigents: Your VValls
should not be battered, your Bulwarks not demolished; your Palaces not laid
waste; your Temples not shut up, your shops not risted, your Persons not
MASSACRED; nor your Cattle slaughtred. But your Liberties Lives, Goods,
Royalties; your Ordinances, your Oracles, holy Altars, holy Priests, holy
Vessels, holy Show bread, holy Incense, and Holy of Holies; even all your
Spiritual Prerogatives and Church privileges should be ratified to you upon
Earth: you should continue a safe People and flourishing City; yea, after you
have served God in his Church, ye should serve him in his Temple; he should
translate you from this City, to the City of the New Jerusalem, that after you
have enjoyed all the Preferments of the material, or mystical City, ye might
have the joys and pleasures of the glorious City, even the Prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Which that ye may have, the Lord grant for his
Mercys sake. Amen.

FINIS.
The POSTSCRIPT By the Author of this ABRIDGMENT.
'TWas the earnest Desire of my Soul after the Prosperity of this famous and
renouned City of LONDON, which engaged me to abridg and publish these
prophetic Sermons: In the doing whereof, I am persuaded, that none will (it
having been my Care, all-along the Work that none should) blame me for injuring
the worthy Author: For, if any should take the Pains to trace me through the
whole, they will find that I have omitted nothing essentially necessary,
whereby the Work may be maimed; and (the Design considered viz. Brevity) that
the substance of the Work may be had for a small Price: Nor is there, in any
one leaf of the Original, things of less Moment inserted here, and those of
more weighty Concern omitted: This were a Fault I could not forgive my self;
nor could the Chiding of wise and sober persons more discompose me, than my own
Breast would be disturbed of it self, etc.

These Sermons were preached in this City, about the Year 1655 or 1656; Their
whole design was then to beget in the Hearers a hatred of SIN; and to press
them to a speedy REPENTANCE, by representing the Wrath and Vengeance, Plagues
and Judgments, which God pours down upon Mortals for their Offenses: Therefore
their Publication, now, cannot but be supposed seasonably time'd: For, alas,
alas! within these few years, there has sprung up (out of the Bottomless Pit,
I had almost said) a Generation of (what? shall I call them Devils? in the
shape of) Men and Women, who, designing to Debauch this Age, have (by amazing
Examples) succeeded too well in their Undertakings; for, by their Lying,
Swearing, Cursing, Whoring, Cheating, Drinking, Perjury, Hypocrisy, Blasphemy,
etc. they out-brazen Heaven it self, and bid Defiance to the God thereof,
thereby ripening themselves for Destruction, except Repentance prevents. Well
then, If Judgments were (as our Author says) upon their March, Rank and File,
so many years past; what man of Understanding is there that does not see them
drawn up, and presenting, wanting only the Word from the God of H^sts?

Read Pages 48, 49.

Now then, Suppose, He begins with another Plague among Us; come. Oh ye Paterns
(I had almost called ye Patrons too, of Wickedness,) you, with the rest of
them, both male and female, that have been poisoned by your Examples, fall all
to this work of Repentance: I say, where will YOU secure Your selves from the
Wrath that is coming? Will those By-places of Secresy, where You and your
Misses, (to speak modishly,) have Caressed together, secure you? No, no. You
may Remember what shift you made to shun the last; Do ye think ye will not be
met with now? What, because God in his Infinite Wisdom was pleased not to
make a Visible; plain Distinction of his Love and Hatred to persons, but the
honest man died of it as well as the dishonest; those that were faithful to the
Marriage Bed are seized by it, equal with those that have been false to that
sacred Tie: He that fears an Oath has had God's Tokens, when he that floods
out Oaths has been free, etc. There Is no Reason for all this* but that it is
the pleasure of the Almighty: for, Should GOD in the Plague-time, or by any
other distinguishing Judgment pick out, sweep or hurry away the most profligate
Debauchees, He Is and She Is, 'twere enough to Scare SINS of all sorts out of the
World: This were, in effect, to answer Dives's presumptuous Petition, Luke
16.27. For who would play Zimri's and Cosbi's parts if they expected (before
the end of the Act) to feel a Phinea^'s spear, and so I might bring in Examples
of all Sins, etc. But God deals, not thus with poor Mortals: No, no, If the
Threatenings of his Word will not deter us from Sin; If his Promises will not invite
and allure us to a holy Life; his infinite Wisdom directs to no other Means,
but according as our Obedience is to his Word, so will it go with us to all
Eternity: And yet (some times) God does hang up sad Examples of his Justice
too. Oh! when Judgments stand ready, should not Mortals stand prepared for an
Eternty? the Godly are by a holy Life, willing and always ready, to submit to
the good Pleasure of the Almighty; and to such Judgment is no Judgment; and if
it periods their natural Lives, it does, at the same Moment initiate an eternal
one of Happiness: But for the others; I mean those that None can, with the
largest degree of Charity imaginable, admit to belong to God, as such, till
true Repentance has capacitated them: How should these, together with the
civiler sort of Sinners, the Hypocrites, Liars, unjust, the Rebellious,
Disobedient, the sly Adulterers, etc. fall upon their Knees, and with Tears in
their Eyes implore divine Mercy in time, before it be too late: For, should
Judgment seize these, be it of what kind it will, Wo's upon wo's will be their
Portion; what Tongue can express, what Heart can conceive (as the Joys of the
first, so) the Pain, Anguish and Torments of the other, which will be endless,
easeless and remediless: If those bodily Miseries, (mentioned page 34,) will be
so exquisite as they may be managed by an Enemy, how dreadful and astonishing
will it be, when these frightful and scaring ones shall be but as fiery
Chariots to convey them to unquenchable Flames? as doubtless they will be to
all wicked wretches, and such who are contriving Plagues and Torments, and
inventing Instruments of Cruelty for others, shall undoubtedly feel their
keeness themselves, together with all those that approve of, consent to, or
connive at the same, without true and speedy Reforming. Trifle not away time,
though it is true, Late Repentance may save, yet it is so great a hazard, that it is
next to, tho not an Impossibility: and, if of the right stamp, yet there is
these Uncomfortable Circumstances in a dying or a last gasp Repentance. 1. In
this life, God can have no Glory by it; which, if Heaven could admit of any
Sorrow, 'twould be this, that they repented no sooner; that they brought God
Glory no sooner, that there should be so much inward Joy and Peace in a holy
Life; and that they should by Impenitency deprive themselves thereof. 2.
Neither themselves nor their Relations can have any Comfort in it; because
words on a Deathbed can express no more than what others have said; and those,
when recovered, their Sins have received life too: Now an evangelical holy Life
is the infallible Testimony of a sound sincere Penitent: And my Soul for thine,
if thou live this Evangelical Life, and do not join it with, nor place it
in the room of Christ, expecting Salvation for it, thou will certainly be
eternally saved.

Flatter not your selves with foolish Hopes or Persuasions, That those which
do'nt Swear, Curse, Blaspheme, Whore, Health, etc. are a parcel of damned
Hypocrites; and as bad as the worst, only they don't show it, and appear so to
the world, but etc. Well then, by thy own Confession, so far as one does keep
stom these Extuberances of Wickedness, they are better than them that run to
the excess thereof, only thy Conceit is that they are Dissemblers, etc. Now, to
please thee, we'll grant it, though, it is the worst thou can judge, and the
worst certainly will be their own: But, I prithee, what does he lose by
abstaining from these Excesses of SIN, though, as I said, he be a Hypocrite, and
therefore miserable, yet his Torments, if compared with thine, will be the
less; and all thy gains by thy aboundings therein, plagues in this life, and
the hottest flames in the next. Again, Will their Hypocrisy excuse thy
abominable Debauchedness, such as a very Heathen would abhor thee for? No,
Know, that Hypocrisy will as certainly convey them to Hell as thy open
Profaneness will hurry thee thither, without Repentance in both; the one Inns
there at a Snails pace; the other Posts thither: The one enters as at the
Backdoor, the other bounces open the great Gates. And, as for these two ugly
Sins of Swearing and Cursing; It Is too probable, nor can it be conceived beyond
bounds of Charity, but that Cursing Persons are Cursed Persons, statu quo; and,
Swearing Persons are. Too often, forsworn Persons; for, if the Wise man says,
Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not Sin; certainly in the
multitude of Oaths, there wants not Sin, and that to a very high degree, etc.

Indeed the Great Outcry against: Hypocrites is, their good Pretenses, and yet
their contrary Practices when it is in their Power to perform the Good
pretended; they declaim against Swearing and Cursing, and yet are hellish
Liars; rail against Whoremongers and Adulterers, and yet are devilish brisk
slyly with their Neighbors Wife or Daughter, etc. This is very sad indeed, and
deserves to be lamented in Tears of Blood, if possible: This is a Wound that
goes to the Heart of a true Child of God, that the holy Name of God should be
thus reproached and blasphemed; as if the Gospel had lost its Regenerating and
Sanctifying Virtue! and did nothing, now, upon the Souls of Men and Women, but
make a parcel of Hypocrites, Factious persons, Rebels and Traitors, etc. Well,
Grant thy Accusations to be truth, and there can be no pleading for them. Yet,
this I Will say in Vindication of the Power of the Gospel; That, now, there are
true Converts; them that are born again, for, the Blind see, the Deaf hear, the
Dumb speak, the Lame walk, and the Poor receive the Gospel, etc. But as for
these Evil doers, and only Pretenders to Good, We disown them, for they are but
the better sort of your selves, crept or sneaked among the truly Godly, because
they are more enlightened then the greatest DON's of ye all that wallow like
swine in your carnal beastly Pleasures: Besides, the Hypocrite's going into
Secret to commit his Sin, thereby condemns himself, and thee too, by being so
impudent to make it so notoriously visible: therefore ye wicked Wretches! Oh
that I might (now) prevail with you, either to make known your Privilege and
Authority, whereby ye have thus endangered a Kingdom by provoking the Almighty
to shower down Judgments; or, if ye be ashamed to vindicate it by Arguing for
it: Can ye do your Souls a greater Kindness, nay, can ye bring greater glory to
God than by (setting up in the Kingdom a Pattern of) Repentance?

And, as for your speaking of good Pretenses and no performances. This is an
Evil which can have no Advocate: Therefore it is necessary to consider the Good
pretended to, whether it be an essential, necessary and universal Good; and if
God's time be come, he will find out fit Instruments, that shall not only
Pretend, but intend and actually do it. Indeed, I wonder that men seeming to
have pregnancy of Wit at a more than ordinary rate; in other things, should yet
herein be short; That they do openly blame Good Designs, because those Designs
have met with bad Managers; when as, at the same time, they secretly commend
the pretended Design: Now, I conceive, that if the Design be good and honorable
it ought to be followed, till it meet with real Intenders which at first must
be Pretenders: Or, why do'nt you, that are the Fault-finders, undertake it your
selves? But as for Hypocrites in general, this may be said of them, That they
are the white Devils, and they have more wit than to associate with the
Impudent shameless Sinner of any sort; though the worst of them too may act the
Hypocrite, in some particular thing, yet not so as wholly to deserve the name of
Hypocrite: You must look for the Hypocrite among the best, and not among the
worst of men.

Now, for Hypocrites, or any other, I may with very much certainty affirm, it is
not difficult to know from whence any get their Riches or Honors; or any thing
else that looks like a Blessing; whether from God or else where, whether with a
Blessing or a Curse? etc. For, if Riches flow in, or thou art advanced to
honors; etc. and thou art proud, envious; oppressive; turn'st a Drunkard,
Swearer, Curser, Whoremonger; an Evil Example among thy Neighbors, a Sabbath
breaker, a Hater of God, and his People, etc. certainly, as long as thou
continuest such, thou have nothing from God in kindness; but in the midst of
thy Enjoyments, it is with thee as with them in Psalm 78.31. while their Meat
was in their Mouths, the Wrath of God came upon them; cursed in all thy
Concerns, tho seemingly thou prosperest. It Is the like for Adversity, you may
know whether God reduces thee to a meaner Condition, in Mercy, or in his
Displeasure, viz. by thy Behavior to God in that Condition; when God brings
low one of his own, for Trial sake, or for other Ends best known to himself; oh
with what Submissiveness, Humility, Love to God* Patience, Cheerfulness, etc.
does he behave himself toward God! But another man, how impatient is he? he
frets and fumes, rages and storms, swears and curses, omits all Duty to God;
blaming this and the other Instrument; and is like a wild Bull in the net, etc.
and, without all Doubt, thou will own Debasement as well as Advancement to be
in Kindness to thy Soul, if thou once becomest a right Ninevite, i.e. a true
Penitent.

But methinks I hear the Debauchees of this Age deride this innocencing Grace
of Repentance, and with their black. Mouths ridiculing it, saying, What need of
it now more than formerly? and wickedly conclude by fulfilling that Prophecy in
2 Pet. 3.4. all things continue as they were from the Beginning of the
Creation; though they will be miserably mistaken, as they may, even in this
Generation, to their eternal confusion find. Therefore I heartily wish, that I
could persuade men from living at a venture; as though it were a piece of
Policy and Discretion to live at uncertainties, in Doubts and Fears, either, as
if there were no Salvation; or, as though there were no right Directions how to
obtain it, therefore no such great need of this Duty of Repentance, as is
pretended, to make them capable of it.

The Truth is; Most men live (the more's the pity it is so where Christianity is
professed) as if 'twere hazardous, or, at least, comfortless to be too zealous
for the very Truths of the Gospel themselves; and therefore they enervate the
Power of every Commandment both Legal and Evangelical; and, to quiet their
Consciences, patch up Rules to themselves far short of the Power of Godliness;
thinking it impossible that any can live, in truth, to a higher degree of
Holiness than themselves: and by those homespun Rules guide their Lives, and
so miscarry to all eternity. That Threatening of our Savior's in Matthew. 5.20.
That except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; may be, by
the Blessing of God, a Sin-confounding, and a Soul-preserving Word, if 'twere
every day sounded in the ears of the Debauches of this Age: Nor can I conceive
what kind of Construction, Interpretation or Exposition their Teachers make
thereof, or they understand thereby: What are they so foolish as to imagine,
that Debauchery and Hypocrisy divide the whole world? etc. surely they do, else
holier Lives would be the Consequent of better Thoughts: They think thus, or
more wickedly, That at the last day, all being alike, God Almighty will, not
respecting how men have lived in this World, pick out some to eternal
Salvation, and possibly (because they are in a sinful sense Self-lovers) they
hope they may be the Persons, etc. Looking upon Faith and Repentance which the
Gospel directs to, as improbable, yea impossible; though indeed, in the true
Believer, they produce a holy Life, which justifies them to be neither dead nor
spurious: and yet in point of Justification, he renounces his Righteousness,
and counts it as a menstruous cloth, as to any stead it can stand him in, to
the satisfying Divine Justice, and wholly relies upon the Merits of JESUS
CHRIST; which for any other but a Child of God to do is impossible. No, others
will look a-squint at their own Righteousness, etc. though in words they may own
Christ; but it is impossible for them to go out of themselves, and rely upon and
another for eternal life. Wherefore the whole life of a Christian in this Word
is a Mystery to others, and understood by none but such as are instructed by
the Spirit of God: And, as there is a Mystery in Godliness, so there is a Mystery
of Iniquity; a Child of God admires how Strangers and Enemies can have any rest
and quiet in their own Bosoms how they can eat, drink, sleep, or indeed do any
thing till they have made their peace with God; and got the pardon of their
Sins in the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; lest in the interim, because they
carry their breath in their nostrils as well as others, they should lie down in
everlasting Flames, where the Worm dies not, and the sire goes not out: which
undoubtedly must be to such, who live and dye strangers to the Power of Faith
and REPENTANCE.

Entered according to Order.

FINIS.
LICENSED,

October 10. 1691.

J. Fraser.

ERRATA
Page 11. Line 16. for Nation read Notion. p. 30. l. 1. read so tha^ p. 30. l.
14. for trying r. saying. p. 31 l. 23. for Majesty's, r Matters.


