REFLECTIONS On the PAPERS Delivered by Mr. Charnock, Mr. King, and Mr. Key, To
the SHERIFFS, On the Day of their Execution.
Mr. CHERNOCK's Paper.
THAT I might avoid distractions, and be Composed as much as possible at the
time of my Execution, I thought it much more proper to Communicate This to the
Sheriffs, than to give my self the Uneasiness of speaking, leaving it to them
to publish (if they should think convenient) for the Satisfaction of the World;
and in what I have to say, I have taken as much care as I could to be short,
that I might not lose time in my greatest Concern.

As concerning an Invasion intended by King James upon England, and that there
was certain Intelligence of it from Abroad, I presume every body was satisfied;
and to the facilitating of which, I own that my self and some others did agree
upon the Undertaking, to Attack the Prince of Orange and his Guards, for which
I am now to Suffer; but I think my self obliged by all the Ties imaginable,
both of Conscience and Honor, to declare, That as for any Order or Commission
of King James's for Assassinating the Prince of Orange, I neither saw, nor knew
of any; but have had frequent Assurances of his having rejected such Proposals
when they have been Offered.

I confess I did hear, that there was a Commission arrived for Levying of War,
and which was natural to believe, if the King was in such a readiness to come
over as was reported; bu if there was any such Authority as that, I declare I
never saw it.

As to what regards the Body of the Roman Catholics, I must do them this
Justice, and which I dare be positive in, That they had no manner of Knowledge
of this Design, nor do I believe it was Communicated to any other Party of such
as are reputed the King's Friends, but carried on merely by a small Number,
without the Advice, Consent, or Privity of any Parties whatsoever.

I ask forgiveness of all the World for what Offenses or Injuries I have done
to them; and I am (I bless Almighty God) in perfect Charity with all Mankind.

Robert Chernocke.


Mr. KING's Paper.
I Am now within a few Moments of Eternity, brought to this Place by the Just
Hand of God in Punishment of all my Crimes; but particularly of that, of which
I have been lately Arraigned, and for which I stand here Condemned; but I hope,
that Goodness of God, which has given me a Sense of my Wickedness, will accept
my Repentance, and show Mercy on me; which I hope to obtain through the Passion
and Merits of my Redeemer, upon whom I entirely cast my Self.

And that I may find his Mercy, I think my self obliged to do Justice to my
Neighbor, that so none may suffer wrongfully on my account; and therefore as I
am soon to answer the Truth of what I say before the Tribunal of God.

I First declare, That I never saw any Order or Commission of King James's
promoting the Assassination for which I am Condemned: Neither do I know of any
such Order or Commission.

Secondly, That this Design was not undertaken with any General Knowledge or
Approbation of any Body of Men, either Catholic or Protestant.

Lastly, That I did not engage in it on Presumption of any King-Killing
Principles that could justify such an Undertaking, but was drawn into it by my
own Rashness and Passion, for which and all other Sins I heartily beseech God
to forgive me.

And I hope, that such who think the Misfortune of their Imprisonment or
Trouble, is derived from my having been engaged in this Enterprise, or such to
whom it has any ways given Scandal, that they will admit me to their Pardon, as
I freely and heartily forgive all Mankind. In this Disposition of a sincere
Repentance and true Charity, I commend my Soul into the Hands of God, and hope
to find Mercy from him. And for this I beg all your Prayers.

Ed. King.


Mr. KEY's Paper.
I Am now going to appear before the Living God; I trust in his Mercy, that he
will forgive all my Sins committed to this last Moment of my Life. God is just
in all his Judgments, and I accept of this Death as the Punishment of my
Iniquities: I forgive all my Enemies, and hope through a Hearty Repentance, and
the Merits of my Savior, to obtain Mercy.

Have Mercy on me, O Father of Mercy, and through thy only Son forgive me all
my Sins.

Thomas Key.


REFLECTIONS, etc.
IT is no easy task to offer Reflections on what was delivered by Men who were
to answer it very soon after, at a great and just Tribunal. But since the
observations, that do Naturally occur from the reading these Papers, lie
heavier on the Cause, and Party, and their Religion, and Principles, than on
the Persons of these unhappy Men, I think it is a Charity to the Public to
help all readers to re-examine them with due attention; and to make these
Remarks on them, which are so Just and Obvious, that even those, who might read
them too hastily, and with too much partiality to observe them at first, will
be forced to acknowledge, on a second reading, they are Native and Genuine,
without putting any Force or Strain on them.

1. Mr. Charnock and Mr. King do both confess the Fact, and so they have
Established the Credit of the Witnesses; but with remarkable difference, that
Mr. King owns that God had given him a sense of his Wickedness, and
acknowledges the Just Hand of God in his Punishment for that Crime in
particular, and so desires to find Mercy at his Hand. But Mr. Charnock seems
not to think so hardly of his share in that design; he mentions it without any
Words condemning it, or importing that he had repented of it; So it is plain he
thought it was no Sin. It is as plain that his Confessor thought so too. For as
no Man, who knows the Principles of that Religion, will believe that he would
die without Absolution, so no Priest, who thought it a Mortal Sin, could give
him Absolution, without obliging him to confess the Guilt, as well as the Fact.
And, since he has not done that, we may well conclude, that his Priest thought
it was no Sin, and so thought him obliged to make no other Confession; but what
might cover the Party. Key says nothing at all of the matter; but a Criminal
who dies without denying that, for which he is Condemned, is presumed to
confess it.

2. Both Mr. Charnock and Mr. King deny that they saw or knew of any Order or
Commission of King James, for the Assassination. Mr. Charnock adds, that he has
had frequent Assurances of his having rejected such proposals when they have
been offered. It is no great Honor to a Prince, that any dare make such
proposals to him. We have a King who would treat any that should make such
Proposals to Him in such a manner, as should for ever discourage the attempt
for the future. When these are frequently made, it seems the thing is liked,
though the methods may not be approved of, or the time not thought proper. To be
often so licited is no Character of a severe Virtue.

But, what is here denied? An Order or Commission for Assassination. This was
never affirmed, nor so much as suspected. The word Assassination is too hard to
be put in any Princes Orders or Commissions. But a Commission to Attack the
Prince of Orange (as he calls him) in his Winter Quarters, Or to Seize his
Person and to fight his Guards, or to levy War against the Person of the Prince
of Orange in England, by all ways and means (after which manner we are told,
the Witnessess express themselves) This is not denied by Mr. Charnock,
therefore it may be presumed that it is confessed by him; and the denial of
this would have agreed better with the words that go before, in which he owns
the Undertaking to attack the Prince of Orange and his Guards. Now the natural
close of this Period ought to have been (if it had Consisted with Truth) that
he neither saw nor knew of any Order or Commission from King James for that
Undertaking. But he changes the word, and puts Assassinating instead of it. It
is plain, Mr. Charnock and Mr. King, both had a mind to clear King James as far
as they could. But though their Confessor might bring them to prevaricate and to
use art in the choice of their last words, yet they would not dye with a plain
lie in their mouths. A Commission to Attack the Prince of Orange, was what was
mentioned in the deposition. That is not denied by them, and therefore it is
presumed to be confessed. But, though the Undertaking to Attack the Prince of
Orange and his Guards, is not in express words, a Commission to Assassinate
him; yet it were suspecting of any Man's weakness too much to go about to
prove, that both in effect are one and the same thing. When the Evidence is
made public, it will then appear what the depositions were, and whether the
Protestations that are made in these Papers, do contradict them or not In the
mean time here is a poor pretense; for the party to give out that the Offenders
dyed clearing King James of any Order or Accession to this matter. They do
indeed deny an Order for an Assassination, which was not in the Depositions,
but they do not deny a Commission for Attacking his Person, which was mentioned
in them. They had a mind to say all they could say, but durst not say all that
was necessary for the wipeing off so black an imputation.

3. Mr. Charnock confesses that he heard of a Commission for Levying of War,
though he declares he never saw it; in which he does not contradict the Evidence,
but he studies to represent this as consisting with the design of King James's
coming over, and as of a piece with it He does not explain the nature of this
Commission, nor contradict the Evidence that was given against himself in this
particular. The Artifice here is a little too gross not to be easily observed.
He has already answered for it and I will urge it no more.

4. It may be easily imagined that some Persons were careful enough to put them
in mind to justify the whole party, but more particularly the Roman Catholics,
and to purge them of any knowledge of this design or accession to it. No body
can imagine a design of this nature was to be talked of about the Town, or to
be Communicated to more than those who were to be in some manner concerned in
it, but it cannot be doubted, but that the Party had it among them, that an
overturning of the present constitution was very near, and very certain; of
this so many Indications broke out, delivered with such an air of assurance,
and in so many different ways and methods, that though the party is known to be
very Sanguine (I am sorry that this word belongs to him in both senses) yet
there seemed to be somewhat on this occasion, that showed they depended upon
that which was more infallible then an Invasion, for that was to turn on two
such unsteady Elements, as the Winds and the Seas, that they must be very
Sanguine indeed, if they could be so positive in a thing that was under so many
uncertainties. The Assurances with which his design was Published in all parts
beyond the Seas. The Triumphs that were made upon it, as so well laid that it
could not fail. And the Medals prepared for the perpetuating the Memory of it,
which without such help is not like to be soon forgot will be upon an other
occasion, laid open with so much light as will silence all the Contradiction of
the most impudent of the Party. One thing is evident, that if the Party had not
at least so much warning given them, as to be ready upon that dismal Signal to
run together, and to see to their own preservation, at least till the French
had landed; it was certainly the most barbarous exposing of them all to the
Fury of the Mob that could have been imagined, for it is not to be doubted, but
that if they had succeeded in that Black design of Assassinating the King, or
as Mr. Charnock words it, of Attacking the Prince of Orange and his Guards, It
would have inflamed the Spirit of the Nation to that degree, that the party if
it had not been well prepared and fortified would have been quickly Sacrificed
in that height of Fury to which so inhumane a Crime must have transported both
City and Country. But how Black and Cruel soever these designs against the
King, and all his faithful Subjects might have been. Yet we may suppose, they
took more care of their own Friends and Party, and that there was warning
enough given them, but in what manner that was done, must be referred to the
succeeding Trials, in which there can be little difficulty, since the Truth of
the design is now become evident beyond the possibility of Contradiction.

5. Mr. King Vindicates himself from King-Killing Principles, and Honestly puts
this on his own Rashness and Passions. Mr. Charnock it seems was not within the
reach of this, for he thought the King was indeed no King, and so calls him
only the Prince of Orange; but it is left to others to Judge what difference
there is between those who think that King William is not a King, and those who
think that he is King de Facto, yet he has no Right, no not so much as by Law
to be King.

Printed for William Rogers at the Sun against St. Dunstuns-Church in
Fleetstreet. 1696.


