An EPISTLE of the Prophet REEVE.
Written in the Year, 1656.
BLESSED are all those that shall read, or hear this Epistle with a meek Soul,
and are kept from judging Things that seem strange at first Appearance, but by
sober searching of the Scriptures, compare Spiritual Things with Spiritual, as
those noble born did in the Apostles Time, being made patient to wait the
Lord's Leisure, who reveals his Secrets to such only who with a pure Conscience
hearken to his Spirit; He that believes makes not Have.

IN the 6th Chapter of St. John 36th Verse, are these Words, The Words that I
speak unto you, are Spirit and Life; and in the 10th, 17th, and 18th Verse, it
is thus written, I lay down my Life that I may take it again: No Man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self I have Power to lay it down, and Power to
take it again. Therefore, that you may increase in your most Holy Faith unto
your Eternal Glory, which are appointed to believe in that distinct glorified
Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, the only God and everlasting Father, from the
Holy Spirit, I shall show you wherein that Power did consist of Christ dying
and living again.

THIS his Power was secretly hid in the Truth of his Word speaking. Why?
because the Nature of Christ's Soul within his blessed Body was only one Voice
of spiritual Faith and Truth. Therefore, you may understand, whatever he spoke
in that Word speaking, was all Power to effect the Thing spoken of. The Words
that I speak unto you are Spirit and Life, that is, as if Christ should have
said, My Words tend not to Joy in Carnal Things that perish, but in the
rejoicing in Spiritual Things which are eternal; or, as if the Lord should have
said, My Word is all Spiritual Light and Love, Meekness, Patience, with all
Variety of immortal Glorious Joys beyond the Comprehension of the Spirit of Men
and Angels.

AGAIN, Christ's Words are said to be Spirit and Life, because all Spirits in
the Creation were made by his Word speaking only: Furthermore, because his Word
only, is the Original Cause of all Light, Life and Glory in Heaven and Earth,
and in Men and Angels; I have Power, says Christ, to lay down my Life, and
Power to take it again. I declare from the Holy Spirit, none in Heaven and
Earth could ever truly speak those Words, but that Man Christ only.

AGAIN, it is as if Christ should have said, I only have all Power within my
Soul, by a Word speaking, to die and live again.

MOREOVER, Christ Jesus being Lord of Life and Death, did believe without any
Motion of doubting in him, that whatsoever he spoke should come to pass, and
that gave a Being to the Thing spoken of, and that made him to say in the 24th
of St. Matthew, ver. 25. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Word shall
not pass away.

So that Christ being the only God of all Truth, you may understand that it was
his Faith in that living Truth, or Virtue of his Word speaking, which gave him
Power to lay down that Divine Soul, or Spiritual Godhead Life in the Hell of
the Grave, and to quicken his Spiritual Life again from Death, to reign in
immortal Glory to Eternity, in that very Body of Flesh wherein he suffered
Death. For I declare, from the Holy Spirit, from that everliving Virtue
continually flowing from the former Suffering of God on this Earth, in the Body
of Christ, the Tongue of Men nor Angels can never express the Variety of new
glorious Joys, the Eternal Spirit of God the Father has in that glorious
Garment of Flesh he has clothed himself withal.

AGAIN, that Divine Faith of Christ in that living Truth and Virtue of his Word
speaking gave him Power over Life and Death, that by his precious Blood
shedding, he might purchase from himself the Lordship of the Dead and Quick.

AGAIN, if God had not been able to have made his Soul to die in his Body, and
by the living Virtue of that Almighty Word of Truth, spoken through his Holy
Mouth, to quicken a new and glorious Life again, O then would it be impossible
for him at the last Day, by the Power of his Word to quicken and make alive,
all the Souls and Bodies of Mankind that are dead asleep, and buried in the
Grave.

YOU may understand, that living Virtue of his Divine Word of Truth, spoken
before he died, was that God, which raised the everliving God from Death to
Life again.

THEREFORE, because the Lord your God lives, ye which are to live eternally
with him with astonishing Wonder and Admiration behold your God, that was
absolutely dead and alive at one and the same Time.

THEREFORE Christ spoke those Words to his Apostles of the Power of Faith, Mat.
xxi. 21. and Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, if ye
have Faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do what I have done to the
Fig Tree, but also if you say to this Mountain, take thy self away, and cast
thy self into the Sea it shall be done; and in Mat. 19. and 26. But with God
all things are possible, and in Genesis 14. Is any thing hard to the Lord.

WOE, WOE, WOE therefore, to all that are left under the Power of Carnal
Reason, that they may ever War against that incomprehensible Power of Spiritual
Faith and Truth essentially reigning in the glorious Body of the only wise God,
your alone Redeemer, which long for his Appearance, which by the Almighty Power
of his Word speaking of that Substance of Earth and Water, created both Worlds,
and all living Forms that in them are, into that Order they appear now to be,
whether for a Time, or for Eternity, which also twice changed the Condition of
his glorious Form by that Almighty Power of the Spirit of Faith and Truth
speaking through his Heavenly Mouth.

MOREOVER, his Divine Godhead dyed in the Flesh and quickened in the Spirit, not
only to redeem his Elect lost Sheep of the House of Israel, from the bitter Cup
of Eternal Death, but also to prove his infinite Power and Wisdom of Truth
speaking, and for the disproving of all lying Reprobates, which always either
in Heart or Tongue, speak against that glorious Power of their Creator.

YOU know, that it is a common Thing for them to say, that it is Blasphemy for
any Man to say, that God could possibly die, with many such like cursed
Speeches against incomprehensible Power. And why do Atheistical Hypocrites say,
that God could not die, because of their lying Imagination they cannot
comprehend by wh^^ Means God should possible live again if he were dead.

THUS they measure that incomprehensible Power of Divine Faith or Heavenly
Truth, by the narrow Compass of their blin^ Reason, and Bottomless Pit of lying
Imagination, which understands nothing of that Spiritual Power of true Faith.

AND because they are not able to comprehend the Spiritua^ Ways of the Lord
Jesus Christ, they hate both him and his Elect and call him a Liar to his Face,
both in his Person and in his Word and in his Prophet, and in his People.

MOREOVER, because they see no Power in themselves, neithe^ to live nor to sly
presumptuously, they take upon them to judg^ the God of all Power over Life and
Death, by their no Power at all.

AGAIN, if that God that said, I have Power to lay down my Life and Power to
take it again, did not die, and was buried both Soul and Body in the Grave, and
after the decreed Time of three Days and three Nights, by a quickening Spirit
revive a new and glorious Life again in Despite of Death's Power, then
(Angelical Reprobate) the following Scriptures were Words of Truth, spoken from
the Spiritual Mouth of the everlasting God, that sent me to declare this
Secret, who did die, but cannot possibly lie; for lying is of a Mortal Man,
like unto thy self. In the Words of Isa. 55. and the last Verse, Because he
poured out his Soul unto Death. In Psalm. 16. ver. 11. For thou will not leave
my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption. In
Acts ii. 27, 31. Because thou will not leave my Soul in the Grave; neither will thou suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption; he knowing that he before spoke
of the Resurrection of Christ, that his Soul should not be left in the Grave,
neither should his Flesh see Corruption. Romans xiv. 9, For Christ therefore died
and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and Quick.
In Rev. i. 17, 18. Saying unto me, Fear not, I am the first and the last; I am
he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and
have the Keys of Hell and Death. And Rev. ii. 8. These Things says the first,
and the last, which was dead and is alive.

IF this Truth be not sufficiently cleared by the Letter of the Scriptures
concerning Christ's Soul and Body being both dead and buried in the Grave, and
living again by his own Power, I would it were. This I am certain of, that they
that deny this Truth, are not only naturally blind, but wilfully also do shut
their Eyes, and stop their Fars, and call the Scriptures Lies, because of the
Cross of Christ, without which there is no Crown of Glory.

AGAIN, if the everlasting God for a Moment could not have died, and left
himself void of all Light or Life, Spiritual or Natural, (as the Condition of
all Mankind is, which are dead asleep in the Dust of the Earth) then he could
not possibly have experimentally known the State of the Dead, whether Elect or
Reprobate. Moreover, neither could he possibly, in his Creatureship Condition,
be capable of entering into the Immortal Glory of his Creator-ship again, but by
his entering into Death, that he might live again, and upon his glorious Head
instead of a Crown of Throns, wear a double Crown of eternal Glory.

AGAIN, that he might also show unto his Elect Men and Angels, his Almighty
Power and unsearchable Wisdom, by quickening an Immortal transcendent glorious
Life out of Death it self.

THUS the Lord of Life and Death, by suffering all Conditions in his innocent
Soul and Body, did purchase at a dear Rate from himself a Prerogative Power of
being Lord and King over all Conditions whatsoever; and from hence he
experimentally knows what Immortal Crowns of Glory are most suitable for all
suffering Conditions his blessed ones undergo: And by Virtue of his unspeakable
Sufferings at the Hands of Jewish Canaanitish Devils, he knows what Measure
of eternal Death in utter Darkness is most meet for the Souls and Bodies of all
the Sons and Daughters proceeding from the Bowels of cursed bloody Cain, that
Reprobate Angelical Old wise Serpent Devil and Father of all the Damned, which
through the Decree of God was cast out of Heaven into this World, that he might
bring forth his Generation of proud envious scoffing persecuting wise Serpent
Devils, not only to war against the Lord of Life and the Truth of Holy
Scriptures, but also against his Holy Spirit of Divine Faith or Truth in all
the Elect lost Sons and Daughters proceeding from the Loins of Adam; so that
their Eternal perishing by the secret Decree of God being hid from them, by his
Wisdom, they might justly be damned in themselves from the everlasting
Remembrance, not only of all their Actions of vainglorious Hypocrisy, but
unmerciful Cruelties.

THIS will be that gnawing Worm of Conscience which never dies, and that fiery
Curse of the Law of the Wrath of God in Men's Souls that never goes out.

AND so much concerning that everlasting Word of Truth that was spoken by the
glorious Mouth of the everlasting God, that Man Christ Jesus upon the Throne of
all Immortal Crowns of Glory and Majesty far above all Heavens, Angels and Men.

Yours which love the Lord Jesus more than this perishing World. JOHN REEVE.

An Occasional Discourse from the First and Second Verse of the Second Chapter
of the Divine Looking-Glass, concerning the Prophet Reeve, that Darkness, Death
and Hell lay secretly hid in the Spiritual Earth eternally with God.
By the Prophet Muggleton, Septem. 28. Anno Dom. 1668.
THE Heaven of Glory that is now God's Throne, with the Substance of Earth and
Water, was eternally uncreated in the Presence of God, who was alone by himself
before any created Being appeared in his Sight: Then his glorious Wisdom moved
him by a Word speaking to that Spiritual Earth above this Global World to
create an innumerable Company of glorious Spiritual Angels, whose Form, and
Image was the same as God's; only differing in their Natures, the Angels Nature
being pure Reason, and God's Nature Divine Faith. And there was no impure Thing
in his Sight; only he created one Angel more glorious than the rest. After
this, the glorious Wisdom of God moved him to create this Mortal Visible World
of Earth and Water which were Eternal Substances, but dark, dead and senseless:
And of this visible Mortal Earth, the Glorious Wise God created Adam and Eve in
his own Image, and breathed into them the Breath of Life: That Breath of the
ever-living God made their Souls Spiritual and Immortal, and would have so
continued: But now behold, what the Wisdom of God moved him to: He first tries
what his Creature, that Holy Angel would do, or what would become of him if he
did withdraw his Revelation from him, and leave him to himself: Not that God
had eternally decreed this, but as his glorious Wisdom moved him to this or
that: For if God knew what was past, present and to come, there was an End of
his Wisdom, and so would not be infinite; but this makes him infinite, that his
Wisdom is eternally increasing. Now, when God did withhold his Revelation from
this glorious Angel, his pure Reason in Creation became impure, and aspired to
be above the Creator; which when God saw and knew, those vilifying Thoughts
that continually sprang in him, he cast him down from Heaven, like Lightning.
From that very Moment Good and Evil was visible in this Creation; which was the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil which stood before Adam and Eve. Here Sin
entered into the World: Therefore the glorious God having found by the Trial of
his first Creature, how it became with him, his Wisdom saw it good to leave Man
of his own Nature to himself: Only he first gave Man a Law, that if he
hearkened to the Subtilty of that Reprobate fallen Spiritual glorious Angel, by
eating or believing in him, he should die the Death; that is, that immortal
Soul he were created in, while he stood in Obedience to God could not fall: But
he should by Disobedience become Mortal: Now the Subtilty of this glorious
Angel was too powerful for Eve: ( Adam was not in the least concerned in Eve's
Temptation,) but being overcome by the Serpent Angel, he having Power,
presently enters her Womb: For the Nature of Spiritual Bodies can transmute it
self into as small a Place as it pleases: And this Angel pollutes her, makes
her defiled, fills her pure innocent Soul with Lustful Thoughts and Desires
toward her Husband: There this Immortal Reprobate Angel lays down his
Immortality, in becoming Seed; and had, or could Eve have lived without the
Embraces of her Husband, she would in her appointed Time brought forth Cain the
Offspring, and only begotten Son of that Reprobate Angel, the Father of all the
Devils in the World: But she could not forbear but tempt poor innocent Adam who
is overcome by hearkening to Eve's Words, and so becomes polluted too, then at
that very Time Death entered into the World, and not before. Now, as concerning
Hell, God comes and says, I will put Enmity between the two Seeds, the Seed of
the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent. There was in Cain Part of the Woman's
Seed (which was God's Nature) as well as the Serpent's: Likewise in Abel there
was two Seeds: But here lies the Difference; in Cain the Seed of his Father the
Reprobate Angel was predominate and Lord over that Spark of the Seed of the
Woman; whereas in Abel, whom Adam begot, though both Seeds were in him, yet the
Seed of Faith being God's Divine Nature, was predominate, and did so captivate
the Seed of Reason in him, that his Sacrifice was acceptable before God, when
Cain's was refused, which made him slay his Brother Abel. Now, mark the Seed of
Reason which is the Seed of the Serpent, or the Reprobate Angel, or the Devil,
should bruise the Heel of the Seed of the Woman, or the Seed of Faith: But the
Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's Head, Now when the glorious God did
fulfill his Promise, and saw it most fit to transmute his glorious Immortality
into a Mortal Human Condition of Flesh, Blood and Bone, by entering into the
Virgin's Womb, who in Time shedding his most precious Blood, has overcome Sin,
Death, and Hell, which Hell, as yet has no Being: Although the Heaven of Glory,
which will be the Reward of the Elect Seed, be in Being and ever was: Yet the
Place of Torment will appear but in Time, when God will call all to Judgment.

BY LODOWICK MUGGLETON.
FINIS.

