REFLECTIONS UPON That ACT of the GLOUCESTER Common Council: Which occasioned
Dr. FOWLER'S Printing his Discourse of Offenses. Together With a short Reply to
the Late Scandalous QUERIES offered to the Reverend Dean of Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church yard.
1683.

REFLECTIONS Upon the ACT of the Gloucester Common Council, etc.
THere is nothing about which the world is more generally mistaken, than in the
false Notions it has of Greatness and Power. For those commonly are esteemed
the most fortunate and mighty, that make their strength the Law of Justice,
that have Power to do mischief, and cannot be called to an Account for it, and
that by a boisterous, irresistible Fury dare to oppress others, without any
fear of punishment in this world, or thoughts of it in the next. But this is a
Greatness that more properly belongs to Beasts and Birds of prey than either to
men or Christians. If there be any truth in the Laws, or Attractives in the
Example of our Blessed Lord and Savior, those ought to be esteemed the only
Heroic Spirits, who dare do their duty, though dangers attend it; who have
that entire Command over their Inclinations, as not to be moved to any
unchristian unseemly passions, but with a Lamb-like meekness and patience can
under the heaviest oppressions and provocations absolutely yield and submit
themselves to the providence of the Almighty, who judges righteously, and tries
the reins and the heart, Jer. 11.20. And finally, who can express the most
fervent charity to their bitterest enemies, blessing those that curse them,
obliging those that revile them, and with the same ardent zeal praying for the
Souls of their persecutors, as they do for their own.

It Is to be hoped that these Gloucester Gentlemen, whatever passions have of
late clouded their Judgments, and like a false Optic represented those objects
to be of the same color, as the Glass which they looked through, yet time has
not confirmed, but lessened and allayed their enmity against the Reverend
Author of the Sermons concerning Offenses, (who I assure you is neither the
Author, Procurer or Publisher of this Paper;) and now the heat of their Anger
is somewhat abated and the dog days are ended, they will with some cool and
sedate thoughts reflect upon the Order made by them Aug. 20. 1683. wherein they
charged Dr Fowler in his Sermons, to countenance Sedition and Faction, and to
Preach things that tended to the disturbance of well affected men in their
City; and therefore whenever he Preached at the Cathedral Church, none of them
would go thither with the Sword in their Formalities to hear him, but to some
other Church in the City to hear a Loyal Orthodox Divine, who was to be paid at
the City Charges.

This Charge differs no more from what was imputed to Christ and his Apostles,
than the late Association does from the Solemn League and Covenant. For our
Blessed Savior was represented as an enemy unto Caesar, John. 19.12. And his
Apostles after him, as pestilent Fellows, movers of Sedition, and such as
turned the world upside down, for preaching down the Jewish and Pagan Idolatry
and Superstition, just as Dr. Fowler Countenances Sedition and Faction by
preaching down that which is Popish and Antichristian.

But is it so in very deed, that the 35 year of King Charles the second is to
evacuate the Law that was made in the 25 of his Reign? Then the wisdom of his
Majesty with the advice of his great Council of Parliament, for preventing
dangers which might happen from Popish Recusants, made a Law that all Mayors,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common-Council-Men, etc. were to undergo a Test; wherein
they were to declare their Belief that there is not any Transubstantiation in
the Lords Supper, in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at, or after the
Consecration thereof -- And are Romish Emissaries less active and dangerous
now, than they were ten years that are past? Had the Papists ever such
advantage against us since the Reformation, as is now given them in the late
Conspiracy by our Sectaries and Democratical Malcontents, who Style
themselves Protestants, though they are as far from being so, as the Apostate
Spirits from being Angels of Light? Why then must that Clergy Man be voted
Factious and Seditious, whose Sermons are no other than a Confirmation of the
Truth of your Oaths, and who delivers no other Doctrine from the Pulpit, than
what is solemnly sworn by you in your Court? How shall dangers be prevented
that may happen from Popish Recusants, if Ministers are treacherous to the Souls
of the people, and forbear to fore-warn and antidote them against the
pernicious Doctrins of the Roman Church? What will become of our Book of
Homilies and Liturgy, if we must undergo such heavy Censures for preaching
against the rebellious and novel principles of Papists? According to your vote,
they must both of them be disused in Churches; For all the Hay and Stubble,
Errors and Superstitions that make up the Roman Religion, are displayed and
confuted in those two venerable Volumes. For shame then, disown your
prejudices, and rectify your mistakes. What your passions moved you to Enact,
let your more sedate Judgments incite you (if not to abrogate, yet) to
suppress. Do not by continuing in so strange an indiscretion, make your want of
Charity to be as apparent as your want of Knowledge.

But to come unto a more close arguing; The matter of your Order (which some,
if not most in the Common Council, were against the very minute it was made, as
we are informed in London) is either true or false; if false, you ought to
retract and repent of it, and to make the Reverend man Reparaion for the injury
and disgrace you designed against him. If true, the Law is open, let Deputies
be impleaded, and the offender proceeded against with the utmost rigor and
Severity. He is now actually possessed of some hundred pounds per An. In
Church-preferments; and the loss of those (which he ought to suffer, if your
Accusation be just) would prevent the trouble and charge of having some other
Loyal, Orthodox Divine to preach before you, when he a scends the Pulpit of the
Cathedral. Nay to send him a begging together with his Wife and Children would
be a punishment so adequately proportioned to his supposed Crimes, that it
might slake the rage of his most malicious enemies, and would infallibly
incapacitate him for ever Preaching Sermons amongst you that countenanced
Sedition and Faction, neither would the well affected men of your City be any
more disturbed by his Harangues from the Pulpit. And you may be assured, that
the main end that the Doctor proposes to himself in the publication of his
Sermons is not only to vindicate his own Innocence, but to furnish your zeal
with matter to make good your charge against him. And if you desist from the
prosecution of him, he and some others in the world will be apt to think, that
either you are afraid and dare not, or mistaken and cannot. For he can no more
question your want of will, than he does your want of prejudice against him.

It may be hoped, if you will have so much patience as to read over what he has
offered you, with an attentive mind, though you may not be so just as to
acknowledge, yet you will be so ingenuous as not to persevere in your enmity
against him. Whether you will peruse or burn them, is not very much valued, we
presume, by the Composer of them. You may be assured, that he has a clearer
Innocence, than to be hectored out of the performance of his duty. Those are to
be so used by you whose fears exceed their Integrity, and who for fear of
losing popular Applause dare not preach down popular or Popish Errors,
especially when the Pulpit is surrounded with Threats and dangers. If he could
purchase his peace without betraying his trust, no one would be more forward to
court your Favor than your late exploded Preacher. But he well knows, that he
transgressed no limits of his duty, and has only made you his enemies by
telling you impartially the Truth; but it is not the first time, that an
Innocent man has rendered himself obnoxious to the hard Censures of those, who
have but a Superficial knowledge concerning him. You may be assured that we in
London entertain other opinions of him, than you do at Gloucester: St. Paul
himself had laid on him at Philippi (...) many Stripes; and yet at Melita he
met with (...), many honors, Acts. 16.23. Acts. 28.10. It seems the very
Barbarians paid him a more venerable respect, than the polished Citizens of
Philippi. And there are too many in this licentious Age, who make it their very
business and pleasure to defame Clergy men, and that either out of design to
expose their Profession, or to vail and extenuate their own wickedness. Neither
is it possible for the most unspotted Reputation to contend with Numerous
Adversaries, whose tongues are their own, who acknowledge no Lord over them, and
who are so habituated to calumnies, and Slanders, that (to use Lucians phrase)
they are ever and anon casting out (...), whole Cart loads of Reproaches upon
the good names of those persons, whose Doctrines or Lives are a Reproof to
their vileness and Immoralities.

But when it is well considered, it will appear that one great reason of the
Intemperance of men's Tongues in assaulting their Neighbors names, will be
found to be a pragmatical intermeddling in their Business. A Fault, very
epidemical in some places; Where men step out of their Spheres and Stations,
and shoot their Bolts against their Governors in Church and State, as well as
against men of a more retired condition, into whose concerns and Affairs, they
have so small a knowledge and insight, that if they pass a right sentence
either upon their actions or discourses, it is (like the blind man's hitting of
the mark) owing rather to their Stars, then to their understanding. And I
verily believe (Gentlemen) that the publication of his Sermons is as plain a
demonstration of the Incompetency of Vulgar and Mechanic Minds to judge of
Pulpit discourses, as any thing that for some years past has been exposed to
public view. The Fate it has already met with, has been so cruel and severe,
that it has exceeded all the Rules of Reason, Charity and Civility. The winds
were so high and boisterous, that no midway was admitted to suppress private
hatreds, or silence public clamours. Now it seems to be a Request equal and
just, that we who are part of the London Clergy may be admitted as able Judges
of Theological Discourses from the Pulpit, as any of you in your several
Callings, that live at Gloucester. I do not know any Divine, tho never so Loyal
and Orthodox, that undertakes to instruct Tradesmen how to measure Tape, to
make up pills, to brew Ale or Beer: Now the truth is, we Divines in London do
verily believe, that Doctor Fowler is as able to make a Sermon, as any
Shopkeeper is to sell his goods; that it is as free from Faction and Sedition,
as any Drapers best cloth in Gloucester from Moths or rottenness. But who can
help it, if there are Committees appointed for Religion at the Tolsey, as well
as Westminster, and that a new sort of Triers are risen up to pass sentence
upon Divinity, as well as Divines? Believe it Gentlemen, we shall never have
peace either in Charch or State, till men study to he quiet and to do their own
Business, and avoid being Busy bodies in other men's matters.

If Edw. Fowler Dr. of Divinity wanted Compurgators, you should have some
hundreds to testify that they are fully satisfied he is as irreconcilable to
Fanaticism, Strife and Contention, as he is to Popery or Debauchery. He truly
abominates all things of these kinds. He knows also with what pathetick
Arguments the Common Savior of us all does conjure us to mutual Charity and
Love. He knows too how his Apostle after him does with the most importunate
Eloquence depress Contention and strise, and make it to be a mark of a Carnal
mind, quite inconsistent with the true Christian Temper and Disposition. Now
pray consider, whether the prejudice you have against the worthy Doctor, do not
arise from false surmizes, and uncharitable misconstructions. It is not
impossible but you may be mistaken in his principles: Nay, it is certain you
were so, when you voted him to countenance Faction and Sedition. And jealousy
and suspicion are the Bane of Friendship and Love. And therefore, be prevailed
with to suppress your Censures, till you better understand his merits. For he
is not the first person whose name has been traduced and rendered infamous by
wanton and petulant Tongues; and yet afterward Providence has been pleased so
to dissipate all clouds of Calumny, as to bring forth his Righteousness as the
Light, and his Judgment as the Noon day. Pray also consider well, what an
infinite (...) is to the Gospel of peace, and to the Church of England, that
the ministers of Religion should have the blackest characters fixed upon them,
by those that pretend friendship to the King and Church And therefore for Gods
sake, and for your own souls sake, do not fortify your hearts against these
proposals of Peace and Charity; do not create sport and triumph for Gath and
Askelon, viz. For Roman and Sectarian Synagogues.

If this Advice be not embraced by you, I hope the good Doctor will receive the
honor of your continued Enmity with a Joy proportioned to the vastness of its
benefit. And perhaps one of the best, Testimonies that a virtuous person can
have of Gods love, is, that wicked and profane men hate him. Neither is the
satisfaction inconsiderable, when we owe the evils we suffer rather to other
men's malice, than to our own guilts, and that we suffer not as evildoers, but
as Christians. This consideration, will make us feel not only comfort, but
security in men's caufless enmity. What Effect these persuasives may have upon
you I know not; But though you should go on in vilifying his person,
undervaluing his labors, and assaulting his Reputation, you will not fail, I
dare promise for him, of the Doctors charity, in pitying your mistakes, and
praying unto God that he would forgive his Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers,
and so turn their hearts in this world, that their Souls may be eternally saved
in the next.

A Short Reply TO THE Late Scandalous QUERIES Offered to the Reverend Dean of
Canterbury.
This Impudent Libeller begins thus;
SIR,
IN your Preface before Bishop Wilkins Sermon, you recommend Moderation to the
world as a great virtue; Wherefore

The 1st. Query is, Whether the greatest Trimmer be the most virtuous man? And
if so,

2dly, Whether the Dean of Canterbury be not the most virtuous man in the whole
World?

Reply. That Moderation, which the Apostle would have known to all men, that
has Integrity, Prudence, and Charity, for its constant Ingredients, will never
suffer in the opinion of any wise man, because Fools give it a Nickname; and I
hope will gain further Reputation, by observing the brutish Rage wherewith such
Libellers as this oppose it, and what Poison of Asps is under the Tongues of
those that traduce it.

3d. Query. Whether a man born of Anabaptistical Parents, and who can be proved
not to have been baptized at eight years of Age, can be supposed to be
qualified to receive Orders of the Church of England, and to be made Dean of
one of the most Eminent Sees thereof, who has nothing to recommend him, but his
spewing up the Engagement?

His 10th Query may be joined to this, being of the same strain, in these
words, Whether or no the said Dean whom his Father called Jahnny, no otherwise
than he named Spaniel Tray, at eight years of Age, and cannot prove that he
ever since had water thrown upon his Face, or the Sign of the Cross made, may
by virtue of his Orders, be judged a Christian?

Reply. It is a Notorious Falsehood, that either of the Reverend Deans parents
was Anabaptistical: and it is so far from being possible to be true that he was
not baptized at eight years of Age, that proof shall be made, if there be
occasion, that before he was three weeks old, he was publicly baptized in the
Parish Church where he was born. (Which fully answers the 10th Query also:) and
who but a Malicious Fool would have objected the taking of the Engagement by a
mere Freshman? (for such he was when it was imposed on the University of
Cambridge) though I know not that he ever took it, but am certain, if he did
not then, he never took it.

4th. Query. Whether supposing it can be proved that the said Dean (...) Preach
expressly against the Common Prayer in St. Marius Church in Cambridge, and that
he has never since either by word or deed contradicted that Sermon, he may not
reasonably be suspected to be of the same Principle still as he was at that
time?

Reply. I will engage on the Deans behalf, that all his Preserments which this
Libeller envies him, shall lie at his Mercy, though his Merits never entitled
him to any, if he can prove, that the Dean, who never preached any Sermon in
Cambridge in his whole Life, has preached in St. Mary's there against the
Common Prayer; nay further, if he can prove so much as his preaching against it
any where else: but I can prove he had a great zeil for it at 20 years of Age,
notwithstanding the Prejudices of his Education.

5th Query. Whether or no a man of his Constitution, who has run through so
many Trials, and is yet (alive) with a safe Conscience, may not at last be
hoped to dye a good Musselman?

Reply. I shall only say, That this sorry Creature has met with one Trial (and
he needs no more) to convince the World what Religion He Is ambitious to dye in.

6th. Query. Whether or no the said Dean designed the Interest of the Church of
England, when he preached a turn for Julian the Apostate, to give him Leave to
Answer Dr. H^cks's Jovian?

Reply. This Insinuation, that the Deans preaching in Southampton Chapel was
designed to serve Julian in answering Jovian, is as false as spightful, and no
less silly; for who can think that the obliging of one with whom he had no
acquaintance, should be his motive to give a Sermon to an old Acquaintance? And
who can suspect that Sermon to have done disservice to the Church of England,
which found so good and great Acceptance when it was preached before the King?

7th. Query. Whether or no it belongs to the Authority and Office of a Dean of
the Church of England to vindicate every Traitor that appears guilty of High
Treason?

Reply. I will ask him a Question, which when he answers, he will answer
himself, viz. Whether it be not the Duty of every Dean to obey all Sub-poena's
of any of his Majesty's Courts of Justice; and what this Rev. Dean did more
amiss upon this occasion, than several Noble Lords, and other worthy persons
did, who are equally reflected on in this Query?

8th. Query. Whether or no the said Dean did well, in defacing the Altar piece
of his own Cathedral, for fear of offending tender Consciences?

Reply. I do not understand (to use those words of the last Query) how it
belongs to the office of a Dean to answer singly for Acts done by a whole
Chapter: nor how making a thing more beautiful can be called defacing it; Nor
lastly, Why the Image of the Sun should be contended for as the most proper
Ornament for an Altar. But whatsoever others may do, I perceive those that have
no Conscience, are but little concerned at offending tender Consciences.

9th. Query. What Opinion we ought to have of this Dean, who at two Solemn
Funerals preached the same Sermon; First for a known Loyal Church of England
man, and afterward for a Fanatic Preacher?

Reply. There is no more conformable Church of England man, than Mr. Gouge was
(whom he calls a Fanatic Preacher) as far as he was obliged to be so in a
private capacity, and no man did ever declare a more hearty Abhorrence of
Schism and Separation; nay this his Fanatic Preacher was a Licensed Preacher,
though he had no Cure; and few Persons of more exemplary Piety and Charity
adorned the Age, than the man whom he brands with this odious Character. Mr.
L'estrange in his Observator, published some few days after his Death, bestowed
upon him a most honorable Character; and no man, but one of this Libeller's
profligate Conscience, would have thus impudently aspersed his Memory.

The 10th. Query was set down and accounted for before.

11th. Query. Whether or no the said Dean would not make a good Dean of Bray?

Reply. Whether had not this Ass better never have brayed against the good Dean?

12th. Query. What Religion is to be understood by the Protestant Religion?

Reply. It is that Primitive Christianity, which thou have neither wisdom to
understand, nor Grace to own.

The Reader of this may be assured, that the Reverend Dean is wholly a stranger
to this paper, and his pardon is begged for publishing it without his Knowledge.

FINIS.

