REFLECTIONS ON THE POEMS MADE UPON The Siege and Taking OF NAMUR; Together
with a short Answer to the Modest Examination of the Oxford Decree, etc. Lately
Published.

Both in a Letter to a Friend at Oxon.

Gaudent scribentes, and se venerantur.

Hor. ep. 2. lib. 2. LONDON; Printed, and are to be sold by M. Whitlock, near
Stationers' Hall. 1696.

REFLECTIONS ON THE POEMS Made upon the Siege and Taking of NAMUR, etc.
SIR,
COuld I have any Reason to suspect (as you seem to have) the Bravery of the
Confederate Army before NAMVR, you know my Inclinations to the present
Government would restrain me from saying any thing that might prejudice its
Interest; much more from Entertaining such Groundless, Unnecessary Jealousies,
as those must be, which would Asperse and Vilify the Glory of our last
Campaign. And, for many other Reasons I am a very unfit Person to answer that
severe Question in your Letter, viz. Whether the late Siege and Taking of Namur
deerves the Great and Extraordinary Applause some People are pleased to bestow
upon it? And whether so many English Lives have not dearly bought the King of
Spain 's Town? But was I never so able to undertake the Dispute, which is here
suggested, common Prudence would keep me from Entering, at this Time of Day,
into the Merits of that Cause, which has long ago been so learnedly handled by
Men of great Experience and Abilities in all Professions. And therefore you
cannot but excuse me, if I wave this Argument, and rather choose to divert you
with my Thoughts of the POEMS, which have come out upon this Occasion, as your
Letter also enjoins me.

And here, Sir, in Regard to your Commands, I put my self upon a Work which is
by no means my Talent; nor do I desire it should be; for the Wits of our Age
tell us, in their Dedications and Prefaces, That no Man can be a True Critic,
unless he add to his Natural Endowments (which ought to he Great indeed) the
exact Knowledge of the whole Circle of Human Literature, both Ancient and
Modern. But, as I humbly conceive, the Gentlemen, who will be concerned here,
are few of them thus qualified; so neither do I think it necessary their Poems
should pass uncensured, till such a one can be found, especially when their
Faults are very obvious to a Man of a narrower Capacity.

I would neither give you nor my self the Trouble of quoting all their several
Mistakes, if I had the Poems by me; my Design, not being to attempt a formal
Piece of Criticism in the Compass of a Letter, which the Post will call for
before I can possibly review it. You must therefore be content with those
general Impressions they made upon me, as I read them hastily in the
Booksellers Shop. And the first I met with, came out under the Name of Mr.
Denn: A Gentleman I never heard of before, tho he has formerly done the King
some secret Service in this kind, as one would guess by his Beginning,

Once more, my Muse, thy William is thy Theme. The Prooemium is very abrupt and
uneven, and so indeed is the whole Body of the Poem. Sometimes his Swan-like
Muse (as he calls her)

-- Gently cuts the yielding Stream. Sometimes plunges over Head in Helicon,
and is almost drowned. Then suddenly springing up like,

A Linnet flutters in inferior Air. In short, though there is here and there a
tolerable Thought, which might be improved to something: I must needs say
(without any Prejudice to the Author) His Language is ill chosen, and his
Verses bunglingly patched together. And NAMVR might still have been in the
Possession of the French, had his Hero (my Lord Cuts) fought no better than he
writes.

But, to atone for this, Mr. Congreve immediately gave us a Pindarique Ode,
the first, in the kind, it seems, he ever made: And I heartily wish, for his
Encouragement, he had been as amply rewarded as (they say) he was for his
Pastoral on the Death of the Queen; For, truly, I think the Pindarique not
inferior to the Pastoral, with Submission to Mr. Pittis. And, perhaps, a
Judicious Reader will take as much Pleasure in the Variety and Strength of M.
Congreve's Numbers, as in the flowing Sweetness of Mr. Pittis's: Who, in my
Opinion, seems all-a-long to affect the same Turn of Thought and Verse, and so,
by ill Management makes a good Figure become Flat and Insipid. This is a Fault
not chargeable on Mr. Congreve's Ode; which, however, is justly Censured by Men
of Learning, as a flashy rutilant Composure, very unworthy a Man of his
Character in the World. I could indeed hardly have believed any Production of
his would have betrayed him so much as this and his Pastoral have done.

And yet, I know not with what Justice Mr. Yalden's Ode (a Man of your own
University) can be preferred to it: When we consider the Barrenness of his
Invention, and the vast Pains he takes to express but little in a great Room.
His Verse is sometimes numerous and sounding enough; but then it is not
animated with a True Warmth and Vigor of Fancy; so that the highest
Commendation which can be given of his Poem is, That it is like a Fair Body (or
Beauteous Statue) without any Soul to Agitate and inform it; whereas it is
Pindar's peculiar Excellency, that in his most exalted Verses, he means more
than he can always express, and his Thoughts are often too big for his Words,
notwithstanding the Copiousness of the Language he had to deal with; which was
capable of Clothing any thing in the most pompous Garb imaginable. In short he
is inimitable, but by such as have naturally a Masculine, Elevated Genius;
because it is otherwise impossible to arrive at those Sublimities and Noble
Idea's, which are the Essential Ornaments of Pindarique Poesy, and to which
that of Horace is particularly applicable,

-- Cui Men's divinior, atque Os
Magna sonaturum, des Nominis hujus Honorem.
And they are much mistaken, who think (or seem to do by their Composings) that
this way of Writing consists in joining a Company of fine hard Words together,
and jumping from one sort of Verse to another, as their own extravagant Fancy
leads; as if there was no Texture, no Regularity to be observed in one of the
most Noble Kinds of Poetry.

There is another Gentleman of the same College, Mr. Addison, who Adresses his
Poem to the Lord Keeper; which I could willingly commend, for the sake of some
Verses in it (and the more, because I fear you will censure my Breeding as well
as Judgment, in Damning all before me) if they were any thing to the Purpose.
But, instead of insisting much upon that, he entertains the Reader with a long
Introduction about the Largeness of the Subjects a good Poet may have in King
William's Exploits; about Virgil and Homer; and when he comes to the Point,
slily passes it over. I wish he had performed what his Title Page promised,
because I believe him Poet enough for it, and that the World might not wait (as
he prophesies it must) till A Thousand Years in full Succession run, Before
Fate's unerring Doom will send some mighty Bard to chant out the Praises of the
present Age.

But though his Success in this Poem cannot be much admired, yet his Translation
of the Fourth Book of Virgil's Georgicks may; for it is well done, and will
recommend him more to his Patron and Men of Sense than a thousand such Pieces
as his last. And, was not Mr. Dryden (who is undoubtedly the fittest Man of the
Age) already engaged in that Noble Design; this Gentleman could not better
employ his Poetical Hours than in attempting all Virgil.

Which is a Work I would by no means recommend to Mr. Manning, though a Gentleman
not at all distrustful of his own Abilities and Skill in Poetry: Which he would
show upon all Public Solemnities. And, you may remember, furnished us with an
Eclogue on the Queen's Death, which an Acquaintance of yours then read to us,
and justly condemned as a Languid, Miserable Ditty, in that it had nothing of
Nature or Passion in it; which would doubtless have very well become his
Shepherds on such an Occasion, if he will Vouchsafe those sort of Men the common
Affections of Humanity. The Character, I think, holds good in this Poem too;
and though he will not allow it to come out of Shepherds Mouths, yet, in my
Opinion, there are no such extraordinary Elevations in it, but what such
Clowns, as his last were, might have said, without the Help of much Learning,
which the nicer Critics wholly exclude from Pastorals, as affected and
unnatural; and therefore blame Virgil for having too much Philosophy and
abstracted Knowledge in his Eclogues: A Fault this Gentleman has carefully
avoided, both in his Pastoral and Heroic Songs.

You had here, Sir, been released had I not this Afternoon met with one Mr.
Charles Whitworth's Albion Rediviva.

Whose pert aspiring Muse dares boldly ply,
With borrowed Wings the Surface of the Sky,
And teach his Fancy without sense to fly.
This young Poet (for such his Verse speaks him to be) is very fond of new
Words, but does not always hit their Genuine Meaning and Propriety: Nor is it
likely he should, the Purity and Delicacy of our English Tongue being only
known to those who have long conversed with the best Books and best Company of
both Sexes; and who, after a thorough digesting of all, have not only brought
themselves to make a right Judgment of Words and Style, but are perfect Masters
of them too. The Run and Cadence of his Numbers plainly discovers a Boyish
Affectation. As to his main Design and Platform, that is borrowed, and is not
much to be commended in those from whom he had it. For though the Ancients (and
especially Ovid) being skilled in the Platonic Philosophy, managed some of
their Poems this way (I mean by representing Things under the Character of
Persons) with wonderful Success; Yet, I must confess, I could never admire it
in any of our Modern Attempters. But since the Foundation of this very Poem is
not originally his, I can only pity the Gentleman's Want of Skill in making no
better a Choice. And I am also sorry he may be narrowly tract in many of his
best Thoughts and Turns. The chief Aim and Endeavor, if I mistake it not, is
to magnify the Glory of our Revolution; and if so, the Gentleman might very
well have spared his Pains, after Dr. Blackmore had sufficiently done it to his
Hands: For, certainly any Man of Judgment, that has read Prince Arthur (though
that Poem has great Objections, against it) will despise this trivial Paper of
Verses.

Thus, in hopes you will confine these Lines to your Closet, or burn them, I
have freely given my Opinion (as much as I could in Three Hours) of what Pieces
I have seen; and if I have dealt too rude Blows upon the Gentlemen, who are all
of them Strangers to me, and therefore ought to have been more civilly treated,
you must thank your self for putting a Sword into a Madman's Hands, who is sure
to Massacre all before him; and, when the Frenzy is over, will be apt enough to
allege Juvenal's Excuse.

-- Stulta est Clementia, cum tot ubique
Vatibus occurras --
And now, Sir, if I have betrayed my Inexperience in these things, I have done
it to a Friend, and that is my Security. But, if by chance, there is any
Judgment in what I have said, I know not what Need there would be of Excusing
the Freedom I have taken to any Body else; and the Gentlemen themselves could
not be angry with me, if I told them, it was the Effect of an unprejudiced
Opinion, that none of them would ever deserve the Name of a Poet, unless he had
better Pretensions than these.

But I would not here be supposed to rob Mr. Congreve of his just
Commendations, since he has really performed many things to Admiration for a
Man of his Years: And if he does not always write with the same Success, it is
no other Misfortune than has attended the best Poets before him. Therefore he
has no Reason to suspect that all his Works should be thought absolutely
perfect, that being a Pretension beyond Human Reach. I have so much Respect for
his Worth, that I think him not to be numbered with any of these other
Gentlemen. And I heartily wish he would spend less Time in serving a Senseless
debauched Stage, and undertake some Noble Epick Poem, or the Translation of
Homer (as Mr. Dryden has done that of Virgil) for such Labors as these would
honor his Country and improve its Language. Such as these, I am sure, have
made the French far the most learned of all the Living Tongues in the World.
But, I leave the Refiners of ours to take their Methods, and remain,

Sir, Yours, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
YOU are always very importunate with me to continue my Intelligence, as you
call it; but, truly, at present I know of no News that can much affect you,
unless it be Dr. Sherlock 's modest Examination of the Oxford Decree,
concerning the Heresy of Three Distinct Infinite Minds in the ever-blessed
Trinity, which was published Yesterday. In this Pamphlet, after a slight Touch
upon you, for being no Critics in Latin or English (a Province I thought he,
of all Men would never have engaged in) he falls foul upon your Decreeing
Doctors, for being made Tools to serve the malicious Ends of his Animadverter;
and says withal, That it is not legally in the Power of an Oxford Convocation,
whateever they may challenge to themselves, publicly to declare Heresy; and
this he alleges a Statute for, as well as many Reasons of his own, about the
pernicious Consequence of such rash injudicious Proceedings; as if, forsooth,
so many cautious, regular Men, as the Heads are, would go beyond the Extent of
their Authority in such Cases, out of Humor, and not Conscience, as he
unworthily supposes.

At first Sight one would almost guess by this, he gave up the Gentleman's
Cause whom he undertakes to defend; but you know the Principle is too much his
own to be so easily resigned: And therefore, as a Self-preservation-Man would,
he once more draws his Pen, that infallible Weapon, in the old Quarrel, not at
all despairing of a Glorious Conquest; for he assures the World he can maintain
his Hypothesis against all Opposites whatever, dogmatically asserting, If it be
false, our Belief of a Trinity is Nonsense and Contradiction. His Three
Distinct Infinite Minds, etc. being fairly deducible from the received
established Notions of the Fathers, and including, if modestly expounded, no
more than they did by Three Persons. But under the Learned Doctor's Favor,
whatever his Private Sentiments are, I fear his New Words admit of too great a
Latitude (as the Animadverter has proved at Large) to be ever reconciled to
that nice Signification the Primitive Church restrained Persons to; certainly
those unwarrantable Terms, of Three Individual Substances never can: Which,
however, are not so extravagant but that the Doctor would very fain justify
them too, because he says, The Preacher seems to have had no ill Meaning in
them; but he must excuse us if we do not allow him to be a Judge in a case,
wherein he is too nearly concerned to be an unprejudiced one. He promises a
Treatise, to give an Account of the Judgment of the Catholic Fathers and
Councils concerning a Real Substantial Trinity, and what their Notion of
Tritheism is. Which I am heartily glad of, because if freely and impartially
collected, it will evidently confute his own Crude Indigested Opinion, and save
your University, and every Body else the Trouble of a Formal Answer, by
bringing one of his Books against another, for Self-Contradiction is no new
thing to the Master of the Temple. He gives your Doctors an open Challenge, To
enter the Lists with him, relying, I suppose, upon this Discourse he has in
store; and, unawares modestly pretends, It is indifferent to him whether he
overcomes or is overcome, for Truth is better than Victory, and will make an
honest Man, such as himself, triumph in being conquered. But he quickly forgets
this Concession, and all-along proudly insists upon the Eternal, Infallible
Verity of his Principles; though, at the same Time he cannot forbear to complain
of his Animadverter's Arrogance and Evil Spirit in his Writings, such as is
enough to give an Unchristian Tincture to those that read them: Whereas any
unbiased Man must certainly return him his Character, when he has heard, that,
besides a great many other Insolences he charges Dr. South (for he is pleased
to name his Animadverter) with Impiety and Profaneness, and says, He may
justly fear his Blasphemies will bring down the Curse of the ever-bless'd
Trinity upon him, and that will be no Jest.

No sure: But why does our modest Christian, when he has professed to curse no
Man, wrest the Thunder out of the Hands of the Almighty: Why does he judge his
Brother, who is accountable to God only, that made him? This you will own to be
a great Height of Unchristianity, and such an one as is not to be met with in
the Animadversions; though I confess that Author has too much of the Spirit of
Persecution in him; and the Argumentative Part of his Book (which is penned
with a Strength and Clearness becoming the Subject) is extremely injured by his
trivial Jests and Condescensions.

It is much to be lamented that our Divines are so divided among themselves in
this great Fundamental Point of our Faith; for after all their Disquisitions
and pretended Definitions it will be a Mystery, and ought therefore rather to
be revered than examined. Our good Friends, the Socinians are, doubtless well
pleased with this Civil War in our Church, and begin to fancy the Victory on
their Side. But, alas! their Reason, as arrogant as it is, can never frame any
adequate Conceptions of a single Deity, no more than we can of a Trinity; and I
hope this inconceivable Mystery will still be the noble Exercise of all honest
Men's Faith, notwithstanding the devilish Attempts that are daily made to
undermine this and all other Articles of our Christian Belief. But I have
already tired your Patience, and ask your Pardon for meddling with things above
me, and such as indeed ought to be touched by no Hand, much less by

London, December. 24th 1695. Your humble Servant.

FINIS.

