A DIVINE Looking-Glass: OR, The third and last Testament of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, Whose personal Residence is seated on his Throne of Eternal Glory in
another world; Being the Commission of the Spirit, agreeing with, and
explaining of the two former Commissions of the Law and the Gospel, differing
only in point of Worship. Set forth for the Trial of all sorts of supposed
Spiritual Lights in the world, until the Ever-living true JESUS, the only High
and Mighty God personally appear in the Air, with his Saints and Angels.

By John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, Penmen hereof, and the last chosen
Witnesses unto that Ever-blessed Body of Christ Jesus glorified, to be the
only, wise, very true God alone, Ever-lasting Father, and Creator of both
worlds, and all that were made in them.

Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, to testify and fulfill thy own promise
in thy Records of Truth, that thy redeemed ones may really know that thou have
seat us, and art that unchangeable God, which cannot possibly lie, though
millions of unredeemed mankind thereby should everlastingly perish. Printed in
the year of our Lord 1656. and since reviewed by, and reprinted for Lodowick
Muggleton, one of the said Witnesses, dwelling in great Trinity-lane in London,
near ^he Sign of the Lion and the Lamb, where this Book is to be had. 1661.

To the spiritual discerning Reader.
MY beloved spiritual brethren, in whom is rooted and really grounded the
saving light of Life eternal, I know that the manifold breakings forth of
seeming glorious appearances in this Age can by no means be hid from your eyes.

Also you know that the true light of Life has almost discovered them all to
be nothing else but the very depth of men's serpentine subtilties, cloaked over
with the divine titles of the most infinite and holy God, so that men's
glittering language now is of no value unto you, unless the holy Spirit bears
witness unto your spirits, that the Lord has spoken unto them from heaven,
neither can men blind your eyes with their natural miracles, artificial
juglings, sophistical signs and wonders, to cause you ever the sooner for that
to receive them as immediately sent forth by the ever-living God.

I say it is not lofty words of imaginary voices, visions, dreams, revelations,
variety of languages, declarations of the knowledge of the heights, and depths
of perishing nature, pretended Jerusalem Journeys, supposed seeing of spiritual
Angels with eyes of natural flesh, and familiar conversing with them, and
knowing the names of all the holy Angels in glory, and every man's protecting
Angel in this world, or any such like carnal fancies, can blind your eyes any
more which have received from above a distinguishing gift between the things of
eternal life and death, not only from its effects, but from its first causes
also.

My selected brethren unto a pure light, language, and life, from the very true
God I certainly know, that nothing in this world will satisfy your hungry
souls, but a right understanding of spiritual things which are eternal in that
world to come; therefore unto you alone which look not after gilded words, but
glorious things, present I this Epistle from that Spirit which can neither
deceive, nor be deceived by men nor angels.

Wherefore if any sober man of a quick comprehension shall suppose that this
Writing might have been composed into fewer words then is here inserted, I hope
he shall wisely consider that things of such concernment requires more words
then ordinary, not only for informing and confirming of the simple Saints, but
also for confounding of the subtle Serpents of this Age.

Moreover, you that peruse this Epistle which are of an unjudging tender
spirit, may also know, that before the eternal Spirit in Christ Jesus became my
Minister, I was very weak in the knowledge of learned men's Opinions, their
Disputes or Writings concerning heavenly things which are hid from them, and
revealed unto unlearned babes.

Therefore the chief desire of my soul is, that it may be manifested unto elect
men and Angels, whether the substance of this Epistle proceeds from mine own
carnal spirit, or from the most pure and holy Spirit of God himself, I mean
that one personal glorious Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose divine
nature both is, and shall be Crowns of immortal ravishing Excellencies in all
his elect, at the great and dreadful Day of eternal burning vengeance upon the
souls and bodies of all bloody-minded impenitent Persecutors that ever were
born.

John Reeve.

Another Epistle annexed to this Book.
My beloved spiritual Brethren, who are, or shall come to be really grounded in
the true Doctrine, which is held forth in the three Commissions, namely the
Commission of Moses and the Prophets. 2 Of Christ Jesus and the Apostles. 3 Of
the Commission of the Spirit; which Commission is now extant in the world,
though not accompanied with visible signs, and natural miracles as the other
two Commissions had in their time, when their Commission was in being; yet this
I am sure, that this Commission of the Spirit being the last Commission that
God will ever send into this world, while time is no more; therefore it is that
this Commission of the Spirit has the only interpretation of the two former
Commissions: for there is no man in the world at this day, let him be of what
Sect or Opinion soever, that does truly know any part of the Scriptures, but
this Commission of the Spirit only, notwithstanding they labor so much after
the knowledge of them; yet for wan^ of a Commission from God, they have no true
understanding of any one principal or true ground of faith; for all that they
do of that nature is nothing else but the very strength of reason, and reason
can never truly know the deep things of eternity; because there is no man in
the world at this day that has the knowledge of the true God, his Form and
Nature, the right devil, his form and nature, but this Commission of the Spirit
only.

Therefore when God spoke these words unto John Reeve, saying, I have given
thee understanding of my mind in the Scriptures, above all the men in the
world. Also God did say at the same time, I have given thee Lodowick Muggleton
to be thy mouth: So that according to the words of God, he has given us two to
understand more of his mind in the Scriptures, then all the men in the world do
at this day, that is, more spiritual knowledge of the Scriptures than all the
men in the world, because God has chosen us two to be his last Commissionated
Prophets and Witnesses of the Spirit, to declare and make known unto the Seed
of Faith those great mysteries which have layen hid in the breast of God ever
since the foundation of this world was laid; and in the time of their
Commission was in some measure made manifest unto the sons of men, by some part
of the mystery of God, as those Commissions aforesaid, namely, Moses and Jesus.

But now in this last Age is the Commission of the Spirit, which is to finish
the mystery of God, according to that saying of John, Rev. 10. and 7. where it
is said, But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel when he shall begin
to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the Prophets.

And now this mystery of God is made manifest in the world by this Commission
of the Spirit both in our Discourse and Writings: so that it may be clear to
you that are capable to understand, and to comprehend those deep and high
mysteries which h^th been declared by this Commission of the Spirit, both by
word of mouth and pen; wherein we have unfolded the mystery of the true God,
and the right Devil, with the persons of Angels, and their natures, with many
other sacred mysteries, which never were revealed unto the sons of men, until
this last Commission of the Spirit.

And the knowledge of the two Seeds is these two Keys which does open or
unlock the gates of Heaven, and of Hell, that is, they know what the Commission
of Moses and the Prophets was, and how far a man is freed from the visible
worship of his Commission which was of the Law, which is the gates of Hell.

Also we know what the other Commission of Jesus and the Apostles was, and how
far a man is bound to observe the visible Worship which was set up in their
time, which was then in great force so long as that Commission stood: but when
God does give a new Commission, the old is made void, as with reference to the
visible Worship which is set up by a Commission; therefore you know that the
Ap^stles Commission did wholly thrust out the visible Worship which was set up
by Moses.

Therefore it was that Christ said unto Peter, I have given thee the keys of
heaven and of hell, that is, thou shall be a Preacher of the Gospel, which is
the Kingdom of Heaven, and so thou shall open the gates of Heaven unto all
those that shall believe in thy Declaration: Also thou shall have the true
interpreta^ion of the Law of Mo^es, which shall open the gate of hell unto all
those persecuting Jews which were under the Law of Moses, at that time when the
Commission of the Apostles was in being.

So likewise it is with this Commission of the Spirit, because this Commission
of the Spirit does hold forth no visible nor external outward Worship, as the
other two Commissions did.

But as it is the Commission of the Spirit, therefore there is no outward nor
visible Worship to be used in it, but that invisible and spiritual Worship
only, which is to worship God in spirit and truth; which spiritual Worship
does consist in the knowledge of the true God, and the right Devil, upon which
the foundations of the other two Commissions both stand upon, which no man in
the world at this day does, or can know, but this Commission of the Spirit
only, and those which come to understand, and to believe the truth of this
Commission.

Much more might be said in this thing, but it would be too large an Epistle;
therefore my counsel and advice unto you that do believe, or shall come to
believe in this last spiritual Commission, is, that you would seriously read
and peruse this Book, called, A Divine Looking-Glass, though it has been much
slighted and disregarded because of the abuse that it did receive in the
Press, yet there is contained in it the most highest mysteries of all, which
have not been revealed since the world began, until now.

But I having occasion for to reprint it again, have read it over with much
serious deliberation, and finding in it such variety of matter, with such deep
profound mysteries, which could not be declared but by the unerring Spirit of
God which was given unto John Reeve; so that I hope that you that have received
some light in your understandings concerning the mystery of the true God, and
the right Devil, upon the knowledge of which does depend many other heavenly
Mysteries which is treated upon in this Book, which I do desire, and shall be
glad that you may increase and grow in the knowledge of them so, that you may
be satisfied in the full assurance of Faith while you are here, and your
knowledge perfected in glory hereafter.

By Lodowick Muggleton.
The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THere being but few Errors in this book by the mistake of the Press, and
therefore not worth the reciting of every particular literal fault, I shall
only advertise thee of some escapes which may (perhaps) impede the sense, viz.
chap 18. ver. 31. read without. chap. 33. ver 5. for of read or. chap. 38. ver
37. for visible, read invisible. chap. 39. ver. 33. for impossibly, read
impossible. These being the most material, you are desired to correct with the
pen, the other every ordinary capacity may understand without amendments.

Farewell.
A DIVINE LOOKING GLASS.
CHAP. I.
1 From whence all Writings proceed. 2 A necessity of extraordinary light to
satisfy or silence curious Questions. 3 The names of the two last W^tnesses,
and the time of their Call. 4 The highest Queries concerning the eternal estate
of mankind. 5 Of the Form and Nature of God from all eternity, who continually
increases. 6 The person of God is the object of true Faith. 7 No reason in
God. 8 The purest reason in man cannot understand the Scriptures.

MY beloved Brethren, you know that all speakings or writings are either
natural or spiritual, and that of necessity they proceed from their several
heads of divine inspiration, or humane imagination.

2 Moreover (...) know also, that a man had need be endued with an
extraordinary light to satisfy or silence curious Questions concerning things
which are eternal.

3 Dear friends, I John Reeve being a poor Layman (so called) upon a
Declaration that the Most High from the Throne of his Glory, spoke unto me in
the year 1651. you may be sure since that, the propounding of nice Questions
have not been wanting unto me, and my Spiritual Companion Lodowick Muggleton,
both from the strong and the weak.

4 Amongst the rest, not many months past, a friend of mine being somewhat
troubled in mind, was moved to propound these high Queries.

Whether any creature was formed of purpose for eternal sufferings?

Or whether it would not have been as advantageous for the Creators glory, to
have formed all creatures for eternal happiness, as otherwise?

Or if any creature was made to be a vessel of wrath, to show forth the
prerogative Royal of its Creator, wherein is that creature blameworthy of sin
or evil, which through a secret decree could not possibly avoid it?

Or whence came that sin or evil into the spirits of man or angel, if they were
pure in their first creation?

My Christian Brethren, these curious Queries will occasion variety of
spiritual matter, yea and it will further me also to treat upon the original of
all heavenly secrets. Wherefore in answer to these difficult queries, I shall
write of several things of most highest consequence unto mankind; namely,
concerning the Glorious Creator himself, and the original cause that moved the
Divine Majesty to produce any creature sensibly to live in his sight, and of
the creation of the true God, and of the imaginary lying creation in the spirit
of sinful man, and whence it came. Also of the creation of Angels before man,
with the materials and manner of it.

5 I confess I have been moved briefly to touch upon most of these things to
the public view of many already, but now through assistance of the unerring
Spirit, I shall handle them more fully, in removing many obstructions in the
way, and for more clearer satisfaction unto the true spiritual Christian, and
confutation of all fleshly lying Antichristians whatsoever.

6 First, by immediate inspiration from the Holy Spirit, I posi^ively aff^^m
against all Naturalists under heaven, that there is a Creator.

7 Secondly, with the same confidence I affirm against men or angels, that this
our God from (...) Eternity, was an uncreated spiritual person, in form like a
man.

8 Thirdly, from the same spirit, I declare that that blessed God-man Christ
Jesus so exalted throughout the true Scriptures, was, and is that eternal
Creator beforesaid.

9 Fourthly, I declare against all literal-mongers in this world, that this our
Creator and gracious Redeemer was only one immortal, undivided personal God-man
from all eternity, and in time, and to all eternity.

10 Fifthly, I declare from the holy Spirit, that the addition of two persons
more unto this our only wise God, blessed for ever, proceeded only from the
old Serpentine Antichristian devil in carnal men.

11 Moreover, as for those words of Father, Son, and Spirit, or Lord Jesus
Christ, or any other divine titles in Scriptures, you may know that they are
only variety of names to set forth the infinite Godhead glory of the Creators
person.

12 Again, I declare from the Spirit of truth, that from all Eternity, the
Creators person was of a sun-shining fiery glory of sensible heavenly motion,
light, heat, voice, and speech, and his divine person was swifter then thought.

13 Moreover all variety of divine excellencies, as a crystal Sea, did
infinitely reign in his heavenly person: as namely, Pure Spiritual Faith, his
Almighty Power, or heavenly Love, his ravishing Glory, or any other divine
virtue that can be named.

14 Thus you that are truly spiritual, may undoubtedly know, that from all
Eternity, the Creator possessed his heavenly joys or new glories by himself
alone, when no created being sensibly appeared to behold his excellent Majesty.

15 By true in^piration from the holy spirit, I positively affirm, that the
principal motion of all variety of heavenly wisdom, joy, or glory, which the
Creator foresaw he should eternally possess, naturally sprang in him from an
incomprehensible knowledge of his own endless infiniteness;

16 Or from a perfect understanding of an eternal increase of all manner of
glorious excellencies to solace himself withal, and elect men and angels that
should be c^^^ted by him.

17 If the Creator should be an infinite formless spirit, as some men vainly
imagine, my spiritual brethren, you know then that it were impossible for any
spirit of man or angel, to be made capable of fixing his understanding upon any
such spiritual Creator.

18 You know that no man can describe the form of an invisible spirit, whether
it be finit, or infinite, unless it be covered with a body or person.

19 Moreover you know also, that no man or angel can be made able in the least
to comprehend the nature of any spirit whatsoever that wants a distinct body or
person of its own to inhabit in.

20 Therefore you cannot but understand that the Creator of mankind, must
needs be a substantial glorious person, and not a nonsubstantial formless
spirit as beforesaid.

21 Again, notwithstanding every divine virtue in the Creators person be
infinite, yet by inspiration from his own spirit, I positively affirm, that
there was never any kind of reason in him.

22 Wh^^ever the learned men of this world have ^ong imagined concerning pure
reason, being the divine nature of God, they are utterly dark concerning a true
understanding of the Creators divine nature or personal glory in the least.

23 I declare from the true God, that all those men that call pure Reason Gods
divine nature, if they und^rstand no other light before ^^ath seize on them,
they shall find their imaginary reason nothing else but a dark tormenting
fiery devil of burning envy in their own bodies at the great day, even against
the Creator himself, and his elect men and angels for everlasting.

24 For this I say from the Lord, unto you that are spiritual, the very nature
of reason though it be never so pure, is nothing else but mere desire:
therefore you may know, that if the Creator himself should have any desire in
his spirit, there would be a kind of want in him;

25 For if his nature be all variety of heavenly satisfaction in it self, as it
is, what rational desire can find place in such an infinite fullness of Divine
Glory?

26 Moreover my spiritual Brethren, what is the principal ground of all
Antichristian darkness in the spirits of Solomon-like men, in reference to a
right understanding of the Creator and his divine nature, is it not because
they think to appreh^nd the true God, by a false light, which they vainly call
pure reason?

27 What is this which worldly men call pure reason? is it any thing else but
that proud angelical serpent devil in them, which by its own natural strength
continually strives to find out the tree of eternal life, that they may cure
themselves of their deadly wounds of soul, arising from all their spiritual and
fleshly rebellions against God and man?

28 Again, does the true understanding of the Creator run in the line of pure
reason, or pure faith in the Scriptures?

29 Is there any saying in Scripture, that Gods divine Nature is pure reason,
or by pure reason we know the true God, or any thing that is spiritual? Indeed
I have read Scriptures that say, By faith the Apostles knew the worlds were
made; and by faith they knew their mortal bodies should be raised immortal
bodies at the great day of the appearing of Christ in his glory; but as
beforesaid, I never read or heard any spiritual wise man say, that the
invisible things of eternity were understood by man's pure reason, no nor Angels
that behold the glorious Creator face to face. It is written, With thee is the
well of Life, and in thy light shall we see light. It is also written, That men
were partakers of the Divine nature, and that Abraham beli^ved God and it was
imputed to him for righteousness; and by faith men were justified before the
Creator, and in their own spirits: And that without faith it was impossible to
please God. Furthermore it is written, That faith is the gift of God.

30 In these Records, and many more such like, you see the Scritures takes no
notice of the word pure reason, by which men could know any thing of the true
God, or of his heavenly secrets at all.

31 Therefore I would fain know whether those men that call pure reason the
Divine Nature, are fit to interpret Scriptures, or to bear the name of
Gospel Ministers; but I will leave them at present to him that will discover
them soon enough to their costs.

CHAP. II.
1 What the substances of Earth and Water were from eternity. 2 A great secret
revealed concerning Death and Hell. 3 Concerning the Heavens above. 4 Earth and
Water not eternally glorious. 5 The residence of the Creator. 6 Earth and Water
uncreated substances.

A Gain in the next place, by inspiration from the unerring Spirit, I
positively affirm, that the substances of Earth and Water were from all
eternity in the Creators presence, uncreated, senseless, dark, dead matter, like
unto water and dust, that have no kind of life, or light, or virtue in them at
all.

2 Also I declare from the Holy Spirit, that darkness, death, or devil and hell
lay secretly hid in that earth above this perishing Globe, and in the sight of
the Creator were eternally naked and bare, both in their root and in their
fruit.

3 Again I declare from the true Light of Life Eternal, that that world or
kingdom where the Creators glorious person is visible, is a place or throne
infinite in length, b^eadth or height, answerable unto an infinite Majesty:

4 Moreover, for your information that are spiritual, from the true God I
declare, that in this heavenly City there is no Firmament, Sun, Moon, nor
Stars; so that you may understand that is an infinite open place for Divine
personal ascending or descending at pleasure, only under foot is fixed a
spiritual earth, and a crystal sea.

5 Furthermore, you that are spiritual may know that it stands to very good
sense, that an infinite Majesty cannot be confined to a finite world or kingdom
as this is, I mean when he possesses the throne of immortality as at this
time, or before he became a body of unspotted flesh.

6 Again, concerning that glorious earth and crystal sea aforesaid, I would
not have you to think that I mean it was eternally so, but after, or in the
finishing of the creation of Angels, and variety of other creatures, the
infinite virtue of the Creators word produced that crystal spirituality in
them, that both visible as well as invisible, every thing or creature appointed
to abide in the presence of the Divine Majesty, might be all glory in their
kind and measure, answerabl^ to the unmeasurable variety of unspeakable glory
in the Creator himself.

7 My spiritual brethren, you know that it is an opinion of the Learned, that
those substances Earth and Water aforesaid, were not eternal; but they have
long imagined that the Creator spoke the word, and so they came to be, and
after he had given them their being, he formed all things that were made out of
them.

8 My beloved brethren, you may know that this must needs be an error, because
you know that the word Create, is to make formless dead matter into sensible
living forms.

9 Besides this, you know, as for creating of those elements of water or dust,
there is no Scripture makes mention of any such thing, therefore a mere
imagination; but more of this in the 6. Chapter.

10 Again you know, that from eternity the divine nature of the Creators spirit
was nothing but immortal fiery glory of life and light: It is written, God is
light, and in him there is no darkness at all. and it is written in Genesis 1. And
darkness was upon the deep.

11 My Brethren, if the Creator be all life and light, as you know he is, then
without controversy the dead earth and dark deep water never proceeded out of
his glorious mouth: but if that Scripture should be objected where it is said,
I create light, and I create darkness, to that I answer: The mind of the holy
Spirit in those words was this: that he created those souls that were naturally
dark, and he created these mortal spirits that were full of immortal light: but
on the contrary there was not the least meaning in those words or any other
throughout the Scriptures, that God created or gave any being or beginning unto
dead, dark, senseless earth and water, as aforesaid.

12 Whatever men vainly imagine the Creator to be, if they shall conclude there
was nothing eternal but God only, if they acknowledge the Creator to be some
glorious thing which is incomprehensibly infinite, then I would fain le^rn of
those wise men, where the glorious Creator was resident, when he gave a being
to earth and water? If they shall say unto me, that he was incapable to be in
any one place because he was every where; As to that, I cannot understand which
way the Creator should be every where, or any where at all, if he had no place
or habitation to abide in, neither finite nor infinite.

13 God being all light, life, joy, and glory in himself from eternity, is it
not against all divine or humane light that is not unreasonable, that ever
those da^k, dead elements of earth and water, should have their original from
his glorious spirits, because their natures are so contrary, that it was
impossible that they should proceed from one another: for alas, what is death
or darkness? Is it not through the absence of life or light? And is not life
being overcome by death, absolutely become death and darkness, or utter silence
for a moment?

14 Again, if light and darkness, or life and death meet together, is there any
peace or agreement between them, until life be swallowed up by death, or death
be swallowed up into life?

15 If th s be so, the which no sober man can gainsay, then without
controversy earth and water were uncreated substances eternally distinct from
the God of glory, because the Scripture says, and darkness covered the face of
the deep.

CHAP. III.
1 Of the Angels. 2 Their Form and Nature. 3 Out of what they were made: 4 The
Serpent which tempted Eve. 5 The Cause why any creature was formed. 6 Who are
partakers of the Divine Nature. 7 No created being capable of the essence of
God, to dwell in it.

A Gain, from the true light of life I affirm, that the Angels were the first
sensible living beings formed by the Creator.

2 I declare also, that the angelical host were all produced by his word
speaking into that dust without or above this visible heavens.

3 Moreover I positively affirm from the same light, that all the Angels in the
heavenly throne aforesaid, are persons in forms like men, and not bodiless
spirits, as the Learned have long declared, and the nature of their angelical
spirits are pure reason only,

4 From the God of all truth I declare, that that Serpent which tempted Eve
unto evil, was one of those Angels of light.

5 Moreover, that Serpent Angel was more wise or God-like in his creation then
all the elect angels of glory, for the most wise God in this may be likened to
a wise earthly prince, that for the manifestation of his royal pleasure,
ex^lteth that ^ubject to the highest dignity, which he has secretly decreed to
the highest disgrace.

6 Thus it was with the glorious Creator, who foreknowing that his prerogative
Royal would compel him to create this angelical reprobate, in reference to his
divine Justice, therefore for the manifestation of his most glorious power unto
his elect men and angels, his wisdom saw it most fit to endue him with more
piercing rational wisdom and brightness of person, then all his angelical
companions, because he was decreed to the greatest shame and pain, as aforesaid.

7 And not only so, but also because the elect Angels should admire their
Creators wisdom and power, when they should see the outcast condition of the
highest created glory, and be filled with new declarations of honor, praise,
and glory unto the divine Majesty, for his free electing love toward them,
through which they were ensured eternally to reign in their created purity.

8 Again, from the true light of life, I positively affirm, that there was but
only one reprobate Angel created at the first, which is fully cleared in this
Book.

9 Moreover, you spiritual ones may understand that if the most merciful
Creator could possible have known any other way for the manifestation of his
divine excel (...) unto men and angels, I say you may be confident he would
never have created any thing on purpose for eternal suffering.

10 Furthermore, can you possibly imagine or think that the most gracious and
wise Creator would ever have suffered the nature of any creature to become
rebellious against himself, for the occasioning of such mavelous transactions
in this world, and suffering both of God, Angel and man, if he could have
possessed his in^^nite glory, in the creating of every thing unto eternal
pleasures.

11 Again, if dust and water were etern^l ^ubstances distinct from the Crea^or,
it being dark and dead matter, it could not produce any kind of life at all of
it self, but was brought forth into life by another.

12 Wherefore it may be queried by some, what was that which entered into dust
and brought forth angelical bodies to live in the Creators presence? was it any
thing else but that spiritual life or divine nature of God himself?

13 Unto this curious Quere from the true light of life I answer, that neither
the spirit of angels, nor any other creatures were formed of the divine nature,
but the souls of Adam and Eve only.

14 But they were created of variety of spirits to one another, and to the
Creator also, yet they were all purely created and in a sweet harmony with each
other, and their Creator also, even so long, and no longer, then they abode in
their created purity.

15 Again by inspiration from our Lord Jesus Christ, I affirm, that the
unsearchable wisdom of the most high God, was secretly hid in the infinite
power of his word speaking only.

16 So that it was the foreknowledge of his own mighty power, which was one of
the principal grounds that moved him to produce and living creature in his
presence.

17 Wherefore before any creature was formed by him, if he had not perfectly
known that of those aforesaid elements of dust or water by his word speaking
only, he could create as many several spirits, with bodies suitable to their
natures, as he saw good, and yet wholly retain the divine nature of his spirit
to himself, he would never have formed any creature to have lived in his sight:

18 Because then, you know, there would have been no distinction of natures or
names between the creatures themselves and the Creator, nor none of the variety
of his infinite wisdom, power, and glory, ever seen or known by the creatures;

19 For you that are spiritual may understand, that the Creators Royal will or
pleasure, was that glorious wheel that moved him to form any creature at all.

20 Therefore you may also know, that it was impossible for him to create the
spirits of Angels and man to be both of the nature of his own spirit, or
neither of them to be of his divine nature, because as aforesaid, the variety
of his wisdom, power, and glory, would have been all lost for want of
distinction.

21 Moreover, if angels and man had been both of Gods divine nature in their
creation, then in stead of their being capable to be transmuted into a higher
or lower condition at the divine pleasure of the Creator, would they not rather
have been unchangeable Creators, then changeable creatures?

22 Therefore the most wise and holy Creator, that he might prevent all that
might impede his divine purpose, he created the bodies of angels spiritual, and
their natures rational, and he made the body of the man Adam natural, and his
soul spiritual:

23 For if their spirits and bodies had been both of the divine nature, then it
would have been impossible for them to be capable of any change, of sin or
evil, or consent to evil in them, no more than the Creator himself.

24 Where then had been all the wonderful transactions of his glorious Majesty,
or what would have been formed but Creators only in stead of creatures, as
aforesaid?

25 Again, because of our weak comprehension in the deep things of God, I shall
speak something by way of imagination only, which is as follows:

26 Suppose the most high God should have created both angels and men all
glorious like himself, and eternally so to remain, yet those created beings
could not possibly be the divine essence of his Godhead spirit, but only a
created light of sensible life of divine joys proceeding from the eternal
spirit, by virtue of words speaking through his heavenly mouth into those
elements beforesaid.

27 Because you may know, that the uncreated Essence or Godhead spirit of an
infinite Majesty, was utterly incapable to be conveyed into a finite created
being; for infiniteness is only capable of its own glorious center:

28 So that you that are truly spiritual may understand, that after the Angels
were formed into living bodies, the divine Majesty and those created beings,
were become distinct in their essences for everlasting;

29 That the angels by apparent sight of their Creators face, might know
themselves to be but creatures, and subject to the divine pleasure of him that
made them.

30 Moreover, from the true light of the Holy One of Israel I affirm, that the
elect Angels of eternal glory had no certain knowledge of continuing in their
created purities, until the Lord had discovered the reprobate angel unto them.

31 It is written, that he made all things for his own glory, and the wicked
for the day of wrath.

32 My beloved spiritual brethren, you know that the heavenly nature of the
divine Majesty, is nothing else but all variety of glorious excellencies.

33 Also you know that the Creators spirit being variety of spiritual
perfections, he could create nothing against his glory, but for his glory
only, because that glory of his is himself, or his all in all, or only pillar
upon which he built his everlasting kingdom;

34 Wherefore if angels or man had been framed in unchangeable conditions, then
in stead of making known his manifold divine glories to his creatures, he must
have created things for his own eternal ruin.

35 For if such a thing could possibly have been, in stead of being creatures,
as aforesaid, they would all have been Creators; and being unchangeable, it
could not possibly be avoided, but they must all have shared in, or of the
Creators unchangeable glory also.

36 Moreover, if the Holy One of Israel should be divided into three divine
Persons, as many men blindly imagine, then you know that being all eternal,
they must of necessity be equal in Godhead, wisdom, power, and glory: A
kingdom thus divided cannot stand.

37 For you that are truly spiritual know, that all the true Prophets in the
time of the Law did never acknowledge any more Gods then that Holy One of
Israel only, and by inspiration they attributed many holy Names unto his
divine Majesty, for the exaltation of his glorious person, above all angels and
men.

38 Moreover, you know that in Scriptures it is written, That the Holy One of
Israel will not give his glory to another.

39 Therefore what ever men vainly dream of a Creator, or God, or three
Persons, or of a bodiless infinite Spirit, yet unto us that are heirs of
eternal glory, there is but one only wise God, Creator, Redeemer, and alone
Everlasting Father, which is our Lord Jesus Christ in one blessed body of flesh
and bone glorified.

CHAP. IV.
2 Of the Angels further. 2 Of the nature of pure Reason. 3 Of the divine
Nature. 4 Wherein they differ. 5 The Angels were under the Moral Law which was
written in their natures. 6 The Creator above all Law. 7 A necessity of
supplying the Angels with continual Revelations from the Creator. 8 He that was
above all Law, made himself under the Law, by becoming flesh. 9 Who is
Antichrist. 10 No joy in God without a form. 11 Death an Enemy to all kind of
life in God, angels, and men.

BEfore I treat of the first appearance of sin or evil in the reprobate angel,
I shall speak of the creation of angels by a compari^on.

2 Suppose a man should speak words unto dry dust of sand distinct from his
person, and before he spoke unto that senseless Chaos he did perfectly know or
believe in himself, that out of that dead dust, his very wo^ds would produce so
many several sensible living bodies in his sight, though those words proceeded
from the soul of the man.

3 Yet you may know that they were not the essence of the man's spirit, but
only a powerful influence of speech or words spoken through his mouth, for
manifesting the variety of his natural wisdom, power, or glory, over the words
which he had spoken.

4 Moreover you know, that a man with great ease might spare a few words
without any trouble of mind in reference to what use he saw fit to employ them,
they being his own workmanship; can any sober man deny this man's p^erogative
pleasure with his own? I trow not.

5 This was the Creators very case in the matter of creation, and who dares to
speak against it? No spiritual wise man I am sure, only some lustful persons
may dispute against it, though it be contrary to their own reason when it is
sober.

6 But deeds of darkness hate the light, and can do no otherwise: and those
that live in the light are made to abhor all deeds of darkness or vain disputes
against the Creators Royal will or righteous ways.

7. Thus you which are truly spiritual may understand, that neither the spirits
of angels, no nor of the man Adam himself, was of the divine essence in their
creation. It Is truth, the soul of Adam was of the very nature of the spirit of
God, but it was a created nature or virtue which brought forth its pure natural
body as its house or tabernacle of abode; so that as the body had a beginning
of dust, through which it was capable of change:

8 So likewise when that divine soul was covered with an earthly temple, it was
capable of mutability, though it proceeded from an immutable glory.

9 But on the contrary, though the spiritual bodies of angels had beginning
also, yet they were not subject to change, but their spirits not being of the
divine nature of him that made them, was wholly subject to mutability.

10 For the angels spirits were pure reason as aforesaid, and what is the
nature of the most purest reason, is it any thing else but all pure desires?
And what is the original of the most purest or perfect desire that is? Is it
not a want of so^ething that is desired, or a kind of unsatisfaction until its
desire be satisfied from some thing that is not inherent in it self?

11 Again my spiritual brethren, is it possible, think you, that there should
be the least motion of the most purest desire that is in the nature of that
spirit which is all fullness of divine satisfaction in it self?

12 Or is it possible that that spirit that has any desire in its nature,
should enjoy fullness of content in it self?

13 Wherefore though the holy God created that angelical reason of all pure
desire, let no spiritual wise man call it his divine nature.

14 Why? because you know there can be no kind of desire in the nature of that
immortal God that is all variety of glorious satisfaction in it self, as
beforesaid.

15 But let him know from the true light of life, that the Creator by his
infinite wisdom or power from a word speaking unto dust, could create, yea and
did make diverse living creatures, and yet not one motion of the natures of
those created beings was inherent in his heavenly spirit.

16 Therefore you that are possessed with that new and true divine birth from
the immortal throne, may know that the spirits of elect angels are not in the
least of any part of the glorious natures of his spirit; but only a created
rational spirit of all pure desires, which was not only become distinct from
his divine nature now it possessed its personal living being in it self;

17 But was also in its non being in the foreknowledge of the Creator
eternally distinct from his undesiring nature of all spiritual glories secretly
hid in its own dark senseless elements as beforesaid, only by a powerful word
it was commanded to appear and manifest it self in its own creaturely condition.

18 Again, some may say unto me, Were the angels under any Law in their
creation? From the unerring spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, to this I answer:
All the angels were equally created under one Law, the which moral Law was
written in their angelical natures, motioning in them that all obedience was
properly due unto their Creator which had made them such mavelous creatures.

19 Again, you that are spiritual may know, that no created being was capable
to be formed in a lawless condition:

20 Why? because there is nothing incapable of being made under a law from
another, but that divine being only which was eternally in or from it self.
You may also know that those very words of creation or creatures, includes a
Creator, and a command of all obedience due unto him.

21 Also you know that no creature could acknowledge any kind of obedience to
be due unto a God, unless he were guided thereunto by (...) light or law from
him that formed him.

22 My spiritual brethren, from the divine voice of God himself, I affirm that
the uncreated Godhead it self is unto the created beings of angels or men
either a law of perfect faith and pure burning love in them toward God and man
unto life eternal;

23 Or else a fiery Law of unbeleeving burning envy them against God, elect
men, and angels, unto death eternal.

24 Not that any sin or evil could possibly proceed from the holy spirit of the
Creator into the nature of the cr^atures, either in his creating of them, or
after they were formed by him.

25 You know that was impossible; because his divine nature in it self is
nothing else but all variety of ravishing purities to himself, or elect men, or
angels.

26 Moreover you spiritual ones may know, that though the spirits of angels
were created perfectly pure in their kind and measure, yet if they were not
continually ^^pplied with inspirations from that divine glory which gave them
their beings, in stead of continuing in their angelical brightness, their
spirits would become nothing else but a bottomless pit of imaginary confused
darkness of aspiring wisdom above the Creator:

27 For the elect angels spirits being only pure reason, the very nature of
them is to desire after the knowledge of that incomprehensible glory which gave
them their beings, and it is the variety of his divine excellencies flowing
into their desiring natures, which is that heavenly food that is prepared for
their eternal preservation.

28 My beloved brethren, if you look into the first Epistle of St. Peter, you
may see that the elect angels are of a desiring or prying nature into the
secret mysteries of our God, when he manifested himself on this earth in a body
of flesh, the words are these: Searching when or what time the spirit which
testified before of Christ, which was in them, should declare the sufferings
that should come unto Christ and the glory that should follow, the which things
the angels desire to behold.

29 Furthermore, I am persuaded in my spirit, the the forming of angels was not
very long before the creating of Adam and Eve.

30 Because you know that the elect angels were not only made for the personal
society of the Creator in his heavenly throne or kingdom of Glory, but they
were appointed also for ministering spirits unto the heirs of salvation in this
world, according to that in the first of the Hebrews.

31 Moreover, you that are spiritual may undoubtedly know, that it was utterly
unpossible for man or angels, to be void of all Law in their creation.

32 Because the Creator himself became subject to his own law, when his divine
Godhead was transumted into pure manhood.

33 It Is truth, that the uncreated eternal God was above all Law, and so
incapable of any ki^^ of Law before he descended from his infinite glory into
the womb of a woman.

34 But that he might be capable of the condition of a servant, for the
manifestation of this his infinite wisdom, power, and glory, in a body of flesh
unto elect men and angels, therefore he transmuted his unchangeable Godhead
into the likeness of sinful mortals for a season, that he might become the
heavenly pattern of perfect obedience to his own Law, in the visible sight of
elect men and angels.

35 And that from thence by virtue of his sufferings at the hands of cursed
Canaanites, he might also become a purchaser from himself of a twofold infinite
ravishing glory to himself, and elect men and angels, the which his spiritual
body was incapable of, until it became suffering flesh, blood and bone.

36 Therefore whosoever says, that any other body ascended into glory, but
that very same body of flesh and bone that suffered death upon the Cross, he is
an Antichrist, and in utter spiritual darkness, let him be the perfectest
literalist, or naturalist in the whole world.

37 Moreover, you that are truly spiritual do know, that it was utterly
impossible that heaven and earth with all the wonderful works in them, should
be from eternity, as godless Atheists would vainly imagine, because they cannot
attain to know what the holy One of Israel is by their own natural reason:

38 For alas, if no mortal man can give a being to one hair of his head, though
he be Lord of all other creatures under the Sun, how should he possibly be from
eternity?

39 I hope these overwise men will not say, that men were brought forth by
Earth, Air, Water, Fi^e, Sun, Moon, Stars, or any such like weak means as those
are: because the spirit of man far exceeds all such creatures.

40 You may know that though those creatures have life in them according to
their kind, yet man being a sensible living soul to it self, and being capable
in some measure to comprehend the nature of those creatures aforesaid, must of
necessity be a more eminent living being then they all.

41 For alas, you know though the Sun, Fire, Water, Wind, or Air, are powerful
in their natures, often times destroying mankind, yet when they have done it,
they are no way capable in themselves of any sensible joy or sorrow for what
was done by them, no more then the stones in the street;

42 Therefore seeing all these creatu^^s were formed for man's use, and are in
measure known by man, and yet are all incapable of any sensible knowledge of
themselves or of man either: and seeing no man by his natural reason can
perceive how any spirit bring forth its own body unto matu^ity, neither how it
by degrees passes away into its dust or non-being again, nor no creatures
worth naming, were ever seen by men to have a beginning in any other way but
that of generation only.

43 How can any ration I wise man possibly imagine or think, that man or any
other living forms should ever appear to be without a glorious Creator to give
them their be^ngs at the first?

44 Furthermore my spiritual Brethren, can any of you be so weak after a sober
consideration, to imagine or think that a formless God gave being to all these
mavelous living forms?

45 How is it possible for that which has no distinct form or person of its
own, to create any kind of living form at all?

46 What though the spirit of our blessed Creator and gracious Redeemer be
infinite, can it possibly enjoy and kind of sensible life, light, or glory,
unless it has a distinct body or person of its own to possess it in?

47 Again, though many seeming wise m^n for want of true divine faith, do
imagine the Lord to be a vast spirit, yet you know that when they are moved to
speak of a Creator, they usually say that the eternal being is an
incomprehen^^ble infiteness of variety of divine glories: as namely, wisdom,
says, love, patience, meekness, righteousness, with all spiritual excellencies.

48 My spiritual brethren, if the Creators nature be all variety of divine
virtues, and every qualification in him be infinite, how can those divine
glories be sensible of their own being, or incomprehensible blessedness, unless
they possess a distinct body of their own to possess that glory in? yea a
transcendent heavenly body, answerable unto an unutterable spiritual glory.

49 For alas, you know that no finite living being can possibly be capable to
possess divine virtues which are infinite and live:

50 You know that mortality and ^n^inite immortality cannot continue together.

51 Therefore you may understand, that that pure light which shines in our
dark spirits, though it be called the divine nature or spirit of an infinite
Majesty, yet it is not infinite nor immortal in us:

52 But it is a heavenly light or virtue in us, changed into a condition of
pure mortality, that it might instruct a mortal sinful soul concerning immortal
things which are eternal.

53 For you experimental ones know, that if that light of life enjoyed by us
were immortal and eternal in us, then it were impossible that we should be
capable of any kind of misery or mutability in the least.

54 Therefore you may know also, that the greatest light in sinful man is but
an inspired motion into the man's spirit, to purify the lying imagination or
impure reason in the soul of that man, that he may be capable to understand
that the Creator has a purpose to crown him with unchangeable personal glory
at the great day.

55 But as for those men which dream of a condition of possessing an
unchangeable glory in this being through an essential oneness with an infinite
Majesty, they are in the depth of spiritual darkness, concerning a right
understanding of the Creator of his heavenly ways in man.

56 Moreover you spiritual ones may know, that though no man has any light of
life in him, but what he has received from an unchangeable glory, yet because
that vessel wherein this light does shine is a mortal sinner and must die,
therefore that heavenly light is made subject to mortality so.

57 Because the most high God by his unsearchable wisdom has decreed, that all
light of life in man shall become dead dust or earth for a moment, that in his
appointed season it may quicken again a new and glorious life out of death it
self, for the manifestation of his infinite wisdom, power, and ravishing glory,
unto elect men and angels.

58 Thus you that are truly spiritual may know, that though death be, and was
that King of fears, and enemy to all kind of life in God, men, and angels, yet
for a further increase of infiniteness of glory in the Creator, and finite
glory in elect men, and angels, it was his divine pleasure to make it as useful
in its kind, as life it self.

59 Though this truth will be the Judge of me, and all men at the last, yet I
expect but few to embrace it, through that endless opposition in man.

CHAP. V.
1 The cause of the Angels fall, and the fruit thereof. 2 The condition of the
elect Angels. 3 The spiritual nature of the fallen Angel remained, and what
names are g ven to h m. 4 An Objection, and the Answer concerning two vessels.
5 Of the ^allen Angel and Adam. 6 No distinction between God and the creaiure,
but by names and natures. 7 Election and Reprobation proved by diverse
Scriptures.

I^ the next place I shall write of the occasion of the downfall of the
angelical rep^obate, from that height of his created glory which he possessed
above all the elect angels: My beloved brethren in ^he pure truth, you know
that light of the holy spirit in the Creator breathing it self into my ignorant
soul, has abundantly remonstrated the distinction between the natures of God
and Angels aforesaid.

2 Moreover, you may remember I told you that the spirits of angels were pu^e
reason in their creation; and furthe^more you know, it is clearly proved that
the nature of the highest reason that ever was or possible can be, is nothing
el^e but mere desire.

3 Wherefore though the Creator gave it its rational being, yet unto you
spiritual ones, I made it appear, that in his glorious spirit not one motion of
reason was inherent.

4 Because where any desire is, though it be never so pure, it is a want of
something desired.

5 Therefore you know than an infinite fullness of divine perfections in its own
spirit, cannot possibly have any kind of want in it, therefore incapable of any
kind of desire in the least.

6 Because what it has a mind to do concerning it self, or any thing it has
made, you know it can do it to the utmost, and who can let it, or shall dare to
say in the day of his eternal account, why have thou made one vessel for
eternal glory, and another vessel for everlasting shame?

7 Wherefore my Christian f iends, you may know that the continuance of the
glory of the angelical reprobate being expired, the Creator only withheld the
inspiration of his divine glory from him, and immediately for want of that
spiritual meat to satisfy his desiring nature, his Godlike cre^^ed purity
became nothing else but imaginary impurities of secret aspiring desires above
the Creator.

8 So that his former pure reason was then become nothing but a loathsome sink
of unclean reasoning, concerning the true knowledge of the Creators being the
Creator, and the creatures being but creatures, and in stead of honoring the
Creator for his unsearchable wisdom, of forming out of a little dead ^ust, such
an innumerable host of elect angels for his Majesty's personal society,

9 At the blind bar of his lying imagination secretly he araigned all the
wisdom of the infinite God in creation, and condemned i^ as weakness it self,
in comparison of his imaginary wisdom, if he had been the Creator.

10 Again his angelical spirit being wholly out of all creaturely order and
being lifted up with the wisdom of his spirit and glory of his person, he
beheld both the wisdom and persons of all he elect angels, as simple uncomely
creatures, in comparison of him or his wisdom.

11 Moreover, conceiving himself most fit for divine Rule, and beholding
himself and the Creator together, he imagined his personal wisdom more capable
of a divine throne, then he which sat thereon.

12 Furthermore, he began to imagine a new creation of his own, for he thought
if he had bin the Creator, by a word speaking he could have formed more
glorious creatures then those angels were, without any dust or any other matter
whatsoever:

13 Or if he must have had some materials to form things withal, he imagined by
his word speaking or thinking only, he could have produced matter of a more
excellent nature for creation then a little dry dust, out of which he conceited
he could have created creatures all glorious, and yet have retained his divine
glory within himself distinct from them all.

14 Furthermore he imagined, that he could have created as many spirits as he
saw fit, without any bodies at all;

15 Or if he saw good, he could have formed spiritual bodies that might be
transformed into any other nature or form after he had created them, and not to
continue only in one nature and form always:

16 For he thought it want of wisdom or power in a Creator, yea and a veyling
of his infinite glory over the things which he had made, if they might not be
transmuted into any condition whatsoever, at his pleasure that formed them.

17 Wherefore in the midst of these and such l^ke creative con^usions, his
irrational wi^dom of imaginary impossibilities, so elevated his outcast
spirit, that secretly he utterly abhorred that the Creator, or any other
creatures should remain in being, unless he only might bear rule over them all.

18 Wherefore when the secret pride and envy of this angelical reprobate was at
that height of unthroning the Creator, or else a dissolution of all, then the
most wise God revealed his spiritual cruelties unto his holy angels, and
answerable unto what he would have done for a Creators throne, in the visible
sight of his elect angels, he condemned him to be cast out of his personal
presence, and heavenly throne or kingdom for everlasting;

19 And immediately like unto lightning, he was thrown down into this perishing
world, where his desired kingdom of godlike government was prepared for him,
and his lineal angels in another way:

20 And so having left their first estate, they are reserved in everlasting
chains of darkness or unbeleef, until the judgment of the great day, then to
give an eternal account of their divellish government over God elect righteous
Abels on this earth, which was so exalted by him in the highest heavens
beforesaid.

21 My beloved spiritual brethren, you may know that then, and not till then,
all the elect angels in glory were filled with variety of new spiritual praises
in their mouths, of honor, power, praises, glory, majesty, wisdom, council,
dominion, faith, love, mercy, patience, peace, meekness, justice,
righteousness, or any divine excellency that can be named to their glorious
Creator, for his electing free love unto them, eternally to abide in their
created purity, to behold his glorious face.

22 And for his wonderful wisdom in creating such angelical perfection, unto an
everlasting rejection of desperate burning envy in utter shame.

23 Moreover you which expect crowns of immortal glory may know that in the
downfall of the angelical reprobate, his spiritual form remained.

24 But the nature of his spirit was only changed as beforesaid, and so after
our first parents were deceived by him, answerable unto his filthy nature of
impure reason or lying imagination.

25 In Scripture Records you know, the Lord is pleased to call him by such like
titles as these; namely, Devil, a Dragon, an Enemy, a Wicked one, a Murderer, a
Liar, a Thief; an Envious man, an Hypocrite a Lucifer, a Beelzebub, or a Prince
of the Air, or Satan, or Reprobate, and such like.

26 O ye blessed ones of the most nigh God! with astonishing admiration it
behooves you not to flight, but seriously to ponder Gods wonderful wisdom in
the creating of angels and man: why? because in it is hid all spiritual secrets
which are appointed to be revealed to elect men and angels unto eternity.

27 Again, I humbly beseech you which have really been possessed with that
spiritual new birth of our Lord Jesus Christ in glory, is there any light, or
life, or love, or any kind of divine excellency in the glorious spirit of our
Creator,

28 Again, had he any power over himself, or over any creature which he had
formed, either to fill them with glimpses of his most excellent glory, or
wholly to retain them to himself?

29 If you grant him this his royal prerogative, the which no spiritual one can
possibly deny; then without all controversy, unless the most wise and holy
Creator had formed two vessels of several spirits to remain only for a season
in their created purity,

30 And at the decreed time leave them both to their own created strength, and
so withholding that heavenly Manna of divine inspiration from them both, by
which they stood, that in order to their charge they might unite their spirits
and bodies unlawfully together, for producing of two several generations of
mankind on this earth, for the manifestation of his ravishing glories unto the
one, and retaining the heavenly splendour of his divine excellencies wholly from
the other, for the demonstration of his divine justice, will, or pleasure;

31 Would not all his heavenly wisdom, divine power, or ravishing glory, have
been veiled from men and angels? And must they not either have been all
Creators, or creatures like unto senseless stocks or stones to all eternity, in
reference of any knowledge of the various wisdom, power, and glory of the
Creator, as abundantly beforesaid?

32 Again, in that pure distinguishing spirit of all divine truth, I humbly
beseech you which are delivered from the power of all natural, notional, or
literal witchcraft, and in the room thereof are endued with a good measure of
spiritual unders^anding in the things of eternity, can there possibly be any
distinction between the unchangeable Creator, and changeable creatures, without
variety of distinct natures and names, to manifest the difference between them?

33 As namely since the outcast condition of the angelical reprobate, and
fallen estate of the man Adam.

34 Can there now be any Creator or God at all, unless there be a devil, or
devils also?

35 Or can there be any light or life, and no darkness in death?

36 Or can there be any eternal immortal glory for some men, and no eternal
shame and misery for other?

37 Again, can any man from any kind of faith or truth possibly imagine or
think, that any one of these can be without the other?

38 Does not the one give an absolute being unto the other? Can any man
therefore think that if one of them should be dissolved, that the other could
continue to be?

39 Thus you which enjoys that true distinguishing light of eternal life in
you, may clearly see that immortal heaven or glory must of necessity be
essentially distinct from hell or shame, or else there can be no perfect heaven
or glory at all, and hell or misery must be essentially distinct from heaven or
glory, or else there can be no certain hell or misery at all.

40 Moreover, the glorious person of the divine Majesty himself, must of
necessity be essentially distinct from men, angels, heaven, earth, and all in
them, or el^e it were impossible that there should be any God or angels, men or
devils, heaven or hell, or any thing else besides, but accidental things,
proceeding from those four elements of earth, air, water, and fire, as all
filthy Atheists vainly and blindly imagine.

41 But my beloved spiritual brethren, you have not so learned Christ, or
received the truth of the ever-living Jesus into your innocent souls, to abide
in any such foolish darkness.

42 Wherefore for your confirmation chiefly is this Epistle written, that you
may be enabled to discern the lying notions, and fleshly voluntary wil^-worship
in man, contending against the secret decrees of the Holy One of Israel.

43 Furthermo^e, because many of the elect of God are as yet in bonds, by the
exceeding subtilty of many silver-roule merchants of this perishing world,
therefore I shall endeavor to confirm what is written from a clo^d of un-erring
Witnesses, my spiritual Brethren, the fo^mer true Prophets and Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ; wherefore it was sai^ by our God, which is Christ Jesus the
Lord, that heaven and earth shall pass away but his words shall not pass away.

44 Again it is written, That he made all things for his own glory, and the
wicked for the day of wrath. Also it is written, That Jacob was loved, and Esau
was hated, before they had done good or evil, that the purpose of God might
remain according to election; For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom
I will have mercy, and will have compassion on whom I will have compassion; So
then it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy. Further it is written, But O man, who art thou which pleadest
against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, wh^ have thou
made me thus? has not the Potter power over the clay, to make of the same lamp
one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? what if God would, to show his
wrath, and to make his power known, suffer with long pa^ience, the vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction, and that he might declare the riches of his
glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has p^epared unto glory, Rom 9. And
in Romans 8. it is thus written, Also we know that all things work together for
the b^st unto them that love God, even to them that are called of his purpose;
for those which he knew before, he also predestined to be made l^ke to the
image of his Son: moreov^r, whom he predestined, them also he called, and
whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he
glorified. Again in the first Epistle of Peter, it is thus written, Wherefore
also it is contained in the Scripture Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner
stone, elect and precious, and he that believes therein, shall not be ashamed:
unto you therefore which believe, it is precious; but unto them that be
disobedient the stone which the builders d^salowed, the same is made the head
of the corner, and a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to them
which stumble at the word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they were
even ordained: But ye are a chosen Generation, a royal Friesthood, an holy
Nation, a People set at liberty, that ye should show forth the virtues of him
that has called you out of darkness into his mavelous l^ght. Moreover, in
the Epistle of Jude are these word: For there are certain men crept in, which
were before of old ordained to this condemnation; ungodly men they are, which
turn the grace of God into wantoness, and deny God the only Lord, and our Lord
Jesus Christ: they are the raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own
shame* they are wandering stars, ^o wh^m is reserved the blackness of darkness
for ever. Again, For if God spared not the angels that had sinned, but cast
them down to hell and del^vered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto
d^m^ation what will become of all those ang^lical fleshly hypocr^tes which
bless themselves in their unrighteousness, and cursedly contend for it, even
against the holy God, elect men, and angels, and their own consciences, which
will become their eternal chief Accomptant in the great day.

45 Again, as a conclusion unto what is written aforesaid, I shall write
something concerning the Scriptures themselves.

46 My spiritual brethren, can you possibly think that those men as yet have
received the spiritual truth of the true God, which idolize the visible
Records, and worship them in stead of that holy Spirit in our Lord Jesus Christ
which spoke them?

47 Again, did ever any man attain to a true understanding of that Holy One of
Israel, by any endeavor whatsoever, from the bare letter of the Scripture?

48 It is written, The letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. Again it is
written, That the Scriptures are sufficient to make the man of God wise unto
salvation.

49 My brethren, can any man be a godly man, or a man of God, unless he has
the spiritual light of life eternal, to enable him to understand the mind of
God in the Records, and so believe unto immortality.

CHAP. VI.
1 Of the Scripture Records. 2 Of the ignorance of men that deifie or villifie
them. 3 The Prophets Prayer in the con^lusion.

IS there any testimony in Sc^iptures, that ever any man of God received the
true faith of the spiritual Jesus in him from the letter of the Scripture, or
could possibly know whether those literal Records proceeded from the wisdom of
God, or from the wisdom of prudent men only, unless he were inspired from that
spirit which spoke them? In the third of the Galatians it is thus written: O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth?
This only would I learn of you. Received ye the spirit by the works of the
Law, or by the hearing of faith preached? Are ye so foolish, that after ye have
begun in the spirit, ye would now be made perfect by the flesh?

2 My spiritual brethren, is it not a work of the flesh in man, which studies
day and night in the letter of the Scripture, to find out the spirit of God in
the letter?

3 Is it not a work of the flesh in man, which labors to reconcile Scriptures
of seeming contradiction, without a divine gift of the spirit?

4 Is not that man in the depth of spiritual darkness, which persuades his
hearers, that the Scriptures are easy and plain, in the very letter of them,
unto that man's reason that is laborious to know them?

5 Are not the Scriptures all matters of faith and very misterious, for the
most part, how then can any man comprehend spiritual mysteries which are
eternal, by his natural perishing reason?

6 Is not the most piercingst reason in man only natural? And can that which
is natural comprehend that which is spiritual?

7 Are they not as contrary as fire and water, or as light and darkness? How
then can any man by his natural reason, understand any thing that is spiritual?
It is written, But the natural man perceives not the things of God, because
they are spiritually discerned; but he that is spiritual discerns all things,
yet he himself is judged of no man. Again is is written, Now we have received
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are given to us of God, which things also we speak; not in the
words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual.

8 My beloved brethren, you may see that the Apostles came not to understand
spiritual things by their study in the writings of Moses and the Prophets, but
by a gift from the Holy Ghost they were enabled in a great measure to
comprehend the invisible things of God which they should enjoy in the
resurrection of the just.

9 Moreover you know, that the Apostle Paul before his conversion, was a very
able man in the letter of Moses and the Prophets, yea and according to the
letter blameless in his conversation, yet for all that in zeal toward an
unknown God, he persecuted the spirit of that letter through ignorance of that
second man, which was the Lord from heaven.

10 It Is truth, that when the Apostles preached the spiritual things of
eternity, they alluded unto Moses and the true Prophets, because some of those
mysteries were fore-prophesied of by them: but yet you may see that they were
not instructed in those heavenly things by virtue of their prophetical letter,
but as beforesaid, by inspiration from the holy spirit only.

11 Thus you that are spiritual may clearly see, that no man by his natural
reason and study in the letter of the Scripture, can ever be established in the
truth of those glorious things, unto which the letter bears record, unless he
has received a spiritual gift from that glorious God that moved holy men of
old to speak and write those Records of Truth.

12 Therefore you may be confident, that those men which ignorantly call the
Letter Spirit, as yet they are not acquainted with those spiritual teachings of
the things of God, which many of his elect do enjoy, that cannot read one
letter in the Bible: his divine Secrets are treasured up for the simple, and
the subtle learned Rationists are sent empty away.

13 My beloved spiritual brethren in the glorious things of eternity, though
men seemingly appear never so innocent in their way, is it probable think you,
that those men are immediately moved to speak unto the people by the spirit of
God, that slight all the Scripture Records as a thing of naught?

14 I humbly beseech you that are sober, can any man of what tongue or language
soever, speak or write a better, or as good a language as the Scriptures are,
and not speak Scripture words, or prove it was not the glorious God that moved
the holy men of old to speak or write these Scripture records?

15 Again, if the most desperatest man living, which says in his heart there
is no God, shall commit murder, or the like, and should escape the vengeance of
man's Laws for a season, yet he cannot possibly prevent the voice of that
spiritual Law within, crying for vengeance from that Law without him,
answerable to that within him.

16 Moreover, though natural wise men, as a nose of wax, produce those Records
to bear testimony unto all error whatsoever, yet you that are spiritual may
know, that the Scriptures themselves are words of pure truth, not having the
least error in them; but error proceeds only from that serpentine devil in
men, which take upon them to interpret the Scriptures without a spiritual gift.

17 Can any man that has the spiritual power of the Scriptures in him, be
offended with those Records which are witnesses of his innocent life, in the
faces of those carnal hypocrites, which for love of silver, or honor, prate of
them only, but secretly h^te all obedience to them.

18 Are not the literal Records a demonstration of the mind of the holy
spirit, unto the chosen of God, which have the light of life in some measure to
comprehend them?

19 Moreover, are not the te^chings of the blessed spirit more abundantly
consolate to him, if those heavenly breathings in him be harmonious with the
commands of our Lord Jesus Christ without him*

20 Can any man therefore which expects that eternal glory unto which these
Scriptures above all the writings in the world bear record, possibly despise
the letter, and yet love that Spirit from whence it came?

21 Again, give me leave to make one comparison, in reference to this matter?
Suppose two friends that loved each other as their own souls, had their
personal residence in several kingdoms, and one of them, as a testimony of his
real love before he passed away, left behind him a Book containing variety of
sweet expressions of friendship unto the other, until he come again; if that
man in the absence of his friend should burn that Book to ashes, in stead of
embracing it, is that any sign of love in him to his friend afar off?

22 Wherefore can any sober man imagine or think from any ground of truth, that
the eternal spirit of the true Jesus, upon any account, did ever command any
man to burn those Records, which are a Remonstrance of the wonderful spiritual
transactions of the most high and holy God since the world began, yea and
before this world was?

23 O Lord God of heavenly order, and not of earthly confusion, even for the
glory of thy dreadful names sake, deliver thy redeemed ones, not only from
exalting the literal Scriptures above the holy Spirit which spoke them, but
also from disputing against the mysteriousness of them;

24 Then no kind of natural witchcrafts, which bear the name of spiritual
power, shall have dominion over them for ever, but they shall patiently wait
for their change by a peaceable death; or being swallowed up of life, through
the appearing of our only God and Savior in the air, with his mighty Angels,
to reward every man according to his works.

25 Even so come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and make it manifest in the sight
of men and angels, whether thou have sent us, as we have declared, or no.

CHAP. VII.
1 Of the creation of the Firmament, Sun, Moon, and Stars, 2 Of the Earth in
the deep waters. 3 The meaning of the word Create. 4 Why the deep waters are
eternal. 5 By what the Firmament was formed. 6 How the Sun, Moon, and Stars
came. 7 Of the distinct and fixed bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. 8 The Sun
and Moon of contrary natures.

SEeing a right understanding of the mysteries of the true Creation or
Redemption, or any spiritual truth whatsoever, consists only in the knowledge
of him which gave them their beings, therefore by divine assistance in the next
place I shall treat again of that glorious Being, concerning whom there is, and
has been in this world such innumerable dark disputes.

2 My beloved brethren in the truth, you may remember that unto any sober man's
understanding it is cleared already, that earth and water were an eternal chaos
of confused matter, essentially distinct from the Creator.

3 Also you may remember, that out of those elements I have told you by
inspiration from an unerring spirit, that the Divine Majesty has created all
things that were made, into that heavenly order they appear to be, whether for
a time, or for eternity.

4 Moreover it is clear also, that without those eternal materials, was nothing
made that was made, neither possibly could be, only that serpentine devil in
the learned men of this world, have long imagined a confused creation of more
seeming wisdom, power, and glory, then that of the Creator, as abundantly
beforesaid.

5 Again, concerning the word Create, make or form, I shall write a little of
the sense of it.

6 My beloved brethren, the very true meaning of that word Create, is to
compose confused dead matter into complete living forms; or that word Create is
light and life, producing dark dead d^st or water, into sensible living beings;
or it is a powerful word proceeding from a glorious form of sensible light and
life, into a chaos of confused formless matter of senseless darkness and death,
and from thence producing variety of sensible living bodies, according to their
kind, for the demonstration of the Creators infinite wisdom, power, and glory,
in creation unto some of these living forms.

7 Again, seeing unlearned spiritual men wrest the Scripture to their own
destruction, therefore for our more cleerer understanding of the true Creator,
in order thereunto, I shall speak somewhat of the visible heavens, and the
lights formed in them for man's natural comfort, next unto the Creators glory.

8 My beloved spiritual brethren, you know concerning the deep waters
throughout the Scripture Records, no man can find one word or tittle in
reference to its beginning, therefore of necessity it must be eternal.

9 Likewise you know, that the waters covered the earth before the creation,
wherefore the earth being as it is in the deep waters, of necessity must needs
be one essence eternally with those deep waters aforesaid.

10 Therefore though it be said, In the beginning God created the heavens and
the earth, and the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the
deep, and the spirit of God moved upon the waters;

11 My spiritual brethren, you cannot be deceived by literal interpretations,
as to think that the deep waters might be eternal, but that lump of hid earth
within those waters had a beginning by the word of the Lord:

12 No, you know that is against all sober sense or reason it self, for if that
earth which was within the water proceeded from the word of the Lord, then the
dark deep water must of necessity have its beginning also at that time the
earth received its being, because in the lump they were essentially one.

13 Wherefore what ever man in darkness have dreamed, as to say that God
created all things of nothing, or that God created that confused chaos of water
and earth, it is so far from having any truth in it, that it is all one as if
they should say, there is no Creator at all, but earth and water, and such like
stuff as they are.

14 Again, by inspiration from an unerring spirit, I positively affirm against
men or angels, that the earth and the deep water were eternally one chaos of
confused matter distinct from the ever-living God.

15 And whereas it is said, In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth, that is, out of that matter of water and earth that were formless and
void, God did by a word speaking, create a formable world, as a place of
convenient residence for mortals to inhabit in.

16 I also declare from the holy Spirit, that God created no light nor darkness
at all without bodies;

17 Wherefore concerning those words, Then God said, Let there be light, and
there was light, that is, the spirit of God being all light, moving or speaking
into the deep dark waters, his word caused a light to appear throughout those
waters, to make a distinction between light, and that utter darkness that was
both in the deep water and the earth, enclosed as a prisoner in the womb of
darkness:

18 So that the Lord called this created light, Day; not only because it was
all darkness before, or that he did not purpose to form a more eminent natural
light then that was; but as aforesaid, an ordinary created light is worthy to
be called Day, as well as ordinary darkness is called Night.

20 Or you may know, that the very word Light signifies Day, as the word
Darkness signifies Night.

21 Likewise you know, that darkness was not darkness without its body;
therefore you may know, that light can be no light unless it be in a body also.

22 It is not the word Light, nor the word Darkness, is, or possibly can be any
thing at all, unless they be in distinct bodies, that they might become
absolute beings of light, or beings of darkness.

23 It is written, Aga^n God said, Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the
waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters.

24 My spiritual brethren, I declare from the holy Spirit, that this visible
Firmament called Heaven, was formed by the powerful word of the Creator, out of
those very waters, in which it is now fixed, to keep them asunder.

25 Moreover it is written, And God said, Let there be Lights in the Firmament
of the heaven to give light upon the earth, and it was so. God then made two
great Lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule
the night. He made also the Stars, and God set them in the firmament of heaven,
to shine upon the earth.

26 My spiritual brethren, whatsoever has been written formerly from men's
imaginations concerning the vastness of the bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
it arose in them from their utter darkness of that glorious Creator, from
whence all true light proceeds.

27 Wherefore from that Light by whom no man ever was deceived, in some measure
I shall demonstrate why the Lord called the Sun and Moon two great Lights, and
of that matter of which they were made.

28 My spiritual brethren, though the Sun, Moon, and Stars transcend each other
in glory, yet you may know that they were all created of that element of water,
and are distinct bodies of light fixed in the heavenly firmament.

29 I do not mean that they are so fixed, as to be incapable of motion; but of
the contrary from the Lord I affirm, that the Firmament it self is not capable
of motion, but by the word of the Lord that formed it, it is made unmovable
until the day of its dissolution, and those bodies of Sun, Moon, and Stars,
motions in that firmamental heaven in their seasons, to fulfill that word of
Government in them.

30 For you that are spiritual may know, that the firmament of heaven, and
those Rulers of Sun, Moon, and Stars set in them, as to govern both the day and
the night, may be compared to a Prince, with his Nobles, Throne, and other
inferior Rulers.

31 For you know, that his kingdom whereon they have their living being is
unmovable, but the Governors do the work unto which they are appointed.

32 My brethren, you may understand also, that the firmamental body above us,
or below us, if you think it so, for its appointed season, is as firmly fixed,
as the earth we tread on: and as things in power are motional on this earth, so
likewise those created lights are only motional in that heavenly body
aforesaid.

33 Again it is said, That God set them in the firmament of heaven to shine
upon the earth.

34 My brethren, hearken no more unto vain Astronomers or Star-gazers
concerning the bulk of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, for I positively affirm from
that God that made them, that the compass of their bodies are not much bigger
then they appear to our natural sight.

35 O empty vain liars! how long have you been suffered to deceive the people
with your monstrous imaginary bodies of Sun, Moon, and Stars, which are not?
and of your great knowledge concerning them; your things are too big to be good
or true, and the time of your serpentine Sophistry is almost finished.

36 Again, I declare from the holy Spirit, that the bodies of the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, are all distinct beings from each other, and possess their own
created light alone, neither borrowing nor lending their light to one another,
what ever has been imagined to the contrary, concerning New Moons or Eclipses.

37 Again you know, the Scriptures do not say, that the Sun and Moon are two
great bodies, but two great lights only: Neither does the Scripture say, that
the bodies of the Global Earth and Heavenly Firmament, are covered with the
vastness of the Sun, Moon, or Stars, or that they enclose any other bodies
within their own bodies; or that any other bodies are fixed in them:

38 But on the contrary the Scripture says, That the Sun and Moon were set in
the firmament of Heaven, to shine upon the earth: wherefore it is as clear as
the light, that that which is fixed is of a less bulk than that wherein it is
enclosed.

39 Yet you know that the greater bulk may receive its principal light from
that lesser body within its circumference, as a rich diamond in a Ring, or a
Candle or Torch in the night in a wide room, or the like.

40 My spiritual brethren, you may understand that the glory of the most high
God consists not in bulk of things, but in the exceeding brightness of them.

41 Nay moreover you cannot but know, that the infinite wisdom of the Divine
Majesty, does the more abundantly appear in an extraordinary light shining from
a very little body.

42 My brethren, it is not the bulk of the Sun or Moon which causes so great a
light, but as aforesaid, it is the transcendent brightness of their created
purities, which displayeth those beams of light through the visible heaven and
earth.

43 What ever has, or shall be said to the contrary, from the Lord I
positively affirm, that the bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are all fixed
beings, only in one firmament.

44 Moreover from the Lord of glory I declare, that this visible Heaven is all
the Firmaments that ever was formed by the Creator.

45 Furthermore, though the bodies of the Sun and Moon were both formed out of
that element of water, yet they were made as contrary in their natures as fire
and water.

46 Because you know their government were over contrary beings, the one to
rule the day, and the other to rule the night; so that as the Sun is a fiery
glorious light for consolation unto the natural things of the day, so likewise
the Moon is a qualifying cold watery light, answerable to the watery things of
the night:

47 Wherefore, though the body of the Sun is of a more eminent brightness than
that of the Moon, yet they being of contrary natures, it is against all sober
reason, that the one should receive any light from the other in the least.

48 Again you know, that when the bodies of the Sun and Moon seem close
together, in stead of any agreement between them, there is such a fiery
contest, as if they would absolutely destroy each other. And what think you is
the just occasion of it? is it not the difference of their natures?

49 Can fire and water, or light and darkness agree, if they be united
together? is there any rest unto either of them until one of them is dissolved?

50 My beloved friends in the pure truth, what ever men have long declared
concerning the Eclipse of the Sun, through the near appearance of the Moon, you
may understand, that the true occasion of the Sun eclipsed, whether in part or
whole, is according to their appearing at a further or nearer distance unto
each other;

51 For, as beforesaid, the nature of the one being fiery, hot, and dry, and
the nature of the other being watery, cold, and moist, if the most high God had
not decreed the time of their contest, when they are nearly conjoined, there
would be no communion between them until one of them were utterly dissolved.

52 Again, is it not as clear as the light it self unto us, that the true
occasion of all variance between created beings, whether sensible or
insensible, arises only from a difference of natures or spirits in them?

53 Moreover, when any kind of natures are suitable to each other, is there not
a sweet harmony between them?

54 Wherefore if the Moon received her light from the Sun, as natural wise men
have long imagined, is it not against all sense or reason, that there should be
no union between them, but at a distance?

55 Does it not rather agree with all true sense, that if the one received her
light from the other, that the more nearer they are in bodily appearance, the
more greater harmony would ensue, and occasion the lesser light rather to shine
more clearly, than darken each others brightness?

56 I think that William Lilly and his learned brethren in Astrologian figures,
dare not say, that either the Sun or the Moon were ever at variance with their
own selves; or, that the Eclipses of the Sun or Moon proceeds from any
harmony between that which occasioneth the Eclipse, and the thing so eclipsed.

57 Well then, if they acknowledge this rational truth, without controversy,
when the light of the Sun is eclipsed from us, it is through its near
conjunction with the natural light or ruler of things of the night.

58 And when the light of the Moon is eclipsed from us, though it be in the
night, or early in the morning, it is through her near (...) Junction with the
natural light or ruler of the day, or a planetary fire answerable to his nature.

59 My beloved spiritual brethren, as for the time and effect of Eclipses, I
leave them unto the figurative Merchants of a Sun, Moon, and Stars, which they
rightly understand not; because no man can truly know them, but by inspiration
from him that made them.

CHAP. VIII.
1 Of the Heavens. 2 How many were created. 3 No more but three. 1 A Throne of
Eternal ravishing glories. 2 A Throne of Natural perishing glories. 3 An
invisible spiritual Throne leading to Eternity.

AGain, if there was but one heavenly firmament created in all, some men may
say unto me, What is the meaning of that third Heavens in the Scriptures?

2 From that light which cannot lie, to this I answer: The spirit of God
speaks of a third heaven in Scriptures, that some men might be capable to
declare unto his redeemed ones, how many heavens there are, and where those
heavens are, and what those heavens are.

3 My spiritual brethren which have ears to hear, hearken unto the pure light
of life eternal, There are three created heavens spo^en of in Scripture Records
and no more, no nor never was any more, what ever vain men have imagined.

4 The first is that third heaven of visible and invisible ravishing glories
which are eternal; this is that vast kingdom where the persons of the mighty
Angels and glorified bodies of Moses and Elias do now inhabit, beholding the
face of that most excellent Majesty, whose divine nature unto his elect, is
crowns of unutterable excellencies.

5 This is that habitation, third heaven, throne, or kingdom of ravishing glory
above the starry heavens, spoken of so frequently in Scripture Records, which
is needless to nominate unto you which are spiritual.

6 But lest some vain glorious men should say, Where is the word of God for
what I speak? Seeing the letter is their God whom they adore, in stead of the
holy Spirit which spoke them, therefore to stop their carnal mouths, if it may
be, I shall write down two or three Scripture Records, Heaven is my throne, and
Earth is my footstool, Acts 7. O God, thy throne is for ever and ever, Heb. 1.
That we have such an High Priest that sits at the right hand of the throne
of the Majesty in the heavens, Heb. 8.

7 The second Heaven which the Lord created, was not a spiritual but a natural,
therefore of necessity it must fade away.

8 This Heaven is this visible firmament, adorned with majestical lights above
us, and a fixed earth beneath us, beautified in its seasons with variety of
delights, which is natures only desired haven, through the secret decree of
the most wise God, to manifest the variety of his most infinite wisdom unto
elect men and angels, in the creating of such natural glory to perish, and the
^^gelical merciless rulers thereof, after they have enjoyed their momentary
glory.

9 Give me leave to cite two or three Scriptures, as a visible testimony to
this second Heaven also: It is written, In the beginning God created the heaven
and the earth.

10 My beloved spiritual brethren, you know that there could not be any
beginning unto the Creator, therefore it may be understood that saying did
include that immortal throne above, and this mortal world beneath, as having a
beginning, was spoken, for the capacity unto men or angels which knew their
being was from another, and understood also their continuance in those several
heavens for a time, or for eternity.

11 In the first of the Hebrews it is thus written: And thou Lord in the
beginning have established the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine
hands; they shall perish, but thou do remain, and they shall wax old as does
a garment.

12 Again, the third and last created heaven, is that within the bodies of men,
or the first man Adam, the which spiritual creation being in natural bodies,
and within this perishing Globe, it is made capable through its union with
changeable nature to enter into mortality, that by the most secreet decree of
the most high God, after a moments tasting of silent death, as he himself did,
it may quicken again through death it self, spiritual bodies full of divine
glories, that as one man naturally as a flame of fire, all the elect may, (as
swift as thought) ascend to meet their Lord in the air, and with his divine
person of bright burning glory, enter into that prepared Throne of ete^nal
pleasures.

13 This created or inspired light in man you know has variety of
Scripture-expressions for the setting forth its excellencies that it shall
enjoy in the life to come; as namely, the kingdom of heaven is within you.
Christ in you the hope of glory. Know you not that the spirit of Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates? It is a true saying, for if we be created
together with him, we also shall live together with him, 2 Timothy 2 Thus God
created the man in his image, in the image of God created he him, he created
them male and female, Genesis 1.

14 Thus briefly I have touched upon the three created Heavens nominated in the
literal Records, unto an invisible, yet visible infinite being of all finite
beings, blessed for ever, viz. a throne of eternal ravishing glories: secondly,
a throne of natural perishing glories: lastly, an invisible spiritual throne
leading them to eternity.

15 From that spiritual Majesty by whom was formed the Heavens aforesaid, and
all in them, I positively affirm against all mortals that ever were, or shall
be, that though men have written, or shall speak of more worlds then what is
fore-written, those additional heavens proceeded from their own imaginary
confused reason, and not from that holy Spirit of all heavenly order.

CHAP. IX.
An exact Scripture rule to prove the Man Christ glorified, to be Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit in one distinct Person.

MY beloved brethren, which desire a right understanding of spiritual things in
Scripture Records, take special notice of this one thing, and you cannot be
deceived by all the wisdom or subtilty of men.

2 I say again from the Lord, take good notice of those Scriptures which speak
positively concerning God, or the highest Heavens, or Angels, or eternal Life,
or eternal Death, or of a natural Heaven, and all mortal things within its orb;
why? because you may know that all privative Scriptures, though never so
eminent or numerous, wholly depend upon positive Scriptures.

3 My dear brethren, for whom my soul is in continual travel until the pure
truth be rooted in you, some of you being weak of comprehension, I shall write
variety of expressions for explaining my meaning in this weighty thing.

4 Again I say, those Scripture-sayings which are positive, though never so few
in number, yet they as Gods, command all other Scripture-sayings to bow down
unto them, upon what account soever they are spoken, whether spiritual or
natural, to continue for a time, or for eternity.

5 Therefore seeing all privative Scriptures are of none effect, but in
reference unto those which are positive, are not those seeming wise men
spiritually dark as pitch, which exalt the privative Scriptures above the
positive, because of the number of them?

6 My beloved brethren, you may know the privative Scriptures can have no being
without the positive; but it seems possible that the positive might have been
without the privative, as the glorious Creator was eternally alone, before any
creaturely beings appeared in his sight.

7 Again, all positive sayings in Scriptures may be compared unto the inward
motion of a Clock or Dyal; and all privative sayings in Scriptures may be
compared unto the outward wheel or hand, that always motions from, or points
to the inward cause of its outward motions.

8 My spiritual friends, if you diligently observe this golden rule, as sure as
the Lord lives, and as sure as you are living creatures, you shall find it
that spiritual Touchstone, which will not only discover all vainglorious
opinions of literal or notional wise men, but it will also further you in the
true understanding of the mind of God in the Scripture, above all men which
are ignorant of this rule, or enemies to this advice.

9 For the strengthening of the weak, in the next place I shall prove by many
positive Scriptures, that the man Christ Jesus glorified, is the Holy One of
Israel only, or is both Father, Son, and Spirit in one distinct person, God
and Man blessed for ever and ever.

10 In the first of St. John's Gospel it is thus written: In the beginning was
that Word, and that Word was with God, and that Word was God, and that Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof, as the only
begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

11 My brethren, though the one pure being has variety of expressions in holy
Writ, to set forth the infinite glory of his divine Majesty, yet you may see in
these very literal Records themselves, that those holy Names of Word, or God,
or Father, be^eth but one sense only.

12 Furthermore, this divine word God, or glorious Father, was m^de, begotten,
or changed into flesh.

13 Again, you may by the true light of life in you, clearly see from the first
words of the Text, that Christ and the Father were but one essential glory
before they became flesh: behold the one divinity in trinity of expressions
only: In the beginning was that Word, and that Word was with God, and that
Word was God.

14 If that Word was God, that was in the beginning with God, and that God from
everlasting was that spiritual Word, Christ being that divine God, or God that
divine Word, which in the beginning created heaven and earth, Genesis 1. and in
the beginning or fullness of time became flesh, then without controversy he is
the alone Everlasting Father and Creator of both worlds, and the only Redeemer
of his chosen ones out of their natural darkness, into this mysterious light of
a right understanding of one divine personal Majesty, in variety of expressions
only.

15 Again, this positive Scripture in this first of John, does open many other
sayings of Christ and his Apostles, as namely those in the eight of John where
it is thus written: And if I also judge, my judgment is true, for I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me. Then said Jesus unto them, When ye
have lift up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do
nothing of my self, but as the Father has taught me, so I speak these things;
for he that sent me is with me, the Father has not left me alone, because I do
always those things that please him. Again it is written in the tenth of John,
I and my Father are one.

16 The next positive Scriptures bearing record unto the one personal divine
being, is in 2 Cor. 15. the words are these: The first man is of the earth
earthly, the second man is the Lord from heaven. And in Romans 9. it is thus
written: Of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen. Again in 1 Timothy 3. the last,
it is thus written: And without controversy great is the mastery of godliness,
which is, God is manifested in the flesh, ^ustified in the spirit, seen of
angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up
into glory; For in him dwells all the fullness of the God head bodily, Colos.
2.9.

17 Again in John 14. it is thus written: Jesus said unto him, I have been so
long time with you, and have thou not known me, Philip? he that has seen me,
has seen my Father, how then say thou, show us the Father? And in Mark 4.
are these words: Jesus said unto him, it is written again. thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God. And in verse 10. Then said Jesus unto him, Avoid Satan, for
it is written thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. And in Mark 1. are these words: Behold a Virgin shall be with child,
and shall bear a son, and they shall call his name Emanuel, which is by
interpretation, God with us. He was in the world, and the world was made by
him, and the world knew him not, John 1. For by him were all things created
which are in heaven, and which are in earth, things visible and invisible,
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things
were created by him, and for him, and he is before all things, and in him all
things consist, Colos. 1. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Colos. 2. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for
grace, John 1. For unto us a child is born, and unto us a son is given, and he
shall call his Name Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. Now the same Jesus Christ our Lord and
our God, even the Father which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace, 1 These. 2.16. Let the same mind be
in you that was even in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it
no robbery to be equal with God; but he made himself of no reputation, and took
on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in
shape as man, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence
also we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our
vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to
the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. And to
you which are troubled, rest with us: When the Lord Jesus shall show himself
from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto
them that do not know God, and which obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1. For the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel,
and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, then
shall we which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the clouds i^
meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.16,
17. For therefore we labor and are rebuked, because we trust in the l^ving God,
which is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10.
We know that we are of God, and this whole world lies in wickedness; but we
know that the Son of God is come, and has given us a mind to know him which
is true, and we are in him that is true, that is in that his Son Jesus Christ,
the same is that very God, and that eternal life, 1 John 5.19, 20. Now unto him
that is able to keep you that you fall not, and to present you faultless before
the presence of his glory with joy, that is, To God only wise our Savior, be
glory and majesty, and dominion, and power, both now and for ever, Amen, Jude
25.26.

18 Remember the golden positive Rule, and none can deceive you concerning the
one glorious personal God-Man, blessed for ever: This is a true saying, and by
all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief: notwithstanding for this cause was I received to
mercy, that Jesus Christ should first show on me all long-suffering, unto the
example of them which shall in time to come believe in him unto eternal life.
Now unto the King Everlasting, Immortal, Invisible, unto God only wise, be
honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 1.15, 16, 17.

19 My spiritual brethren, if you take good no^ice of this place of Scripture,
you may plainly see that the Apostle Paul owneth no other God, Father, or
eternal Spirit, but that one personal Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ in
immortality: There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all. But unto every one of
us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he
says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first
into the lowest parts of the earth: He that descended, is even the same that
ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.

20 My beloved spiritual brethren which are appointed unto an immortal personal
glory, you may see that the Lord Jesus Christ is that Holy One of Israel, which
first descended from his throne of infinite Godhead glory, into the lower
parts of the virgin earth, and so became a body of pure flesh of her seed, and
by virtue of his divine power in that very body of flesh and bone, he descended
into the lowest part of the earth, death, hell, or the grave, for a moment; not
only for improving the power of his Godhead life entering into death, and in
that very body of flesh quickening and reviving a new and glorious life again,
and as a flame of fire naturally ascending and immortalizing that body of flesh
and bone with a Fathers Throne of transcendent Excellencies, but also for
destroying of the power of sin, and fear of eternal death in all his new born
elect trees unto eternal life.

CHAP. X.
1 Of persecution of Conscience. 2 Of the sin against the Holy Ghost.

MY beloved brethren, by immediate inspiration from that Holy One of Israel, in
the next place I shall clearly demonstrate unto the heirs of glory, the
confused darkness of two or three sorts of men, concerning the knowledge of the
only very true God, the which confusion rises in them through their
misunderstanding of the true grounds of certain Scriptures, as namely these:
God is a Spirit, and a Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have. But
more especially these Trinitary expressions, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. For there are three
which bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and
these three are one, 1 John 5.7.

2 The first sort of deceived persons past or present, which affirm the Holy
One of Israel to consist of three persons, were Athanasins, Socinus, alias John
Biddle, and their literal adherents.

3 My brethren, I do not say they can help this their darkness, or blame them
for this their error; for alas, poor simple or over-wise men, to their
imaginary understandings it is a pure truth, and those which are contrary
minded to them, in darkness.

4 Therefore who ever are left to persecute their persons for their judgments
sake only, it would have been better for those men that they had never been
born, if they acknowledge a Christ.

5 Take this for an infallible Rule, those that persecute a man for error in
judgment concerning his God, will as soon persecute him for the truth of
Christ, as for a lie.

6 Let no persecutor flatter himself, that he may repent and find mercy as well
as Paul, because Paul acknowledged no Jesus at all, when he persecuted his
Saints; therefore you know how he pleads Gods mercy toward him, in that he did
it ignorantly.

7 Moreover, how deeply did he pledge that cup of persecution upon his own body
for the Truths sake all his days, which instrumentally for Christ's sake he had
caused others to drink?

8 Again, before I go forward concerning the point in hand, it will be
necessary for me to show you who those persecutors are, which commit that
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost.

9 My spiritual brethren, if a Turk do persecute a man that professes himself
to be a Christian, for despising of his Mahomet; or if a man called a Christian
should persecute an Infidel for despising the Lord Jesus Christ, this
persecuting each other is pardonable, though not justifiable in their
consciences, when they shall understand the truth of leaving all vengeance in
spiritual things unto God himself:

10 But on the contrary, suppose two men shall acknowledge that the man Christ
Jesus glorified, is the Son of God spoken of in the Scriptures, both of them
affirming that all their hopes of eternal salvation only depends upon him; if
these men for difference in judgment only concerning this Jesus, shall
persecute each other before a Magistrate, or the like, there remains no more
sacrifice for that sin;

11 For that is the unpardonable sin against the Holy Spirit, because they
persecuted each other for his sake which they both confessed to be their God
and Savior, even to their own knowledge.

12 And in so doing they condemned their own faith, and to the utmost of their
power they crucified the Lord of glory afresh, and put him to an open shame,
even before his filthy scoffing enemies.

13 Again, if a man shall come in the holy Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
shall declare many heavenly secrets which he has received from the throne of
glory:

14 If men which confess the same Jesus, because the things declared are
contrary to their ways, and hard sayings to their comprehensions, shall
therefore condemn them as delusions and blasphemies, and the spirit which spoke
them to be of the devil, in so doing they have fallen under that sin of eternal
condemnation, because, as aforesaid, they have crucified the Lord of Glory
afresh, and put him to an open shame, and have judged themselves unworthy of
everlasting life, and have denied their own faith and hopes in him, through
their despising that holy spirit which seals men up unto the day of redemption.

15 My beloved brethren, though any one beloved Dalilah reigning in men unto
the death, tends to eternal condemnation, yet there are no actual sins
whatsoever but are pardonable, unless men commit them upon the account
aforesaid.

16 My spiritual brethren, there is a vast difference between the heirs of
glory, and the vessels of shame concerning this sin.

17 The holy spirit of Christ Jesus has endued his elect with such a measure
of light, though most of them know it not, that by virtue of that holy fire
they are not only preserved from that condemning evil, but are rather fearful
they have or shall commit it.

18 But on the contrary, the desperate reprobate is so far from any kind of
fear in him concerning the committing of that castaway sin, that when occasion
is offered, he glories in it as the acceptable sacrifice unto his God, and yet
knows it not.

19 Thus briefly I have touched upon the unpardonable sin against the holy
spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose very saying only makes a sin pardonable
or unpardonable, because he is Truth it self, and cannot possibly lie: Verily I
say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven unto the children of men, and
blasphemies wherewith they blaspheme; but he that blasphemeth against the Holy
Ghost shall never have forgiveness, but is culpable of eternal damnation,
because they said he had an unclean spirit, Mark 3.28, 29, 30. You blessed
ones, know who it was that spoke those words.

CHAP. XI.
1 Of the true nature of Infiniteness. 2 Wherein it lies, viz. in the not
knowing its beginning or ending. 3 Infiniteness and Finiteness are incapable of
equal glory. 4 Against all true reason that there should be three persons in
the Trinity. 5 Christ and the Father one undivided Godhead. 6 Denying Christ
to be the only God, is Antichrist. 7 How Prayers are heard.

IN the next place from the Holy One of Israel, I shall demonstrate the
absurdity of that error of Trinity of Persons in the unity of Godhead.

2 My beloved spiritual brethren, if the divine Majesty should contain of three
distict persons in coequal Godhead glory, and each person be uncreated and
eternal of it self, then in stead of those Names of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, they would of necessity be three Fathers only.

3 Because you know, that if the person of a Son or Holy Ghost were created or
begotten, or proceeded from a Father, then it is contrary to all sober sense or
reason, that the persons of Son and Holy Ghost, should either be coequal with
the Father, or eternal of themselves.

4 Moreover, if the persons of Son and Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father,
then they are but finite created glories, and in degree lower than the Father.

5 You that are spiritual know, that that which received its beginning from
another, could not possibly be made equal with that which was eternal of it
self.

6 Uncreated incomprehensible infiniteness, was capable to transmute it self
into a lower condition for its own transcendent advantage in the spirits of his
elect, but it was utterly impossible for him to create infinite,
incomprehensible beings, to become coequal in Godhead wisdom, power, and glory,
with himself.

7 Uncreated glory is so unutterably infinite, that it is incapable to
comprehend the height, length, breadth, or depth of its own eternal
excellencies.

8 If this saying seem strange unto any man, as to cause him to think it
ridiculous, or dishonorable to the Creators glory, unto that man I positively
affirm, from the spirit of Truth, that it is so far from any kind of dishonor
unto the divine Majesty, that on the contrary all the variety of spiritual joys
or heavenly pleasures for himself, or elect-men and angels, consists only in
his perfect understanding, that he cannot possibly know any beginning or ending
of his glorious excellencies.

9 To know the beginning or ending of it self, you know causes nothing but
sorrows, rather then joys:

10 So likewise on the contrary, not to know any beginning or ending of it
self, must needs occasion nothing else but ravishing everlasting joys.

11 Thus you which are spiritual may clearly see the falacy of the three
persons and one God, spoken of in Athanasius Creed; you know that infiniteness
and finiteness are incapable of equal glory.

12 Also you know, that if there should have been three persons eternally of
themselves, there could not possibly have been any Son or Holy Ghost at all,
because a Son or Holy Ghost proceeds from a Father, and not, as beforesaid,
from themselves.

13 Moreover you may understand, that if it stood to any true faith or sober
reason, that there were three persons eternally of themselves, yet they of
necessity must be three Fathers only, and so agreeing together, two of those
Fathers must be transmuted into a Son and Holy Ghost by the other Father, or
from themselves, to make up this confused Trinity, proceeding from the
Literal-mongers of this vainglorious perishing world, or conscientious
non-commissionated men, which would compel Words to become Persons, having no
positive record to prove any such three persons throughout the whole
Scriptures, but the contrary altogether. My glory I will not give to another,
says the Holy One of Israel: Jehovah our ever-living Jesus, God only wise,
blessed for ever and ever, honored only from his elect men and angels.

14 My spiritual brethren, you know that the Lord Jesus Christ has not only
the Godhead Titles in Scripture records, but also all the glory from men and
angels was attributed unto him in the body of his flesh: And let all the angels
of God worship him, Heb. 1. To worship, honor, magnify, or adore man or angel,
is not that giving glory to him, or glorying in him?

15 Does not all such kind of divine worship, honor, or glory, belong only to
the Creator? and does not the Holy One of Israel positively say, that he will
not give his glory to another? what sober, sensible man then that has any
spiritual light in him, dares say that Christ and the Father are not one
undivided personal being, seeing all glory in heaven and earth was given unto
him only?

16 Again, seeing God has said that he will not give his glory to another, and
yet all his glory was given unto that Man Christ, do not those Trinitary
Literal-mongers call the divine Majesty a liar to his face, which deny Christ
Jesus the Lord of Glory to be that Everlasting Father?

17 Does not the Father give all glory to the Son in Scriptures, as well as the
Son gives all glory to the Father? who art thou then that dividest them into
three personal beings, presum, tuously taking upon thee to share the infinite
glory of the Holy One of Israel, seeing his glory he will not, no nor cannot
give to any other distinct person?

18 And what art thou then but that Antichrist and utter enemy unto thine own
soul, and a deceiver of those which are deceived by thy literal wit, which
says, That Christ was only an extraordinary Messenger sent forth by the most
high God to do his will; or that Christ was only a God, and not the God; or
that Christ only had the Titles of the divine Majesty put upon him for a
season, that he might become a fit Mediator between God and man, but there was
another Father above him that sent him, abiding in the highest Heavens, unto
which he was fain to cry out for help in his need.

19 My spiritual brethren, if men so acute in the letter can attain to
understand this one thing in Scripture Record, then those sayings of Christ, or
Son, and such like, will be no stumbling block in their way concerning Christ's
Father. You know that the Lord Jehovah says, Because there was none greater
than himself, he swore by himself, concerning something that was in his mind
to bring to pass: the thing is this, that God of Glory that was compelled to
swear by himself for the exaltation of his own greatness in men and angels,
because there was none beside himself, therefore he glorifieth himself alone.

20 Again, because none could humble or exalt him but himself, therefore he
alone first exalts himself by an oath, that he might be the more admired at of
all that know him; after that he abaseth himself a little lower then his
angelical creatures in respect of death, that by virtue of his infinite
humility in flesh, his glorious Godhead might in that personal manhood exalt it
self in a new and wonderful way, far above all Gods, heavens, angels, and men.

21 Wherefore concerning the Scripture saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit
thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool, that is, the
everlasting Father speaking to himself in a twofold condition, or God the
great Jehovah in the height of his glory exalting himself over all opposition
in his creatures, in the lowest appearance of a creature himself.

22 Again the Lord says, He will set his King upon his holy hill of Sion: And
God says, O God, thy throne is from ever and ever, wherefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

23 My beloved brethren, is there any more then one God and King of Glory
perpetually fitting in the midst of the Throne of the highest heavens?

24 Is there any more then one God and King, spiritually sitting upon his
Throne of Sion, or souls of his redeemed ones?

25 Is not this one God in his Throne above, and in his Throne beneath, Christ
Jesus our Lord?

26 If this be granted, which none can deny but filthy Atheists, over-wise
Literalists, or very weak Saints, I would fain know from any man under what
kind of Trinity soever, who that God and King was, unto which God said, I will
set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. O God thy throne is for ever and ever?

27 If there be but one God and King of Sions glory alone, then there cannot be
a God, and God or a King, and a King of eternal glory: If this be not good
sense, let me be reproved with better.

28 Again, has God any other King to exalt upon Sions holy hill but himself,
or to sit on the right hand of all Majesty, Wisdom, Power and Glory, in the
personal presence of his mighty Angels, Moses, and Elias, but himself?

29 Who then is that most high and mighty God and King of Sions glory, or that
spiritual All in All, or that Alpha and Omega, or that Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, but our Lord Jesus Christ in immortal glory it self?

30 Thus you that have any true light of life eternal in you, may clearly see
that the Holy One of Israel which swore by himself, to himself, for his own
further exaltation, by the same rule he may change his glorious condition into
flesh, and having humbled himself to himself, he may cause his humanity to
speak, pray, or cry, unto his divinity within him, or unto his own spiritual
charge committed unto his angels without him, for a further manifestation of
his unsearchable wisdom, power, and incomprehensible glory in shame and
weakness, as well as in power and glory, as aforesaid.

31 Is any thing hard or impossible for an infinite Creator to do, when his
glory moves him to do it?

32 Again, did not his infinite power, wisdom, and glory more abundantly appear
in the lowest abasing himself in the visible sight of elect men and angels? why
then should it seem strange to any sober wise man, that the everlasting Father
should be clothed with flesh and bone, as with a garment?

33 Or that Christ Jesus should be both God and man in one distinct body
glorified, there is none but Christ, none but Christ; no other God but that man
Christ Jesus our Lord, if men or Angels should gainsay it.

34 Though this may seem strange unto many at present, yet they only are
eternally blessed that are not offended with this saving truth, but are made
obedient unto this crucified and glorified Jesus.

CHAP. XII.
1 To own or believe any other God but Christ, is a cursed lie. 2 Who are the
deceived persons. 3 Concerning the true knowledge of God. 4 The deceivers of
others under conflicts of mind, described by many and various expressions.

ALl the Divine Titles of the Holy One of Israel, made over to the second man
the Lord from Heaven, and is not the Fathers Throne invested upon his person?
and is not all spiritual honor, praise, and glory, commanded to be attributed
unto him by men and angels?

2 And is not all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily, and from
his fullness only do we not all receive, and grace for grace, if we have any
grace at all ruling in us?

3 And is he not the Redeemer of his beloved people with his own blood? and is
he not the Judge of quick and dead? and was not all things made by him, and for
him? and was there any thing made that was made without him? and was he not
before all things, and do not all things consist in him? and are not all things
upheld by that Almighty word of his holy Spirit only?

4 Seeing these are undeniable words of Truth it self, do not all those men
that own any other God, or Father, or Creator, above, before, or besides our
Lord Jesus Christ, deny the Holy One of Israel, and imagine a cursed lie, and
bow down to that cursed Idol of their own invented words only, utterly denying
that honor and glory due unto Jesus Christ the Creator himself?

5 Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is that Christ, the same is
that Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. Whosoever denies the Son,
the same has not the Father: he that has the Son has that life, and he that
has not that Son of God, has not that life: he that believes in the Son of
God, has the witness in himself: he that believes not God, has made him a
liar, because he believed not the record that God witnessed of that his Son,
and this is the record, to wit, that God has given unto us eternal life, and
this life is in that his Son. But ye have anointment from that Holy One, and
know all things. These literal words of truth are in the Epistles by St. John.
All things are given unto me of my Father, and no man knows the Son, but the
Father, neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him, Mat. 11.

6 Some deceived persons ignorantly hold forth a false God, or Trinity, which
say, that the infinite Majesty is a vast bodiless spirit; also they call their
God by a twofold name or spirits, a Spirit Father, and a Spirit Son, and these
spirits they say are in their spirits, and so these three spirits being one
essence, make up their imaginary Trinity in Unity.

7 These are those which affirm, that there is no other God, or Father, or
Creator, b^t what is invisibly living in the Creation, or in the creatures
only: and if you soberly ask them whether there be a Creator, and concerning
the true knowledge of any such Creator, you shall receive such like answers as
this is:

8 The Creator is an infinite incomprehensible Spirit, essentially filling all
things and places; or they will say, that a creature is utterly incapable of
any knowledge of the Creator himself, but within the creatures only; or else
they will tell you, that not to know the Creator, is the greatest knowledge of
a Creator.

9 Again, you shall have such confusion as this from some of these high flown
Atheists, the Creator is all things, and yet he is nothing at all, and is every
where, and yet he is no where at all.

10 If a man shall reply and say, Nothing is nothing: but if you grant a
Creator, he must be something as well as his creatures, or else there can be no
Creator at all.

11 Further, if a man shall say the Creator must of necessity be some glorious
thing, which is infinite in it self, and distinct from all creatures, as well
as the creatures are distinct from one another, or else you utterly deny a
Creator.

12 Then these men will say, What is your Creator you pretend to know, and
where is his residence, did you ever see him? or such like.

13 If a man shall reply, That the Creator is an incomprehensible glorious
person in the form of a man, and that by virtue of his brightness he fills
heaven and earth, angels and men spiritually or naturally, only his ever
blessed person is resident on a throne of infinite glory, in but one place at
once, as the person of a man is in this world.

14 Then these men are ready to villifie such a Creator, as a simple weak
thing; or else they will say, this is to confine an unknown infiniteness into a
creaturely substance, and such a God of a bodily appearance any way like unto
themselves in the least, they utterly abhor: but as beforesaid, a wonderful
God, which is incapable of ever being seen or known by the creatures, such a
non-sensible infinite nothing, all vainglorious men delight to own, who love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.

15 Another sort there are of these men, which appear more angelical then the
rest, these are those which are full of expressions of heavenly Raptures,
through a supposed union with a Father and Son within them only, and various
Songs, which they call Spiritual breakings forth in them; unto which hymns or
natural songs mixed with many spiritual expressions in meeter or otherways, they
bow down their souls, and ignorantly say it is the Father breathing forth those
fleshly ballads through their mouths. Moreover, if these notional flashes
shall see any of their own fancies lying under a wounded spirit, and through
some extraordinary guilt crying out, they have that fire of hell burning in
them, and are those devils which are under eternal damnation already.

16 Further, though their condition be like unto Cain, through the eternal
absence of the spirit of God speaking peace unto their outcast condition; yet
when these notional flashes shall come to visit their friend in this his horrid
unutterable pain and shame, they will speak such like empty speeches are these.

Come, come, it is very good for you, that you should be thus afflicted, it is
a token of the fathers love unto you, he will bring all men and women into your
condition more or less, that the glory of his mercy might shine over all: or
else they will say, it is the Fathers love in darkness appearing unto you, if
you could but see it. Further they will say unto their hopeless friend,
wherefore do you thus torment your own soul? there is but one pure being, and
all our spirits came forth from this Father of Spirits, and in the end we shall
all be swallowed up into the eternal being again: wherefore then do you talk so
much of eternal damnation, or call your self a devil, making such lamentation
for your sins, as if you could possibly be divided from your Fathers love, or
cast out of his glorious presence, I boldly affirm unto you it is no such
matter; for there are no such devils, or damnation, or sins at all, but in the
esteem of men deceived so to think by their fellow creatures, which ignorantly
lord one over another, from some blind opinion in them; wherefore our counsel
is, that you would hearken no more unto vain thoughts or motions, or
imaginations within you, or words from any creature without you, as to become
so weak or foolish to trouble or torment your self, seeing there is nothing in
us but God only in variety of appearance. Furthermore, do you not know, that
he is all in all, what then is there besides himself? Comfort up your
despairing self therefore, and understand that it is the spirit of the Father
only appearing in you, sometimes in light and love, and sometimes in death,
darkness, or seeming wrath or envy, in the end you shall find that all
visibilities are but mere forms, shapes, or shadows; and that all invisible
operations of seeming contrariety, was the Father only, who is the first and
the last, and there is none beside him.

17 Again, if a more grosser sort of these Trinitary-mongers, or rather fleshly
Atheists, shall come to visit their friend in the condition beforesaid, they
will endeavor to comfort them or smooth them up with these, and such like
expressions: Friend, what is the matter with thee? or what is there that should
cause thee to be so full of fears or trouble of mind? thou fear where no
fear is, thou art like unto a child or fool that is frighted with their own
shadows, or else thou art mad and want a Chyrurgeon to let thee blood, that
the devil, damnation, sins, or ciphers, may fly from thee. Further, they will
say unto their wrathful friend, Let not that called sin in the least trouble
thee, but rather let it be thy glory, because there is none in such bondage, as
those that are so nice or scrupulous concerning sin. Sin, what is sin or sins
in us? are they any thing else but so many several Stars or Angels in us? Art
thou not worse then mad therefore, to be troubled with the variety of thy
Fathers brightness appearing in thee, though in seeming darkness?

17 Again, if none of these or such like cursed speeches take effect with their
despairing friend, then out of Atheistical madness they will say unto one
another, That he is an ass and a fool for making such a noise and trouble to
his friends as he does, when he will he may help it with case; sure it is
somewhat doubtful that he dissembles with himself for some by-end, to bring his
friends into public shame amongst their ^eligious adversaries?

18 My beloved spiritual brethren, this is the end of such comfor^ers, and
their hellish counsel unto their friend under present wrath. O will not Jobs
comforters rise up in judgment, and condemn all such wretched counselors as
these are; at the visible appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ with his mighty
Angels?

19 Another sort of empty comforters will say unto this their despairing
friend, Brother, how is it with you? do you earnestly pray unto the Lord to
forgive you your great transgressions committed against him? or are you
heartily sorry for all your evils? or are you willing to be prayed for when the
Saints shall meet together? or shall we set a day apart of fasting and
humiliation before the Lord for you? or are you not guilty of some secrets
sins, lying heavy upon your conscience, because you do not disclose them,
through which the prayers of the Saints are not answered? certainly your sins
are not so great, but if you confess them and forsake them, they are
pardonable: cry therefore mightily unto the Lord day and night, we also will do
the like, that your wounded spirits may be healed: but it may be you have
committed some such horrible wickedness, that God will not suffer you to be in
peace, though you cry never so much or long unto him, until you are made to
desire his Saints to lay open your rebellions before him in public or private,
zealously fasting and crying unto him with a loud and bitter voice, that this
sort of soul despairing sins, or devils, may be cast out of you: or it may be
you have committed some secret action of murder, buggery, or such like, and
therefore the Lord will neither answer our prayers or your own, or ever suffer
you to be in peace more, until you are cut off by the hand of the Magistrate;
therefore that you may be delivered from the wrath of God upon you, and die in
peace, our counsel is that you will hide none of your rebellions committed
against the Lord or man.

CHAP. XIII.
1 Of the language and conditions of two sorts of men and women. 2 The one
elected unto Glory, the other rejected unto shame. 3 The Prophets declaration
thereupon.

IN the next place I shall speak of two sorts of men and women, the one elected
unto glory, the other rejected unto shame; or which have committed the
unpardonable sin against the holy Spirit through reprobation, and which has
not through election, yet both of them may continue under despair to their
lives end, for the manifestation of the prerogative will or pleasure of the
Creator over his creatures, and who art thou that dares dispute against it?

2 My spiritual brethren, if an elect vessel has been left to commit adultery,
buggery, murder, or such like, and lies under despair, and if he has not
fallen under these serpentine stinging evils, but is wounded in spirit, through
a continual fear of being overcome through temptation, to commit it one time or
other;

3 Or suppose he is full of blasphemous thoughts against the Creator, through
which there is a continual fear in him of eternal damnation, yet there is so
much light of life in him secretly upholding his bleeding spirit, that if you
discourse with him concerning his condition, he will usually utter these, or
such like words:

I know God is able to pass by all my rebellions against him, but I fear he
will not: Or he will say, Do you think that if God did purpose to show mercy
unto me, or had ever any thoughts of love unto my poor soul, that he would
suffer me to do those detestable evils against nature it self, beside my inward
dreadful temptations against himself? Again they will say, I cannot believe that
ever any of the beloved of the Lord were ever under any such strange
temptations, or desperate thoughts against the Lord, or against my self, my
wife, my children, or relations, as I am? Again they will say, When I find any
motion of deep sorrow in me for all my rebellions, and a full resolution by the
power of the Lord to forsake them, and a desire to love the Lord in hope of his
mercy, or to praise him for his preserving me under all past dangers, then
immediately I am subject to the most firiest temptations of all; therefore what
hopes can there be for such a one as I am? I fear hopes or desires concerning
me is but vain, sure my condition is as bad, if not worse than Cain, Balaam,
Judas, or any such like.

4 Notwithstanding these and such like hopeless expressions, yet if they find
a man that experimentally understands the sadness of their condition, they are
apt to desire that man to entreat the Lord for them.

5 Again, what ever befalls them, they have this property abiding in them, that
if you speak of the Creator, you shall never hear them speak evil of his most
glorious person, nor endure to hear any one blaspheme his holy Name; but on the
contrary, in the very depth of their despairings, they will speak honorably of
the Holy One of Israel, and justify him in all his proceedings toward them or
any other of his creatures.

6 The truth is, this is that repentance or godly sorrow in them, proceeding
from the Holy Spirit, and that most acceptable spiritual sacrifice that can be
offered up unto him, if the wounded spirit did but know it.

7 An elect vessel under fear of the wrath to come, has this property in it
also, that it is both ready and willing, if it be persuaded that the Lord will
speak peace through the mouth of any man or woman unto its poor soul, even to
walk unto the ends of the earth, to hear the voice of the Lord in that creature.

8 Another true testimony in a chosen vessel is this, notwithstanding his
present hopelesness of mercy in reference to his former rebellions, yet his
soul through the secret love of God by his own light in him, is not only
fearful of further temptation unto evil, but it does also abhor all kind of
iniquity whatsoever, upon the account of its contrariety against the Divine
Majesty, and is full of longing after perfection, whether it be through life or
death.

9 Again, another infallible testimony of an experimental wounded spirit is
this, if out of bitterness of spirit they open their sorrows unto their
supposed or real friends, they will oftentimes say these, or such like words:

O wretched creature that I am, sure never any one rebelled against such light
as I have done; I have been so ravished sometimes with the presence of the
divine Glory shining into my poor soul, that I thought I had been unmsveable
for ever, and yet in a little season through remembrance of former iniquities
committed against so glorious a Majesty, or ^ew temptations against so gracious
a Father, I am so full of burning horror of confused darkness, as if never any
true light of life had appeared in me:

10 Again, through a strong desire of knowing of the secret purpose of the
Creator toward them, they will say:

O that I never had been born, or that I had been a toad, or any other created
being, but a man; or that, that God which gave me a being, would finish my
intolerable sorrows through my everlasting dissolution: Or if I must perish, O
that I were in it, that I might know what I must trust unto, for I think I
should find more ease then now I do: or if it be thy pleasure neither to let
me know it, nor know it not, O give me strength to bear it, and leave me under
the hottest wrath that thy fury can administer unto me.

11 These and such like bitter lamentations, are the elect beloved of the most
high God subject unto, which are left under a despairing condition upon what
account soever: A man may bear any natural sufferings whatsoever, because he
knows they will have an end; but a wounded spirit who can bear, not knowing
any end thereof?

12 It is thou, O Lord Jesus Christ, which wounds the souls of thy redeemed
ones, through thy spiritual absence, and it is thou alone must heal them with
thy glorious presence.

13 It is not in the power of men or angels, if they could weep rivers of
blood, or could submit for a season to bear the same wrath in their own
spirits, that can move thee in the least to release that wounded soul whom thou
love as thine own self, until the fixed time thereof, which is only known to
thy self, that thou alone may have the glory of all thy love trials.

14 O empty vain men, who ever you are, which measure the unsearchable wisdom
of the Holy One of Israel, by your own lying imaginations, and by your blind
reason think to persuade the unchangeable God with goodly words to walk out of
his own way.

15 And because your vain spirits are upon any occasion subject to change, you
think the unchangeable God is like unto your selves, and may change also, and
so either for silver, or honor, or both, you combine together as one man to
public or private meetings, to cheat one another with flattering speeches, and
call it the pure worship of God, being ready to condemn all that come not to
it, as ungodly men orhereticks, though in their dealings be ween man and man,
they are seven times more righteous than your selves; and in obedience unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, are subject to all civil Authority for conscience sake, by
suffering under them, leaving all vengeance unto the Lord, who has said,
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it.

CHAP. XIV.
1 A moderate Discourse concerning Civil Wars in a Kingdom. 2 The peoples
subjection to the Laws. 3 Wherein several Objections are answered. 4 Many
things of very great consequence seasonably declared.

IN the next place give me leave to take notice of this, that I do not account
those men truly rational, which say there is no God but Nature only;

2 Or which say, that God is only an incomprehensible formless Spirit:

3 Neither do I account them spiritual or rational, which confess an infinite
being of beings, and yet deny the creature to be a creature, and the Creator to
be the Creator; my meaning is this, which make no difference between the
glorious Creator, and the poor empty creature, but affirm the divine Majesty of
glorious purities to have his abode in all impure spirits.

4 Though God is the life of all sensible or insensible living beings by virtue
of Creation, yet I positively affirm against men or angels, that neither
heaven, earth, angels, nor men, are capable of the In-dwelling Essence of his
holy Spirit, but his own person only.

5 Again, I do not account those men truly spirit^ (...) or rational as yet,
which pretend to know themselves to be personal living beings, and yet deny the
personal God of all infinite glories*

6 Moreover, though men speak like Oracles, and seemingly appear to be innocent
as Doves, yet if they say there is no God but within this world only; or if
they confess a God upon the Throne of his Glory in another world, if they say
he is three persons in coequal Godhead glory, or in degree one above another;
or their Spirits are in one personal Majesty, or any such like confusion
concerning the one personal being of our Lord Jesus Christ:

7 From his unerring spirit I declare, that none of these are the men that I
account spiritual or rational grounded men, what ever good thoughts they have
of themselves, or one of another; wherefore if there be any sober rational man
in the world, come let us reason together.

8 What though thou and this present Civil Powers, to your own thinking, and
full resolution of equal good to the three Nations, did engage together against
the former Powers, as enemies to the common good, and did purpose by Gods
assistance to establish such a Government for the peoples good, that the like
could not be paralleled in the world; what ever you intended by Covenants or
Engagements, I would fain know whether you are any more then creatures? And if
you grant me that rational truth, then in the next place I would know whether
any man has sufficient power in himself to continue one minute in his
resolution, though never so solemnly engaged?

9 Again, if it should be replied, thus reasoning: All Covenants made in the
presence of God, or between man and man, are of none effect; no, that does not
follow, for the Moral or Civil Law is very good in it self, and was added for
transgressors; but whosoever has the true love of God in him, that man has no
need of man's law to be his rule, but he is a law unto himself, and lives above
all laws of mortal men, and yet is obedient to all laws.

10 Again, I declare from the God of all truth, that no rational wise man,
unless God himself by infallible grounds had declared it to him, dares enter
into Covenants or Vows, to make a people more happier then they are, by a sword
of steel.

11 I confess that Civil Laws are just and good in themselves, and according to
equity all men are alike liable to the Law: but this I would fain know from any
sober man in this world, if he were guilty of the Law in what kind soever,
whether he would not rather live then be put to death?

12 Or if he were troubled with guilt of innocent blood, and breach of oath
with faithful friends, would he not say in his spirit being in a place of
power, What advantage will my life be unto the dead wronged by me, for want of
power from above to have prevented it?

13 Or what profit would my blood be unto the living friends of him that is
dead? my life cannot possibly yield any true peace to the living any more then
the dead; therefore O let me live, that I may do what good I can, seeing what
is past cannot possibly be recalled.

14 Again, if Magistrates act any unjust things in their places, is any man
sure that another Power should act better? Do not men that seem to be very
sober, just, and wise, oftentimes secretly act most unjustly of all, when
exalted into high places?

15 But some may say unto me, If we had had that we fought for, we should have
taken such a course, that no unjust Magistrate should have continued long in
his place, without being called to an account.

16 To this I answer: Truly my friend, the heart of man is so desperately
wicked, and places of Authority so full of fleshly snares, that men are apt to
act unjustly, if they die for it at the years end.

17 Is there not a Law of death without mercy against murder, and was there
almost ever murders committed more then now? where then is the power in the
Law to prevent it?

18 Is there not a Law of death also against those which are taken in Adultery,
or such like uncleanness, and is there not more Adultery or such like
committed, then in former Ages, when there was no Law of putting men to death;
where then is the power of the Law to prevent natural or unnatural lusts?

19 Is there not a Law of death against Robbing on the highway, breaking up of
houses, and such like, and was there in many ages such house-breaking, and
highway robbing as now there is, even by many men of very good estates; where
then is the power of the Law to make an unjust man to do that which is right
unto his neighbor?

20 Again, as beforesaid, the heart of man by nature is exceeding full of
pride, envy, lust, and such like wickedness, that they are apt to commit it so
much the more, if men speak against it, or make laws to prevent it. If men
think this strange, or question the truth of it, if they know their own heart,
and that God that preserves men from these evils, they would then know this to
be as true as God is truth.

21 If it be so, some men may say, What need there then be any Law at all?

22 For a just man there is no need of any Law as aforesaid, but for a godless;
the moral Law of Moses, and the Civil Law of Magistrates are very useful in
several respects; for where there is no Law, as the Scripture says, there is
no Transgression: but devils clothed with flesh, blood, and bone, do want a
whip, and is there any so fit to scourge them withal, as their own Laws?
wherefore the Laws of God and man are useful to convince and condemn the
wicked, but not to convert them.

23 Again, you know the Civil Law is also useful to defend an upright man from
the violence of a wicked man, it being instituted for that very end, that as
beforesaid, he may be justly condemned in his own conscience by his own law,
for acting cruelty upon him that was always ready to do him good.

24 Though I thus write in the true defense of the Civil Law, with the
obedience due unto it, sure I am that a merciful man, in stead of taking
advantage of the law for the imprisoning, or the cutting off the most wickedest
of men, if it be possible, he will rather overcome him by love. O that all the
chosen of God knew but the power of Love, Patience, Mercy, or Forgiveness to
men that are averse unto all good!

25 If you which are offended with the Civil Magistrate did but anderstand,
what equal good soever was intended by your combinations together; or if your
intended good of rest and peace had been attained unto through your
establishing false Laws in a golden balance, by lodestone Magistrates of your
own choosing, in stead of such a glorious happiness as you have imagined as
beforesaid, through the desperate wickedness of the men of this age, is it not
more probable the quite contrary would have ensued?

26 I pray you what were the acts of the Sodomites when they became all
Magistrates through an equal general ease, from a mighty fullness of bread, and
such like: if you have any spiritual faith in you to believe the Record, read
the first chapter to the Romans, and there you may see the effects of this your
natural wisdom of general happiness to the Creation, or Nations.

27 Again, because of the endlesness of man's reasoning against that innocent
peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Spirit full of glory, belonging unto
all those that are made obedient to this heavenly Rule; therefore I shall write
a little further concerning this needful point.

28 If this Golden Rule be general, and without obedience to it no man can
enjoy true peace, some men may say unto me, Are the Magistrates excluded from
obedience to it, because they are Lawmakers?

29 From the Holy Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, to this I answer: It is
impossible for any Civil Magistrate to be obedient to this Rule, because you
know then, that he could not execute justice upon any man upon what account
soever.

30 Again, whether a Magistrate be a just or unjust person, yet you may know,
that upon a civil account, he represents the person or place of the righteous
Judge of quick and dead; wherefore according to his obedience or disobedience
unto his commands, he shall be rewarded in this world, or that to come;
Therefore know, that since the God of glory clothed himself with flesh and bone
in the form of a man, to kill, or consent to murder the Head Magistrate, it is
as if thou had murdered the King of Glory himself.

31 Though nothing comes to pass by chance or fortune, but by the Providential
Decree of the most High God, yet no man can be cleared in his Conscience from
the guilt of innocent blood all his days, if secretly or openly he shall
consent to kill the Ruler of the Nation, without an immediate command by voice
of words from the God of heaven and earth.

32 Suppose the former Governors of these Nations were guilty of much innocent
blood, and ruin of Families, by their Spiritual Courts so called, and through
their imaginary wisdom, Lucifer-like, sat in the throne of God, commanding men
to worship their inventions, triumphing over all tender Consciences which could
not bow down to their Egyptian Calves; and yet what spiritual or sober rational
man can blame those men for their willful bloody-mindedness, seeing a blind
fiery zeal moved them to it, in reference to the worship of their God?

33 If any of them through covetousness of silver or honor amongst earthly
Princes, did only pretend a Divine Worship, and through secret envy to those
which could not obey their commands, did ruin men to the utmost of their
power, through those Jesuitical Counselors who were Atheistical, can any sober
man imagine or think that those men were not oftentimes convinced of
hypocritical irrationality, besides a secret fear of eternal vengeance,
notwithstanding all their fleshly glory, through which they were strengthened in
their spirits, to flatter themselves up with vain hope that there was no God at
all; or if there was any God, to cheat themselves with a conceit that it was
irrational cruelty, for a man to think that the Creator could be so unmerciful,
as to create men for eternal damnation, in reference to momentary infirmities
which their frail natures could by no means prevent.

34 Again, if thou which thus reasonest did truly understand, that thou had
no power in thy self to withstand these natural evils beforesaid, thou could
not possibly then commit them; but this is hid from thine eyes by the secret
wisdom of the most High God, that thou might clear his divine Justice, in
reference to thy former cruelties, with everlasting thoughts, that thou
might have done otherwise when thou wast in thy earthly pomp if thou would.

35 If the God of Glory should neither recompense men in this life, nor in that
to come, for all their wilful vainglorious bloody cruelties, which they think
they could prevent if they would, then indeed these seeming wise men may justly
say, if there be a God, he is so far from any spiritual equity, that he falls
short of all rational equity whatsoever.

36 Another infallible demonstration of the truth of this writing, is this,
that though many writings extant are more accute in form of words, yet
throughout this Book thou shall find no point absolutely contradicting it
self, nor one another.

37 Again, another testimony of the truth of this writing, is this, That it
discovers the vanity of all formal or irrational opinion in man concerning
God, Worship, Angels, Devil, Sin, Heaven, or Hell.

38 By this infallible Rule also thou may know, that this Epistle proceeded
from a spirit infinitely above all kind of reasoning in man or Angels, because
it allows no man, upon what pretense soever, to murder one another, or to
sit in Gods throne to cut off the Head Magistrate, or to rebel against him with
a sword of steel, or to speak evil of him, or desire evil unto him.

39 Moreover, though this Book was penned by the hand of a sinful man, yet by
this undeniable Argument thou may know it proceeded from that Spirit that
cannot be deceived; because it denies all power in man or angel, as to be
capable to act spiritual or natural good to one another, or to resist spiritual
or natural evil without a continued light proceeding from a spiritual body, too
infinitely glorious to be essentially united to heaven, earth, angels, or men,
yet this wonderful God is now for everlasting abiding in a body of flesh and
bone; therefore not a bone of him was suffered to be broken upon the tree, or
corrupted in the grave, only his Godhead natural Life was left in this world
for an everlasting Consolation unto those that shall attain to believe that it
was the unvaluable Lifeblood of the only Wise God himself, that was freely
poured out unto death for the redemption from the power of sin, and fear of
eternal death, and for a dreadful witness at the Great Day against those men
that shall be left to their own unbelieving spirit, to vilify the glorious God
for abasing himself into the likeness of sinful mortals.

CHAP. XV.
1 Of the Error of Errors in men, who say that there is no other God or Christ
but in this Creation only. 2 Several Objections and Answers concerning the
death of the soul. 3 The light of Christ in man; is the invisible image of God
which purifieth the inward filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and presents the
certain truth of an eternal life of glory or shame. 4 No need of a new birth,
if there be a sufficient light of Christ in generation to conduct to heaven. 5
Children cannot understand spiritual or natural good or evil, so need not
Christ's spiritual gifts in the womb for eternal happiness. 6 A great error to
believe that the essence of the eternal Spirit dwells in any man but in the
Lord Jesus only. 7 Two marks of Reprobates.

YOu that are truly spiritual may know, that there are many thousands of
Atheistical minded men and women at this instant, which are possessed with a
spirit reprobated unto all inward and outward purity, out of which there is no
redemption, what ever men shall vainly imagine to the contrary; only their
decreed time of eternal damnation in the sight of elect men and Angels is
fixed: These are those which say all things comes naturally of themselves: Also
they will say, there is no beginning of any thing at all, but from all eternity
all things were as you see, and so shall continue to all eternity.

2 There are many of these men, which appear in Temples of Stone, or else
where, as experimental speakers of the everlasting Gospel, and are more accute
in a seeming glorious language then most men.

3 Usually they will talk of one pure being within all men only; also if they
branch forth this their pretended God, unto their deceived hearers, you shall
hear them utter these or such like expressions: Brethren, be not so carnally
minded as to think of a God in the form of a man sitting in a Heaven above the
Stars, but mind that spiritnal God in the invisible Heaven of your hearts.
Again they will say, that spirit of the Father within you, is that God of love,
beauty, virtue, with all variety of glorious perfections whatsoever, if you
were but once acquainted with it; wherefore if fears of eternal damnation seize
upon you, they are apt to say it arises from your ignorant conceivings of a
God and a Heaven at a distance. Again, for mannaging of this their sophistry,
that their deceit might not be perceived; they will treat upon these and such
like Scriptures, Christ in you the hope of Glory: know ye not that Christ is in
you except ye be reprobates: as he is, so are we in this present world: the
Kingdom of Heaven is within you: at that day shall ye know that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you: that they all may be one, as thou O Father
art in me, and I in thee: Even that they may be also one in us: he that is born
of God sins not.

4 Thus they wrest these literal Scriptures to hide their fleshly glory, and
subtle Hypocrifie, that their eternal vengeance may exceed all men's in this
age, at the visible appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ with his mighty Angels.

5 You that are endued with a gift of spiritual distinguishing between
perishing glittering words, and glorious things which are eternal, if you
observe these sorts of golden sophisters, you shall find that whatever
scripture they treat upon they carry it in an allegorical notional mystery of
nothing but mere empty words only: As for example, if they speak of the
persons of Cain and Abel, or of the persons of the bondwoman and her son, and
the freewoman and her son, they will bid you look within you, and you may see
them all there in seeming contrariety only.

6 Again, if you observe these men, you shall seldom or ever hear them speak of
any thing after this life: but they will tell you of a death and resurrection
of man in this life, but as concerning this mortal soul and body of ours
entering into the grave or death, and quickening again a new and glorious life,
by raising this mortal body into a glorified condition, in the visible sight of
it self, and presence of a personal God, elect men, and Angels, in a kingdom of
eternal glory, these are riddles or uncertain things at a great distance.

7 It is not a God, or Christ, or throne of eternal glory above the Stars,
which no mortal man can make visible unto men's eyes, that will cloth men in
plush-Jackets, and feed their bodies with dainty delicacies; no, no the
infallible truth concerning a bodily resurrection of a purified spirit unto
eternal Glory, and a personal appearing of an impurified soul unto everlasting
shame, will yield no such Peacocks feathers, nor Dives dishes as those are: the
Apostles and those of the same faith with them will one day personally appear
again, to bear record unto this truth.

8 My brethren, what difference is there between those men which glory of a
God, Christ, Heaven, Word, Ordinances, and Salvation without them, and are
ignorant of the teachings of the Holy Spirit within them, and those men which
glory of all these heavenly things within them, and yet are ignorant of that
glorious personal Majesty and Throne of immortallity without them?

9 Are not these men those hypocritical Pharisees, and Atheistical Sadducees,
which indeavored to cover their nakedness with inward and outward leaves of
rational words only?

10 Do not all men which confess a Creator, conclude that his spirit is
infinite, immortal, unchangeable, and eternal?

11 Does not every man possess a distinct living spirit in his own body?

12 Is not every man a sinner, and subject to all manner of loathsome diseases
of mortallity?

13 Wherefore if this one pure spirit of God himself was dwelling in the body
of any mortal man whatsoever, is it possible, think you, that that man could be
desirous after carnal copulation, or subject unto any kind of putrefaction
whatsoever?

14 Who art thou then poor vain perishing clay, which boasts of possessing of
a most holy, immortal spirit within thee, and yet can not enjoy any life of
peace in the least, without a continual supply of fleshly carnalities without
thee?

15 Again, art thou capable of possessing an infinite eternal spirit, which art
but a finite piece of fading dust?

16 Art thou so vain in thy imagination, as to think that such a changeable
piece of confusion as thou art, can possibly be capable to bear about thee that
bright burning glorious spirit of the unchangeable God, whose glory is above
all heavens, at whose power of a word speaking, all kind of lights within this
Creation are immediately subject to enter into silent darkness, as if they had
never had any being?

17 Again, is not the glorious body of Jesus Christ in the Throne of the
Father, the eternal Son of God?

18 And is not all the divine Godhead of the everlasting Father, living and
reigning in him bodily?

19 And is this spirit any more then one spirit united unto that one body of
glorious flesh and bone of our Lord Jesus Christ?

20 And is not all the treasures of wisdom hid in this Jesus only, and is it
not from his fullness that we all receive grace for grace?

21 If we have any true light at all ruling in us, if this be truth, which none
can deny but notional Atheists or bloody minded Formallists, what art thou then
but that outcast angellical Reprobate which does not only divide the Godhead
spirit of Christ Jesus our Lord, but impudently affirmest, that thou and all of
thy opinion, do possess the very Godhead spirit within you?

22 And not only so, but like a Devil incarnat, as thou art, thou cursest
those that discovers this thy horrible blasphemy.

23 Again, thou which carriest thy God about thee where ever thou art, when
thou have breathed out thy sinful Soul, and all thy light or life, into silent
dust or death, where then is thy inward God and self become?

24 But it may be thou will reply, and say, thy soul is immortal and cannot
die: to this lying conceit of thine, I answer by way of Quere:

25 Do thou indeed believe any truth in Scripture Records?

26 If thou reply thou do, then my Q^ere is this, whether thou think that
the soul of Christ when he was in a body of flesh on this earth, were not as
immortal as any other man's is, or rather immortal alone, and all others mortal
besides him?

27 Well then, if I prove that the soul of Christ died and was buried, can
thou then be convinced that thy sinful soul is mortal and must die also?

28 In the 53. of Isaiah it is written, he poured out his soul unto death.
Again it is written, that his soul was heavy unto death. Again it is written,
that his soul was made an offering for sin: Again in the first of Revel. it is
written, I am he that was dead and am alive, and behold, I live for evermore.
Again it is written in St. John, I lay down my life of my self, no man takes it
from me: I have power to lay it down, and power to take it again: Christ
therefore died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the
dead and the quick: In the second of the Acts of the Apostles it is written,
thou will not leave my soul in grave, nor suffer thy holy One to see corruption.

29 Behold, is it not as clear as the light in these Scripture Records, that
the pure soul of Christ himself died and was buried in the Grave for a moment?
and do thou think thy sinful soul is immortal, and shall escape death?

30 Again, thou can not be so fortish as to think that the spirit of Christ
was buried alive in the grave; neither can thou possibly prove by these
Scriptures that his soul was not buried with his body in the grave: how then
can thou, or dare thou say that thy polluted soul is immortal, and cannot
die?

31 Again, did that spotless soul that was incapable of the least motion of
folly, enter into death, and do thou think that thy soul shall escape death,
which naturally is become so full of folly, that it is utterly incapable in it
self of all kind of purity whatsoever?

32 If no sinful man be capable of the in-dwelling of the Spirit of God, some
men may say unto me, What is that spirit, light, or life of Christ, spoken of
in the Scriptures, which all men are made partakers of, except they be
reprobates?

33 From a divine gift of the Eternal Spirit, to this I answer: The elect of
God being endued with the virtues, fruits, or effects of the most Holy Spirit,
these heavenly graces or motions in the mind proceeding from the glorious
Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, are called by the divine Titles of God
himself, because they are of the very same nature, operating the very same
effects of immortal glory in the end of the world, as it did upon Christ
himself.

34 Again, you know it is written in Scripture, The fruits of the Spirit is
love, peace, gentleness, goodness, faith, long suffering brotherly kindness,
and such like, against which there is no Law. Also it is written. That men were
made partakers of the divine nature, and that Christ did live in men's hearts by
faith. And that Christ said, He was the Vine, and his Apostles or Believers
were the Branches, and his Father, or Spirit, was the Husbandman. Again it is
written, Let the same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus. Likewise
it is written, There were diversity of gifts or operations of the Spirit of God
in men.

35 My spiritual brethren which wait for a Crown that fades not away, if you
compare Scriptures with Scriptures, you may see then that no sinful mortal did,
or possibly could possess the in-dwelling essence of the Spirit of God himself,
but only the in-shining motions, operations, voices, virtues, fruits, or
effects of that most glorious Spirit.

36 Again it is written, That Christ is the Light that lights every man that
comes into the world; and why so? Truly because there is no other Father,
Spirit, Creator, or God at all, but Christ Jesus alone to give light unto men
or angels; that is, all men which are enlightened with the true light that
leads unto life eternal, receive it only from the glorious Spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

37 Again, though it is said, that Christ is the Light of the world, or that he
gives light unto every man that comes into the world, yet it does not
therefore follow, that all men are partakers of the light of Christ in them,
unto life eternal.

38 Furthermore, I confess there is so much light of Christ in the most
wickedst of men to convince them of sin, but not to restrain them, or convert
them from evil.

39 Again, there is a twofold light of Christ in men: the one is literal, and
the other is spiritual.

40 Now you that are truly enlightened from above, may understand that there is
naturally so much light of Christ's Law written in every sensible man's spirit to
convince him of good and evil, and to cause him oftentimes to confess the
truth, and to wish that he could love it, or do it, or that he might die the
death of the righteous, like unto Baalam:

41 But though this legal light of Christ in men be never so great in measure,
yet no man was ever capable by it to be made inwardly obedient unto the spirit
of Christ our Lord Jesus.

42 Therefore who ever thou art which say, that all men have so much light
in them as will make them happy if they will, thou know not as yet what it
is to possess that spiritual new birth of true light unto life eternal.

43 That light of Christ which does not only convince a man of inward
Rebellions, and convert him from the ruling power of them, may also be called
by a twofold name, either a created light, or a renewed light.

44 This light of Christ in man is that invisible image of God, which does not
only purify the inward filthiness of flesh and spirit, but does also in some
measure present unto the understanding the certain truth of an eternal personal
glory, or everlasting shame of a life to come.

45 Again, you know it is written, that except a man be born again, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Also it is written, From his fullness we all
receive, and grace for grace.

46 My spiritual brethren, if a man's understanding is not capable to comprehend
any thing of the invisible and visible things of the Kingdom of Glory, except
the eternal Spirit of Christ Jesus convey a new and shining light into him,
what then think you, will become of those men which say, there is so much light
of Christ planted in every man's spirit, that is sufficient to make him
eternally happy, if he will but hearken unto it?

47 If all men which are begotten and brought forth by the spirits of sinful
parents, were naturally endued in the womb with such a measure of the light of
Christ in them, that will safely conduct them into the Kingdom of Glory if they
will, what need then would there be of any new birth at all from the Lord Jesus
Christ? Or what man would want any further light from the Holy Spirit of the
only everliving God?

48 Again it is written, When Christ ascended on high that he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men.

49 My spiritual brethren, you know that by nature we are all under a
tyrannical yoke of spiritual darkness, and all manner of fleshly uncleanness
whatsoever:

50 Also you know, that innocent infants, though defiled in their natures
through generation, yet they are neither capable to understand spiritual or
natural good or evil; therefore they have no need of Christ's spiritual gifts in
the womb, for to ensure themselves of their own eternal happiness:

51 Again, if the Lord Jesus Christ alone is the light and life of men, and if
all men that are saved must of necessity receive a new light unto their dark
souls from his Divine Spirit, then without controversy those men as yet are
utterly ignorant of the new and true birth of the ever-living Jesus, which say
every man has so much light of Christ in them that is sufficient to salvation,
if they will.

52 Again, if every man have the spirit of Christ living in his conscience, as
many men vainly imagine, what then is become of the spiritual body, or that
Jesus that ascended into the throne of his glory, in the visible fight of men
and angels?

53 Or what man has any need of his spiritual gifts, or heavenly graces at
all, if his Christ and he was conceived and born together from the womb of his
mother?

54 When the Apostle said, For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and from his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace, I would fain
know from any man whatsoever, whether that God or Christ were in them when they
spoke or writ those words.

55 Again, if that Godhead spirit of Christ Jesus our Lord had been within them
when they uttered those speeches, I suppose it had been more proper for them to
have said, For in us dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. If the
Apostles had always possessed the spirit of God or Christ within them, then
they uttered but vain words, when they speak of receiving of grace or truth,
from a personal Christ without them.

56 Again, if Christ or his Spirit had been within the Apostles when they spoke
of his divine Glory, or Godhead fullness of grace and truth, would it not have
been more proper for them to have said, from that God or Christ within us, we
are filled with all manner of spiritual consolations, or heavenly perfections
whatsoever?

57 If Christ or his Spirit were within men when they uttered those words, all
faith or hope in reference to eternal glory was vain, and of no effect: why?
because if men have their God or Christ within them only, they are no more
under the teachings of another spirit, but are as glorious already as ever they
are like to be: But what says the Scripture, If our hopes were in this life
only, we were of all men most miserable. Again concerning these words, Christ
in you the hope of glory: Or know ye not that the Spirit of Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates?

58 My beloved brethren, what need any man hope for glory, if he has the
Spirit of Glory resting upon him already?

59 Again, I hope no man will say that he has a Christ in him that hopes after
glory, or stands in need of any glorification whatsoever: Well then, the mind
of the Spirit of Christ in those words was this; That except your understanding
be enlightened from the eternal Spirit of a glorified Christ in that heavenly
throne above the stars, ye are but reprobates.

60 Or thus: Except you are filled with the gifts of graces of that glorious
God-man Christ Jesus, who is ascended far above all Heavens, Angels, or men,
know ye not that you are but in the State of reprobation?

61 Or, as if the Apostle should have said, Know ye not that you are but meet
reprobates, if ye glory of a God or Christ within you, and deny the Godhead
person of that Lord Jesus Christ that was crucified upon a tree without you?

62 Again, who ever thou art which glories of a spiritual union with a God or
Christ within thee, and despisest a personal glorified Christ of flesh and bone
without thee, yea and distinct from thee in another world, I say from his
eternal Spirit thou art but a reprobate.

63 Who ever thou art which boasts of a God, and a Christ and his Ordinances,
and of a glory to come without thee in the highest heavens, if thou shall be
left to the pride and envy of thy formal spirit, to condemn the invisible
teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ in his innocent people, because they are
contrary to thy opinion, I say from the everliving Emanuel, that thou art also
but a reprobate.

CHAP. XVI.
1 Of diverse comparisons of the Spirit or Person of Christ, unto the face of
the natural Sun. 2 No man or Angel can be capable of the in-dwelling of Gods
essence, but his own person only.

THe Spirit or person of Christ may fitly be compared unto the face of the
natural Sun in diverse respects: you may know that the natural spirit of the Sun
by virtue of the decreed word of the Lord, is so exceeding fiery glorious, that
no created thing that has natural life in it, is capable of its in-dwelling
brightness, but its own body or face only:

2 So likewise that infinite Spirit abiding within the glorious body or face of
our Lord Jesus Christ, is so unspeakeable fiery glorious, that no created
spirit of man, or Angel is able to bear the indwelling essence of it, but its
own body or face only.

3 Again, you know that all natural things of the day are preserved only by
virtue of that inward light, life, beauty or glory in them which shines
through the body or face of the Sun only.

4 So likewise all spiritual light, life, beauty, joy, or glory within the
spirits of elect men and Angels, shines only through the glorious heavenly
mouth of Christ Jesus our Lord.

5 Again, though both sensible and insensible creatures are preserved in their
well beings, by virtue of a measurable light and heat proceeding from the Sun,
you may know that if the essence of the Sun were on this earth, it would not
only put out the fire, but also immediately consume all things to ashes or dry
sand.

6 So likewise, though the spiritual well beings of elect men and Angels, are
only preserved by virtue of a measurable light and life proceeding from that
bright shining spirit, through the face of Christ Jesus our Lord, yet if the
essence of his spirit were within the spirits of any created beings, it would
consume them immediately to powder.

7 Again, though all created beings under the Sun, are enlivened and continued
by virtue of its light and heat, through which, according to their kind, they
are full of joy, yet if the Sun should absent it self a little too long, all
his former light would vanish like smoke, and the creature would both languish
and perish, for want of a new supply from its presence: so likewise it is with
elect men and Angels, for though that inshining light and life be of the very
same nature of God himself, yet if his spirit should wholly retain its glorious
brightness within his own body, all its former light or life would either be
subject to be defiled as Adams was, or else it would perish for want of the
renewing presence of his glorious spirit.

8 Again, through that consolation flowing from the inshining light of the Sun,
you know in all sensible or rational creatures, there is a desire to behold
that bright shining face from whence their joys proceed.

9 So likewise through that spiritual joy and hopes of glory flowing from the
inspiring light of the Son of God, there is as strong desire in those that
enjoy this light, to behold that glorious face from whence it proceeded.

10 Again, if the Sun had not a distinct body or face to give forth his light
into the Creation, you know there could be no sunshine at all:

11 So likewise you may also know, that if the God of glory had not a person or
immortal face, to display the sunbeams of his heavenly glory into elect men
and Angels, there could be no God all all.

12 Therefore you that are truly spiritual may know, that all that light, life,
or glory, shining in the spirits of elect men or Angels, does not proceed from
a God or Christ within them, but from an eternal spirit of a God or a Christ
without them, too transcendent glorious to be possessed by Heaven, Earth,
Angels, or men, as beforesaid.

13 Again, though the natural life of created beings, by the decree of the most
high God, be continued by virtue of the inshining light of the Sun, yet you may
know that what ever joy the creatures are possessed thereby, it does neither add
nor diminish unto the glory of the Sun in the least:

14 So likewise though the spiritual light of elect men and Angels be
everlastingly continued by virtue of the inshining light of the eternal spirit,
yet you may also understand, that what joy or glory soever the creatures are
possessed withal, that it does neither add nor diminish the Creators glory in
the least: therefore you which are truly spiritual may understand, that if any
man or Angel could be possessed with the indwelling essence of the eternal
spirit, it could not possibly be avoided, but he must become infinite,
immortal, unchangeable, and eternal, even as the Creator himself is.

15 Again, whether creatures are possessed with joy or sorrow, life or death,
by an extraordinary light proceeding from the Sun, yet you may know, that
according to his understanding he glories in himself equally, in reference unto
what was effected by him; so likewise whether creatures are possessed with
spiritual joy or sorrow, eternal life, o^ death, by a more then ordinary
presence or absence of the eternal spirit, yet you may also understand that the
most glorious God equally rejoices in himself, in relation unto what was
produced:

16 Again, though the nature of the Sun through its cretaed brightness is so
exceedingly glorious, that it is utterly incapable of natural polution from any
creatures within its orb, yet you know that things which are not by virtue of
his power, in measure qualified with a suitable capacity to receive his in
shining light, are rather hardened or destroyed by his appearance, then any way
comforted or revived in the least, witness the fire or any thing else of an
adamantine nature:

17 So likewise it is with the Son of God the everlasting Creator; for though
his eternal spirit in its own nature is so infinitely pure, that if it be his
divine pleasure it destroys all impurity immediately, and wholly converts a
polluted creature into its own divine likeness, you may also know, that if the
spirits of men, or Angels, by his power, be not in some measure qualified to
receive his glorious in-comes, instead of dissolving their spirits into a soft
and sweet pleasantness, it hardens their legal spirits with envy against the
Creator, like unto brass or the nether-milstone, according to that of Paul
where he said, they were a sweet savor unto God of life unto life, in them
that are saved, and of death unto death, in them that perish.

CHAP. XVII.
1 No man's salvation or damnation lies in his own will, but in the prerogative
of God. 2 Diverse absurdities which follow from the opinion that Christ is only
within men. 3 A Question and Answer concerning a twofold presence of God in
the creature. 4 If the essential Spirit were united unto creatures, it could
not be infinite.

THis I would gladly have men and women to understand, which were elected unto
glory, that the eternal salvation or damnation of created beings lies not in
the will, power, or desire, of men, or Angels, or in any divine light received
from the holy spirit that made them, but only within the glorious breast of
the divine Majesty himself:

2 That neither elect men, nor Angels, may glory in themselves or render
praise, honor, power, wisdom, or salvation unto any spiritual light, joy, or
glory whatsoever, why because that is but the Sun beams of life eternal
shining in them; but as most due is, by virtue of that light, they may return
all praise and glory unto that infinite Majesty upon the Throne of glory
without them.

3 Wherefore you know it is written: That it is not in him that wills, or in
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Also it is written, To will is
present, but how to perform I know not: Also it is written. Every branch that
bears not fruit in me, he takes away; and every one that bears fruit, he
purges, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the word
which I have spoken unto you. The words that I speak unto you are spirit and
life.

4 I would fain know of any man, whether the spirit of Christ were not in his
own body, when he spoke those words unto his Apostles or Disciples.

5 If it be granted it was, which none can deny but reprobates, then that light
of Christ in men or Angels, cannot be the essential spirit of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but a spiritual word proceeding through his mouth from the throne of
his infinite glory, as it did formerly on this earth the footstool of his
divine Majesty.

6 If there should be no other spiritual God or Christ, but what dwells in
the spirits of men or Angels, then of necessity this must follow, that every
man and Angels is a God or Christ to himself.

7 It is not to be wondered at, that many thousands should be so easily
persuaded of attaining to a perfection in this mortality, if they be possessed
with the God of heaven and earth.

8 If there be no other God o^ Creator but within men only, I would fain know
for what end men so migh^ily contend with one another, about a God or worship
due unto him?

9 Or why they vex one another by writings or speakings, unless they are
hurried on for silver, or an everlasting name?

10 If there be no other God or Christ but within men's consciences only, is it
not one of the maddest things in the world, for men to talk of rebellion
against the divine Majesty, or of any cruelty acted between man and man
whatsoever?

11 Is not the divine nature of the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, all
Wisdom, Power, Glory, Love, Meekness, Patience, Long-suffering, Justice,
Righteousness, yea Salvation it self: or condemnation to whom it pleases, for
manifesting the glory of its power?

12 Sure I am that none can, will, or dare deny this truth but reprobates:
Wherefore if the very spirit of God were living within the spirits of men,
could there possibly then be any thing else, but a godlike harmony between them?

13 Is not the eternal spirit of Christ Jesus in it self a glorious order, and
is not every man living at varience within himself, and so at the best is but a
disorderly piece of contradiction or confusion in himself?

14 If this be truth which none can deny, but vain glorious cast aways, how
then think you it possible, that any mortal man that is but polluted dust,
should be capable of the indwelling essence of the Spirit of God, or if he
enjoyed the eternal spirit, what could be in him but a glorious harmony?

15 If no created being is capable of the indwelling essence of the Spirit of
our Lord Jesus Christ, because of its incomprehensible glory; but its own body
only, some men may say unto me, if the Spirit of God be infinite, what person,
place, or creatures can be excluded of its invisible presence, from that light
of life eternal?

16 To this I answer: There is a twofold invisible presence of God in all
sensible or insensible beings, that have any light or virtue in them.

17 There is a natural presence of God by virtue of creation, which shall
perish and come to confusion, for everlasting:

18 Also there is a spiritual presence of God in elect mankind by virtue of
redemption, which gloriously increases and continues to all eternity.

19 Again, what ever natural wise men imagine or think, from the spirit of all
truth it self, I declare, that all created natural light, life, or joy, both
visible and invisible, shall become utter darkness, and a Chaos of everlasting
confusion, because though it made not it self, it is as contrary to the nature
of that spirit that made it, as light and darkness, or life and death.

20 Who ever thou art unto whom this seems strange, if thou wast in nature as
wise as Solomon, yet if thou have no distinction in thee, between this natural
perishing God of time, and that spiritual flourishing God of eternity, as yet
thou art in utter darkness concerning any heavenly thing whatsoever.

21 Though all natural or spiritual light do virtually flow from the divine
Spirit of Christ Jesus our Lord, yet if that eternal Spirit were not a glorious
being distinct from all created beings, it could not possibly be infinite?

22 Why? because you may understand, that infinite life does not consist in
bigness or bulk of things, but in its exceeding brightness of wisdom, power,
and glory in it self, in that it can contain its infinite brightness within its
own person only, or let forth his inshining glory by degrees in the spirit of
elect men, or Angels, as it pleases him.

23 Though all light or life in men, or Angels, proceed from the natural or
divine presence of the one holy Spirit of God himself, yet if that eternal
Spirit were essentially united unto those creatures, it could not possibly then
be infinite.

24 To be essentially dwelling within all living things, is not infiniteness,
but finitness: but, as beforesaid, to be a glorious being in it self, in the
bigness of man, and essentially distinct from Heavens, Earth, Angels, and Men,
and yet from so small a compass, though at never so small a distance, all
created beings in heaven or in earth to be virtually filled with his divine, or
natural presence, in their measures, according to the pleasure of his good will
by a word speaking, in this is all infiniteness indeed.

25 If there were no God or Creator at all, but what does live increated
beings, then it is possible that all beings, and their indwelling God may
eternally vanish together, because there is that in them which is more natural
to provoke them all to murder one another, and kill themselves, then the good
of one another: for alas, you know that it is both a common and easy thing
oftentimes with small means for men to destroy themselves or one another; and
is it not by the same rule, as easy totally to cut off all the creation at
once?

26 If this be truth, which no sober man can deny, what then would become of
men and their Christ, if this total dissolution at once should fall upon them?

27 If the Spirit of the most high God be so infinitely vast, boundless, or
that it is both the light and life of all spiritual or natural things or places
whatsoever, as is abundantly declared, some unsatisfied men in this point may
say unto me, That to confine this incomprehensible Spirit of the omnipresent
God of Heaven and Earth, into one single person and place at once, like unto a
poor mortal man, seems unto us an imprisoning of infiniteness into a narrow
compass, instead of declaring its incomprehensible glory: from a divine gift of
life eternal. To this I answer:

28 Is it not rather an imprisoning of the everliving God, and robbing him
wholly of his infinite glory, for any man to divide his most blessed Majesty
into distinct persons, or to divide his Godhead Spirit into all spirits of men,
and Angels, leaving no throne or person for the divine glory to be in, but his
created beings only.

29 In stead of honoring that Spirit within the glorious person of Christ Jesus
our Lord, does not those men that affirm the indwelling of that infinite spirit
in the whole Creation, not only share the divine glory and Godhead titles of
the eternal Spirit amongst the lying creatures, but also wholly deny any other
Creator, or eternal Spirit, within or without men, but perishing nature only,
whatever they pretend to the contrary?

30 What dishonor or disadvantage is it unto an infinite Spirit, to possess his
ravishing glories to himself within a distinct body of his own? nay is it not
altogether advantageous unto his divine Majesty, that it should be so, and that
it can be no other ways? for alas, you know that it stands to good sense or
reason, that if the God of Glory were only an invisible spirit dwelling within
the Creation, he could not the^ possess any new joys or ravishing glories to
himself, but the whole creation of men or Angels must be partakers with him, as
soon as he.

31 Therefore you that are truly spiritual, may know, that those men that talk
of a God, or a Christ, living in men's consciences only, and cannot endure to
hear of a distinct personal God upon the throne of his glory in the Heavens
above the Stars,

32 What ever God-like shape they appear in, as yet they are but freewill
redemptionists, or refined naturalists at the best: and all their speakings,
though mixed with many words of truth, tend to nothing else but meritorious
popery from themselves, and tyrannical Prelacy over one another.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 A discourse that the divine being is clothed with flesh and bone. 2 How God
knows all things in the world. 3 Of the manner of Gods taking upon him humane
nature. 4 What the form of God was before he became flesh. 5 No spirit can
enjoy happiness or misery without a body.

IS not Heaven, Earth, Angels, and Men, as they are created beings subject to
change, or to be changed?

2 Does not all men that acknowledge a Creator, conclude that his spirit is
infinite, unchangeable, immortal, and eternal, as beforesaid?

3 Wherefore if this infinite or boundless Spirit of the Eternal Majesty were
dwelling within the spirits of men, or Angels, could it possibly be avoided,
but every thing then would become infinite, unchangeable, immortal, and eternal
in it self as he is?

4 Does not the Scriptures call the glorious Spirit of the everliving God by
titles, a consuming fire, and everlasting burnings?

5 O all ye lucepherian despisers of a glorious God, in the person of a man,
wonder and perish, at a miracle of all miracles that shall be declared unto the
general view of men in this place:

6 Wherefore behold, ye elect and precious Jewels of divine glory, though the
eternal spirit of your Creator and Redeemer be of so fiery glorious a nature,
that neither Fire, Air, Earth, Water, Sun, Moon, Stars, Heavens, Earth, Angels,
Men, nor any thing else is capable of the indwelling of it one moment, without
being consumed to Ashes, Dust, Sand, or Powder, yet this infinite bright
burning spirit, is contained within a single person of flesh and bone glorified:

7 Yea, and is so united unto it, that all its divine pleasures naturally
flows from its essential owness to all ete^nity:

8 Insomuch that from that unerring spirit I positively declare, against men,
or Angels, that this fiery glorious spirit cannot possibly possess any sensible
living being, out of that blessed body of flesh and bone in glory, no more then
the mortal soul of a man can live without its natural body of flesh, blood and
bone in shame.

9 Though the heavenly body of the eternal Majesty be very flesh and bone it
self, yet I would gladly have you that are spiritual, to understand that
through the indwelling of its Godhead spirit, it is so fiery glorious, that
neither men, nor Angels, can behold his fa^^ and live, unless their spirits be
strengthened by virtue of its inshining excellency.

10 Though the glorious body of the everliving God be very flesh and bone, yet
you may understand, that its clearer then Cristal, brighter then the Sun,
swifter then thought, yea and infinitely more softer then Down, and sweeter
then Roses.

11 You may also know, that the visible sight of so glorious a face, is that
which will eternally ravish the spirits of men and Angels.

12 You may also understand, that though the body of Christ glorified, be very
flesh and bone of a burning, bright, swift, soft, sweet nature, beyond all
expression of men or Angels, yet it is of an immortal, fiery, glorious
softness, or sweetness, and not of a mortal fiery nature mixed together, as the
most softest, or sweetest of pleasures in this world are.

13 Though the infinite Spirit of the unchangeable God, is clothed with his
eternal Son beforesaid, which was too pure to be subjected by sin, wrath,
death, hell, or the grave: yet you that are truly enlightened from on high, may
know, that by virtue of his wisdom or transcendent glory, he perfectly sees
through Heavens, Earth, Angels, and Men, at once, and knows all motions,
thoughts, desires, words, or actions in all things whatsoever, without charging
his spiritual memory in the least.

14 Therefore it is written, that the eyes of the Lord pass to and fro through
the earth, beholding the just and the unjust, and the Lord knows that the
heart of man is vain, and his imaginations are evil, and only evil, and
continually evil: and all evil things that are done now in secret with delight,
shall be revealed upon the house top or head of men's understandings, soon
enough, and with sorrow, pain, and shame enough, what ever is thought or said
to the contrary.

15 If the Spirit of the divine Majesty be so infinitely glorious, that no
created being is capable of the indwelling of its divine Godhead; some men may
say unto me, had not that man Christ called the Son of God, his being on the
woman's part from the loins of Mary his mother, as well as other children? If
this be truth which the Scriptures clearly demonstrated, how then could that
child Jesus be capable of the indwelling of an infinite spirit, any more then
any other child whatsoever?

16 Unto this curious query, from the unerring spirit, I answer, though that
child Christ Jesus had beginning of the seed of his Virgin Mother, as all
children have, yet he was that Holy One of Israel, which from eternity was a
spiritual body, in form like a man; therefore when he entered into the Virgins
Womb, he laid down his infinite spiritual glory by virtue of his Godhead power,
that he might be capable to transmute, create, or conceive himself of the
Virgins seed into a condition of pure flesh, blood, and bone, in a new and
wonderful way, for an everlasting astonishment unto elect men and Angels:

17 Wherefore the Virgin Mary his Mother was forewarned by the Angel of his
glorious and gracious purpose, that her soul might be prepared for that
marvelous incoming of her only God and Savior, to become the Redeemer of his
elect people from the power of sin, and fear of eternal death.

18 It is written, great is the mystery of godliness, which is, God was
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world received up to glory. Again it is
written, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a
servant.

19 Is there any more then one God? and was not Christ the form of this
invisible God, before he became the person of a man? and did not that spiritual
form of Christ Jesus enter into the Virgins Womb, and became a pure natural
form?

20 Moreover was not Christ and his Father only one uncreated, heavenly person
from all eternity?

21 Though I undoubtably affirm, that Christ Jesus eternally was the divine
form of the invisible God, yet I would not have any man imagine, or think, that
I go about to prove the Creator to be a body of flesh, blood, and bone from
eternity.

22 Neither would I willingly have any of the blessed of the Lord, to be so
grossly ignorant, as to think, that the glorious Creator could possibly be a
spiritual living substance, without a body or person.

23 If Christ Jesus, and the Father from all eternity, were but one distinct
person, some men may say unto me, What might the form of his uncreated Majesty
be before he became flesh from the light of life eternal?

24 To this I answer: His divine form did not consist of natural Earth, Air,
Water, or Fire, in the least; but is was a bright burning fiery glory of
uncompounded purities, continually satisfying it self with variety of divine
excellencies:

25 Though the spiritual person of the Holy One of Israel, was from eternity so
transcendently glorious, that no Elements could possibly contain him without
being immediately consumed to ashes, yet he was absolutely from the crown of
his glorious head, to the soles of his divine feet, in form like unto the first
man Adam.

26 You that possess the heavenly truth in you, may know the divine form of
Jesus Christ the everlasting Father, was of so pure, thin, or light nature,
that as beforesaid, it was swifter then thought, clearer then Cristal,
infinitely more glorious then the Sun, purer then the purest gold, or any thing
more precious:

27 So that when the eternal spirit moved him to enter into the Virgins Womb,
it being swifter then thought, and its body being of its own nature, he was in
her womb before she was aware of it, only by a wonderful change in her soul,
she felt him converting his Godhead glory into flesh, blood and bone, according
to his promise by the Angel Gabriel, this was that wonderful mystery of God the
everlasting Father, which manifested himself in a body of flesh, at which most
men and women stumble and perish.

28 Is any thing impossible for God to do, when his divine glory moves him to
it?

29 Moreover, is not the infinite power, wisdom, or glory of the everliving
God, most of all seen by men, or Angels, in the lowest abasing himself?

30 Do not all men which confess a Creator, conclude, that his holy spirit is
infinitely full of all divine qualifications whatsoever, and is the
incomprehensible Spirit of the Holy One of Israel, any thing at all without its
glorious virtues?

31 Is it possible, think you, that this eternal spirit could be sensible of
its heavenly glories, without a distinct body of its own, to enjoy them in? If
this be truth, the which none can gainsay but senceless sots, or simple saints,
then with controversy, Christ Jesus and the Father was eternally but only one
spiritual body in form like a man.

32 Is there any created being, whether sensible or insensible, either in
Heaven or in Earth, that possesses any kind of spiritual or natural motion,
heat, light, life, joy, or glory in the least, without a distinct body of its
own, suitable to its present condition?

33 Has the most wise Creator so ordered every living being that all the joy
they possess is in their own bodies, chiefly distinct from one another, and
that each others joy is nothing at all to one another, unless they be both
sensible of the same.

34 Can any sober man be so senseless, as to imagine or think, that the glorious
Creator of all spiritual and natural order, can possibly be any thing at all,
without a distinct body of its own, as abundantly beforesaid?

35 Are not all infinite creatures a mere Chaos of senseless matter, until they
are formed into distinct beings of themselves, and have names given them by God
and man, according to their natures, and are they any thing at all, until they
become living spirits in complete bodies of their own, as aforesaid?

36 This being known to be as true as truth it self, can it possibly be that he
that gave beings to all things, should not be something that is infinite also,
or a distinct glorious body having variety of holy Names attributed to him,
according to his divine nature, for the exaltation of his infinite Majestical
Person above all Heavens, Angels, and men.

CHAP. XIX.
1 Of the true spiritual Trinity in Unity. 2 Of the one personal divine
Majesty. 3 No Scripture mentions God to be three persons, only one God and
one person. 4 Why God called himself by a threefold name.

IN the next place I shall treat of that divine Trinity in Unity of the Holy
One of Israel.

2 You may remember I have already elsewhere in this Epistle clearly
demonstrated the horrible fallacy and absurdity of that old error of three
distinct persons or spirits, and but one God, from these words, For there are
three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and these
three are one.

3 My spiritual and literal brethren also, that have any desire in you to know
the truth, take special notice of this thing, there is not one positive record
in Scripture that affirms the God of Heaven and Earth to consist of three
persons.

4 Was not the eternal Jehovah called the Holy One of Israel in the Law?

5 Was not the eternal Jesus called the Holy One in the Saints time of the
Gospel?

6 Is not Jesus called a consuming fire in the Gospel, as well as Jehovah in
the Law?

7 Has not Jesus attributed unto him the Titles of a Creator, Ancient of Days,
Everlasting Father, Mighty God, or Redeemer, and such like, as well as Jehovah?

8 Was not all divine honor, glory, praise, might, or dominion by men and
angels, in as full a manner ascribed unto Jesus, as Jehevah?

9 Does not the Scripture say, that the Holy One of Israel will not give his
glory to another, and yet you know Christ Jesus had all glory from men and
Angels given unto him, who then is that eternal Jehovah, but the everlasting
Jesus? and what is that eternal Jesus, but the everlasting Jehovah?

10 Before the eternal Jehovah became Jesus in flesh, was not his invisible
Spirit the everlasting Father?

11 Was not that fiery glorious body wherein God the Father had his heavenly
habitation, that eternal Son of God?

12 Was not the Holy Ghost that Almighty Word that proceeded through his
heavenly mouth, when his holy Spirit moved him to speak?

13 Is not this Trinity in Unity, or Unity in Trinity more agreeable to the
Holy One of Israel then any other Trinity whatsoever, unto all men which
acknowledge but one eternal Being?

14 What difference is there between the holy Names of Father, Son, and Spirit,
and Lord Jesus Christ? was it any thing else but one and the same Godhead
person in a threefold condition, appearing unto men?

15 Again, if need be, will not the Names of Father and Lord bear one sense?
The names of Son and Jesus signify one thing, and may not the Titles of Christ
and Spirit, be of one signification also?

16 Does not the word Lord signify divine protection? and does not the word
Father bear the same sense?

17 Does not the word Jesus signify a Savior? and does not the word Son bear
the same sense? and does not the word Christ signify Crystal clearness, or
anointing? and does not the word Holy Ghost bear the same sense?

18 If this be truth, which none can gainsay but men as yet under spiritual
darkness, what difference is there then between the word Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, and Lord Jesus Christ? Are they not only names, words, or titles, in
relation to the only wise, immortal, invisible, distinct, glorious God-man,
blessed for ever and ever, in himself, and honored only of men and angels,
unto whom he is made manifest.

19 Though the eternal Jehovah had variety of divine Titles for the exaltation
of his infinite Majesty, under the legal or ceremonial worship of Moses and the
Prophets, was he ever owned by any more then one name of glorious God, or Holy
One of Israel?

20 If he had contained of three divine Persons or Spirits in coequal Godhead
glory, can any man be so senseless to think that he would have hid it from Moses
and Aaron, Abraham, David, and all those Prophets, with whom he was so familiar
in divine appearances, or wonderful miracles?

21 If the Most High and Mighty Jehovah was but only one spitual person, in
the times of Moses and the Prophets, which none can gainsay but men in Egyptian
darkness, are not those men at present utterly ignorant of the only wise God,
which endeavor by literal violence to persuade themselves and others, that the
Holy One of Israel is three persons, because he is called by a threefold name
in the New Testament?

22 You know in Scripture a man is called soul, body, and spirit, though he be
but one person.

23 Also you may know that men in highest places are called by a threefold
Title, as namely, Kings, excellent Majesty, or the like.

24 Though they attribute to themselves never so many honorable Titles, to
manifest their earthly greatness, that they might be dreadful in the spirits of
earthly minded people, yet you know they are but one person only;

25 So likewise though the eternal Jehovah be called by a threefold name of
Father, Son, Spirit, or Lord Jesus Christ; or though he has never so many
divine Titles attributed to him for exaltation of his infinite Majesty, within
the spirits of his redeemed ones, yet you may know, that he can be no more then
one glorious being only.

26 You that are truly spiritual may know, why the God of glory called himself
by a threefold name, because no man by humane learning should by the letter of
the Scripture truly know what the Holy One of Israel is, or was, that God alone
might have all the praise or glory in revealing himself unto mankind.

27 Christ Jesus the Holy One of Israel, called himself by a threefold name, in
reference to a threefold manner of appearance to his elect Israelites.

28 In his first appearance unto Moses and the Prophets, he was pleased to
manifest himself by the Divine Titles of Jehovah, the mighty God of Jacob, the
Holy One of Israel, and such like.

29 When the God of Glory abased himself in flesh in the form of a servant,
answerable unto that second appearance unto his chosen ones, you know he called
himself Jesus the Son of God, the son of man, the Savior, and such like.

30 Jesus Christ the Holy One of Israel, being ascended into the throne of his
former glory, now in his third and last appearance, he is pleased to call
himself by the names of holy Ghost, or Spirit, because of his immediate
spiritual teaching of his redeemed ones.

31 Or thus: the only God may be understood a spiritual Lion in the days of
Moses and the Prophets, a divine Lamb in the days of Christ and the Apostles, a
heavenly Dove in these our days of confused darkness.

32 Or thus, the Holy One of Israel may be described, the eternal Jehovah in
the Law, the eternal Jesus in the Gospel, the eternal Spirit in this age.

33 And yet but one only distinct personal Majesty, even from eternity, to
eternity.

34 Though the Lord of Life and Glory, commanded his Apostles to Baptize those
of the Faith, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet you know
their miracles were done by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

35 Whatever any literal monger shall object, you that are spiritual may know
that the Lord Jesus Christ, and Father, Son, and Spirit, bears but one sense.

36 Jesus Christ the Holy One of Israel, called himself by a threefold name of
Father, Son, and Spirit, in relation unto his threefold witness on earth, in
the words following, which are these; and there are three which bear witness in
the earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in
one.

CHAP. XX.
1 No title of honor ever attributed but to a Person. 2 Who it was that Christ
prayed unto in the days of his flesh. 3 The Creator distinct from all his
Creatures. 4 Of Gods Oath concerning his Transmutation into pure flesh and bone.

MY spiritual brethren, because all true and lasting peace wholly depends upon
a right understanding of the only wise God, and because most of the heirs of
glory are not clear in their understandings, concerning his personal Majesty,
though much has been declared to that purpose in this Epistle already, I shall
write distinctly concerning the Creator, and his immediate commissionate
Messengers, or Ambassadors, from these two threefold Scripture Records.

2 You know that in Scripture Records as beforesaid, a man is called by a
threefold name of Soul, Body, and Spirit, as if he contained of three distinct
essences, yet you know that in the originality of nature, he is but one
distinct personal being:

3 So likewise though the only wise God in Scripture Records be called by a
threefold name of Father, Son, and Spirit, or Lord Jesus Christ, as if he
contained of three distinct essences, yet you which are spiritual, may know,
that he is but only one distinct glorious person in form like a man.

4 If an earthly Monarch did not possess a distinct body, could there be
ascribed any honorable titles of Emperor, King, or such like unto him at all?

5 If the eternal Majesty were not a distinct person, what holy names could be
attributed unto him in the least?

6 Is it names, words, or titles, makes a King to be, or gives being to an
Emperor, without a natural person?

7 Is it divine words, names, or titles, makes a God to be, or gives being to a
Divine Majesty without a spiritual person?

8 You know that all the honorable titles in this world, to be vain and of none
effect, if there were not the person of a man to ascribe them unto.

9 You may know, that all honorable titles concerning a divine Majesty, would
also be of none effect, if there were not a spiritual person to attribute them
unto, or unless they were a signification of the divine nature and form of a
something that is infinite.

10 It is as clear as the purest light it self unto you that are experimentally
spiritual, that it is not names, words, or titles, proves God or Man to be any
living beings at all, except they be distinct persons, to manifest their
honorable names, as proceeding from comprehensible somethings, and not from
incomprehensible nothings.

11 If the God of Glory in Scripture Records should be called not only by
three divine titles, but by threescore thousand holy names, also yet all the
men in this world, or Angels in that world to come, can never prove him to be
an infinite spirit without a body; or prove him to be any more then only one
distinct glorious person also.

12 You heavenly ones may also know, that the divine Majesty is called in
Scripture Records by three divine titles, that as beforesaid, that the most
learned, prudent men in this world, might never attain to a right understanding
of the very true God, and the spiritual mysteries of his everlasting kingdom,
by all their rational study in the Scripture Records, or any other ways: and
that was the very cause that the Lord Jesus Christ said unto his own spiritual
power, represented by Angelical Moses and Elias, I thank thee Father that thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
babes and sucklings.

13. Concerning that threefold title of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in stead
of three persons, as of long time by blind guides have been imagined, does it
not rather stand to better sense, that the word Father has reference unto the
Godhead Spirit, eternally united unto Christ Jesus our Lord.

14 And that the word Son has relation unto the glorious body of the
everliving Emanuel, which is visibly seen by elect Angels, Moses and Elias.

15 And that word Holy Ghost has reference unto a divine word of light, life,
or power, proceeding from the invisible Father, through the glorious mouth of
the visible Son, into the invisible spirits of elect mankind, to the
inlightning of their dark understandings, and purifying of their fleshly minds.

16 Thus you which are truly enlightened from above, may clearly see what that
threefold heavenly Record signifies, of that only distinct personal Majesty
of the Lord Jesus Christ, God alone, blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

17 It is also as clear to you that are spiritual as the light it self, that
the holy one of Israel could not possibly be three distinct persons or spirits
in one Godhead being, or any such like confused deities.

18 You know, that wheresoever the Scriptures exactly make mention of the Holy
One of Israel, it attributes all honor, praise, and glory, unto him always in
the fingular number, as unto one distinct personal Majesty, or glorious being,
and not in the plural number of three distinct persons, or spirits in one body,
as has been long imagined, by deceivers of the whole Christian world so
called, which are in bondage to their confused God, and invented formalities.

19 You know that in the conclusion of many several things the Scriptures run
in such a line as this: to the only wise God, or unto God only wise, or
though there be that are called many Gods, or many Lords, yet unto us there is
but one God, or the holy one of Israel, and such like.

20 You know because there is none above a King, or head Magistrate in his own
kingdom, or equal with him upon an extraordinary occasion, he will swear by
himself, or by the faith or word of a King.

21 Thus it was with that Holy One of Israel, because there was none above him,
or beside him, or equal with him in Heaven or Earth, he swore by himself,
concerning the transmutation of his uncreated glory, and everlasting spiritual
Priesthood, into a pure body of flesh, blood, and bone.

22 Before the God of Glory was descended into the Virgins Womb, you know he
had many holy names attributed unto him; wherefore you may also know, from all
eternity he was a distinct divine person, and not an infinite formless spirit,
as most men blindly imagine.

23 You spiritual ones may also know, before he was clothed with flesh, it is
not the holy names of Creator, infinite Spirit, Jehovah, Ancient of days,
mighty God, Lord of Hosts, Redeemer, Holy One of Israel, King of Glory, or
everlasting Father, or any glorious expressions that can be uttered by the
tongues of men or Angels, that can prove any God at all, except he was a divine
person distinct from Heavens, Earth, Waters, Angels, Men, and all things else:

24 That the one personal infinite Majesty may remain in the heavenly center of
his own uncreated glory, and all beings that he has formed to live in his
sight, may continue in their own creaturely stations, for an everlasting
distinction between the glorious Creator, and poor changeable creatures.

25 Thus by a free gift received from the Holy Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ
upon the Throne of Glory, in simplicity of spirit, and plainness of speech, in
a small measure I have declared the mind of the Holy One of Israel, in those
literal expressions: for there are three which bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

CHAP. XXI.
Of a threefold Record of natural witnesses, proceeding from the blessed person
of Christ at his death.

I Shall write a little of a threefold Record in that most pure natural body of
Christ, when he was on this earth, in relation unto the threefold record of his
spiritual body, in the invisible heavens before said: in the 53. of Isaiah it
is written, He poured forth, or out his soul unto death: and in the 19, Chap.
by S. John you may find it thus written but one of the soldiers with a spear
pierced his side, and forthwith came there blood and water: here you, that are
spiritually discerning, may clearly see a threefold Record of natural
witnesses, proceeding from that blessed person of our only God and Savior, at
his voluntary death:

2 As namely, blood, water, and spirit, wherefore his most precious soul
pouring forth it self unto death, that was the witness of the death of the
everlasting Father in flesh.

3 The issuing forth of the unvaluable blood, that was the witness of the death
of the eternal Son in flesh.

4 The flowing forth of the water that was the witness of the death of the
erernal spirit in flesh on earth.

5 These sayings are not only hard, but intolerable to be born by cursed
Oanaanites, which understand nothing truly of the power of an infinite Majesty:

6 Nevertheless unto you which are made to understand the deep and hidden
mysteries of the most wise and powerful Creator; does not this answer these
Scriptures sayings?

7 I and the Father are one, and from Jesus Christ which is that faithful
witness, and that first begotten of the dead, and that Prince of the Kings of
the earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, will pour clean water upon them and they shall be clean, he died in the
flesh, and quickened in the spirit.

8 Thus you that are truly enlightened from on high, may see a little into that
wonderful mystery of the only wise God, imanifesting it self in earth,
answerable unto his threefold Record in the Heavens beforesaid.

9 Three glorious words, names, titles, or distinctions, in reference unto one
divine person only, in a threefold manifestation of his spiritual glory unto
elect men and Angels.

CHAP. XXII.
1 Of the three Witnesses on earth, 2 Of Spirit, Water, and Blood. 3 The three
Records on earth are the three Commissions. 4 What the Commissions are.

SEeing all spiritual power and wisdom in Heaven above, or in Earth beneath, is
no where to be found, nor never was, but only within the divine Ark or
spiritual person of our Lord Jesus Christ;

2 In the next place by his own light in some measure, I shall remonstrate unto
you that are capable, what is the meaning of those three witnesses of Water,
Blood, and Spirit in Earth, which agree in one, unto which the foregoing words
have relation of Father, Son, and Spirit, which are but one.

3 My spiritual brethren, are not those three witnesses in earth the
commissionated messengers, which by voice or words, through the glorious mouth
of God himself, were sent forth unto an unbelieving bloody worldly minded
people, for a witness unto them to this purpose at the unexpected dreadful day
of the Lord Jesus Christ?

4 Does not that water witness in earth signify Moses, and the true Prophets
under the Law, in reference unto the holy name of God the everlasting Father?

5 Does not the witness of the blood in earth signify Jesus, and the chosen
Apostles, in relation of that heavenly name of God the eternal Son?

6 Does not that witness of Holy Ghost in earth, signify those two witnesses
in the 11. of the Revelations?

7 As Water, Blood, and Spirit, mixed together, are in a sweet harmony in the
body of a man in perfect health, and through a defect of either of them the
body could not subsist:

8 So likewise it is with those witnesses of God in earth, called Spirit,
Water, and Blood; for these three sweetly unite bearing witness unto but one
only wise distinct personal God glorified.

9 Therefore they agree in one heavenly harmony, and cannot possibly be one
without the other, not only because they proceeded from one glorious spirit,
but also because they three only by the secret wisdom of the Eternal Majesty,
were chosen to bear witness in earth before men and Angels, unto that threefold
Record in Heaven of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost aforesaid.

10 But some men may say unto me, the Law and Gospel being witnessed unto by
the Prophets and Apostles already, what need is there of this third witness of
the spirit in earth, or what does it bear Record unto?

11 From a divine gift, to this I answer: In many respects there is as much use
of the witness of the spirit in this Atheistical age, as of the two former
witnesses of Water and Blood.

12 To fulfill the Scriptures which says, heaven and earth shall pass away, but
his word shall not pass away; or not one title of his word shall be unfulfilled.

13 How should Christ Jesus the Lord of Glory be known to be the only God of
truth, if there were not at one time or another a third witness in earth to
fulfill the Scripture, for there are three that bear witness in earth.

14 Another necessity of this third witness of the spirit is this, because you
may know that there has not been above these thousand years a commissionated
messenger sent forth by the eternal Spirit, to bear witness unto that truth,
which the two former witnesses sealed too with their bloods.

15 Another necessity of the witness of the spirit is this, because of late,
and at present, so many several Antichristian spirits are come forth into the
world in their own names, and from the power of their own strong imaginations,
and cunning cursed observations, have acted many visible lying signs and
wonders upon their own bodies, and other ways, to the ruining of many a poor
deceived soul, in body, mind, and personal estate, all of them pretending when
those fleshly fits comes upon them, that it is the power of the eternal Spirit
immediately moving them.

CHAP: XXIII.
1 Of several empty opinions concerning the Two Witnesses in the eleventh of
the Revelation. 2 What they are. 3 No true witness without a voice from Heaven.
4 Who are the two last Spiritual Witnesses.

IN the next place I shall write somewhat of men's empty opinions concerning the
two witnesses in the Revelation, for your better understanding of the ensuing
truth, some men have imagined them to be the spirit of Christ, and the flesh of
Christ.

2 Now you may know that cannot be, because the spirit and body of Christ were
both glorified together in the highest Heavens, long before John prophesied of
the two Witnesses standing before the God of the whole earth, amongst the sons
of men.

3 Others there are that would have them to be the literal Law and Gospel: now
you that are spiritual may also know that cannot be the Witnesses here spoken
of, because without a true Interpreter the Scripture in it self, is but a
killing letter.

4 You know that the invisible truth of the Scriptures proceed only from a
true light received from the spiritual person of Christ Jesus our Lord, in the
throne of immortal glory.

5 You know that from the bare records, it is impossible to attain to the
knowledge of the only very true God, or the spiritual mysteries of his
everlasting kingdom, and that was the very cause of these and such like
Scripture sayings, I thank thee Father, that thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes: Make the heart of this
people fat, which have eyes and see not, cars and hear not, hearts and
understand not: and why so? to fulfill the word of the Lord spoken through the
mouths of his Prophets in the time of the Law.

6 If the two Witnesses here spoken of were the Letter of the Scripture, what
need then would there be of the invisible teachings of the Spirit?

7 For the most part, does not the Ministers and people set up the letter of
the Scriptures, and offer divine worship unto them as the children of Israel
worshipped their golden Calves?

8 The two Witnesses cannot be meant the literal Scriptures, because it is
said, If any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any hurt them, in this manner they must be
killed.

9 Now you may know, that at this very present there are many thousands in
these three Nations, that do not only count the Scriptures mere inventions of
wise men, to keep the simple in aw under their Rulers, but if it were not for
fear of men, if they could have their wills, they would burn all the Scriptures
in the world to ashes, and in stead of fearing any fiery vengeance following
them, their unbelieving seared spirits would greatly rejoice at it, as a most
noble or profitable act to the whole world, for preventing all literal
contestations concerning a God, or glory, or misery to come.

10 Some men would imagine these Witnesses to be the Magistrates and the
Ministers.

11 Now you may know that cannot be, because both Magistrates and Ministers are
either chosen by one another, or by the voice of the people, in stead of being
chosen by the voice of God himself, or a true Prophet sent forth by his eternal
spirit for that purpose.

12 It Is written, that the witnesses had a powerful gift of prophecy: now you
know that since God became flesh, instead of the Magistrates or Ministers
owning themselves to be commissionated witnesses, or Prophets of the divine
Majesty, for the most part, if men have appeared upon that account, they have
persecuted them by imprisonment, stripes, banishment, or death it self.

13 Again, it is written, the witnesses were clothed in sackcloth, therefore
they cannot be the Magistrates, or the Ministers; because you know that for the
most part they are rather clothed in Satin, or other costly garments, then
Sackcloth or mean apparel; Wherefore seeing all Magistrates with their
Ministers are chosen by men only through the secret decree of the most high
God; and it being apparent that instead of honoring the Lord of life and glory,
or showing mercy unto his Prophets, for the most part they seek the honor of
one another, and persecute his messengers, and rejoice in feasting one another
through the fastings of others.

14 It is as clear as the light unto any man whose heart is not stone blind,
that they are none of the witnesses prophesied of by St. John in the eleventh
of the Revelation.

14 Another sort of Atheistical people there are, that would imagine themselves
to imply the two witnesses there spoken of, saying the two witnesses are within
them, or every men's soul and body are those two witnesses, and such like:

15 Now you may know that this is so far from any spiritual truth, that there
is no sense or reason in it: why? though a man be called soul, body, and
spirit, yet he being but one person only, you know he can be no more then one
witness upon what account soever.

16 Again, the invisible witness of men's consciences, concerns men's own
particular only between God and man, or between man and man, and God only
wise perfectly sees that witness always, and not men; therefore that cannot be
the Witnesses here spoken of, because you know that the Witnesses or Prophets
of the Lord were always visible whilst they had a being in this world.

17 Thus it is as clear as the light, that none of all these are those two
witnesses spoken of by St. John, but meet imaginary fancies of men's own brains,
for want of a divine Light in them to distinguish between the true witnesses,
sent forth by the Creator himself, and the false ones that went before they
were sent.

18 Again it is written, But I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they
shall prophecy: My spiritual brethren, you may know that when John spoke those
words, that the two Witnesses were to come into the world, to bear testimony
unto the truth of the two past witnesses of the Lord, because the Text says,
but I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy.

19 And you know, according to the truth of unerring Scriptures, the two former
witnesses had power given them from the Lord, and they did prophecy in their
times:

20 So that you may understand, that the Lord did purpose to raise two men in
this Atheistical Age, out of the very ashes of the two former witnesses, not
only for discovery of all lying appearances in his name, as they did in their
times, but also for a more clearer manifestation of the deep things of God,
then ever was since this world began.

21 You that are spiritual may know, that since the Lords two former witnesses
fell asleep in the dust of the earth, not a man have powerfully appeared to
bear witness unto one distinct personal Creator, as they did, until we came
forth in the latter end of the year 1651. in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ
by voice of words spoken unto me, by his eternal spirit three mornings
together, to the hearing of the ear as a man speaks to his friend.

22 Again, the Scriptures call them by the name of two witnesses only;
wherefore if any man adds to their number, or despises them because they
appear not like a God, to bring fire down from heaven, or turn waters into
blood, or such like natural plagues, or miracles, as has been acted already,
if there be any truth in the Scriptures, can that man escape the Plagues of God
in the life to come threatened in such a call?

23 Again, you know it is said, the Lord gave power unto the two witnesses to
prophecy: Is not this answerable unto the word of the Lord, when he said unto
me, that he had given me understanding above all the men in the world, and that
he had chosen me as his last messenger for a great work unto this bloody
unbelieving world, and had gived me Lodowick Mugleton to be my mouth.

24 You know that the witnesses are said to be two Olive Trees, and two
Candlesticks, standing before the God of the whole earth: my beloved spiritual
brethren, has not the glorious God of Heaven and Earth, both by speaking and
writing, manifested through our earthly Candlesticks, or mortal mouths, more
divine Oil, or golden Truth, then in any men in the world besides?

25 Again, you know it is said, the witnesses were clothed with sackcloth: I
humbly beseech you that have truly tasted of the glory of eternity, did any men
upon the face of the earth, since the time of the Apostles, upon an account as
sent forth from the eternal spirit, suffer persecution for bearing witness unto
the man Christ Jesus glorified, to be the only wise God, and alone everlasting
Father, but we two only?

26 Again, you know it is written, if any man will hurt them, fire proceed^th
out of their mouth and devoureth their enemies: My spiritual friends, is not
this answerable unto the word of the Lord, when he said unto me, I have put the
two edged sword of my spirit into thy mouth, that whoever I pronounce blessed
through thy mouth, is blessed to eternity, and whoever I pronounce cursed
through thy mouth, is cursed to eternity?

27 Who ever thou art that shall see these passages, and be offended with me,
because of them, be it known unto thee, and all men else, that I of all men
neither do nor can expect any mercy from the glorious God to all eternity, if
the Creator himself did not speak those very words unto me by voice from
Heaven, as aforesaid.

28 Though at present Atheistial men shall laugh to scorn what we speak or
write in the name of the Lord Jesus, yet they being words of truth by an
immediate Commission from the eternal spirit, you that are heirs of immortal
Crowns, may know in that unexpected day of the Lords general account, they will
become an invisible fire within the spirits and bodies of those that heard
them, of eternal bright, burning, ravishing, glories, or everlasting fiery
shame in eternal death.

29 What power is attributed unto the two witnesses in the 11. of the
Revelation, you may know that it is spiritual and invisible; why, because as
beforesaid, it being the third and last witness in earth of the eternal spirit,
its declarative Plagues upon the spirits and bodies of persecutors were
spiritual, answerable unto the natural Plagues that were executed by the two
former witnesses, upon the spirits and bodies of those that persecuted them for
their Commissions sake.

CHAP. XXIV.
1 Of the witnesses Trials and Persecutions, after the publishing of their
Commission. 2 The Prophets interpretation of some verses in the 11 Revelation.
3 An objection against the true witnesses answered.

YOu that are experimentally spiritual, may understand that the true light of
Christ in his beloved Apostle Saint John has in those two Revelation-witnesses
concluded in one, both the true Prophets in the Law, and chosen Apostles in the
Gospel, and the two last commissionated witnesses of the invisible spirit, in
this spiritual conceited Age.

2 Why? because they jointly as one man against all gainsayers in the world, do
bear witness unto that man Christ Jesus, clothed with flesh and bone in glory,
to be the only wise very true God, and alone everlasting Father and Creator of
both World, Angels, and men.

3 Again, you know it is written, that when the witnesses have finished their
testimony the beast out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and
overcome them, and kill them: behold as that bottomless pit, beastly
imagination within the spirits of the Cananitish Pharaohs and Herod's, was
stirred up unto cruel persecution upon the two former witnesses for their
testimonies sake;

4 So likewise a little after that testimonial truth of the same nature was
published by us, the Holy Spirits two last witnesses, in a Book, entitled, A
transcendent Spiritual Treatise; I humbly beseech you that were the moderate
eyewitnesses thereof through the instigation of the people,

5 Did not the spirit of persecution appear in the head Magistrate of this City
of London, when he committed us unto the common Goal of Newgate, (so called) in
September 1653. notwithstanding no man did accuse us in the least of the breach
of any civil Law of England?

6 The next Sessions following in the Old Bailey, were we not araigned at the
Bar like Thieves or Murderers, before Alderman Fouke then Lord Mayor of London,
the Recorder Steel, and some other Magistrates?

7 And did not the Magistrates beforesaid in open Court condemn us as
blasphemers against God, because we did bear witness unto the man Christ Jesus
glorified, to be the only wise God, and alone everlasting Father, by virtue of
a commission we received from his eternal spirit?

8 Upon the account aforesaid, were we not kept close prisoners in the house of
correction, called old Bridewel, six Months, without bail or main-prise?

9 I appeal unto any man that he^^d our trial, that has any true hope of
eternal salvation by that Jesus Christ that was nailed to a tree, without the
gates of Jerusalem, whether any thing was laid to our charge by our accusers,
the Lord Mayor, and the witnesses, upon any civil or natural account in the
least?

10 It Is truth; because of some speeches spoken unto the Lord Mayor first, and
afterward to the whole Bench and Jury, by the power of the Lord Jesus Christ
in us, in reference unto our Commission and innocence of spirit, whether it was
to gain the Magistrates favor, or whether they knew of it, the Lord knows:
some said, whipping was too good for us, others said, hanging was too good for
us, burning of us was most fit:

11 But where was the man that had so much love of truth, or natural pity in
him, as to say, but what evil have they done? was there any such man upon the
Bench, or in the Jury, or among the Officers, or amongst all those men that
heard our trial? if there were, it was in secret.

12 I remember it is written when our Lord Jesus was accused before Pilate, for
a deceiver of the people, blasphemy, and such like, notwithstanding he was
vehemently accused by the chief Priests, and rulers,

13 Yet Pilate oftentimes said, but what evil had be done? I find no fault in
him; so likewise though we are but poor sinful dust and ashes, and in
comparison of our Lord Jesu: Christ not worthy in the least to make mention of
his most Holy name,

14 I am fully persuaded in my soul, if Pilate had sat in the judgment seat
with the Recorder, he would have asked the Lord Mayor, and our accusers, what
evil we had committed, or what Law we had broken, before he had past sentence
upon us?

15 What ever men's thoughts and opinions are concerning the Recorder Steel, I
appeal unto God, elect men, and Angels, and to his own conscience, whether he
came not short of Pilate, when he sat in the judgment seat concerning us; if
this be truth, which none can deny that heard our trial, if truth be their
guide, I hop^ he does not think much of Pilates being his elder brother, but
will also grant him the pre-eminence in the day of the Lords eternal account.

16 Some of you that heard our trial may remember that the Recorder did examine
us chiefly (...) not wholly, concerning Christ's Father, or what that Father
was, that in his agonies he cried or prayed unto?

17 If you have not forgot it through distance of time, you may remember our
answer was to this purpose:

18 That that Father which our Lord Jesus Christ made mention of in all his
extremities, was his own representative spiritual power or charge, which he had
committed unto Angelical Moses and Elias in glory, whilst he went that sore
journey in flesh for the redemption of his elect lost Israel^tes: it is
written, he shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, that he and thee was
but only one divine being, let men and Angels disprove what I have written
concerning this thing if they can, that I may be ashamed and confounded of my
great confidence in that which is not.

19 So much concerning our trial for our bearing testimony unto Jesus Christ to
be the only true God, and alone everlasting Father, before the powers of this
perishing world.

20 For a more clear manifestation of the commissionated witnesses of the
eternal spirit, unto the heirs of immortal glory, I shall write somewhat of the
mind of Christ from John's words in the beginning of the 11. Chapter, the
first words are these: then was given me a Reed like unto a Rod, and the Angel
stood by saying; Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them
that worship therein: But the Court which is without the Temple leave out, and
measure it not, for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they
tread under foot forty and two months.

21 My devine friends, you may understand that that reed like unto a rod
possessed by John, was a free gift of inspiration which he received from a
glorified Christ in the high heavens by his Angel, whereby like unto a skillful
Land-measurer, his understanding was enabled to comprehend the spiritual
signification of the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship
therein.

22 You may also understand, that the Temple, and them that did worship
therein, did signify Gods spiritual house, or tabernacle of elect Jews, and
Gentiles, which make but one complete body for Christ Jesus their head to reign
in, by his heavenly light.

23 That Altar spoken of by John, did signify the glorious body, or Tabernacle
of the eternal spirit, unto which divine Altar, or Godhead person, those
spiritual worshippers were vertually united by a received light from that
infinite Majesty: through which invisible intercourse sometimes their souls
were full of spiritual joy, through that inward seal of Godlike glory, which
they were to enjoy in the life to come.

24 You may understand, that that unmeasured Court without the Temple, did
signify the visible Scriptures.

25 You know that when sacrifices or ordinances were in force at Jerusalem,
there was the inward Temple, and outward Porch or Court, joining to the Temple.

26 You also know the Court without the Temple was a common place for all
people to meet in, but none might enter into the inward Temple in the time of
their worship, but the chief Priests, or those that were Confessors of the true
God, and approved of by those teachers of the Law.

27 Likewise you may understand, that the outward Court, or Scripture, which is
common to all men that was left unmeasured, or cast out, did signify all the
outcast unbelieving Jews, and Gentiles: and the inward Temple or spirit of the
Scriptures, did signify all the Elect believing Jews, and Gentiles, in that
glorious Altar beforesaid.

28 Again, you know that the Court of the Temple was an outward ornament or
witness, unto the beauty or glory within the Temple:

29 So likewise the Court of the visible Scriptures, is an ornament or
testimony unto that eternal spirit of all truth, within the Temple, Body, or
Tabernacle of the everliving God: and vertually in a great measure living in
the Temples, or bodies of his elect, that are enabled to give a true
distinction between the things of eternal life and eternal death.

30 Again, you know it is said, that the unmeasured Court without the Temple,
was given to the Gentiles, and that they should tread the holy City under foot
two and forty months.

31 You spiritual ones may know that the mind of the Holy Spirit in those
words was this: that to fulfill the Prophecy of Christ concerning the
destruction of the Jews, their Temple and City of Jerusalem by the Romans
through conquest, they should possess the literal Records, written by the
Prophetical and Apostolical Jews, and not only worship it in stead of the
eternal spirit, but also by cruel persecution for above thirteen hundred years,
were to tyrannize over the Holy City of spiritual Jews and Gentiles, that could
not bow down unto their inventions.

32 You that are spiritual, may know that the Roman Gentiles here spoken of by
John, are those people which men call Cavaliers, whose Princely race sprang
first from the loins of King Herod that bloody persecutor of the Lord of glory,
and so streamed into the line of the tyrannical Roman Empire or Popedom.

33 From this papal power, whatever Apostical or Christian style they attribute
to themselves, through all the Christian world so called, they have banded
together as one man, to tread underfoot, as beforesaid, that chosen City of
heavenly minded Jews and Gentiles.

34 Because their innocent souls could not forsake that everliving Altar
manifested unto them, and bow down to their Egyptians Calves, set up as a snare
unto the people, chiefly for fleshly gain and perishing glory from men of their
own spirits.

35 Also you that are spiritual take special notice of this, that these two
witnesses or Prophets spoken of in the 11. of the Revelation did not appear
unto men, until the Gentile power of persecuting Bishops were extinguished in
this land.

36 But it may be objected by some, that one Bull and Varnum, and others long
before them, have pretended to be these two witnesses, and yet it came to
nothing.

37 To this I answer by way of query, can any man make it appear from any
Record since the Apostles time, that in any Land or Nation, two men did ever
bear witness in all opposition of all men or Angels, unto the man Jesus Christ
glorified, to be the only God, everlasting Father, and Creator of both worlds,
Angels, and men?

38 Again, amongst all the pretended Prophets in the world, does any of them
bear witness unto one personal Majesty, distinct from Heavens, Earth, Angels,
and men?

39 Nay of the contrary, do they not all rather disown such a God, as a weak or
carnal thing, and as one man like unto Baals four hundred Priests, and the
false Prophets, and Priests in all ages, imagine the Creator to be an infinite
formless spirit?

40 If any man should moderately enquire of the pretended Prophets, or
spiritual lights in this age, concerning the knowledge of the Creator, or a
glory to come, is there any answer to be had from them but this or such like:
the Creator is an infinite, invisible, unchangeable, eternal spirit: or else
they will say, the Creator is all wisdom, love, purity, riches, beauty, joy,
righteousness, justice, or divine excellencies, he fills heaven and earth, he is
the all in all, and there is nothing besides him: or else they will say, the
more ye desire the knowledge of the Creator, the less you will know of him,
because he is infinite: or they will bid you mind that God or Choist within
you, and trouble not your self about incomprehensible infiniteness: thus these
false Prophets of cursed Cain, make a wonderment of an infinite Creator of
nothing, but mere words only.

41 Thou which art puffed up with such a Creator as this is, shall one day know
to thy eternal sorrow and shame, what it is to despise a personal God,
infinitely full of all glorious perfection.

42 When this personal Majesty shall show his infinite power upon thee, through
the retaining of his inshining light from thy Lucephe^ian spirlt, and shall
leave thee and thy inward God in an unspeakable condition of eternal shame and
confusion of sold and body, then shall thou know, that thou did hear of a
personal God infinitely glorious for Heavens, Earth, Angels, or men, to be
capable of the indwelling essence of his eternal spirit.

CHAP. XXV.
1 Of the sinful soul of man. 2 Of its mortality. 3 All souls that are
generated are mortal. 4 If men's souls were immortal they could not be capable
of diseases.

CAn the soul of man be any thing at all but dust without their bodies, or can
their bodies be any thing at all but dry dead, cold dust also without their
spirits?

2 Does not the rational soul or spirit of man lie secretly hid in his seed
like unto a spark of fire, and can this seed of man have any living being
without its body?

3 Can the soul and body of man be therefore any more then one distinct living
or dying essence?

4 When a woman conceives life in her womb, through mixtures of seeds, by
virtue of the decreed word of the Lord spoken at the first Creation of nature,
is not that life the very soul or spirit of the child?

5 Does not that soul or spirit in the womb by degrees congeal together into
rational fire, blood, and water, and so in due time become a complete body of
flesh, blood and bone?

6 If men and women together beget and conceive the soul and body of the child
by an instinct in nature, which none can gainsay, but senceless sots, or
conceited wise men, which through an ambition of tongues, or languages, have
studied beyond all sober sense, reason, or wit.

7 Is it then possible, think you, that the soul of a man should be immortal,
and the body wherein it lives be mortal?

8 Does it not stand to very good sense, that being both conceived into life
into the womb together, and both born together into the world, and both living
together upon the earth their appointed time, and being both poluted together
with sin, that they should also both die together, and turn to their dust, or
non-being again, until the general bodily resurrection of all mankind that are
dead asleep in the dust of the earth, when time is no more, either unto eternal
glory or everlasting shame.

9 Again, it is written in the 46. Chap. of Genesis, All the souls that came
with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, beside Jacobs wives, where
in the whole threescore and six souls.

10 In the tenth of Deuteronomy and the last verse, it is written, thy fathers
went down into Egypt with seventy persons: Here you see the Scriptures are
plain for prooving the souls proceeding out of the loins of man, as well as the
bodies.

11 Also you see that a man in Scripture is caled soul, and sometimes is called
body, or soul, body and spirit, and yet you know, he is but one living essence
or substance.

12 If all souls and bodies since the fall of Adam by natural generation
proceed from the loins of one another, as it is prooved clearly by spiritual
sense, reason and Scripture: how can poor vain perishing dust imagine that his
sinful soul is immortal and cannot die?

13 Is it not natural for an immortal spirit to be united only unto an
immortal body? and is it not natural for a mortal soul to be united only unto
a mortal body?

14 Is it not against all sober sense or reason, that the body of man could be
subject to any kind of diseases or distempers in the least, if his soul were
immortal and could not die?

15 Is it not the very nature of immortality immediately to swallow up all into
life, or to transmute that body wherein it siveth from all manner of corruption,
into his own uncorrupted glory?

16 Is it not the nature of a sinful soul to become subject to die through the
defilement of its first created purity?

17 Is there any undefiled soul now living upon the face of the earth, and is
not immortality all spotless purity as aforesaid, how then thinks thou it
possible that the sinful souls of men are immortal already and cannot die.

18 It is written, the soul that sins shall die; also it is written, in the day
thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death. I confess that the souls of Adam
and Eve were not capable of any kind of death until they were both defiled
with the sinful nature of the Angelical Serpent:

19 But as soon as ever they had eaten of that cursed Serpentine Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, their soul and bodies were free from all their
former pure life:

20 In the room thereof were subject to all kind of imputed death whatsoever,
and did not know but that they were both cut off from the divine presence of
the eternal spirit.

21 Until the God of Glory himself graciously promised them to become flesh,
blood, and bone, of the Virgin; seed, to redeem their sinful souls and bodies
again out of all kind of death, into an unchangeable immortal glory, at his
personal appearing with his mighty Angels.

22 Again, the Lord has said in diverse places of Scripture, that the souls of
men shall be cut off from the land of the living, and that the soul that sins
shall die, and that the pure soul of Christ himself was poured forth unto
death, and that the soul of Christ should not be left in grave, nor that his
blessed body should see corruption; and the Lord has said, that Adam and Eve
were but dust, and to dust they should re u^n again. And yet thou, contrary to
all Prophetical or Apostolical Scripture, and against all sober sense or reason
in its right mind, ignorantly or impudently affirmest, that the sinful soul of
man is already immortal, and cannot die, or be put to death.

23 Again, from this thy nonsensical imagination, do thou not call all the
Scriptures all lie, and the eternal Majesty from whence they proceeded a liar
to his face? and do thou not call all sober sense and reason a mere lie also?

24 I know it is a common thing for men to say they have in them a good spirit,
and a bad spirit; it is confessed that every man in his fallen spirit has
remaining a little light or motion of the spirit of God in him,

25 Yet take notice of this, though he has a twofold motion in him to justify
all the righteous proceed^ngs of the Creator in his conscience at the last day,
yet he has but one spirit or soul in him.

26 Indeed the Apostle says, the spirit lusts against the flesh, and the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and these two are contrary: that which the
Apostle calls the spirit in this place of Scripture was a divine light of life,
received into the dark understanding, by virtue of a word speaking from the
eternal spirit of a glorified Christ, but not the essence of the Holy Spirit.

27 And that which he calls the flesh, was man's own spirit, which consists of
nothing but confused lying imagination, or cursed carnal reasoning against that
heavenly light aforesaid.

28 Again, you that are spiritual do know, that all men that do expect a glory
to come in the invisible Heavens, do confess that the spirit of the divine
Majesty is infinite, unchangeable, immortal, an eternal.

28 If the Creators person is of an incomprehensible brightness, which none can
gainsay but angelical carnalities, how then think thou it possible for men
or angels to be capable of the in-dwelling essence of the eternal Spirit?

29 Though every man as aforesaid, have little or much of the spiritual motions
of God abiding in his soul, yet take notice of this, when he inspireth any
light into sinful spirits, that very light it self being distinct from the
infinite Spirit, and essentially one with mortality, is made capable, not only
to live, but also to die together, that it through death might be capable by
the decree of that Spirit from whence it was produced, to quicken and revive
that mortality again into the glorious likeness of the eternal Majesty it self,
from whence it came.

CHAP. XXVI.
1 Of the nature and place of the Reprobates torment. 2 The last witnesses
great confidence concerning the end of the world. 3 Without a tongue no speech
can be made by God, Angels or men. 4 God is visibly seen by spiritual bodies,
as Kings are by their subjects.

TAke notice of this also, that in what soul soever this in-shining light has
appeared, though he be preserved from despising a personal God, if before he
taste of death, he does not attain to understand this glorified Jesus to be the
only wise very true God, upon the sight of so clear a discovery as this is,
then this will be his portion, All the light at his death shall vanish and come
to nothing, and in the day of the Lords account, by virtue of his decree, that
Luciferian Serpentine spirit which abhorred the simple plain truth, because it
discovers its carnal deceits, shall quicken and bring forth a body
spiritually as dark as pitch, and naturally as heavy as lead, a body of thick
darkness, or blackness of darkness, according to Holy Writ.

2 Again, it will be a body whose invisible spirit shall be a fire of such a
dark envious nature, that it shall burn more intollerably fierce than any fire
in this world whatsoever, through which it shall be tormented, as if it were
nothing else but a carcass or pillar of unsavory burning brimstone.

3 In that very place where it does appear upon this earth, it shall either
stand, sit, kneel, or lie along, neither seeing its own dreadful person, nor no
man's else.

4 And the main ground of all his unspeakable sorrow will arise from hence,
because its spirit is barred close prisoner in its own body, from all kind of
former thoughts, or motioning forth upon any spiritual comforts whatsoever,
through the total absenting in-shining presence of the Lord Jesus Christ the
everlasting Father.

5 Again, all thy former pride, envy, covetousness, lying, lust, and
hypocrisy, which thou with delight did act toward thy innocent brothers
ruin, shall then be acted against thine own self; it will be the eternity of
thy condition that will increase thy sorrows and shame: O it will be in vain
then to wish thou had never bin born, or any thing else.

6 Who ever thou art that shall out of thy atheistical soul laugh these words
to scorn, and say, these are but mere fancies of my own brain, know this from
the Lord of Glory, when this whole world, and all the beauty and natural glory
thereof, as namely, the Firmament, Sun, Moon, and Stars, are become nothing but
burning dust, or dry sand, and an utter Chaos of everlasting confused darkness,
then thou shall remember thy despising things thou knew not.

7 Is not this answerable to Christ's own words, where he says, If that light
in thee be darkness, how great will that darkness be? Again, The Son of man
shall send forth his Angels, and they gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of sire,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 13. Take notice of this
record of Scripture, and you shall find that he said, these things should be
done at the end of the world. Again, and when the Son of man comes in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his
Glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats: and he
shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left; then shall
the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, take the
inheritance of the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. 25.

8 Here ye may see that the Lord Jesus does not speak of cursing or burning up
of sin in all men, and eternal salvation unto all men's persons, but makes as
clear a distinction as there is between sheep and goats, of an eternal
separation of two distinct generations.

9 The one personal nation to enter into that most blessed estate or kingdom of
the right hand of eternal ravishing glory, with Christ and his holy angels, and
the other personal generation to be cast out into the left hand of the fiery
burning kingdom of everlasting utter darkness, with that devil Cain and his
cursed generation, being thereunto appointed from the foundation of the world.

10 Again, what ever men shall imagine or think to the contrary, this was the
very mind of Christ in those words of his, concerning blessing elect
Israelites to eternity, and cursing Canaanitish reprobates for everlasting.

11 Who shall dare open his mouth in that day to say, why have thou made me
thus? As sure as the Lord lives, and as certain as thou art a living soul and
body, this very thing will come to pass in a short season, though men or angels
should gainsay it.

12 The Lord Jesus Christ neither can, nor will be found a liar in this nor any
thing else, for all the cursed whimsies of men in this age, or any other age,
though the persons of ten hundred thousand times ten Millions of men and women
should suffer the vengeance of eternal fiery death in utter darkness. O poor
vain despiser of a personal God, what acursed condition art thou in, and
know it not?

13 In the next place I shall speak again concerning the Creators being an
infinite personal Majesty, unto which the visible forms of men and angels bear
record, as unto an incomprehensible glory, from whence all their comprehensible
things had their beings.

14 Was there not an uncreated eternal Majesty alone, when no creatures whether
men or angels, appeared in a sensible living being?

15 Again, seeing there was from eternity a distinct Glory, is it not of
necessity that this everliving being should be a glorious something?

16 Is it not both lawful and expedient also for a man, according to sobriety,
to declare unto his spiritual and natural brethren, what this glorious God was,
and is, that man being sent forth by the eternal Spirit for that very end or
purpose?

17 Does not all men which confess a Creator, conclude positively there is but
one God, and no more?

18 If this one God was an infinite distinct spiritual substance, before any
created being appeared to themselves, is it not of an absolute necessity that
he should abide in his own divine center, and so continue a distinct glorious
being to all eternity, for an everlasting distinction between the unchangeable
Creator, and the changeable creatures?

19 Do not all men which acknowledge this distinct glorious Being, conclude him
to be an infinite, eternal, unchangeable Spirit, and do they not conclude this
incomprehensible Spirit to be an eternal Godhead being in it self, and so of
necessity must he not be a distinct glorious Being, from all things and places?

20 If there be a Creator, and if this glorious Creator be an infinite distinct
something, too transcendently divine to be essentially united unto heavens,
earth, angels, or men, which none can deny but conceited Notionalists, or
literal Hypocrites, are not those men as yet utterly ignorant of the Holy One
of Israel, which imagine the Creator to be an infinite formless Spirit,
essentially united unto the whole Creation, utterly hating that God that is a
distinct glorious being to himself?

21 Again, if the eternal Being be an infinite Spirit, can that glorious Spirit
be any thing at all without it be endued with variety of divine qualifications?

22 Is not that infinite Spirit and its glorious properties, but only one
essence or Godhead substance?

23 Is not every virtue in the Eternal Spirit infinite?

24 Is that eternal Spirit and its heavenly virtues, any thing else but
immortal Crowns of bright burning glories?

25 Can this infinite spiritual Glory be sensible of its divine excellencies,
or be a perfect blessedness, except he has a distinct body suitable unto his
eternal Spirit, to enjoy his divine pleasures to himself, and at his pleasure
to distribute by measure into the elect spirits of men and angels, the
in-shining glimpses of this incomprehensible glory?

26 Though the eternal Spirit be that invisible God, that by the power of its
Almighty word has created all things either for a time, or for eternity, into
that glorious order they now appear to be, yet you that are spiritual may know,
that without a body, face, or tongue, his glorious Spirit could not possibly
have spoken any distinct words at all, no more then the spirits of men or
angels can speak distinct words without a body, face, or tongue of their own.

27 Though all power, wisdom, and glory proceeds only from an invisible
eternal Spirit, yet you may know that it cannot be a perfect glory, except it
be clothed with a Majestical person, as a visible ornament for men and angels,
to behold face to face in the high heavens, no more then the invisible spirits
of earthly Monarchs could be complete without natural bodies or persons, for
their subjects beholding them face to face.

28 Thus you that are truly spiritual, may know, that though there was nothing
created by any bodily labor, or painful study of the glorious Creator,

29 Yet without a distinct heavenly body there was nothing made that was made,
neither possibly could be, what ever is or shall be imagined to the contrary.

30 So much at present concerning that one personal Majesty, or
i^comprehensible being of all beings, which are subject to change, or to be
changed at his divine pleasure.

31 O blessed only are all you that have the faith of his own glorious
personal God abiding in you.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 A more full discourse of the two witnesses. 2. No true messenger or witness
without a voice from God to the hearing of the ear. 3 The three Commissions
agree all in truth. 4 Differing only in point of worship. 5 There was not, nor
can there be assurance of eternal happiness but in the belief of a Commission.
5 God owneth no worship in this Commission but what is spiritual. 6 The
difference between true and false Commissioners.

IN the next place I shall treat again concerning the witnesses according to
former intention: you may remember where I ceased, I challenged the whole world
whether since the primitive times, any men upon the account of bearing record
unto the man Christ Jesus in glory to be the only wise God, Creator, Redeemer,
and everlasting Father, appeared as the two Revelation-witnesses?

2 Again until the Roman Bishops persecuting tyranny was expired in this land,
you may know the two Revelation-witnesses, or Prophets, never appeared:

3 For according unto Scripture order, you that are of a spiritual
comprehension, may know, that we are those two commissionated witnesses, or
Prophets of the Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, because as beforesaid,

4 According to the prophecy by Saint John we exactly appeared when the Roman
Bishops times were expired, of treading under foot the holy City or people of
the Lord Jesus Christ in this land.

5 Some men may object and say, Why are the witnesses of the spirit but two in
number, and the former witnesses of so great a number? Unto this objection from
the Lord I answer by way of quere: Does not the glorious wisdom of the eternal
spirit most of all appear in the smallest number of things for the acting of a
wonderful work?

6 Is it not most advantageous unto the Creators glory, to prevent men or
Angels from knowing his witnesses or their number, either by miracles or
without miracles, until his pleasure is to reveal them?

7 You know that Gods worship formerly was not only invisible but visible
also, and to continue for a long season, therefore there required a great
number of spiritual speakers unto the elect.

8 But the worship of God being now only spiritual or invisible, thou may
know, that a witness or two is sufficient, the day of the Lord being near at
hand to proclaim his glorious coming, by speaking or writing unto the ends of
the earth.

8 Again, is not a witness or two sufficient to discover the vanity of all vain
glorious fleshly formalities amongst the sons of men, seeing the Lord is at
hand to make an eternal separation between the blessed Israelites, and the
cursed Canaanites?

9 Does not these three witnesses in earth only agree in one divine body of
all truth in this respect, because they received their commission by voice of
words, to the hearing of the visible, as well as invisible ear, through the
glorious mouth of a personal Majesty?

10 Wherefore can any man upon this earth that counts himself, or is accounted
by others, to be a true Prophet, Apostle, Minister, Preacher, Teacher, Bishop,
Shepherd, Priest, Ambassador, or witness from the God of Heaven and Earth
without a voice of distinct words to the hearing of the ear from the everliving
God?

11 Or can he possess any true joy or peace of conscience, in his prophetical
declarations, without such an immediate commission from the true God as
beforesaid.

12 Again, though Spirit, Blood and Water, by the wisdom of God sweetly agree
within the body of a healthful man, yet you know that they are of contrary
natures to one another;

13 For the soul or spirit of man is an absolute mortal fire within the blood
and the water, which by virtue of its fiery nature, qualifieth the blood and
the water according to their capacities;

14 Through which they are so sweetly composed, that unanimously they give
natural life and strength through the whole man: in so much that the one cannot
live without the other, though they are of contrary natures.

15 Thus through the secret decree of the divine Majesty there is a marvelous
trinitary mystery within the natural body of man;

16 But very few men understand it for want of the prophetical spirit of David
in them, who cried out with exceeding admiration of the Creators wisdom,
saying, I am fearfully and wonderfully made*

17 So likewise you may know, it is with these three commissionated witnesses
of the divine Majesty in earth:

18 For though all three proceeded from one and the same spirit of truth, and
all bear Record unto only one distinct personal God-man glorified, yet in the
manner of their declarations concerning the worshipping of the Holy One of
Israel, they differ, and are as contrary as fire, blood and water, which are
without the body of men.

19 But in the spirituality of their administrations concerning invisible
worshipping of the Lord Jesus Christ, they harmoniously agree as one soul, like
unto spirit, blood and water, within man's body as aforesaid.

20 If any man should ask, why the Holy One of Israel has put such a vast
difference between the administrations of his three witnesses in earth? To this
from the Holy Spirit I answer by way of Quere; Is it not to blind the eyes of
the wise and prudent men of this world, that from their strength of reason in
Scripture records, they may war against the pure light of life within the
witnesses of the God of all saving truth?

21 That they may remain in their rational darkness of unbelief wherein they
were born, and so everlastingly perish for want of that ^ew and true birth of
the fiery glorious Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ.

22 Is it not also that God alone may receive all the honor, power, praise, and
glory, from his redeemed ones, in the revealing his true witnesses or Prophets
unto them by his eternal spirit, through which they attain to the right
understanding of the very true God, and the glorious things of eternity,
declared by his own chosen messengers;

23 And so are made to receive those divine truths in the purity of them, by
loving of them above the gain or glory of this conceited peri^hing world?

24 Moreover, do they not thereby enjoy an invisible seal of an assurance of
the eternal immortality of their persons at the visible appearing of the divine
Majesty of the Son of man,

25 That most infinite glorious God, with all his mighty Angels, Moses and
Elias, at that dreadful day when all time shall vanish immediately, and
eternity only seize upon all mankind in their several persons:

26 Again, if water, blood and fire, without the body of man be mixed together,
being of contrary conditions or natures, you know they cease not contending
until they have conquered one another.

27 Also you know blood is too strong for water, and fire too powerful for
blood, so likewise you may know it is with the three commissionated witnesses
of God in earth, Moses, the Apostles, and two last Witnesses.

28 Though they unanimously agree in bearing record unto only one distinct
personal God of all saving truth, as spirit, water, and blood, sweetly accord
within the healthful body of a mortal man as aforesaid.

29 Yet you may know that in their visible worship they are at warfare with
each other, until they have obtained victory one over another,

30 That the present immediate spiritual wisdom of the divine Majesty might
bear rule in the consciences of the chosen Jewels of immortal crowns, and not
that which is past.

31 Wherefore when that Gospel administration of blood appeared, you know that
the Apostolical Commissioners thereof did with all their power preach against
all Mosaicall observations of Jewish circumcision, new Moons, or abstinence
from meat, drinks, or any kind of Sabbattical Ceremonies whatsoever, to be
vain and of none effect, and contrary to the Spirit of Christ.

32 Thus you that are enlightened from on high, may see that that spiritual wine
of the everlasting Gospel, in the chosen of God, transmuted all watery
Ceremonies into its own spiritual substance, even as water being mingled with
blood, is converted into its own nature.

33 Moreover, since the appearing of the two last Witnesses of the eternal
spirit, you may know, that all Apostolical ordinances imitated by men called
Ministers of the Gospel, are counterfeit Apostles, which take upon them to
Preach, Pray, Baptize with water, break bread, lay on hands, or any such like,
without a commission from on high.

34 Whether for silver, or honor, or a name amongst men, under pretense of
conscience unto a God which they truly understand not, nor desire to know.

35 From the true God I say again, you that are spiritual may know, that these
idol Shepherds, and their imaginary formalities, are now become vain, and
contrary to the heavenly breathings or incomes of the glorious Spirit of our
Lord Jesus Christ, God-man glorified.

36 Thus in what soul soever this divine worship of the true God powerfully
appears, it immediately transmutes all Apostolical formalities into invisible
spiritualities of glorious joys,

37 By virtue of an heavenly intercourse between the divine spirit and the poor
soul, that is acquainted with his heavenly voice, or still motions.

38 Again, if diverse men appear as Witnesses, or Prophets, immediately sent
forth by a powerful commission from the everliving God, are there not certain
divine seals to distinguish between those Embasladors which are infallible, and
them that are but fallible?

39 My elect brethren, is it not the property of a commissionated Witness of
Christ Jesus at the first appearance of God unto him, to desire the Most High
that he would pass him by, and make choice of any other to be his Ambassador
unto his people?

40 Furthermore, in the manner of his spiritual declarations unto the most
wisest natural men, does he not appear not only seemingly quite contrary unto
the Lords former witnesses, but also as the most blasphemous, simple, base
fellows that ever appeared in the name of the Lord?

41 But of the contrary for the most part in men that are deceived, is there
not a strong desire in their fleshly spirits to be a spiritual witness of the
Lord?

42 And upon that account will not the least appearance within them, or without
them, stir up their spirits to go or run before they were sent?

43 Moreover, for want of a true commission by voice of words from the God of
heavens and earth, do they not declare mavelous natural things that shall
suddenly come to pass, or spiritual voices of power within them, with many
lying signs and wonders suitable unto the nature of man?

44 Through which the most wisest rational men are not only outwitted by
them, but subject to become one with them.

45 Furthermore, for want of spiritual declaration to witness in the
consciences of the people of pure light, language and life, that they are from
the unerring spirit, do they not deceive their own tosticatd, spirits by taking
upon them to act over anew the former actions of the true Prophets, or
Witnesses, or high Priests of the Holy One of Israel?

46 Does not this demonstrate those to be the commissionated Witnesses of the
unerring spirit, that are endued with a divine gift, to write a volume as large
as the Bible, and as pure a language as that is, with as much variety of
matter, without looking in any writing whatsoever, or having any real
contradiction in it?

47 Again, if men are endued with a divine gift to remonstrate the real grounds
of the invisible things of eternal glory, and shame, appointed for two worlds
of people when time is no more; is not this a clear manifestation unto the
elect Israelites that those men are the immediate Witnesses, or Prophets, of
the eternal spirit?

48 But on the contrary, if men pretend to be Prophets, high Priests, or Kings
of Israel, by an immediate power from the eternal Jehovah, and yet are ignorant
of the invisible things of eternity,

49 Is not this a clear manifestation unto all that have any divine light in
them, that such men are but spiritual counterfeits?

50 If men by a divine gift unto those that have any light of life eternal,
shall make an undeniable discovery of all sorts of spiritual counterfeits in
the world, is not that a real evidence of the infalibility of their commission
from the Holy One of Israel?

51 On the contrary, if men are so far from a true discovery of all spiritual
counterfeits, that they can show no sensible divine grounds of their own
commission from above, is not that a clear manifestation unto all that are
truly enlightened, that they are persons under spiritual deceits?

52 If all sober men in general upon the perusal of this epistle shall in their
consciences be convinced, that concerning the invisible things of eternity,
this is the clearest discovery that ever their eyes beheld, and yet but very
few of them shall dare to own the penmen thereof, for fear of loosing their
present enjoyments of fleshly honor, profit, or pleasure amongst men.

53 Is not this a clear demonstration unto the chosen of God, that this book
was penned by the infallible witness of the eternal spirit, in the glorified
person of our Lord Jesus Christ;

54 Whom men durst not own when he was on this earth, for fear of being
excommunicated of their vain glorious Synagogues, or because of many hard
sayings unto man's reason, spoken through his gracious and unerring mouth.

55 So much at present concerning the chosen Witnesses, Prophets and Apostles,
sent forth by the eternal spirit unto the sons of men, to bear record unto the
man Christ Jesus the Lord from Heaven, the only wise God and alone everlasting
Father, against all gainsayers that ever were, are, or shall be, from these
Scripture words: And there are three which bear witness in the earth, the
spirit, the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one.

56 Crowns of eternal glory are prepared for those men and women, which are not
only preserved from despising things that seem strange unto them, but are also
made with patience to wait upon the Holy Spirit for his discovery of them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1 No reason in Angel or men can be satisfied in it self without revelation
from the Creator. 2 God created reason. 3 Yet it was not of his own nature. 4
Infiniteness is to create persons and things differing from his own nature. 5
Though all Creatures were made by God, yet they came not out of him but by the
word of his power. 6 No creature spiritual, or natural, can be said to be the
image of God, but man only. 7 It is the property of reason to promise
obedience to God by his Prophets, but perform none. 8 Why the Angels are called
mighty.

AGain, because of the endlesness of that Serpentine reason in man, continually
warring against the innocent Dove of plain truth, proceeding from the eternal
spirit of a glorified Christ,

2 Therefore I shall write again concerning the vast difference between the
nature of angelical reason, and the nature of divine satisfaction in it self,
utterly unknown to men or Angels, until it be his pleasure to impart the
inshining glimpses thereof into their shallow comprehensions.

3 Though the spirits of the mighty Angels are pure reason, yet you that are
spiritually quick, may know, that their undefiled reason would immediately
become all rebellious imagination against the Creators glory, if it were not
continually supplied with inspirations from his eternal spirit.

4 Is the nature of the most piercing reason that is, any thing else but mere
desire?

5 Where any desire abides, is there not a want of something desired, and
where any thing is wanting, can that spirit be fully satisfied in it self?

6 Again, seeing the pure spirits of the mighty Angels are but rational, and
the most excellentest reason that is, but mere desire, and desire a want of
inward satisfaction, and where such satisfaction is wanting in it self, there
can be no true peace enjoyed, or continuance one moment in its present purity.

7 What spiritual power is there in the most piercing reason that can be?

8 Is it any thing else but a mere desire that it might be partakers with the
glorious purity of that spirit that gave its sensible being?

9 Has it any power at all to desire after wisdom, love, or any kind of
divine excellency in the least from its own rational nature? If this be truth,
which no spiritual or sober rational man can deny, are not those men under deep
darkness which say, the divine nature of God himself is pure reason only?

10 If the most purest reason in its own nature be nothing else but
unsatisfactory desire, is it possible think you, that spirit should have one
thought or motion of reason inherent in his nature, whose divine virtues are
all transcendent satisfaction in it self?

11 Some men may say unto me, Could the divine Majesty create a rational living
spirit, and yet have none of that life or rational nature living in himself?

12 You may remember I have written upon this point already in the creation of
Angels, yet for a further convincing or confounding of that Luciferian
reasoning in the learned men of this world, against the infinite power, wisdom,
or glory of the Creator, I shall speak somewhat from the Lord Jesus in answer
to this curious Quere.

13 You may know that all things are possible and very easy for an infinite
Spirit to bring to pass, when his glory moves him to do it.

14 You may also know, that though the eternal Spirit be infinite, yet it has
no power to do any thing at all, except his Glory moves him to it, or against
its own glory.

15 I confess it is not only contrary to reason, but far above all reasons
reach truly to understand the mysteries of the Creation, or Redemption of the
mighty Jehovah, or everliving Jesus.

16 What is the height, or depth of the purest rational comprehension in men or
angels, concerning the glorious things of eternity? Is it any thing else but
either strength of memory, or excellency of speech, or swiftness of
understanding, in comprehending all words whatsoever, whether they are uttered
according to acuteness of sense or no? but for a true understanding of those
heavenly things signified by those divine words, it knows nothing at all in
the least.

17 You know it is written, With thee is a well of Life, and in thy light shall
we see light. Here you see that David did not attribute the sight of that light
of the well of life unto his rational comprehension, but unto the divine light
which he received from the well of life eternal:

18 So likewise you may understand, that the holy Angels themselves do not
comprehend that inspired light of life in them by their own rational purity,
but by virtue of the glorious in-comes themselves, proceeding from the divine
nature of the eternal spirit.

19 So that you that are spiritual may clearly see, that neither men nor Angels
are capable to comprehend divine truths by any rational comprehension
whatsoever:

20 But only by virtue of divine words or motions received from the spirit of
an infinite Majesty of all glorious truths which are eternal.

21 If the divine Majesty could not by the power of his word speaking, into
some substance distinct from him, as well create sensible and insensible living
beings of variety of natures contrary to his own heavenly nature, as produce
sensible beings of his own divine nature, how could be possibly then be
infinite?

22 If the most High God should have inherent in his own spirit somewhat of
every nature that he has created, how could he then be all variety of nothing
but infinite purity in himself?

23 Or how could there be any spiritual Creator at all, but perishing nature
only, as over-wise men blindly imagine?

24 I would gladly have you that are spiritual-minded, to understand this
divine secret, Though every thing that have life had its original from the
Creator, yet all spirits whose natures are opposite to the divine Glory, were
without him, and not within him, and so were eternally distinct from his most
pure spirit.

25 From eternity he perfectly foresaw all those spirits alive in their own
elements, though they were nothing but sen^less confused matter in themselves,
and when his divine pleasure moved him to make them appear into distinct living
beings, you may know, that it was none of his divine nature, but a powerful
word only, commanding those spirits to come forth out of secret death or
darkness, and manifest themselves according to their several properties, into
distinct living beings, in the visible sight of themselves, and elect men and
angels, as manifestations of his eternal decree.

26 Wherefore you know, in the forming of the man Adam it is recorded that God
said, Let us make man in our image, but you never read or heard that any other
creatures were made in the image or likeness of God besides them.

27 You know it is written, that Christ took not on him the nature of Angels,
but the seed of Abraham: why did not the Creator take on him the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham? you that are spiritual may know, it was
because the one was created or renewed into his own image or spiritual
likeness, and the other was in his nature quite contrary to the divine Majesty.

28 If the angels spirits had been of the divine nature, how could it be said,
that Christ took not on him the angelical nature?

29 But it may be objected, that those words were spoken in relation to Christ's
fleshly part. To that I answer: Was not Christ both God and man in one person?
and was not his divine spirit and natural flesh one bodily essence after his
Godhead was transmuted into pure manhood?

30 Though the unchangeable glory of the Creator was wholly transmuted into a
body of flesh, blood and bone, that sinful mortals might behold their God face
to face and live;

31 Yet you may know that the nature of his spirit, in respect of its divine
purity, neither was, nor possibly could be changed, but only his infiniteness
was laid down in flesh for a season, for the fulfilling of Scripture prophesies.

32 Again, if Christ took not on him that Angelical nature of pure reason, what
then, think you, will become of all rational wise men, which understand nothing
but what is visible unto the eyes of earnal flesh?

33 If the eternal spirit of the Creator has no Angelical reason in his divine
nature, some men may say unto me, How will you answer that Scripture, where the
Creator says unto the Jews, Come, let us reason together?

34 As to that you may know, when that Scripture was spoken, that the Lord did
not talk with the Nation of the Jews in his own person, but in the persons of
his true Prophets, which were sent to convince those stony-hearted Jews, by
declaring the glorious God and his spiritual truths unto them, in the balance
of their own reason.

35 You know is it written that the Israelitish Jews cried out, Let not God
speak to us any more lest we die, and it was granted unto them, that he would
not speak unto them any more in his own person, as they desired; therefore you
may know, that the Lords reasoning with the Jews was only by his Prophets,
which were rational men like unto themselves.

36 If the Creator himself seems to reason with any man, is it any other
ways but to confound the wisdom of unclean reason in man, by way of quere, and
such like, as Christ the only God often did to the Jews in the days of his
flesh?

37 You know it is written, that Christ wept over Jerusalem, and the Jewish
Nation, saying, How often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not: behold, as he was a man he wept
over the unbelief of their bloody* minded spirits, but as he was a God he
rejoiced at their damnation, in relation unto his eternal decree.

38 Is not this answerable unto those sayings of his, where he calls them
Serpents, and Generation of vipers, and children of the devil? and how should
ye escape the damnation of hell? and such like.

39 Again, concerning those words ye would not, you that are spiritual may
know, that the divine will or pleasure of God in his Prophets, did spiritually
contend with the carnal spirits of the legal Jews, answerable to their cursed
imagination, of having power in their own rational wills to do whatsoever he
should command them.

40 If the nature of the most purest reason be nothing but unsatisfactory
weakness, some men may say unto me, why then does the Scriptures call them
Christ's mighty Angels? From the true light of life eternal, to this I answer by
a comparison, If men are chosen by the greatest Monarch in the world for his
society, that they may be always ready to obey his will in whatsoever he shall
command them, when they have received a commission from his own mouth, to
execute vengeance upon Rebels, their Towns, Cities, or Castles, in his
dominions you know they appear mighty or dreadful unto all his people, as the
King himself that sent them;

41 So likewise you may know is is not in reference unto the purity of the
Angels natures, that they are called mighty Angels; but because they were
created, not only to stand in the personal presence of an infinite Majesty, to
behold his bright burning glory face to face, but also to be ready to receive
commissions from him to execute vengeance upon the Persons, Goods, Towns, or
Castles of Canaanitish Rebels, that are left to despise his spiritual
government, or glorious truths, declared through the mouths of his chosen
Messengers.

42 Again, though those men that stand in the presence of the worlds Monarch,
are looked upon as the most mighty Nobles on this earth, yet you know that the
sight of them is not very dreadful to behold, until men know they have received
a commission of life and death from their mighty Lord and Master;

43 So likewise though the holy Angels are called mighty, because they stand in
the personal presence of the most infinite Majesty of heaven and earth, yet you
may know, that the sight of them are not very dreadful to behold, until they
have received a commission of life and death from their most mighty Lord of
heaven and earth.

44 Again, you know that the servants of the most eminent Prince, are not only
looked upon as honorable and mighty persons, because they stand in the presence
of so powerful a Prince, but also because they inherit a temporal kingdom of
such exceeding vastness, with variety of honor, beauty, riches, or pleasures;

45 So likewise you may also know that the persons of Angels, are not only
called Holy or Mighty, because they stand in the visible presence of so
infinite a Majesty, but also because they inherit a kingdom of such infinite
vastness, and unspeakable fullness of all variety of ravishing honors, beauties,
riches, or pleasures which are eternal.

46 Again, you know that the servants of an earthly Monarch, for the magnifying
of their Lord and Master, in the spirit of his subjects, are clothed not only
with or naments decked with silver, gold, precious stones, or the like, but
their bodies also are anointed with precious odorus, and fed with the finest
delicacies;

47 So likewise for exalting of the transcendent glory of the infinite God in
the spirits of his obedient subjects, you may know that the persons of the
elect Angels, does not only shine brighter then gold, or any precious stones
whatsoever, but their bodies also are anointed with divine odours, and their
spirits are fed with glorious delicacies, by virtue of a continual inshining
brightness, proceeding from the eternal spirit that made them.

48 So much at present between the divine nature of the eternal spirit of
undesiring satisfactory fullness in its own personal Majesty, and the rational
spirits of unsatisfactory desires, dwelling in the spiritual bodies of the
elect Angels, and why they are called mighty Angels.

CHAP. XXIX.
1 Of the creation of Adam. 2 Why God spoke in the plural number in the making
of man.

IN the next place I shall treat of the Created purity of the first man and
woman that ever were made, that the heirs of immortal Crowns may the more
clearer understand my ensuing discourse: in the first and second Chapters of
Genesis, it is thus written; furthermore God said, let us make man in our
image, according to our likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea,
and over the foul of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth,
and over every thing that creeps and moves on the earth; thus God created
the man in his image, in the image of God created he him: he created them male
and female. The Lord God also made the man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living soul.

2 My beloved spiritual brethren, I do not question your satisfaction
concerning the Holy One of Israel, being but only one eternal personal
Majesty, because not only the ridiculousness of three persons in the Deity, is
so fully discovered already in this Epistle, but because the true ground why
the God of glory calls himself by a threefold title of Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, is clearly manifested also.

3 Before I write concerning what that image of God in man's creation was, give
me leave to reason a little upon those words, let us make man in our own
likeness.

4 If thou which art so literally accute or exact, do but soberly mind the
first and last words of the three Scripture Texts together, thou can not
possibly but be convinced of thy Trinitary error.

5 Concerning those first words, furthermore God said, has not those sayings
relation unto the singular number only?

6 Moreover, though God spoke in the plural number, let us make man in our
image, according to our likeness; it does not therefore follow that the Holy
One of Israel can possibly consist of three personal beings in coequal glory,
as men vainly imagine.

7 Again, thou which little think that University tongues keeps thee under
spiritual darkness, whether was it most proper for the glorious Creator to say,
let us make man in our image, according to our likeness; or to say, I will make
man in my image, according to my likeness?

8 Is not the word us in creation more emphatical, or spiritual order, then the
word I in creation?

9 What is thy natural wisdom but rational exactness, whether words bear a good
sense, sound, or language, and from thence to imagine the Holy One of Israel to
be three personal beings, because he was compelled to speak words in the plural
number, in reference unto the glory of his wisdom or counsel, concerning the
creating of man in his image or likeness?

10 Again, as in the foregoing words the creation of man was spoken in the
plural number of trinitary expressions, let us make man in our image, according
to our likeness; so likewise in the following words you may see the plural
number converted wholly into the singular number of one divine glorious being,
in those sayings; Thus God created the man in his image, in the image of God
created he him: he created them male and female.

11 Does not these trinitary expressions themselves unto all men that have any
spiritual light in them, clearly discover the confused darkness of any kind of
personal trinity whatsoever?

12 Can three persons in equal power, wisdom, and glory, possibly be but one
God?

13 Is not three in number absolutely three? How then or by what diabolical
Logic can thou make three beings appear to be but one divine essence?

14 Three distinct persons, as beforesaid, cannot possibly be less in number
then three Gods, unless two of them in number be removed, that there may remain
but one personal God alone, that none may share with the Holy One of Israel in
his infinite wisdom, power and glory: if this be not good sense, let men or
Angels reprove me with better.

15 I have better thoughts of thee that thou should imagine the Creator to be
three persons, united together in one divine bulk or being, and to think that
he by his infinite power might disunite his divine Trinity, and send two of
them forth for a season unto the sons of men as he saw occasion, and so to
return unto the divine essence.

16 I confess, these and many such like gross absurdities concerning the
Creator, every man is subject unto, until his understanding be enlightened from
on high by the Holy One of Israel himself.

17 Because Millions of people lie under deep darkness in many Nations,
concerning the right understanding of the Trinity of the only true God in
unity, through the deceit of antiquity of custom, proceeding from the Orthodox
Ministers of the Gospel, so called, therefore I am compelled to use many words
in this most needful point.

18 If through a sober and mock perusal of this Epistle, thou attain to know
there is an eternal being of beings, and truly to understand this glorious
Creator to be but one personal Majesty, thou will then as clear as the light it
self, not only see the miserable confused darkness of those men that say,
there is no God but in men's consciences only, or that say, there is no God at
all but perishing nature: but thou will also see all men that are ignorant of
this one personal Majesty, which come forth in the name of the Lord, but meet
deceived persons, though they speak like Oracles or Angels.

19 Again, because many upright souls for want of clear distinction in them of
the invisible God of eternal glories, are subject to continual doubts of being
deceived through the variety of pretended appearances in his most Holy name;
therefore in the next place I shall write in a comparative way upon those
sayings, let us make man in our image, according to our likeness.

20 If a mighty earthly Prince have secret thoughts of acting a thing of
concernment, in relation to his honor, you know with advice of his privy
Counselors, it is usual for him to say, It is our Royal pleasure to do such a
thing, or we think fit so to do; or let us do such a thing, or we rejoice in
your welfare as our own, and such like:

21 So likewise when the King of Glory was moved to create a thing of
concernment, from his spiritual privy Council, it was most requisite for him to
say, let us make man in our image, after our likeness.

22 Again, if he intends to do some ordinary thing by virtue of his Royal
pleasure, in reference to his honor, you know not taking advice of his privy
Council, he speaks in the singular number altogether; as namely, I will such
a thing to be, or let it be so, and such like:

23 So likewise when the King of Glory created things for his honor, that were
not of his divine image, or likeness, those creatures being at a distance, and
of lower concernment, to him you know he spoke altogether in the singular
number only, as if he had not formed them from his unsearchable Council, as
namely, let such a thing be, or let it be so, or the like.

24 Again, if a King for his highest honor from his most eminent Counselors
having no heir, is moved to set his Royal stamp upon a man, as to be called by
the name of the blood Royal, and to be the next man in the kingdom to the King,
you know the thing being of so near concernment unto him, he thinks he can
never speak too much, or home enough in the thing, for the taking upon the
spirits of his subjects; therefore he will say, Let us make such a man our
heir, or it is our Royal pleasure to make that man our kinsman, and ruler over
our whole kingdom, next to our self, and the like:

25 So likewise, as beforesaid, the creating of man being of the highest and
nearest concernment unto the King of Glory, that his wonderful wisdom and love
in the thing, might operate not only upon spiritual men, but also in the
mighty Angels themselves, the glorious Creator with a fullness of speech from
the depth of his invisible Council said, let us make man in our image, or in
our likeness, because until man was made, he had formed nothing in his own
likeness, but the contrary altogether, as abundantly beforesaid.

26 Again, you that are renewed from on high with the image of Christ, may
know, that one chief ground that moved the divine Majesty to say, Let us make
man in our image, it was because he did eternally purpose to become a spotless
man of flesh, blood, and bone himself:

27 So that the word us had relation unto a twofold condition of that spiritual
man the King of Glory himself, therefore they were spoken in the plural number,
let us make man in our own image, and such like.

28 Another ground why the divine Majesty said, let us make man in our image,
was this, because the glorious Creator himself from eternity was a spiritual
person in the likeness of the man Adam.

29 The chiefest ground of all why the divine Majesty said, let us make man in
our own image, was this, because the infinite Majesty, and the man Adam. was to
be of so near a union both spiritually and naturally;

30 Therefore the God of eternal Glory was compelled to disrobe himself of his
infiniteness by transmuting of it into flesh on this earth, that from his
divine self he might purchase for elect mankind in that body of his flesh,
personal Crowns of God-like glory in the highest heavens, with himself and his
mighty Angels;

31 Heaven descended into earth, that earth might be made capable to ascend
into heaven.

32 God himself became very man, except sin on earth, that very man himself
might become the very God in the high heavens, and that elect mankind, except
sin, may be all like God himself in the heavens also in their several divine
measures, at the personal appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ in the clouds of
heaven, with all his holy Angels.

33 Was not this one end also why the Holy One of Israel spoke in the plural
number, saying, let us make man in our image, that the learned men of this
world should not only blind their own eyes, but also become that scarlet
whore that sits upon many waters, making the nations continually drunk with
their spiritual witchcraft of trinitary Merchandising lies, that they may be
justly condemned in their own consciences in that day when our Lord Jesus
Christ shall say unto them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know ye
not, or I sent you not, ye preached in my name only for silver and honor among
men, and ye persecuted my Prophets to the death, because they discovered your
l^arned deceits unto my people, from your own subtle imaginations you made
laws to stop all men's mouths as Blasphemers, Heretics, Seducers, Deceivers of
the people, or disturbers of the civil peace, and such like: that you only
might usurp lordship over all men's consciences, persons, and estates, that
could not bow down to your Idolatrous inventions; you laid snares to entrap all
those that you suspected, might impede your vain glorious decrees; you lived in
secret lusts and pleasures upon the ruins of my innocent people, and flattered
the ignorant, what pains you took in studying after sparitual things for their
souls health: you made use of my holy Name only as a cloak to hide all your
subtilties from the deceived people; you blinded their understandings with your
Sabbattical Ceremonies of long prayers, and lifting up your eyes and hands
toward heaven, as if you had been purity it self, notwithstanding your hearts
were full of covetousness, and your fees swift to shed innocent blood; you
offered up your bloody fasts and feasts unto me for a sacrifice of acceptance
of your doings, as if I were like unto your selves, to be persuaded by goodly
words to justify all your unrighteousness; you pretended my glory in all your
imaginary formalities, but it was your own honor principally you sought from
the people, and death unto you to loose it; earthly riches, honor, beauty,
unsatiable pleasures, long life, and such like, were your only joys; you have
had this your desired Paradise already, and my poor people have suffered their
hell in your heaven, and now must you suffer your eternal pain and shame, and
they must possess everlasting joy and glory.

34 So much at present why the God of Glory spoke in the plural number: in the
next place I shall in some measure show what that image of God in the creating
of man does signify.

CHAP. XXX.
1 How God made man in his own image or likeness. 2 The soul of Adam was of the
same divine nature of God. 3 Not of the nature of the Angels. 4 Of the created
virtues in Adams soul. 5 Adam did not know of his power to stand or fall. 6 The
breath of life which Adam had received from God, dyed.

THe Scripture declares what condition man was formed in, in these words; thus
God created the man in his image, in the image of God created he him.

2 After the man was completely made in the similitude of his Creator, the
Scripture tells you then what substance he was created of, in those words, the
Lord God also made the man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and the man was aliving soul.

3 You that are spiritual may know in the creating of man, that the Lord God
spoke the word only into the dust of the earth, and immediately the virtue of
that word brought forth a living man of pure flesh, blood and bone, like unto
God himself, as near as possibly could be.

4 It was not the visibility of their persons that differ in the least, but the
glory of them only:

5 The one was an infinite spiritual body in all parts perfectly holy, and the
other was a finite natural body of perfect innocence, resembling that divine
form, as aforesaid.

6 You know I have abundantly showed the impossibility of the least motion of
reason to be inherent in the nature of God; therefore I would have you to
understand, though Adams body being made of dust, and appointed for generation,
was but natural, yet his soul was not rational, but supernatural, or divine:
Why? because it was formed according to the invisible glory of the eternal
spirit.

7 Therefore you may understand, that if the soul of Adam had been rational in
its creation, then it could not have been divine, but of an Angelical desiring
nature, only of unsatisfaction in it self.

8 Again, you spiritual ones may understand, that that divine soul in Adam,
which was created after the likeness of the eternal spirit, did consist of
several heavenly properties in its measure, answerable unto those divine
qualifications in the glorious Creator, above all measure.

9 What were those created virtues in Adams. soul? It was an invisible
spiritual light and life, called wisdom, faith, love, righteousness, meekness,
patience, and such like.

10 Though his soul could be nothing at all without its several properties, and
though those qualifications were all in a heavenly harmony, yet this I would
have you to take notice of, that joy of soul that Adam did possess, arose in
him from one divine voice only, called the spirit of faith, which was all
satisfaction in himself with his present condition, not having the least
thought of any happiness beyond what he enjoyed already.

11 As the divine nature of the eternal spirit was variety of infinite
satisfaction in it self, so likewise the soul of Adam being composed of the
very same qualifications, was variety of heavenly satisfaction in it self also,
according to its measure.

12 If the nature of Adams soul had been rational in his creation, then through
want of divine satisfaction in it self, it would always have been desiring
after something that he wanted, like unto the elect Angels and us, which have
two contrary voices in one soul.

13 You may know, that the created nature of the soul of Adam, could not
possibly have any reason in it; why? because the very nature of reason is
seriously to consider, whether things be good or right that are propounded unto
its understanding or no.

14 But of the contrary, that spirit which without the least consideration
perfectly knows the excellency of a thing, as soon as ever it is presented
unto it, as Adams did, must needs be divine as Gods is, and so super-rational,
though clothed with pure nature only.

15 Again, though the soul of Adam through the divine purity of its nature was
immortal, and incapable of the least motion of any kind of rebellion against
the glorious spirit of its Creator, yet because his body was natural, and had
its beginning of dust, and so was subject to change, or to be changed from its
present condition, his immortal soul having its being in a piece of clay, was
become subject through temptation to be transmuted from its present created
glory also.

16 For this I would gladly have you to understand, though the soul of Adam was
of a divine nature, yet because it was a created nature distinct to it self, it
was become a son, a subject, a servant unto its divine God, and capable of
transmutation through deep temptation into a sinful condition, through which
both soul and body might not only be subject to natural death, but also full
of fears of an eternal death, or casting out of the spiritual presence of the
divine Majesty;

17 To bring forth his heavenly design of a more transcendent eternal glory,
that he had prepared through sufferings to be enjoyed by his divine image, at
the last day with himself face to face.

18 You that are spiritually quick may know, that the body of Adam was not
created natural only, because he was appointed for generation, but also
because if his body had been immortal in its creation, as well as his soul; he
would not only then have been incapable of natural generation, but also he
would have been incapable of any kind of transmutation whatsoever, unless he
gave consent unto it self.

19 And where then had the prerogative power, infinite wisdom, and transcendent
glory of the Creator, ever been seen, or known by man or Angels, as beforesaid?

20 Again, though Adams soul was of the divine nature in its creation, yet I
would have you to understand that he knew not whether he should stand or fall
from his present estate or no.

21 Neither did he know not what power he was endued withal in his created
purity, as many man vainly imagine:

22 If he had known that he had power in his own will to preserve himself in
his present condition, he not knowing as aforesaid, any glory above what he had
enjoyed, you may be sure if he could have kept himself in that blessed estate,
he would never have lost it for want of making use of all the power that was in
him to have resisted a temptation unto rebellion; in which he knew there was a
threatening of the loss of that created glory he enjoyed as, beforesaid.

23 Again, though the soul of Adam was of the divine nature in its creation,
yet because it was one essence with a body that was taken out of dust,
therefore it was both probable and capable to be brought into a condition of
entering into dead dust for a moment, to fulfill those Scripture sayings, for in
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death, in the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread till thou return to the earth, for out of it wast thou
taken, because thou art dust, and to dust thou shall return.

24 Was the body of Adam any thing but dead dust before its living soul was
infused?

25 Was the soul of Adam ever spoken of as a sensible living being, before it
became one essence with his body of flesh, blood, and bone, formed our of the
dust as an house or tabernacle for its comfortable substance and sensible
understanding of its own living being?

26 Seeing the body of Adam was nothing but a lump of dead cold senceless dust,
before his soul entered into it, and composed it in^o a com^leat living man; by
virtue of a spiritual word spoken through the glorious mouth of the Creator:
do thou think it possible that either of them could enjoy any sensible living
being without the other?

27 You know the Scripture says, the Lord God also made the man of he dust of
the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man
became a living soul: though the body of Adam was formed of dust, you see all
the lise it en^oyed was from its soul only, and the man became a living soul.

28 When the Lord said, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die the
death; was it not the very soul of Adam, as well as his body, that was
threatened with death it self?

29 Nay, was there any thing could live in the body of Adam but the soul? what
then could be capable of dying, but the soul only?

30 Again, can thou be so senceless as to think that ever the body of Adam
could have turned to dust, if his soul had not died within his body, and like a
spark of sire in an Oven that is closed from all kind of air?

31 So likewise thou may understand, that the immortal soul of Adam became
mortal as soon as ever it was polluted with sin, and when it came to taste of
death, according to the word of the Lord, through the sloppage of the breath of
life, proceeding from the invisible soul, that fiery spark was quenched with
silen^sleep of death, as life or light that is smothered, and did not fly in
the air, as men vainly imagine.

32 Again, it is said, the man became a living soul; now you know that every
man's sinful soul is the life of its natural body, yet it may be a dark dead
soul in spiritual matters, while it is alive in natural; but as beforesaid, the
spirit of Adam was called a living soul, in relation unto the living virtue,
beauty, or invisible glory of its creation.

33 I confess that it was impossible for the soul of Adam of ever being capable
of death, if it had been always preserved from being polluted with sin.

34 Moreover, as soon as ever it was but touch with sin, in that very sin was
death it self:

35 Who ever thou art that shall say that the pure soul of Adam was not defiled
with sin it self, what ever light thou pretendest to know, thou art utterly
ignorant as yet of the spirit of the Scriptures.

36 If according to the divine truth of Scriptures, thou art made to confess
that the pure soul of Adam was overcome of sin, and therewith all defiled
through his whole man, though men or Angels should gainsay it, thou may be
fully assured that both the soul and body of Adam are in the dust of the earth
dead asleep, void of all life, light, motion, heat, or any thing appearing unto
life, until that second man Adam the Lord from heaven, by the mighty power of
his word does, or shall raise him again, and all mankind that are asleep with
him in the dust, at the last day.

37 Again, though the body of the man Adam being formed of dust, was absolutely
natural, through its appointment for generation, yet I would have you that are
spiritual to understand this secret, that until Eve lufted after Adam, through
her being first defiled with the Angelical Serpent, the soul of Adam being
divine, and free from all kind of rationality, could not possibly have any
desire in it after carnal copulation with his wife.

38 You may know that carnal pleasures were too low for a spiritual soul, whose
nature was variety of divine satisfaction in it self.

39 Though the woman Eve through the permission of God, was first guilty of the
transgression of lust, and so tempted her innocent husband to lie with her, to
cover her folly, if it had been possible, yet because her soul was of the
divine nature in its creation, as Adams was, you may know that that carnal
desire in her toward her husband, proceeded not from her own divine purity,
but from the rational nature of the unclean Serpent within her, as I shall
clearly demonstrate when I come to trout of the manner of her being overcome by
the subtilty of that Angelical Serpent.

40 Thus though the bodies of Adam and Eve were both natural, and so were
capable of luft to bring forth generations, yet you may know, that the secret
wisdom of God saw it most fit, that neither Adam nor Eve should be first
capable to know what it was to desire after carnal copulation from their own
divine spirits, but from that Serpentine unclean spirit, that entered into the
body of Eve.

41 So much at present why God said, let us make man in our image, according to
our likeness, and what that image of God was in the creating of man.

CHAP. XXXI.
1 Of the seed of the woman. 2 Of the seed of the serpent. 3 How sin came into
man's nature. 4 No Angel cast out of heaven but that one which deceived Eve. 5
No true knowledge of the Scriptures but in the knowledge of the two seeds. 6 No
speech could proceed from any but from the Angel.

IN the next place I shall write of the Angelical Serpent, and of he manner of
his beguiling of innocent Eve.

2 In the 12 Chapter of the Revelation it is thus written: and the great Dragon
that old Serpent called the Devil and Satan, was cast ou^ which deceives all
the world, he was cast out into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with
him. Seeing the Scriptures make mention of an old Serpent, Dragon, Devil, and
his Angels, some men may say unto me, was there many Angels cast from Heaven
into the Earth together, or but one only? and if there were but one or many,
where are those angels now become?

3 From a divine gift received from the unerring spirit, to this I answer: As
there was but one man Adam cast out of his heavenly Paradise of created purity
of soul and body, and all his generation were cast out of their spiritual peace
with him;

4 So likewise there was but one Angelical Serpent cast from his created
rational purity, and that was that Serpent Devil which deceived Eve.

5 The Angels which were cast out with him were of his seed or generation,
through his union with the intrails of Eve, as I shall make manifest in the
ensuing discourse.

6 My beloved spiritual brethren, because my soul desires your perfection as
my own;

7 Therefore would I gladly have you possessed with an infallible understanding
between Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels; or between the
seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent; why? because in the knowledge
of these two distinct Seeds, Sons, or Generations, depends a general
understanding of the spirit of the Scriptures;

8 Wherefore in the 2. of Genesis you shall find it thus written; but of the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it, for in the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death.

9 If you look in the 3. Chapter of Genesis with a spiritual eye, then you may
clearly see what that Tree of knowledge of good and evil did signify; the
words are these, Then the serpent said to the woman, ye shall not die at all,
but God does know that when ye shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. So the woman seeing that the
Tree was good for meat, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be
desired to make one wise, took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also
to her husband with her, and he did eat.

10 My elect spiritual brethren, you know it is a general opinion amongst
learned men, that the Serpent which appeared unto Eve, was one of the beasts of
the field, which the Lord God had made.

11 And that the Devil was an invisible spirit, which entered into the body of
the Serpent, and spoke those subtle speeches through his mouth;

12 And so caused the woman to eat of the fruit of a natural Tree, which the
Lord God had forbidden, and tempting her husband to eat of that fruit with her,
it operated that venomous evil in them and all mankind.

13 Behold the gross darkness abiding in the spirits of the learned men of this
perishing world!

14 You know that the Scriptures are generally expressed in natural terms for
the manifestation of spiritual things, to the weak comprehension of sinful
mortals;

15 And natural wise men would persuade men to understand them exactly in the
letter, because they measure the glorious things of eternity, by their rational
learning only, as beforesaid.

16 In Scripture records you know that Christ is called a Lion, a Lamb, a
Stone, a Door, a Way, a Vine, a Green Tree, and such like expressions, in
reference unto spiritual meanings.

17 Also you know that evil minded men are sometimes called by the names of
Devils, Dragons, Vipers, Serpents, Fruitless-trees, and such like, according to
that of John the Baptist, when he said, now the ax is laid unto the root of the
tree, every tree therefore that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire;

18 So likewise you that are spiritual may know, that that Angelical Reprobate
by whom Eve was deceived, was called a Dragon, an old Serpent, the Devil, and
Satan, a Deceiver, or the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and such like
names suitable unto his cursed nature.

19 But the very truth is this, that Serpent that tempted Eve was that
Angelical Dragon devil beforesaid, which the Lord God from the highest heavens
cast down to the lowest earth.

20 And it was his seeming divine wisdom, and Angelical person, that bewitched
Eves innocent soul to hearken unto him, and her eyes to dote upon him:

21 For you know that Eve had three considerations in her before she was
overcome to consent unto the Serpents language;

22 First, The tree was good for meat. Secondly, It was pleasant to the eyes.
And thirdly, It was a Tree to be desired to make one wise.

CHAP. XXXII.
1 The condition of Adam and Eve in their fall. 2 The Angel called a Serpent. 3
He was more comely in Eves eyes then Adam. 4 How the fallen Angel became flesh.
5 How God became flesh.

BEfore I write of the three secrets hid in the Angelical temptation, I shall
speak a little of the dispensation of the secret wisdom of God to his chosen
ones.

2 You that are spiritual may know, that in the divine will of the infinite
Majesty, is a twofold operation, which is this; When his wisdom see^h fit to
reveal a divine secret to his elect, then his Holy Spirit is all active, and
when he sees fit to obscure it from them, then his divine spirit is all
passive.

3 For the manifestation of his infinite power and wisdom, you know, that he
can create light out of darkness, and life out of death, with a glorious
advantage:

4 You know, that if the glorious Creator, for trial of his creature, should
leave the most experimental man that is to his own inspired light, and suffer
him to be tempted unto that evil of Adultery or Murder, and overcome thereby,
he must of necessity loose that former joy and peace of the divine light, or
love of God in him;

5 And in the room thereof both see and feel nothing but spiritual darkness,
with a secret fear of eternal death:

6 Until the light of life appears again, with a new assurance of a glorious
deliverance from that sinful darkness and fearful death, as aforesaid.

7 Truly, what ever men shall imagine to the contrary, as sure as there is a
God, this was the condition both of Eve and Adam also, when they were defiled
with unlawful lust one toward another, by subtle temptation of that Serpents
council, called the Tree of knowledge of good and evil.

8 Again, though it is said, It was a Tree to be desired to make one wise; yet
you may know that the soul of Eve was not of a desiring nature after wisdom in
her creation, because she was all divine satisfaction in her self:

9 Therefore that desire of tasting of the fruit of a Tree to make her wise as
Gods, to know both good and evil, proceeded only from the rational nature of
the unsatisfied spirit of the Angelical Serpent.

10 For this I would have you to understand, at that time Eve was tempted to
evil by the Serpent, she was wholly left to her own strength;

11 And it was the seeming glory of his Angelical language that overtopped her
present light, and begot that desire in her understanding, through which her
soul was moved with a powerful desire to make trial of his Serpentine council,
and to taste of his spiritual meat so highly exalted by him:

12 Because to her received new thoughts, she had not heard so glorious a
language before.

13 Again, the tree was pleasant for sight, truly before that glittering
Serpent appeared, Eve wanted no satisfaction in beholding the man Adam,

14 But she looking a little too long upon the comeliness of his form, through
his infused witchcraft her soul was ravished with the sight of his Angelical
person.

15 Again, It was a tree whose fruit was to be desired to make one wise as
Gods, to know both good and evil. My beloved spiritual brethren, the pretended
meaning of the Serpent in those words was this, if she did but taste of the
fruit of that tree, it was so full of divine virtue, that she should not only
be like unto God, but she should be as God to her self;

16 Also to know all that was to be known whether good or evil within her own
soul; but the truth is, his secret intent was this, that when she had tasted of
that forbidden fruit, she should with him both know and feel in her own spirit
the difference between light and darkness, life and death, love and envy, peace
and war, good and evil, or God and devil.

17 Since Eve, the natural mother of all mankind, was overcome by lust,
through the sultilty of the Serpent, has not many a poor innocent Virgin, or
Virgin-wife, been deceived in like manner, through the comeliness of men's
persons, and their Serpentine languages, by persuading them that they loved
them above their own lives, and of giving them such content they know not of,
or if they deny them, it will be their death.

18 Moreover, by telling them all men are but one man, and all women are but
one woman, and therefore it was pure liberty to be free unto all; and that they
are in the greatest bondage which are united to one only.

19 I say, has not these and such like cursed councels occasioned many an
innocent soul to betray their Virginity, or Virgin bed, unto their perpetual
sorrow, and shame afterward?

20 Truly my Christian friends, this was the Virgin-wife Eves very case, though
it may seem strange at the first unto many that shall read this Epistle:

21 You know the Scripture says, That she seeing the Tree to be good for meat,
and pleasant to the eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise, took of
the fruit thereof and did eat, that is; when the innocent soul of Eve was
overpowred with the Serpents subtle language, as before said, her spirit did
consent unto him to come in unto her, and take full possession of her to be her
God and guide, instead of her Creator.

22 Truly in this case the Virgin Eves condition may fitly be compared unto the
Virgin Mary;

23 You know after the Angel had told her that without knowing of man she
should be with child, through the power of the most high overshadowing of her;
how easily was she entreated, not only to have it so, but also how exceedingly
did her soul rejoice with the very tidings thereof?

24 If men look with a spiritual eye between their Angelical salutations, they
may see more seeming glorious enjoyments in the unclean Angels greeting of Eve,
then in the holy Angels saluting of Mary.

25 Though men or Angels should gainsay it, from the spirit of truth it self,
I shall declare the very sense of this secret in plainess of speech, which was
this;

26 As soon as ever Eves soul, through the permissive power of God, was
overcome to consent to the Serpents cursed counsel, his Angelical person entered
into her womb through her secret parts;

27 And being united to her soul and body, his Serpentine nature dissolved it
self into her pure seed, and defiled her throughout, and so became essentially
one with her, through which naturally she conceived a Serpent, Dragon, Devil,
into a man-child of flesh, blood, and bone, and brought forth her first
begotten son of the devil, yea the very Dragon, Serpent devil himself, and
called his name, according to his nature, Cain, or cursed, though ignorantly
she said she had received a man from the Lord.

28 So likewise of the contrary, the Womb of the Virgin-Wife Mary was honored
with the only wise Angelical God himself;

29 Through which her poluted nature was not only cleansed, whilst he was in
her womb;

30 But also by virtue of the divine power, she was enabled to conceive his
glorious Majesty of her seed into an holy babe of unspotted flesh, blood and
bone, and in his season to bring forth her first begotten Son of God:

31 Yea the true God and everlasting Father himself, and call his name,
according to his nature, Emanuel, Jesus, or blessed.

32 So that you which are inwardly Baptized with the true knowledge of the Holy
One of Israel, may see in some measure what is meant by the two Scripture
seeds, the Angelical devil first became a man-child, and the Angelical God
afterward became a man-child.

33 Thus the most Holy God abased himself in the very womb of a woman, that he
might first or last destroy the power of that Serpentine reason, or lying
imagination in all his elect Israelites.

CHAP. XXXIII.
1 What form the devil was of before he tempted Eve. 2 Spiritual bodies do not
change their forms but their glories. 3 Spirits can take up no bodies but their
own. 4 The forbidden fruit was not an apple, or any other fruit that could be
eaten with the teeth.

IT is written, But God gives it a body as it pleases him, even to every seed
his own body.

2 My spiritual friends, according to the truth of the letter, you may see,
that by the decreed word of the Creator, every seed, or spirit, naturally
brings forth its own body, or likeness in its season.

3 Thus it was with the Serpent Angel when he tempted Eve, he was not a homely
beast, as men vainly imagine from their beastly reason;

4 But he was a spiritual body, and appeared unto Eve in form like unto a
glorious God, or man.

5 For this I would have you to understand whose souls are fixed upon a
substantial glory to come, though the spiritual bodies of God, or Angels, be
transmuted into natural bodies, or though the mortal bodies of men be changed
into immortality, yet the form of their persons are never altered, but the
beauty of glory of them only.

6 But some men may say unto me, is any thing hard for the Lord, or can he bot
appear in any form, or transmute his creature into any shape whatsoever, after
he has formed him?

7 To this I answer, from the truth it self, The Creator can do whatsoever his
divine wisdom sees sit.

8 Now in his wisdom he foresaw that his infinite power and wonderful glory
would most apparently be seen by elect men and Angels, in a comely ordering the
things that he should make.

9 So that all creatures from eternity appeared most amiable in his eyes, that
in time were to bring forth their own bodies, according to their kind.

10 Whefore when any monster is born, you may know it is either through
unnatural mixing of seeds together, or it is some judgment answerable to some
wicked act, or else it is a forerunner of some strange or dreadful thing that
is to fall upon the heads of monstrous minded men or women, which abhor the
very name of a personal Majesty;

11 For our God is the God of all spiritual and natural order, and not of
Magical confusion.

12 This truth will be an eternal witness in the consciences of all Canaanitish
lying devils* which say, When the body of man turns to its dust, the soul is
swallowed up into the eternal Ocean, or else it appears in some other form,
as namely a horse, or an ass, or a dog, or a root, or a flower, or such like.

13 My beloved spiritual brethren, from whence think you proceeds this, and
all such like errors? truly only from some secret lusts men are in bondage
unto, which are as dear to them as their very lives:

14 Therefore they are afraid of appearing again in the bodies of men, lest
they should reap the fruit of all their former filthiness; Blessed are the
purified spirits, for they shall see their God eternally face to face.

15 Again, it is written, that she gave also to her husband with her, and he
did eat: that is, being full of natural lust from that serpent within her, she
by her Angelical speeches did entice her husband to lie with her, and so he was
defiled also with her.

16 But it may be objected, that the woman was made for that very end for
procreation of mankind, therefore it seems something strange that natural
lust should be that sin of eating the forbidden fruit, or tree of knowledge of
good and evil.

17 To this I answer, It Is truth the woman was formed for that very end, and in
her seed was the very law of generation:

18 But she was defiled in spirit and body by another, to her own knowledge,
before she was capable to know what it was to desire her own husband;

19 And the truth is, as aforesaid, she immediately desired him to hide her
known rebellion against her Creator.

20 Besides all this, knowing her self first in the transgression, her
conscience told her that she ought not to have ensnared her innocent husband,
to hide her folly;

21 But to have waited for the issue of her own doings, I mean the birth of
that Serpentine cursed Cain in her womb, before she had desired the lawful
knowledge of her own husband.

22 Again, if you that are sober do but seriously ponder it in your spirits,
you cannot be so weak as to think, that the law of eternal life and death
depended upon the eating of an apple from a natural tree;

23 For you know that the Lord caused the earth to bring forth all variety of
fruit to be eaten by the mouth, principally as a superfluity of delight of the
taste of man only:

24 Therefore how can sober men imagine or think, that the souls and bodies of
all mankind should be so venomed through the eating of an apple?

25 As sure as the Lord lives it was such a devilish apple that was eaten by
Eve, that it has and will bring forth many Millions of Serpent Dragon Devils,
in forms of men and women, unto eternal condemnation.

26 Again, you know it is written, that Christ said unto his Apostles, perceive
ye not yet that whatsoever enters into the mouth, goes into the belly, and is
cast into the draught, but those things which proceed out of the mouth come
from the heart, for out of the heart comes evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false testimonies, slanders, these are the things which
defile the man, Mat. the 15.

27 My spiritual brethren, I hope ere this you see that it was not a natural
apple eaten by Eves mouth, and so passing through her belly into the draught,
that defiled her whole man.

28 For if our God and only Savior be all truth, as he is, and cannot possibly
lie, then that which is eaten by the mouth of man, goes into his belly, and is
cast into the draught, without defiling his soul: so that without controversy,
that fruit or apple taken, and eaten, or received by Eve and Adam, through
which they were wholly defiled, shamed, and fearfully tormented, never came into
their mouths, or teeth, as literal wise men vainly imagine;

29 But as beforesaid, it was a spiritual eating of the Serpent Angel in the
innocent mouth of Eves soul, by her unlawful lusting after her innocent husband
that knew nothing of the thing, that he might cover her iniquity, or when she
was called to an account, help to bear her burden.

30 Again, it is written, the Kingdom of Heaven consists not in meats and
drinks; also it is written, whatsoever is sold in the shambles eat, making no
question for conscience sake. Furthermore it is written, there is nothing
unclean in it self, but as it is so esteemed, for the earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof; in these and many such like Scripture sayings, is it not
as clear as the light it self, that whatsoever was made might freely be eaten,
so that it were moderately taken?

31 So likewise whatsoever was created at the first for man's eating with his
mouth, was absolutely pure and very good for that end it was made; but of the
contrary that fruit or tree of knowledge of good and evil eaten of by Eve, was
not only full of tormenting spiritual venom to her former peace of soul, but
it caused her very body also to be subject unto all manner of mortal diseases;

32 Besides a secret fear of eternal death, which was worst of all, until the
voice of God in the garden of her soul, quieted her wounded spirit, with a
gracious promise of a glorious deliverance, through his appearance in a body of
flesh, in that saying, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.

CHAP. XXXIV.
1 The tree of knowledge of good and evil, was no natural tree: 2 What it was 3
Whence the originality of sin came.

IN the first Chapter of Genesis it is thus written, And God said, behold, I
have given unto you every herb bearing seed, which is upon all the earth, and
every tree wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing seed, that shall be to you
for meat, and God saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good.

2 If thou which read this point do but view this place of Scripture with
sobriety of spirit, thou can not then but be convinced of the gross absurdity
of the learned men of this world, that have long imagined the Tree of Knowledge
of good and evil, to be a natural tree bearing apples, or such like fruit.

3 Again, if every green herb upon all the earth, and every tree wherein is the
fruit of a tree bearing seed, were given unto Adam and Eve for their food,
according to what is here written, and that God that gave it them saw all that
he had made to be very good, how then can any sober man possibly imagine or
think, that the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil could be of this creation,
though it appeared unto Eve upon this earth, seeing all the trees that God had
made in this earth, was very good in his sight, as aforesaid.

4 This I would fain know from the Learned, whether this earth was capable of
any curse, or any natural thing that grew in it, before Eve had eaten of the
forbidden fruit.

5 If the earth was blessed, and all that was created in it, until Eve had
rebelled against the Creator, then without controversy what ever venomous
creatures, trees, or herbs there are, or any thing else that is hurtful to the
nature of man, upon the account of eating with the mouth, they had no being in
this creation, until Eve had transgressed.

6 Therefore that Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, could not possibly be trees bearing natural Apples,
as has been long imagined.

7 But they were trees of higher concernment, then of eating their fruit with
the mouth, and casting of it into the draught.

8 Do not all men that have any true light in them, look upon the tree of Life,
from the beginning of Genesis unto the end of the Revelation, to be nothing
else but the spiritual person of that Lord Jesus Christ who is the only
ever-living God, from whence flows all living waters into the Garden of Eden,
who are the spiritual trees of eternal glory?

9 Do not those men that are of a sound judgment in the things of eternity,
look upon that tree of Knowledge of good and evil, to be the outcast unclean
person of that Serpent Dragon Devil, which through essential union with Eve
become that murdering, lying cursed Cain, through which the spirits of the
elect Israelites are all defiled, as well as the Cananitish reprobate trees of
eternal death, until they are watered anew from the glorious Tree of life
eternal, as beforesaid?

10 But alas, in this confused age of seeming lofty light, in stead of a true
understanding of the spiritual trees of eternal life, and the carnal trees of
eternal death, spoken of in Scripture-records, do not many Atheistical minded
men in these our days, endeavor with all their might to convert the glorious
truths of the everliving Jesus into nothing but brain fancies of notional lying
vanities?

11 Is it not become a second nature unto them for silver, or honor, to deceive
their own souls, by flattering their poor deceived brethren lying under the
power of many filthy lusts, that all their sins shall be burnt up, but their
souls shall be swallowed up into the eternal Being?

12 Suppose the forbidden fruit had been an natural Apple, the Creators nature
being all purity it self, and the soul of Eve being of his divine image, if the
forbidden tree was pure in its nature also before it was touched by Eve, whence
then came that sin upon the spirit of Eve, seeing all things that was made in
this creation was very good at the first, as is clearly proved by the Scripture
Records already?

13 This I am sure of, that no man that is sober neither will, nor dares say,
that that evil proceeded from the Creators forbidding her to touch the tree, or
its fruit; neither could that sin possibly proceed from the soul of Eve,
because it was of the divine nature in its creation.

14 And if that tree and its fruit eaten of by Eve were of this creation, how
could there possibly be any evil in its nature, either seeing every thing and
tree that was formed in this world, was made very good at the first in the pure
eyes of the Creator, as abundantly beforesaid?

15 But some men may say unto me, Though the eternal Spirit of the divine
Majesty was incapable of the least motion of evil, through the infinite purity
of its spiritual nature, yet sin being but a defect of nature, may it not
originally rise out of the soul of Eve though it was purely created, and for
want of a Creators infinite power in it self for its own preservation?

16 From the light of life eternal to this I answer: As for the originality of
sin, it is both granted and clearly demonstrated already in that secret of the
creation of Angels beforesaid, that the root of all evil sprung from the nature
of the unsatisfied Angelical reprobate, through the absenting of the Creators
inspiring glorious excellencies to him:

17 But on the contrary, it is against all spiritual or rational truth that is
sober, that the least motion of evil could possibly have its original from the
divine spirits of Eve or Adam;

18 Therefore much less out of any kind of Apple Tree, or any other wooden
trees, herbs, or plants, which were made for man's natural comfort or delight
only;

19 For this I would have you to understand, though the souls of Adam and Eve
were but finite created beings, yet because they were of the same nature of him
that made them, their spirits were as free from all kind of desire after
wisdom or any thing else, as the Creator himself; for, as beforesaid, where any
desire is, there is a want, and the least want that is must needs be a defect
or weakness in nature, which being not immediately satisfied, it is subject to
become nothing but evil.

20 Wherefore from a divine gift received from on high, I affirm against men or
Angels, that that first desire of sin in the soul of Eve, proceeded not from
the nature of her own spirit, but from the unclean spirit of the unsatisfied
Serpents language spoken into her.

21 For you that are spiritually quick may know, that there appeared no kind
of desire or lust in the soul of Eve toward Adam, until she had tasted of the
forbidden fruit; and if that fruit had been an Apple, is it not very strange
that Adam should be ignorant of it until his wife had found it out, seeing all
the trees in the Garden which the Lord God had made, were very good, and given
them for food.

22 Moreover, who ever thou art, after the perusal of this truth, shall call
this nonsense, blasphemy, heresy, lies, and such like, because it discovers
thy darkness, is it not a clear testimony in thy own conscience, that thou art
one of the cursed brood of the old Serpent Devil beforesaid, which art not able
to endure the light, because by it thy deeds are manifested to be evil?

23 Again, though I know I have written sufficiently concerning this truth
already, unto all that are of a quick comprehension, yet for the satisfying of
the lambs of Christ, and for a further convincing of all gainsaying wolves, I
shall go on to the utmost in the further clearing of this truth of so high
concernment unto mankind.

CHAP. XXXV.
1 The Curse was not pronounced upon any natural beast, but the fallen Angel.

WHerefore in the third chapter of Genesis you may find it thus written, Then
the Lord God said to the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art cursed
above all cattle, and above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou
go, and dust thou shall eat all the days of thy life, I will also put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, he shall break
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. My spiritual brethren, can any of you
upon mature consideration possibly imagine that that Serpent was a natural
beast that was pronounced cursed by the Lord, for some evil deed done unto
innocent Eve?

2 If it were an evil spirit that spoke through the Serpents mouth, can any
sober man think that the most wise Creator would have pronounced a curse upon
the bruit beast and his seed, if the evil that was done to Eve proceeded only
from the Devil within the body of that Serpent?

3 Can you find in any place of Scripture, that ever the Lord charged any evil
spirit or devil with that deed done unto Eve, but that Serpent that spoke unto
her?

4 Therefore what ever men vainly dream of Apples pulled from wooden trees, or
of a natural Serpent, or of an evil spirit in the body of an ignorant beast, or
any such like imaginary stuff concerning the deceiving of Eve, yet you that are
truly enlightened from on high may know, that that Serpent by whom Eve was
beguiled, was that angelical reprobate cast down from the Kingdom of Glory
beforesaid, into this perishing world.

5 Moreover, you may understand also that the Serpent Angel deceived Eve upon a
spiritual account, and not upon a natural account, because you know that she
was ignorant of that poor and low thing of lusting after a man, until she had
obeyed that Serpents voice;

6 Therefore when the Creator denounced that curse upon the Serpent and his
seed, that Angelical Serpent was within the womb of Eve, and not without her.

7 And the Lord called him a Serpent, only because of his exceeding subtilty
to deceive.

8 Concerning the Serpents going upon his belly, and eating dust all the days
of his life, if that had been a natural Serpent so threatened by the Creator,
was he not as well as if he had enjoyed legs to go, and the choicest of things
to eat, seeing the one was become as na^ural to him as the other?

9 Of what concernment was that to the woman for a natural Serpent to be cursed
by the Lord; does any man or woman heed Serpents upon that account, or any
other whatsoever?

10 Moreover, suppose that curse had been denounced against an evil spirit
distinct from the soul and body of Eve, what hurt would that have been unto Eve
or Adam, or their generation?

11 Or who regards a curse upon any devil in the least, so that he himself be
not that evil spirit or devil so cursed?

12 Concerning the enmity put between the woman and the Serpent, and their
seed, I would fain know from any sober man, whether there might not be as much
enmity between Eve and a She-bear, as a natural Serpent?

13 Is it not believed by all men that are possessed with the true light, that
that Christ Jesus recorded in Holy Writ to be the Son of God according to the
Spirit, and the Son of man according to the flesh, was that heavenly Seed of
the woman here spoken of?

14 Moreover, was not this Jesus conceived of the Virgins seed into flesh,
blood, and bone, by the eternal Spirit, and was he not pronounced blessed when
he was in the Virgins womb?

15 Furthermore, are not all his spiritual seed of elect mankind pronounced
blessed with him also, as the offspring of the most high God, and heirs of
immortal Crowns of eternal glory?

16 Does not the Scripture Records throughout make a distinction between two
seeds or generations of mankind?

17 And do they not attribute names unto them, according to their several
natures?

18 Moreover, does not the Scriptures make mention of a day of Judgment both
for the dead and the quick, and does it not frequently speak of an eternal
personal glory, and its habitation prepared for some, called by the titles of
elect and precious Jewels, chosen ones, Sons of God, Saints, the blessed of the
Lord, and such like?

19 Does not the Scriptures also speak of an everlasting shame of personal
fiery death in utter darkness, ordained for others, and their place of
residence?

20 And does it not ascribe titles unto them according to their natures, as
namely, Devils, Dragons, Serpents, Vipers, sons of Belial, cursed children, and
such like?

21 Again, if the Lord Jesus Christ was that Angelical God which became that
blessed Son of the Virgin, promised to Adam and Eve after their transgression,
the which none can deny after so clear a demonstration of the Scripture seeds
as this is, except they be reprobates, then without controversy that Serpent
which was cursed for his evil deed was not without her, but within her, when he
received that sentence by the mouth of the Lord, and that seed or firstborn of
Eve, called Cain, was that cursed Serpent Angel himself, clothed with flesh,
blood, and bone, in the form of a man;

22 Who not being able to endure the sight of righteous Abel, that blessed
Seed, or Son of God, answerable unto that curse of enmity denounced against him
in the womb of Eve, his spirit was restless until he had manifested himself to
be that old Serpent, murdering lying devil, and the father of all Cananitish
murthering-minded men and women, so frequently spoken of in Scriptures, Not as
Cain which was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, in the first Epistle
of John, chap. 3. He that sows the good seed is the Son of man, and the field
is the world, and the good seed are the children of the kingdom, and the tares
are the children of that wicked one, and the enemy that sows them is the
devil, Mat. 13.

CHAP. XXXVI.
1 Of the mind of the Spirit in the word Eating of the Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil. 2 No true interpretation of the Scriptures but by immediate
inspiration. 3 Reason not capable of the mysteries of God, 4 but Faith only. 5
No devils but men and women. 6 No devil without man tempts any, 7 but the
seed or lust of his own spirit.

WHat is the mind of the spirit by that word, eating of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil? from the light of life eternal, to this I answer; The most
wise Creator called it eating, for several respects:

2 First you may be sure, that the Lord God called it eating, that neither men
or Angels should know his secrets until it was his divine pleasure, that he
might receive the praise and glory alone from all those that he should reveal
them unto.

3 The spirit of God called it eating, because of the civility of that speech;
for the Scripture language is much like to a modest pure Virgin, who is loath to
have her secret parts mentioned in the least, though they are as usefully in
their kind, and as honorable being undefiled as any part of the body;

4 And why are they honorable, because the only Lord of all life and glory
has honored them himself by his blessed birth.

5 Moreover you know, if a spiritual or natural thing be propounded to the
understanding of a man or woman, of which they have had no experience, their
spirits feeds upon it, and considers the pleasure of it as much as possible may
be, before they consent to taste of it with the whole man:

6 So likewise in the word eating, you may know that the meaning of the Spirit
of God was this, that the soul of Eve should beware of harkning unto any other
voice that was contrary unto that divine image, or voice of the Spirit of God
within her, so that if she should hear the voice of a stranger, she should not
give way in the least unto that voice, lest she should be overcome therewith.

7 Again, if the Spirit of God instead of saying unto Eve, thou shall not eat
thereof, should have said, thou shall not spiritually, or naturally, lust after
any God or Angel, but be content with what I have appointed for thee, then
indeed there would have been no need of any interpretation upon the words, but
as beforesaid, the wisdom of God saw it most fit to act otherwise.

8 Therefore what ever the learned men of this world dream of finding out the
invisible things of eternity, by searching into the Scripture Records, and
comparing them together, the divine Majesty has locked up all the principal
secrets of the Scriptures in his own spiritual breast, that he by any immediate
inspiration may dispose of them into the spirits of elect men and Angels, most
advantageous for his own glory and their consolation:

9 Therefore the sacred Scriptures runs not in the line of reason, but in the
line of faith, inspiration or revelation, according to those sayings in the
Hebrews and other Records;

10 By faith the divine work of creation, and wonderful mystery of redemption,
was, and is known with the immortal eternal glory, and everlasting shame of
men's persons in the end of the world.

11 But of the contrary, you shall never read in any place of Scripture, that
any man knew the things of eternal glory in the least, by any kind of rational
comprehension whatsoever.

12 I confess the natural reason of man is a very good handmaid, if it be well
qualified with the spiritual dame of divine faith, for illustrating of the
things of God unto weak comprehensions;

13 But as for truly understanding the invisible things of God by the highest
reason that ever was in man or Angel, it is utterly impossible, as abundantly
beforesaid:

14 Why? because though the spirit of reason were never so pure, yet you may
know its nature is but desire only after the knowledge of the divine nature of
that spirit from whence it had its living being:

15 But of the contrary, spiritual truth or faith, being of the very divine
nature of God himself, in what soul soever that heavenly seed is sown, it
springs up in that spirit with variety of glorious consolations, in reference
unto life eternal, by virtue of an intercourse with the eternal spirit from
whence it came.

16 Moreover I confess, that a man that is endued with a Solomon-like gift of
natural reason, may be able to comprehend all words, whether they are spoken in
a good form, sense, or language, or no, and to be mighty in disputes about the
glorious things of eternity.

17 But as for his real understanding whether there were any such eternal
things or no, he has no certain knowledge of that at all, but his bare
thoughts only, which equally weighed in that balance, it may be true, or it
may be false, and all this is for want of an infalibility of truth it self.

18 Therefore though the divine things of the eternal Majesty be nothing else
but spiritual purity of infallible truth in themselves, yet unto that rational
wise man, they are nothing but non-sensical blasphemy, or lying tales, till his
reason is confounded in him by a true and heavenly faith.

19 Again, if there should be any evil Angels or Devils living in the air, and
a Devil amongst them called Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils, what need any man
trouble himself with the least fear of eternal death, whatsoever wickedness is
committed by him, because if a man is tempted to evil by any Devil, but what is
in his own nature only, that evil spirit is to be eternally damned, and the
man to be set free:

20 Nay moreover, if sin or evil issued not from man's unclean reason, or lying
imagination within him, is it possible think you, that any man should be so
tormented, as some men are, with an inward burning through a secret fear of
eternal sufferings, rising in them from the guilt of former evils, committed
against the light of conscience?

21 Furthermore, seeing all men which live after the flesh must die or perish,
and that man's own lust is that imaginary Devil, from whence proceeds all sin or
evil, without controversy though men or Angels should gainsay it, there are
now no other evil Spirits, Angels, or Devils, but unmerciful men and women
only.

22 Again, if envy, pride, covetousness, hypocrisy, lust, and such like, be
the Devil in man, are not men and women those Devils that are under the power
of those evils, I would fain know from the learned men of this world, whether
there are any other evil Angels, or Devils, besides mankind, that lust after
women, or silver, or honor, or revenge, or any kind of evil whatsoever.

23 Truly if those supposed wise men which talk so much (...) subtilty of the
Prince of the air that rules in the children of disobedience, could possibly
know that their own imaginary reason was that evil spirit, or Prince of all
their airy disputes concerning God, Angels, Devils, Heaven, Hell, eternal
glory, or shame to come, which they know not of according to truth:

24 Then in stead of their rejoicing in the approbation of many men, in
relation unto their natural gifts, their own spirits would immediately become
the principle of all those howling groaning Serpent Devils, spoken of in holy
Writ, even in the sight of elect men and Angels in this mortal life.

25 Again, is it not against all spiritual or rational sense, that any Man,
Angel, or Devil, should suffer eternal damnation for the sins of another, or
for another tempting him to sin or evil?

26 Moreover, does it not stand to very good sense, that that creature that is
left to himself to be tempted unto sin or evil, and overcome thereby, and
remains under the power of it to his lives end, should eternally suffer at the
great day for his own sins, and not for another iniquity?

27 Wherefore is it not now one of the vainest things in the world for any man
to think, that there is any other evil Spirit, Angel, or Devil, that tempts him
to any motion, imagination, thought, desire, word, or action of rebellion
against God, or man, but that lying proud envious Devil, living in his whole
man as beforesaid?

28 Therefore let no man that professes spiritual light, or life in him, for
very shame say, that God can be tempted, or tempt any man unto sin, or evil,
neither let him say, that any evil Spirit, Angel, or Devil, in the air, or
earth, or in the water, or in the fire, tempts him to commit any sin or evil,
but that air, watery, fiery, fleshly Devil, dwelling only in his own body;

29 I say, let him know that that is the Prince of the air, which through the
abscenting virtue of the Holy Spirit, begets those legions of Devils, or lusts,
in the soul of man;

30 And it is the true light of the Lord Jesus Christ in all his new born ones
that crushes those Cockatrice Eggs, before they become Serpent Devils, to sting
the whole man with fears of eternal death:

31 Those Devils which by the powerful word of the Lord Jesus were cast out of
Mary Magdelen, or any other creature, spoken of in holy Writ, were only all
manner of filthy diseases, or fiery distempers in man, that hurried him about
any desperate wickedness whatsoever, oftentimes increasing so powerfully, that
it did not only occasion him to rend his own body, and break iron chains;

32 But also he is ready to tear any one in pieces, until the Lord of glory
shine into his distempered soul with that golden grace of true faith, through
which that imaginary Devil is chained up, whereby all his fleshly goods were
spoiled of ever having power in him as formerly, and being now in his right
mind at the glorious feet of the true Jesus, through his own pure light
leading him into heavenly raptures, in reference unto his eternal glory at his
visible appearing in the Clouds with all his mighty Angels.

CHAP. XXXVII.
1 The prerogative power of God is above all Law. 2 Why God cursed the fallen
Angel in the womb of Eve. 3 The Angels nature (after his offense) was not
satisfied without being ruler.

SOme men may say unto me, if it should be granted that that Serpent by whom
Eve was beguiled, was none of the trees of this Creation, nor an evil spirit in
the body of a natural Serpent, as has been long imagined by the learned
Ministers of men, but was an absolute Serpent Devil, as is abundantly declared
by you, and that it entered into Eve, and in her womb, was pronounced cursed by
the Creator, and so naturally brought forth himself a cursed Cain of her seed;
what was this unto Eve, or why should she suffer any kind of punishment for
being overcome by an enemy that was too mighty for her?

2 From the light of life eternal, to this I answer: Concerning the enemy being
too potent for her, that was hid from her eyes by the unsearchable wisdom of
the Creator;

3 For you that are spiritual may know, that the soul of Eve was not only
purely created in its kind, like unto Angels, or other creatures, but it was
also of the very same nature of his most glorious spirit that formed it, so
that she could not be ignorant in the least, that all obedience was most due
unto her Creators command.

4 Moreover, you may know also that the Creator, by the virtue of his Royal
will for manifesting of his glorious power, might give his creature a spiritual
law of light and life in it self, and yet reserve to himself the prerogative
power of it.

5 Furthermore, you know the glorious Creator might present unto the view of
his image, a Serpent Devil, for the trial of his workmanship, and might upon
pain of death forbid his creature of having to do with that tree, or of
hearkening unto it in the least.

6 Also you know the Creator might leave his divine image unto its own present
strength, through which it might by a subtle enemy be tempted and overcome to
commit evil with it, against its Creators law, and yet its sin be upon his own
head;

7 Why? not only because it rebelled against its own divine light, but
principally because there was no law to bind an infinite Majesty to protect it
in its created purity.

8 My beloved moderate brethren, if men could forbear reasoning against the
Creators prerogative power, wonderful wisdom, or ways which are past finding
out, then would they enjoy true and lasting peace in their own souls, through
deliverance from that conscience condemning evil, of rash judging things, they
know not, but this grace of patience is prepared only for the blessed
Israelites, and not for scoffing Ishmalites.

9 Again, if the Angelical Serpent was in the body of Eve when he received his
curse, some men may say unto me, was he capable of understanding of a sentence
denounced against him, being in the womb of Eve, and changed from his former
condition, as abundantly declared by you?

10 Or why should the Serpent and his generation undergo an eternal curse, and
Eve and her generation suffer but a temporal curse? seeing she rebelled against
greater light then he;

11 Or if that Angelical Serpent was not cursed before Eve had actually
rebelled with him, was not Eve as liable to an eternal curse as he, seeing they
both transgressed against an infinite glory?

12 From the light of life eternal, to this I answer; That curse denounced by
the Creator upon the Serpent in the womb of Eve, was not for his satisfaction
in the least, but is to convince Eves deceived thoughts of possessing such
god-like happiness promised to her, if she obeyed his council, as aforesaid;

13 Also it was to convince her in due time of that error of doting upon her
first born, as a blessing received from the Lord, for when she should see the
fruits of her heir, in stead of her rejoicing in him as at his birth, her soul
would not only loath his company, but would also cast him out of her presence,
lest he should murder her, as he did his righteous brother, for her former love
and tender compassion toward him.

14 Moreover, that curse against the Angelical Serpent and his seed, was spoken
unto her for her divine satisfaction afterward, when the light of redemption
should shine in her deceived soul, and show her that her firstborn son was
that Angelical Serpent, cursed in her womb by the Creator;

15 And that his generation of men and women were cursed in his loins also,
that she might the more abundantly magnify the free grace of Gods electing
love toward her deceived soul;

16 That having had so near a union and communion with that Angelical
Reprobate, she was not eternally cursed with him also.

17 Furthermore, notwithstanding the soul of Eve rebelled against a greater
light then the Serpent did, yet you that are spiritual, may know, that she was
utterly incapable of an eternal curse upon her person for these considerations:

18 First, because her soul proceeded from the heavenly nature of the eternal
Majesty himself.

19 Secondly, because that consent unto evil in her, proceeded not from her own
nature, but the unclean spirit of the Serpent speaking into her innocent soul,
as aforesaid.

20 Again, you may know that the Serpent was called the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, before Eve was tempted unto evil, therefore though he had been a
tree in his first estate, which had known nothing but good, before Eve or Adam
had any sensible beings, yet being fallen from his created purity, he was now
become a tree of sin or evil only:

21 Therefore he was a rejected, or cursed outcast tree from the glorious
presence of life eternal, before his visible appearing unto Eve;

22 So that though Eve through temptation was overcome to know both good and
evil, with that cursed Serpent, yet she had some relenting light of life in her
after her rebellion, which occasioned a secret shame and confusion of soul in
her, for her rebellion against the Creator.

23 Therefore she was capable of being made a good tree again; yea, and a tree
bringing forth fruit of a more transcendent glory then she was capable of
before her fall.

24 But of the contrary, that Serpent tree was so far from any kind of
relentation of sin, or rebellion against the Creator, before or after he
tempted Eve, that in stead of being capable of reproof of sin or evil, whereby
he might be restored from his most wretched estate, he did utterly abhor both
God and man, unless he might be their Counselor, and ruler over them for
everlasting, as beforesaid.

25 This eminent truth of the two Scripture seeds, or trees of eternal life and
death, is plainly proved in the seventh Chapter of St. Matthew, where it was
said by Christ, the only God himself, a good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit, therefore by their
fruits ye shall know them:

26 So that you which are spiritual, may know, that according to the truth of
Holy Writ, though men or Angels should gainsay it, the Serpent Angelical tree
being Reprobate unto all manner of evil, he and his seed of Cananitish men and
women, were not only cursed in the womb of Eve, but also before this world was.

27 But of the contrary, innocent Eve being a good tree in her Creation,
through her proceeding from the divine nature of the tree of eternal glory it
self, though she was overcome by that wicked one as beforesaid, yet she and
Adam, or any of their seed, could not possibly eternally perish, because they
were trees elected to bring forth good fruit unto everlasting life and glory,
long before this world was, as abundantly beforesaid.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
1 The bodies of Angels are capable of dissolving into seed. 2 The seed of the
Serpent only damned. 3 Pure reason lost the knowledge of the Creator, and of
its self. 4 Cain not the son of Adam, but of the Serpent. 5 Cain was brother to
Abel, only by the mothers side. 6 All that dyed in the first Adam shall be
saved by the second. 7 Those that are not lost in themselves, can never be
saved.

IF the Angelical Serpent was of as large a compass as the person of a man,
some men may say unto me, how could he enter into the womb of Eve through so
narrow a passage, as is declared by you? Truly this Quere is much like that in
the 3. Chap. by St. John, where it says, Can a man be born which is old, can
he enter into his mothers womb again, and be born?

2 My spiritual friends, as our Lord answered Nicodemus unto his fleshly
question, so likewise from his own light in like manner I shall make answer unto
this, Though the body of the Angelical Serpent in its length or breadth was as
a man is, yet you may know it was not of a gross substance as man's is;

3 But it was a spiritual body, created in another world;

4 For though the bodies of the mighty Angels are in forms like men, yet you
may know that they shine like unto the Sun, or a flame of fire, being formed in
a region of a more higher nature then this:

5 Therefore they are of motion as swift as thought, and of a pure thin, or
bright fiery nature, so that with great ease they pierce through a narrow
passage at the divine pleasure of the Creator:

6 So likewise it was with that Serpent tree of knowledge of good and evil, for
though his created purity was become all manner of imaginary impurities through
his outcast condition, yet you may know that his form was of a more fiery
brightness then that of Adams, or else Eve could not possibly have been
deceived by him, as aforesaid.

7 Also his body being spiritual, though his nature was carnal, there was no
let to hinder his descending into her womb, to bring forth the Creators secret
purpose of two generations, coming through the loins of one woman, to make an
everlasting distinction between the transcendent glory of respection, and shame
of rejection.

8 Though the Angelical Serpent descended into the womb of Eve, yet you may
know that his ascending nature was utterly lost, in that in stead of his
ascending upward into that habitation of ravishing glory from whence he was
cast, he was ignorant of it, and of that God and his mighty Angels, as if he
had never known them in the least;

9 For he imagined his Serpentine subtilty to be the only wisdom then in
being, and this world to be the only heaven.

10 My beloved brethren in the eternal truth, whatever carnal minded men vainly
dream of a general redemption by Christ, as sure as the Lord lives, there is a
Serpentine generation of cursed men and women, which glory in all manner of
fleshly sporting themselves about a Creator, or in possessing of a perfection
in this mortallity, which with their father Cain are utterly ignorant of the
true God, his everlasting kingdom, elect Angels, immortal personal glory, or
misery, or any spiritual thing in the least.

11 Does not the Scripture throughout make mention of two distinct seeds, sons,
or generations of mankind?

12 Can Cain and Abel both therefore proceed from Adams loins, or be of his
begetting upon the body of Eve?

13 It is written in the third of Luke and the last verse, concerning Christ,
that he was the Son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the Son of God.
If Christ Jesus the eternal Son of God according to the spirit, was the very
son of Adam according to the flesh, can any sober man possibly think, that
there should be any relation of spirit or flesh between Christ and Cain?

14 Or that the everliving God upon any account whatsoever, should be brother
unto a cursed Serpent?

15 Though righteous Abel was Cains brother, yet their brotherhood came by the
mothers side only, and not by the father, though Eve was made out of Adams
side.

16 You know that righteous Abel did represent the glorious person of all
righteousness and truth it self, who was that holy and innocent Lamb
spiritually slain from the beginning of the world in Abel, by the heart and
hand of murdering lying Cain.

17 Moreover, is not this answerable unto that of Christ and his brethren, you
know their brotherhood was by the mothers side only, and not by the father.

18 Thus if your eyes be opened you may see in contrariety, a harmony between
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent.

19 Again, because of the great opposition that may rise up against this
glorious truth, through the exceeding pride and unbelief in the heart of most
men, give me leave to cite a few Scriptures in the 3. chapter of the first
Epistle of John, you may find it thus written, Not as Cain which was of that
wicked one, and slew his brother. In the 13. Chap. of Matthew it is thus
written, He that sows the good seed is the Son of man, and the field is the
world, and the good seed are the children of the kingdom, and the tares are the
children of the wicked one, and the enemy that sows them is the devil.

20 Moreover, in the 8. chapter of St. John, Christ Jesus the only God of
truth speaks thus: Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do: He has been a murderer from the beginning, and abode not
in the truth, because there is no truth in him, when he speaks a lie, then
speaks he of his own, for he is a liar, and the father thereof.

21 My spiritual and rational friends which are sober, was not Cain the first
murdering lying man that ever was born of a woman? Seeing no true Christian can
gainsay it, was not cursed Cain from the beginning that murdering devil and
father of lies spoken of by Christ, aforesaid?

22 In answer unto those carnal Jews which boasted themselves to be of Abraham's
seed, and were not those lustful murdering minded Jews or Gentiles which our
Lord branded with titles of Serpents, Vipers, children of the devil, and such
like, filthy Cananites which proceeded out of the spirit of cursed Cain, that
old Serpent Dragon Devil, and father of all the damned in this world, and not
from the spirit of Abraham, though they might proceed from his loins according
to the flesh, through mixtures of seeds in marriages: the sons of God saw the
daughters of men to be fair, and they took of them to be their wives.

23 Though the blessed Israelites and cursed Cananites are mixed together by
carnal copulation, since the Prince of devils became flesh, yet you that
spiritual may know, that the Lord Jesus that made them both, knew how to
separate them for all their close union, and to call them by names answerable
to their own natures.

24 I confess that all that died in the first Adam, shall be made alive in that
second Adam the Lord from heaven; but what was that whole world that were lost
in the first Adam, and found again in the second Adam?

25 If with a spiritual eye you shall look from the 1. of Genes unto the last
of the Revelation, then you may clearly see what that whole world is which are
appointed unto immortal Crowns of eternal glory by our Lord Jesus Christ:
behold, are they not called a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a redeemed
People, adopted sons of God, heirs, or coheirs with Christ, blessed children,
or the lost sh^^p of Israel, and such like?

26 Did not the glorious Creator and blessed Redeemer himself make a clear
distinction between two worlds or generations, when he said, I pray not for the
world, but for them that thou have given me out of the world.

27 Can you that are sober imagine or think, that there is any spiritual
salvation for those men or women, which the Savior of the world excludes in his
petition?

28 Moreover it is written that the Apostle said, We know that we are of God,
and the whole world lies in wickedness, or the devil.

29 Behold ye redeemed ones of the most high God, is it not as clear as light
it self, that there is two distinct whole worlds, according to that saying,
then all Israel shall be saved:

30 A redeemed world of elect lost Israelites, and an unredeemed world of
unlost Cananitish reprobates, that were never truly lost in themselves, and
therefore never capable of being found in Christ, according to that in the
Epistle of Jude, where it is thus written, For there are certain men crept in,
which were of old ordained to condemnation, ungodly men they are, which turn
the grace of God into wantonness, and deny God the only Lord, and our Lord
Jesus Christ; we unto them, for they have followed the way of Cain, and are
cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages, and perish in the gainsaying of Core.

31 Thus is it not clear unto all men that have any faith in them, in the truth
of the Scripture, that there is two distinct whole worlds to distinguish
between the divine glory of election, and everlasting shame of rejection;

32 A Curse Cain, and a blessed Abel, from the beginning of the world unto the
end thereof, a subtle Serpent, and a simple Saint, a scoffing carnal Ishmael,
and a spiritual Isaac, a bloody minded Esau, and a merciful minded Jacob, a
persecuting Saul, and a prophetical David, a treacherous Judas, and a gracious
and glorious Jesus, a blessed Seath born in the stead of righteous Abel, whom
cursed Cain, slew, to bring forth the generation of the just, that the Lord of
eternal glory might according to the flesh as well as the spirit, spring from a
spiritual line of his own light of life eternal.

33 And not from a rational or carnal line of eternal dea^^ in chains of utter
darkness, which if it had power according to i^^cursed desire, it would destroy
God, elect Men, and Angels, Heaven, and Earth, and all in them and it self
also, rather then be subject to any, or might not only it self bear rule over
all.

34 Seeing the God of eternal glory himself sprang from the loins of Adam,
according to the flesh, is it not the greatest darkness that can be imagined,
for any man to think that Cain and Judas, were of the seed of Adam, as well as
Abel and Jesus?

35 Do not those men that teach this error out of ignorance, justify Cain and
Judas and condemn Abel, and Jesus?

36 From this gross mistake do they not strengthen men in all their rebellions
against God and man, what seeming glorious language soever proceed through
their mouth?

37 Again, if Cain and Judas, Abel and Jesus, sprang both from the loins of the
first man Adam, according to the flesh, or any other account whatsoever, is it
not one of the vainest lip labors under heaven, for men to speak or write
concerning the visible things of eternity, unless it be for a heap of silver or
deceitful honor among men that perish?

38 All solid sober men do certainly know, that it is impossible that any man
should suffer eternal misery, if all mankind by generation sprang from one root
only.

39 What is the reason think you, that the wise naturallists in disputes, are
able to silence the most learned speakers under heaven, in their own supposed
spiritual matters? Is it not because those Ministers are incapable to give a
true distinction between the originals of eternal life and death, or the seed
of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent?

40 If men that speak their experiences to one another, as received from the
holy One of Israel, are ignorant of this point, is not that the occasion of all
notional brain fancies or airy opinions, even amongst the most purest
appearances in this present age?

41 Is it not from hence that men of a rational piercing wit are able to
counterfeit outlandish Chronicles in a Methodical manner concerning the
strange acts of Kings, and Emperors, many thousand years before the first man
Adam had any sensible being, or invent Histories, so accurately concerning
Knights, Ladies, Giants, and (...) like, that no man by his natural reason can
know, whether they a^^ fained, or un^^igned.

42 Can any sober man imagine, or think those men that want the foresaid
spiritual gift, were ever moved, or called by that glorious spirit to be a
public, or private speaker, or interpreter of holy Writ, or a messenger, or
Ambassador to his brethren of invisible spiritual excellencies, appointed
visibly to be seen to eternity?

43 If Cain and Abel were both begotten by Adam, upon the body of Eve, as
almost all men vainly imagine from one bare Scripture Record, which they
understand not, I would fain know of that man that is offended with me
concerning this point, why Cain was nominated in Holy Writ to be of that wicked
one aforesaid, and branded as an outcast, fugitive, or vagabond, and cursed
from the divine presence of the Creator, and cast out of the natural presence
of his parents for ever, and condemned with Balaam and Core as a perishing
castaway?

44 This I am sure of, that no spiritual, or rational man, that is sober, dares
say, that either Adam or Eve was that wicked one, from whence the cursed spirit
of Cain sprang?

45 Why? because there is no such approbrious names attributed unto them
throughout the sacred Scriptures.

46 Moreover you may know, that that wicked one from whence Cains spirit
proceeded, could not possibly have any relation unto Adam or Eve, though Cain
was conceived in her womb, and born of her body:

47 Why? because there was an absolute curse denounced upon the Angelical
Serpent, and his seed in her womb, as aforesaid, without any after promise in
Holy Writ for ever being redeemed by the Creato^.

48 But on the contrary you know, there was a gracious promise by the Creator
himself, of the redemption of Adam and Eve after their fallen estate, with
their whole generation of righteous Abels, Seths, or Abraham's, in that glorious
hidden, saying; the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head; and that
in the fifth of the Romans where it is thus written, likewise then as by the
offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation, so by the justifying
of one, the benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life.

49 If you that are spiritually sober, compare this Scripture of seeming
general redemption unto other Scriptures, concerning Cain, and his generation,
as abundantly aforesaid, you may understand, that the Apostle spoke only of a
restoration of the elect Israelites, or Adamites, and not of the line or
generation of Cananitish Reprobates.

50 If you look in the Generalogy of Adam unto Jesus, the second Adam, you
shall find no Cain there made mention of in the least.

CHAP. XXXIX.
1 No condemnation but to persons of maturity. 2 No children damned though they
be of the seed of the Serpent. 3 He that kills a Prophet, or a righteous man,
would kill the Creator if he could. 4 No salvation by the power of man's own
will, 5 but by the power of God.

IF two distinct generations have proceeded through the body of one woman, the
one elected unto eternal personal glory in the high heavens, and the other
rejected unto everlasting shame, in this perishing world at the end thereof,
which we can no ways disprove;

2 Wherefore our desire is to know, whether all the posterity of Cain are
rejected, seeing the whole generation of Adam are elected, is as at length
declared by you, from that divine gift I received by voice of words from the
everliving Jesus.

3 To this I answer, That eternal election, or rejection, spoken of in Holy
writ, had relation only to persons of understanding, and not unto children
that were incapable of any distinction between light and darkness, or good and
evil;

4 For you that are well acquainted with the Scriptures, do know, that
throughout the whole Bible there is not one saying in the least, that makes
mention of condemnation of children, but the contrary altogether.

5 You may know, that that curse denounced against Cain, and his seed, ran in
the line of persons of maturity, and not of minority; though it is said, that
God loved Jacob, and hated Esau, before they had done good or evil:

6 You may know that that word was spoken in reference to their being in the
persons of men, in the sight of the Creator, and concerning the difference of
their spirits, and the effects that would thereby ensue;

7 You know it is said, there were two nations in Rebeccahs womb at the birth
of Esau and Jacob; now you know that could not possibly be, except they lived
to the age of men to fulfill that truth.

8 You know it is written, that the Lord of Glory commanded his Apostles to
suffer little children to come unto him, and forbid them not, and took them in
his arms and blessed them, saying, of such is the kingdom of heaven.

9 My beloved spiritual friends, if God only wise has said, that his heavenly
kingdom consists of little children, or innocent childelike men and women, are
not those men more like unto cursed Serpents, then blessed Saints, which
contrary unto all spiritual literal or rational truth, impudently affirm that
little children may be eternally damned by original sin.

10 If all the seed of Cain that die in their childe-hood, shall find mercy in
the resurrection of the just, some men may say unto me, shall the saved
children of Cain and Adam, being of two contrary natures, appear in the same
kind, or measure of glory, in the day of the Lords vengeance upon ungodly men?

11 From the light of life eternal, to this I answer, As they differed in their
natures in this life, so shall they differ in the manner and measure of their
glory in that life to come:

12 The saved children of the Angelical Serpent will enter into that rational
glory, out of which their reprobate fathers was cast.

13 But of the contrary, the spiritual seed of Adam shall enter into that glory
from which he fell, in a more transcendent godlike condition to all eternity;

14 But not in a Paradissical separated place of glory in this creation, as
some men vainly imagine, but in that glorious new heaven and earth without, or
above this vanishing Starry heavens, according to the truth of Holy Writ:

15 Thus the most Wise and Holy God of all spiritual and natural order,
restores his spiritual and rational images into their first created
conditions, upon a more firm foundation of possessing everlasting life and
glory together, purchased at a dear rate from his divine self, by his own most
precious blood, or Godhead life, according to that saying by the Apostle Paul,
Christ therefore died and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both
of the dead and the quick; and of that saying in the 20. Chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, whereof the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers to feed the Church
of God, which he has purchased with that his own blood.

16 Again, if you look in the 4. Chapter of Genesis with a spiritual eye, you
may clearly see that Gods eternal election, or rejection of men, runs in a line
of personal understanding, and not in a line of innocent children, or natural
fools; the words are these, and in process of time it came to pass that Cain
brought an oblation unto the Lord, of the fruit of the ground, and Abel also
himself brought of the first fruit of his sheep, and of the fat of them, and
the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering, but unto Cain and his
offering, he had no regard.

17 Ye that are redeemed from the power of all inward filthiness, I beseech
you, what occasioned the respection, or disrespection between Cain and Abel, in
the pure eyes of the Creator?

18 Surely not their offerings, for you know that God needs no man's person for
his sacrifice sake in the least, but for the glory of his own name sake only;

19 Yet you know that Cain had as much wisdom from his own reason to present an
acceptable sacrifice unto the Lord, as Abel;

20 Yet it was the Creators eternal free love unto Abel, which caused both his
person and sacrifice to find such sweet acceptance with the Lord, that the
divine love of God in Abel might be seen in the fatness of his sacrifice;

21 In that you may know he was made to offer up himself a living sacrifice of
invisible and visible obedience unto the Creator, as a seal of his being chosen
to life eternal.

22 Yet you may know, it is not any kind of sacrifice, worship, righteousness,
or desire in man, or Angel, that can possibly move the divine Majesty to accept
of it, or his person in the least, but it is his eternal free love in his own
season, which operates in him all heavenly mindedness, or love to God, or man.

23 But of the contrary you may know, that the original cause of all manner of
fearful darkness, and fiery shame in Cain, proceeded only from the
non-election of his person;

24 This was his condition when he was marked with the invisible seal, of
rejecting both his person and sacrifice, from those words; Wherefore Cain was
exceeding wrath, and his countenance fell down.

25 My beloved Christian Friends, what moved Cain to be so full of wrath, or
with whom was he so fiery hot?

26 Truly, as beforesaid, his furious anger arose in him from a sensibleness of
his outcast condition, and because he could not come at the Creator himself,
therefore his purpose was to avenge himself upon his favorite, even innocent
Abel.

27 The Scripture gives you the reason thereof, because his own works were
evil, and his brothers good:

28 Thus you that are endued with that light that cannot be disproved, may see
as clear as the light it self, that it is not in him that wills, not in him
that runs, but in God alone that shows mercy.

29 What then think you in the day of the Lords vengeance will become of those
free-will-mongers, or oracle-grace Merchants, which cursedly teach their
deceived fleshly brethren, that a man may be in a condition of salvation to
day, and to morrow be cast away?

30 Truly my spiritual friends, if eternal election and rejection depend upon
the acceptance of man's will, until he be born again with a distinguishing
light from the divine will of the Creator, every man living would choose
eternal death in stead of life, such power, or purity, is in the choicest of
men's wills, wuntil the divine Majesty present an immortal Crown of glory unto
their blind born spirits;

31 Then indeed, and not till then, man's soul that was averse to all spiritual
good, by that divine light is made willing to choose the better part;

32 Because then he certainly knows that there is an eternal life and glory for
some, and an everlasting death and shame for others.

33 Therefore you that are truly spiritual, cannot but know, that though men
speak a language like unto Angels, or the divine Majesty himself, as the
Angelical Serpent seemed to do in the beguiling of Eve, yet it is utterly
impossibly they should possess any true understanding of the spiritual things
of the everliving Jehovah, or Jesus, until their souls are firmly established
with an undoubtable assurance of their own personal glory in a world to come.

34 So much at present concerning the tree of knowledge of good and evil, or
seed of the woman, and seed of the Serpent. O blessed and happy are those men
and women in themselves already, that enjoy this distinguishing light of life
eternal in the purity thereof.

CHAP. XL.
1 Concerning Christ's coming to judgment. 2 The vanity of that opinion that
believes Christ's personal reign upon this earth.

BEcause of many opinions of Christ, and the ignorance of most men, concerning
his coming to judge both the quick and dead, therefore in the next place I
shall treat of this most needful point from certain sayings of himself in the
17. Chapter of Matthew. the words are these; for as the lightning that lightneth
out of the one part under heaven, shines unto the other part under heaven, so
shall the Son of Man be in his day, and as it was in the days of Noah, so shall
it be in the days of the Son of Man, they eat, they drink, they married wives,
and gave in marriage, unto the day that Noah went into the Ark, and the flood
came and destroyed them all; likewise also it was in the days of Lot, they eat,
they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they built, but in the day
that Lot went out of Sodom it reigned fire and brimstone from heaven, and
destroyed them all; after these ensamples shall it be in the day when the Son
of Man is revealed.

2 My beloved spiritual brethren, you know there is a twofold appearing of
Christ unto the sons of men, the one spiritual, and seen only by the invisible
eye in the soul, and the other is personal, and seen only by the visible eye
of the body.

3 Also you know Christ being the divine rock of all ages, he has spiritually
manifested himself unto his blessed Abels from the beginning of the world, till
now; but as for his visible appearing in a body of flesh, whereby men might be
able to behold the face of their God in the similitude of a man and live, you
know that he did but once so appear only for a few years.

4 Again, in the 25. Chapter of Matthew it is written thus, And when the Son of
Man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations, and
he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep
from the goats.

5 It is also written in the Thessalonians thus, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, rendering vengeance
unto them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

6 If you that are spiritually sober, do but compare these three places of
Scriptures together, then you may clearly see, what Christ meant by that day of
his personal appearing;

7 After his suffering and glorification he shall appear like lightning from
one part under heaven to the other, he shall appear in his glory with all his
holy Angels;

8 Behold, ye blessed of the most high God, what kind of appearing of Christ
in his glory like lightning, or a flame of fire, is this? is it not the visible
appearing of his fiery glorious person, with the glittering persons of his
mighty Angels under the whole heavens, or in the air?

9 If it be not so, how shall all nations be gathered together before him, that
he may make an eternal separation between them, according as he has spoken?

10 It has been long imagined by men of rare parts, in the account of many
people, that before the general judgment day, Christ would come again
personally to reign a thousand years on this earth with his Saints;

11 And their opinion is grounded partly upon the 20. Chapter of the
Revelation, which was long since fulfilled, as I shall demonstrate in due
season.

12 But first I shall prove by Scripture Record, the failing off this opinion
in the 3. Chap. of the Acts it is thus written, when the time of refreshing
shall come from the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was
preached unto you, whom the heaven must contain until the time that all things
be fulfilled, which the Prophets have foretold since the beginning of the
world; what think you then of Christ's personal reign on this earth a thousand
years with his Saints? is it not point blank against the truth of this plain
testimony of Holy Writ?

13 In the 14. Chapter by Saint John you may find it thus written; Let not
your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me: in my fathers
house are many dwelling-places, if it were not so, I would have told you, I go
to prepare a place for you, and if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also.

14 In this place of Scripture you see that Christ did not speak in the least
to his Apostles of his coming again personally to reign upon this earth a
thousand years:

15 But of the contrary, he told his heavy-hearted Disciples that he was going
to prepare a place for them, or he was going into the highest heavens, or
prepared place of eternal glory, appointed for them with himself, after they
had suffered with him on earth, and he would come again in his glory with his
holy Angels, and receive them into his fathers house, or heavenly kingdom,
where he now is, that they might with his mighty Angels Moses and Elias,
everlastingly behold his bright burning glory, even face to face.

16 What is this personal reign of Christ with his Saints a thousand years,
that supposed wise men have so much talked of?

17 Is it any thing else but a temporal heaven at the best, if spiritually
examined?

18 Moreover, is it not a very unlikely matter that the infinite divinite
Majesty should come again personally to remain upon this bloody earth a
thousand years with his Saints, having suffered here already, and ascended upon
the throne, or right hand of transcendent glories, yea far above all heavens,
as it is written, that he might fill all things.

19 Furthermore, do not all personal raign-mongers confess, that Christ was God
and man in one person, and that that most blessed body of his is now glorified
in the highest heavens?

20 Do you not also pretend to believe, that the divine person of this God-man
glorified, is infinite immortal, unchangeable, and eternal?

21 Moreover, if there be any such divine light, or heavenly faith in your
persons, I would fain know whether you think it possibly that this mortal
world, or men, can bear the presence of a divine Majesty, whose body is become
a consuming fire of immortal everlasting burnings, without its being
immediately consumed to ashes, or transmuted into his own glorious likeness?

22 O that all the elect did but know how suddenly this personal God will
appear in his glory to consume this whole world!

23 Again, if you look in the 11. Chapter of the Hebrews, you may find it thus
written; All these died in faith, and received not the promises, but saw them
afar off and believed them, and received them thankfully, and confessed that
they were strangers and pelgrims on the earth, for they that saw such things,
declare plainly that they seek a country; and if they had been mindful of that
country from whence they came out, they had leisure to have returned, but now
they desire a better, that is an heavenly, wherefore God is not ashamed of them
to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a city: here you may see
that Abraham himself was so far from expecting a personal reign of Christ on
this earth, though he believed that his seed should enjoy the promises of God,
both temporal and spiritual, in their appointed seasons;

24 Therefore he only minded a personal ascending into the heavenly City of
eternal glory, prepared for him and his elect seed, at the resurrection of the
just;

25 So that Abraham looked upon the promises of God, that they were to enjoy in
this world only, as types or shadows of that heavenly City or Kingdom, with
its ravishing excellencies, as aforesaid.

26 Moreover, if that glorious God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, had intended a
personal reign on this earth a thousand years with his Saints, after his
glorification in the highest heavens, can any sober man be so weak as to think
he would have hid it from Abraham, whom he was pleased to call the father of
the faithful, and friend of God? You know what is written, shall I hide this
thing from Abraham.

27 Furthermore, if the Lord in life, or death, had revealed any such thing
unto Abraham, the thing being of so great concernment, can you possibly think
that he would have hid it from his generation to come? you may be sure if there
had been any such thing to be accomplished, he would have declared it to after
ages.

28 Seeing neither Abraham, nor any of the Patriarks, or Prophets, knew of
Christ's personal reign on this earth with his Saints, but spoke as to the
contrary altogether, what sufficient ground has any man in this world to
expect such a thing?

29 But how can it be otherwise, when men takes upon them to interpret the
mysteries of the Scriptures, without an immediate Commission from the eternal
spirit.

30 Again, the Scripture says, That the day of Christ's appearing shall be like
unto that of Noah and Lot, now you know in the day that Noah entered into the
Ark, the flood came, and by degrees destroyed them all.

31 Also in that day Lot departed out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone
from heaven, and destroyed them all.

32 If the whole world was drowned with water immediately after Noah entered
into the Ark; and Sodom and Gomorrah was consumed by fire suddenly after Lot
departed out of the City, and the day of Christ's coming shall be in like manner,
without controversy in stead of his personal reign on this earth with his
Saints, at his next appearing, immediately after all his blessed Noah's and Lots
are ascended into the Ark of his immortal glory, this firmamental created
heaven and the lights thereof shall be all on fire;

33 And shall descend upon the face of the whole earth, and burn all the fruits
and glory thereof unto ashes, but it shall not be so favorable as to consume
the bloody minded men therein.

34 If the Lord of Glory had purposed to come personally to reign a thousand
years amongst his Saints, before the general day of judgment, is any man so
weak as to think he would have hid it from his chosen Apostles, whom he had
promised to set upon twelve thrones, to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, when
he appeared again in his glory?

35 Is there any one place in Holy Writ that expressly speaks of Christ's
personal reign in this world?

36 If there be no express record for any such thing, as I am sure there is
not, does not those men that hold forth such an opinion as this, imitate little
children, or fools, that re^oyce in Rattles, or Counters, in stead of gold, or
precious stones?

37 Thou that art confident of Christ's personal reign on this earth, suppose
such a thing should come to pass in thy days, and thou should be one of those
Saints, what condition do thou think thy body shall be in?

38 Do thou think it shall live upon carnal things, or shall it be
immortalized and live upon spiritual things only?

39 Or if thou think thy soul shall be in a divine condition, and thy body
shall feed upon natural things, as now it does, and shall be in perfect health,
and free from diseases;

40 I say, if thou have imagined such an estate as this is, I would fain know
of thee what condition thou think that Christ will appear in?

41 Do thou think that he will descend from the throne of his Glory upon this
earth amongst the sons of men, again to eat and drink of carnal things with
them, as formerly?

42 Or do thou think that he will appear amongst them in a glorious
condition, to make them more happy in things that perish, then now they are?

43 If Christ should personally reign with his Saints, what union or communion
could they enjoy with him, more then now they do, unless he was in a capacity
of eating and drinking with them? or else they were delivered from feeding upon
natural things themselves, through their transmutation into his own glorious
likeness?

44 It is written in the 26. Chapter by St. Matthew. I say unto you, that I will
not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day, when I shall
drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.

45 Here you that are spiritual may see, that Christ was so far from
encouraging his Apostles to expect his coming to taste of the fruit of the
natural vine, in a personal reign with his Saints, that he lays it down as a
positive rule, that he would drink no more of the natural vine in this earth,
until he drank it in a new and spiritual way with them in his Fathers kingdom.

46 Where then is thy imaginary personal reign of Christ on this earth with his
Saints a thousand years?

CHAP. XLI.
1 The vanity of believing in a God that has no form. 2 And of them who say
the Creator is an incomprehensible Spirit. 3 Or that there is no God but nature
only. 4 Or who say, that Gods Spirit, and their spirits, are but one spirit.

ANother sort of deceived men there are, that through strong delusions from
their natural comprehensions, have imagined a mighty spiritual appearance in
themselves, from a bodiless God or Christ, that never was.

2 This sort of men are those, which from a cursed conceit do not only despise
a glorious God, in the person of a man, but they also talk of great signs and
wonders, which they expect shall come to pass by inward voices, or visions,
from their imaginary bodiless God, as beforesaid.

3 Moreover, being bewitched to the purpose, though they pretend a great
spiritual light in them, they can make a hard shift to fool themselves from the
literal records, as to think that the Holy One of Israel had commissionated
another high Priest, or King of the Jews, besides himself.

4 Though this counterfeit high Priest, or King of seven Nations, I mean John
Tanee, pretends a natural glorious deliverance suddenly unto the Jews in many
Nations.

5 Truly those that understand nothing above a Paradissical temporal glory, are
not to be blamed in the least, for their bountifulness toward his perishing
tenants, in reference to his Hierusalems conceits.

6 John Tanee thou may remember about three years and six months past, I
told thee of thy deceived condition, concerning thy carnal Jerusalem journey,
with John Robins, also by an immediate voice from on high.

7 Furthermore, if thy high priesthood, kingship, and Jerusalem, temporal
glory, do not vanish like smoke, as John Robins did, even when thou think
thy self most sure in the thing, then the Lord God sent not me to thee.

8 Again, when thou art ashamed and confounded in thy self from all thy lying
voices, or visions, declared unto Saints and Serpents, in the name of the great
Jehovah, then thou shall know with sorrow and shame enough, that it was the
Lord that sent me unto thee, to declare thy fleshly error.

9 I do not say thou can help it, it is through the permissive power of the
Lord for some secret end, only known to himself, that thou, or any man else,
should break forth into such strange appearance of darkness, yet seeming
glorious lights, when thou art found too light in the balance of divine truth;

10 It is not thy natural, or all gorical whimses, that can blind the elect,
nor pacify the judge of life and death within thee, and without thee.

11 Again, there is a third sort of deceived persons, which with great
confidence have declared, that Christ should spiritually reign over the Nations
in King Charles Seed; and of this sort one Arice Evans in Blackfriars, was
looked upon as a great Prophet by many of the Royal party.

12 Moreover, from this their foolish conceit, they had many pretty whimses,
and dark sentences, to blind men's apprehensions, like unto John Tanee and John
Robbins; Which took much upon the spirits both of the subtle and simple also
for a season.

13 Furthermore, their understandings being utterly dark, concerning the
spiritual or personal appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ in his glory.

14 It is usual for them concerning Charles the second, as to join Christ and
him in one, calling him the white Pearl, that should make the nations in a
sweet harmony of divine unity, through his glorious ruling over them; also they
said, that he should not attain to the throne of his Father by any carnal
weapons, but he should be brought into this land, and set upon the Throne by an
immediate power of the eternal Spirit of God himself.

15 Again, this carnal Cavalier Prophet pretended the knowledge of certain
Scriptures by voices or visions, in reference to the reign of Charles the
second; and John Tanee-like, sought to confirm it by natural observations:

16 And truly, I do not blame the people that were deceived by them, because
they wanted a true distinction in themselves, betweeen those things which are
divine and humane.

17 Moreover, when all pretended high Priests, Prophets, or Apostles in this
land, are clearly discovered by an unerring light of life eternal, I make no
question of the subtilty of their Serpentine spirits to blind their own eyes,
and those that were deceived by them.

18 I know they can say, If they be deceived, the Lord has deceived them; or
they can say, We had a mysterious language given us by Jehovah to confound all
literal or notional appearances in this confused age, and men understood us in
a carnal sense only;

19 Or if they have often fixed a time concerning things that should come to
pass, and nothing comes of it, they can also say, As the Prophet Jonas
understood not the Lords time and mind, concerning the destruction of the
Ninevites:

20 So likewise this thing in the way of our fleshly expectation, was hid from
our eyes, but the mighty Jehovah in his season, will bring it to pass in a
spiritual manner, beyond the comprehension of men or Angels.

21 Moreover, if none of these excuses will blind their eyes, which expected
wonderful things from them, then because they are not able to bear the shame of
being found liars in the name of the Lord, they will say, all men are liars, or
there is not a true Prophet upon the face of the earth;

22 Or else they will say, There is but only one pure being, invisibly ruling
in the whole Creation, and this spiritual power manifests it self in various
manners of seeming contradictions for the confounding of all men's understandings
that would find out its secrets; but in the end when it has fooled men to the
purpose, it will appear in a glorious harmony, to the content of all.

23 Furthermore for the blinding of their own eyes, and those of their own
spirits, that they may both fall together in a deep ditch of eternal
destruction, they will, or may say, If there be a Creator, he is an
incomprehensible spirit, and all our spirits proceeded out of his spirit, and
when our bodies dies, our spirits returns into his spirit again.

24 From this cursed error they may or will say, That God can as soon destroy
himself, as any soul that he has made, with an eternal condemnation.

25 Moreover, if this grand fleshly deceit prove also but a broken Cistern,
then as aforesaid, they may, or will say, there is no God but nature only;
your most wise men in nature know this to be truth, but they are compelled to
nominate a God to the people, to keep the rude multitude in obedience to their
governors and government.

26 Knowing if they should confess a Creator besides nature, all their
pretended divine voices, or visions, would appear but mere fleshly lies.

27 Therefore for strengthening themselves in their Atheistical error to prevent
discovery, they may, or will say, there is no world but this only, and this
world had never any beginning, nor will never have any ending, men may talk of
a Creator, and a day of judgment for silver and honor, or to keep children or
fools in awe, but wise men knows as aforesaid, that one generation passes
away, and another comes in its room, and so it will be for everlasting.

28 Thus you that are truly spiritual do, or may know, that the spirit of every
man naturally, is so cursedly proud, that rather then men should find him a
liar in the name of the Lord of Hosts, even against his own rational light, he
is apt to say, there is no other God, or shame, or world to come, but the
Elements of air, water, earth, and fire, of this perishing world, though these
and such like sandy foundations, are the pillars of cursed Cananites; yet I
know that you blessed ones have not so learned Christ.

29 The fourth and last sort of deceived men, are so far from acknowledging
Christ's personal reign with his Saints in any kind whatsoever, that they
blasphemously affirm they are all Gods or Christ's themselves:

30 These are those, which say, that God is a Spirit, and that his Spirit, and
their spirits, are but one spirit only.

31 Moreover, to strongthen themselves in this their Serpentine Sophistry, they
can tell you from the Records, that Christ is the head of his Church, and his
Saints are his body.

32 Also this sort of men pretend such a union with the divine Majesty, that
they do not only attribute to themselves his Holy Names or Titles, but
Lucifer-like, they will tell the simple and fearful soul, that they are set
down in the Throne of Glory with Christ already.

33 Furthermore, though this sort of Saints in their own account are all Kings,
Priests, and Prophets unto God, yet if you should ask them a sober question
concerning any spiritual thing after death, they are so dead drunk with their
notional witchcrafts, that they count all men in darkness that see not
themselves in the throne of immortal glory already, as aforesaid.

34 Again, they also seem to be full of Hymns, or Spiritual songs, in reference
to the present glory they enjoy with the eternal Spirit, when the Lord knows
they acknowledge no divine Majesty, or God at all, but those imaginary Siren
songs, and their own natural blinde-born spirits, from whence they proceeded.

35 This sort of seeming glorious Saints, do imagine their spirits so divine,
that they think it impossible it should ever see death, but they like unto
children or fools, conceit their bodies turn to dust for ever, but their souls
ascend into an unknown spiritual glory.

36 Therefore if a man speaks of a personal God, or a personal glory in a life
to come, they will tell him he troubles himself above a simple carnal God and
Glory that is not;

37 But if he knew what it was to be possessed with divine light, life, or
glory in his own soul, as they do, he would no more trouble himself in the
least, concerning a God or glory to come at a distance.

38 There are some among these of a more purer sort, which speak many sweet
truths, and according to their light they live in them, only poor hearts as
yet they are ignorant of the fountain of glory, from whence their spiritual
streams proceed.

39 Moreover, though they cannot close with a personal God, and personal glory
of the elect in another durable world, and a personal shame of Reprobates in
this world to all eternity, yet the secret love of God preserves their merciful
spirits from that error of the wicked, I mean from despising things that are
hid from them.

40 Therefore I make no question but in due season, they shall be revealed to
them unto their everlasting joy and glory in the highest heavens, as aforesaid.

41 Furthermore, though these elect vessels at present understand no other God
but what is within them, yet they are afraid to call themselves God, or Christ,
or Creator, or the like, lest there should be a divine Majesty to own those
titles himself.

42 Again, all those simple hearted souls, which are appointed to eternal
glory, are not so rivetted in their present light, but if a more clear
manifestation appear, their spirits are both ready and willing to embrace it;

43 But of the contrary, all cursed Cananites are fully resolved to remain
where they are, though never so glorious a light should appear.

44 Moreover, those that are the blessed of the Lord, are very tender of
condemning any men, of what appearance or opinion soever, if they see never so
little of the pure light of life eternal appearing in them;

45 But of the contrary, the unmerciful reprobate condemns all men as in a
bottomless pit that are contrary unto his fleshly opinion

46 Furthermore, the blessed of the Lord are made willing to yield all
spiritual obedience unto the unknown God, till they know him, and show mercy
unto all, though he perish, this is a Job-like spirit, who said, though thou
kill me, yet will I trust in thee:

47 But of the contrary, the hypocritical Cananites love to make a glittering
show before men, but as for any inward purity of spirit toward God, and mercy
unto all men, they are so far from any such principle, that they count it a
delusion in them that enjoy it.

48 Many of the blessed of the Lord do know, that all the desires of men or
Angels, cannot prevail with the divine Majesty, to persuade him to set the se^l
of his love upon any man's person, until he is graciously moved unto it of his
own pleasure, according to those sayings of Holy Writ, I am found of them that
sought me not, and before they call, I will answer, when they were in their
blood I said unto them, live; and of that notable saying in the 15. Chapter of
the Prophet Jeremiah, Then said the Lord unto me, though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, yet mine affection could not be toward this people, cast them out of
my sight, and let them depart.

49 But of the contrary, the formal Hypocrite is so dark in this divine secret,
that he thinks himself the blessed of the Lord for his much babbling, and counts
those men cursed that are not of the same mind with him.

50 My beloved spiritual friends, though I have branched these men into four
several heads, yet in the main they are all of one spirit; my meaning is this,
they are all ignorant of the glorious God being in the person of a man.

CHAP. XLII.
1 A further Discourse concerning the Error of Christ's personal reign. 2 The
interpretation of the three last verses in the 12. of Rev. 3 Concerning the
Dragon and the Woman. 4 Of the binding of the old Serpent Dragon for a thousand
years: 5 When they expired. 6 Of the worship of the beast. 7 Of Satan's being
loosed out of prison. 8 Who they are that be in the deepest prisons of raging
darkness.

IN the next place, according to promise, I shall write somewhat upon the 20.
Chapter of the Revelation by St. John, because that error of Christ's personal
reign a thousand years with his Saints on this earth, is partly grounded from
this Chapter.

2 My beloved brethren in the eternal truth, you know that this Book of the
Apocalypse is too mysterious to be understood by the Achitophels of this
perishing world.

3 Also you know, that Gods way is to choose the base things of this world, to
confound the most honorable things thereof, that no flesh may glory in his
presence.

4 Moreover you know, that if the most High endues a man with a divine gift, to
demonstrate his eternal secrets to his brethren, he preserves the soul of that
man from giving the glory of that heavenly power to his own net; my meaning is
this, that man does not give any praise or glory to any God, or Christ, or
light within him, but he is made, as is due, to return all the honor, praise,
or glory unto an infinite Majesty, or spiritual Fountain of glories without
him, from whence alone all divine light as crystal streams flows into the
spirits of elect men and angels.

5 But to come to the matter in hand, And I saw an Angel come down from heaven:
Brethren, what Angel was that which John saw come down from heaven? Truly it
was no other but that Angelical personal God, our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
with whom John was more conversant than all the Apostles in divine secrets.

6 Again, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand,
that is, this Angelical Jesus alone had all divine power of heaven and earth in
his own spirit, over the bottomless pit, lying imaginations of devils
incarnate, or cursed men.

7 Moreover, the everlasting Gospel, or Truth, which proceeded through his
heavenly mouth for the consolation of his Saints, and confounding of the
Serpents, that was the great chain in his hand.

8 Furthermore it is written, And he took the Dragon that old Serpent, which is
the devil and Satan, and he bound him a thousand years, and cast him into a
bottomless pit, and he shut him up, and sealed the door upon him, that he
should deceive the people no more, till the thousand years were fulfilled. My
spiritual friends, what was that old Serpent Dragon Devil which was bound a
thousand years by the spiritual power of Christ? It was an imaginary bottomless
pit Devil within the body of man, that persecuted the Truth of Christ in his
own person, Apostles, and Saints.

9 Again you that are spiritual may know, that the Serpent Devil that was bound
or shut up as in a prison, or in a dungeon of darkness for a thousand years,
was the cursed spirit of murdering Cain raging against Christ and his seed, in
the person of King Herod and his seed, or seven sons in the Ten persecutions.

10 In the 12 Chapter of the Revelation it is thus written, And there appeared
another wonder in heaven* for behold a great red Dragon, having seven heads and
ten horns, and seven Crowns upon his head. Also in the 13 Chapter it is thus
written, And I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads and ten
horns, and upon his horns were ten Crowns. This red Dragon and beast that rose
out of the sea, was that Herod and his seven sons in the Ten persecutions, as
aforesaid.

11 Again, for your clearer understanding in the thing, give me leave to speak
of the three last verses of this twelfth Chapter, the words are these, And the
Serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman, like a flood, that he
might cause her to be carried away of the flood. My spiritual friends, you may
know that this Serpent was bloody Herod, and the woman was that Virgin Mary,
that brought forth the Lord of life, and the flood was the men of war that was
sent forth to persecute the Virgin, and murder her Son and our Savior: but the
earth holp the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the
flood which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth.

12 My spiritual friends, you may know that the innocent children that were
murdered by bloody Herod's men of war, was that earth that opened her mouth and
swallowed up that flood of persecution that was intended to be poured forth
upon the blessed Babe, or God of eternal Glory.

13 Again, then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made war with
the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.: My spiritual brethren, you may also know because
Herod could not come at the holy Babe and his Mother in its infancy, therefore
his cursed spirit in his seed or sons, did persecute the Lord of Glory, and his
Apostles, and Believers, to the death afterward; if you look with a spiritual
eye in the second of Matthew, and the Acts, upon king Herod his seed, Council
of Priests, Scribes, and men of war, then you may see this to be the very mind
of the holy Spirit in these mysterious Records.

14 Again, when the earthly powers through the glorious appearance of the
everlasting Gospel are sealed up unto bloody mindedness, against the messengers
of that divine Truth, to fulfill the secret decree of the most high God, then
are their spirits shut close prisoners in their own bodies, as in a dungeon of
spiritual darkness, through which, in stead of enjoying any sweet peace, that
soul is full of raging madness, and not knowing which way to turn it self, it
thinks to get out of its condition by acting all manner of cruelties to the
utmost of its power.

15 My spiritual friends, you may know that this was that spiritual binding of
that old Serpent Dragon Devil in king Herod, and his Herodian spirits, for a
thousand years; the which thousand years were expired when the Ten persecutions
ceased, which was the ten horns of that savage beast, aforesaid.

16 For you that are spiritual know, that no man can possibly find out the
truth of Holy Writ of the most perfectest account in the world, because the
wisdom of God has reserved the seasons of all divine secrets in his own
heavenly breast, that men or Angels may know them, when his Glory sees it most
fit.

17 Wherefore, all time observation in reference to a right understanding of
any thing that is spiritual, is utterly confounded in that Scripture saying,
For a thousand years is as one day with the Lord, and a day is as a thousand
years.

18 Moreover, when the glorious Truths of the divine Majesty were poured forth
upon the face of the Nations, as it was in the primitive times, through the
spiritual Ministry of the everliving God, you may know whilst that
commissionated spiritual power remained in being, the Nations could not be
deceived with the hypocritical Formalities of the persecuting Powers and
Priests of this perishing world.

19 This was that shutting up of the Serpent Dragon Devil in the evil powers
aforesaid, from deceiving the Nations any more until the thousand years of
their ten bloody persecutions of the Saints was fulfilled.

20 Again it is written, And I saw seats, and they sat upon them, and
judgment was given unto them, and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded
for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worship
the beast, neither his image, neither had taken his mark upon their foreheads,
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: My spiritual friends,
what judgement-seats were those which John saw, and who were them that sat
thereon in judgment?

21 Those seats of judgment were the accusing consciences of the bloody
persecutors aforesaid; and the preaching or publishing of the glorious truths
of our Lord Jesus Christ, through the Commissionated mouths of the chosen
Apostles, Ministers, or Saints, was that judge of life and death reigning in
the consciences of the aforesaid spiritual Tyrants: Do ye not know that the
Saints shall judge the world? Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels?

22 My spiritual friends, what ever men shall imagine of these literal Records,
as sure as the Lord lives, those Angels spoken of by the Apostle Paul, were
the Tyrannical Magistrates, and their bloody minded covetous Priests, which
committed spiritual wickedness together in high places.

23 Again, you chosen ones may know, though the bodies of the Saints suffer
imprisonment or death for the truth of Christ, yet their spirits are in pure
peace, and at perfect liberty in life and death.

24 But of the contrary, though the persons of the cruel persecutors be at
perfect liberty in their temporal heaven, yet their spirits are close prisoners
in their own bodies, and void of all heavenly peace whatsoever, through that
envy in them against all divine purity:

25 And that blood spilt upon the earth by them for the testimony of Christ,
that was the shutting up of the door of all true hope from them, and sealing up
their bloody spirits unto an eternal vengeance at the great day of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with his mighty Angels.

26 Again, seeing John by a divine light saw the souls of them that were put to
death for bearing witness to the word of God, or spiritual truth of Jesus,
reigning with Christ over the raging spirits of their bloody persecutors, that
thousand years time of the Ten persecutions aforesaid: My spiritual brethren,
what was that worship of the beast, and receiving his mark in their foreheads
and hands, which they were preserved from in the thousand years reign, or time
of their fiery trials for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ? that is, they were
delivered from that idolatrous worship, proceeding from the beastly imagination
of their spiritual bloody Tyrants, as aforesaid, not daring in the least to
handle any carnal weapons in defense of their cursed inventions, what
sufferings soever they endured.

27 This I would gladly have you to understand, that the commissionated
Witnesses of the Lord of Glory, are for the most part appointed unto the
greatest trials at the hands of Cananitish devils, or perishing gods of this
vain glorious world, because of the reward of that transcendent glory which the
Lord Jesus has prepared for them with himself above ordinary Saints, with his
holy Angels face to face.

28 Again it is written, But the rest of the dead men shall not live again
until the thousand years be finished: this is the first resurrection, blessed
and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, for on such the second
death has no power, but they shall be the Priests of God and of Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand years, and when the thousand years are expired,
Satan shall be loosed out of his prison: My spiritual brethren, who were those
dead men that lived not again until the thousand years were finished? You know
in holy Writ it is said, ye that were dead in sins and trespasses, has he
quickened:

29 So likewise you may also know, that those dead men there spoken of, were
the remainder of the Saints and chosen Witnesses of the eternal Spirit that
were to appear in these last days, to bear record unto that glorious Truth
which the Prophets, Apostolical Ministers and Saints sealed too with their
blood, as abundantly beforesaid.

30 Again, you know it is written, that Satan shall be loosed out of his prison
for a little season when the thousand years are expired, to deceive the people
which are in the four quarters of the earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them
together to battle, whose number is as the sand of the Sea, and they went up in
the plain of the earth, and they compassed the tents of the Saints about, and
the beloved City; but fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.

31 Again, you may remember that from an unerring Spirit that sent me to
declare divine secrets, that I have already demonstrated unto you what that
Satan is, and that prison of his thousand years abode.

32 It remains now that I should write somewhat concerning his being loosed out
of his prison, that you may the better understand the truth in relation to the
dead men aforesaid.

33 Moreover, you that have been well acquainted with spiritual conditions,
cannot but know, that no men in the world are in such a deep prison of raging
darkness, as those men that tyrannize over the consciences of innocent souls,
which cannot bow down to their imaginary divine ordinances.

34 Furthermote you may also know, that when the Magistrate and his pretended
Prophets were prevented from persecuting men's persons, in reference to their
consciences toward God, then, and not till then was Satan loosed out of his
prison.

35 This was that loosing of Satan for a little season out of his unspeakable
prison in the temporal powers, when the innocent professors of Christ had
freedom of conscience in reference to their faith in the Lord of Glory, through
which the Christians were multiplied again in the earth.

36 Again, you may know that it was but a very little season since Christ was
glorified, that the Saints possessed any such spiritual freedom in any kingdom
under heaven;

37 Therefore the persecuting spirits of Satanical Prelates in the Civil Powers
have had but a very little season of resting from shedding the blood of Gods
innocent people in the whole world.

38 Moreover, though the name of Christ was almost extinguished from the face
of the earth in the thousand years spiritual reign of the Saints and raging of
the serpents, as aforesaid, yet you may know in that season of liberty of
Christian conscience, that the Saints were mightily increased again in the
world.

39 Furthermore you may also know, that those Saints are the dead men that
lived not again until these last times of the invisible teachings of the divine
Majesty himself: wherefore you spiritual ones may also know, that that Gog and
Magog, that are gone forth to battle in the plains of the earth, compassing the
Tents of the Saints, and the holy City, are those Heathenish Magistrates, and
their bloody Priests that proceeded from cursed Cain, through the loins of King
Herod, and his Priests and Scribes, as beforesaid; so that the dead men that
lived not again until the thousand years were fulfilled, are those Saints and
holy City of God, which at this time, and to the end of all time, do suffer
cruel persecution for the testimony of a good conscience in all the Nations of
the world.

40 My beloved Brethren, this is that spiritual reign of the first resurrection
with Christ on this earth, appointed in some measure for all men to drink,
which are delivered from that second death, which is treasured up for all
bloody minded Tyrants whatsoever.

41 Thus you that are sober, may clearly see, that it was not a visible
personal reign of Christ a thousand years with his Saints on this earth that
John aimed at, as many men have long imagined, but it was a spiritual reign, or
suffering with him for his truths sake upon earth, that when he appears in
his glory with all his holy Angels, then to reign with him in his Throne to all
eternity in the third heavens.

42 Now brethren, I shall go on to prove his personal coming in glory,
according to the intent of his most holy Spirit from his own words.

CHAP. XLIII.
1 Of the personal glory of Christ's coming to judgment. 2 No man has so much
faith as a grain of mustard seed but Christ only. 3 Of spirits finite and
infinite.

MY beloved brethren, in the unerring spirit you may know, there is a twofold
appearing of Christ's glory in his chosen ones, as the glory of the Sun excels
the glory of the Moon, so these two glories transcend each other.

2 Moreover, you know the Moon appears in the brightness of her glory at one
time, and at another time she appears altogether like unto darkness or shame:

3 So likewise it is with Christ's appearing in glory to men's souls in this
life, sometimes by virtue of the in-comes of his eternal spirit, the soul of
man for a moment is transmuted into the glorious likeness of the divine Majesty
himself;

4 But at another time you know, when none of these spiritual lightnings appear
through some fleshly guilt, the poor soul seems to be full of fearful darkness,
horror, and shame, as if it had never seen any light or life at all.

5 So that you see all the glory of Christ's appearing unto the spirits of men
in this life, is but a changeable Moon-like glory at the best;

6 Therefore it can be but a spiritual type of this personal appearing of
Christ in his judgment seat, glory with all his mighty Angels.

7 Again, you know the Sun is no way subject to change in the least, but
Gyant-like runs his course in four and twenty hours through the whole heavens,
and in one place or other appears in his glory unto the end of all time:

8 So likewise you may know it is with this personal appearing of Christ in his
glory with his holy Angels, for in that day of his appearing the persons of his
redeemed ones shall be nothing else but Sunshine, like divine glories in
themselves, and so run their heavenly course even to all eternity.

9 Who ever thou art that is ignorant of this personal glory of Christ's coming
in the clouds, or air, with his elect Angels, to make an eternal separation
between the persons of the blessed Israelites, and cursed Cananites, though
thou art full of seeming glorious expressions concerning a God or Christ,
living in men's consciences, yet thou can never be firmly established, until
thou know that personal God, or Christ, sitting in the throne of his
infinite glory in the high heavens without thee, from whence alone all inward
light or life proceeds.

10 I confess if a man become an innocent merciful spirit, he may be able to
speak such a language from a supposed God or Christ in men's consciences only,
that may confound the seeming holiness of all Church fellowships in the world;

11 But what advnatage is this to himself, or his heirs, except when he is
confounded, in the room thereof he does not only declare the effects of
Christ's truth in the minds of men, but is able to demonstrate in some measure
the personal appearing of Christ in his glory in the world to come?

12 If the visible appearing of a glorified God or Christ in the person of a
man be such a choak-pear unto thee, or seem low or carnal, because the national
Priests confess such a like thing;

13 I would fain know of thee by sober speaking or writing, where thy God or
Christ is become, when thy soul, and all thy light, or life, for a moment is
become silent death, or darkness, with thy body of dust?

14 Moreover, if thou understandest not a personal God or Christ too
transcendent glorious for Heavens, Earth, Angels, or Men, to be capable of the
indwelling of his eternal spirit, what is thy inward God or Christ thou
discoursest so much about, but pleasant words or perishing nature only?

15 Furthermore, if thou know this wonderful secret concerning what a spirit
is, then would thou certainly know how impossible a thing it is, for any
spirit whatsoever, to possess a living being without a distinct body of his own.

16 Again, of what bigness do thou think a spirit is, whether it be finite or
infinite? give me leave to write a little of this strange thing from those
sayings of Christ to his disciples in the 17. Chapter by St. Matthew, the words
are these, For verily I say unto you, for if ye have faith as much as is a
grain of Mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, remove hence to yonder
place, and it shall remove: and nothing shall be unpossible unto you. Behold,
is not a grain of Mustard seed a very little? and yet you see Christ says
nothing should be unpossible unto that man that has such a quantity of
spiritual faith in him.

17 Again, it is written, with God nothing shall be unpossible: who then is
capable to possess so much faith in him as will contain the quantity of a
Mustard seed, but Christ Jesus the God of Glory himself, unto whom all things
are possible, that he is moved unto by that seed of faith, which is the eternal
spirit of his glorified person?

18 Moreover, if a spirit be in its quantity but as a grain of Mustard seed, or
a spark of fire, how then is it possible for the Spirit of God, Men, or Angels,
to possess any sensible light, life, joy or glory, but in their own bodies
only?

19 Furthermore, if this description of a spirit seem strange, be it known unto
thee, the Lord has made me to declare it, for the confounding of that cursed
error of Gods essentially being in all things.

20 Again, if the eternal spirit should consist of so great a bulk, how then
can there be any God at all, but nature only?

21 Or how can it possibly be an infinite spirit, when it is not distinct to it
self, but is compelled to have its being in finite things only? this unknown
bodiless God is much like unto the Star-gazers monstrous Sun and Moon aforesaid.

22 Is not this infiniteness indeed for all the spirits of elect men and
Angels, to be filled with variety of divine glories, with one word speaking
from so small a fiery glory as this is?

23 Who ever thou art that shall be left to despise this little spark of
immortal Crowns, which essentially reigns in the man Christ Jesus alone, it
is because there is no true light of life in thee.

CHAP. XLIV.
1 Of the great white Throne which John saw, Revelation 20. 2 A mark of a
Reprobate to desire miracles, to make him believe the truth of a commission.

IN the 20. of the Revelation it is thus written, And I saw a great while
throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face fled away both earth and
heaven, and their place was no more found; My spiritual Brethren, though men's
earthly mindedness, and heavenly conceitedness, will fly away, and be no more
found^, when the true light of life eternal is throned in their spirits, yet
from the unerring spirit I positively affirm, that this place of Holy Writ, had
reference only unto Christ's personal appearing in his glory, with his mighty
Angels, to make an eternal separation between the just and unjust.

2 My Christian friends, why did John call it a great white Throne, which he
spiritually saw? It was because of the glorious brightness of the Judges face,
or person, and his Angelical attendance, and also because it was the dreadful
general appearance of mankind, to receive their eternal dooms.

3 You know when Christ was transfigured upon the Mount, through which his face
shone, and his garments glittered, the Texts says, that Moses and Elias
appeared to him in glory:

4 So likewise you may know, that John called it a great white Throne, as
beforesaid, because of the transcendent brightness of Christ's person.

5 What heaven and earth was that which fled away from his glorious face? what
ever men imagine to the contrary, you that are spiritual may know, that it was
the dissolution of that heaven and earth that had a beginning, as if it had
never had any being, I mean this visible firmamental heaven and earth, and all
light or life in them.

6 Therefore where John says, their place was no more found, that was spoken
in reference unto their former natural brightness, virtue, beauty, power, or
glory, being translated into a Chaos of everlasting confusion.

7 Again, besides the glorious brightness of Christ's person, and his Angelical
Host, give me leave to write a little more of that great white Throne which
John saw.

8 You that are truly spiritual, cannot be so grossly ignorant, as to think,
that Christ has no other Throne to inhabit in but his peoples spirits, and
this natural world only: why? because that error arises out of the
Atheistical hearts of fleshly men, that has no faith in the truth of Holy Writ.

9 Moreover, if men's spirits be but rationally sober, though at present they be
never so atheistical, they may be convinced that there is another world besides
this, which is of a higher nature compassing this Globe round about, and yet it
is not global as this is, only there is no elementary Firmament, Sun, Moon,
nor Stars in it, but it is an open place, City, Throne, or Kingdom, of infinite
vastness in length, breadth, or height, answerable to the person of an infinite
Majesty.

10 Also it is a Throne of exceeding whiteness, or Sun-like brightness,
suitable unto the transcendent brightness of the Kings person that sits
thereon, and his glorious companions.

11 Though the joy and glory of an earthly Prince consists chiefly in the
greatness of his person, power, vast territories, and honorable subjects for
his safety, yet for all this, you know, that his palaces are decked with
embroidered Ornaments of gold, silver, precious stones, and such like, for the
further setting forth the mortal glory of his Princely Majesty:

12 So likewise it is with the divine Majesty, for though the variety of his
infinite Godhead joy and glory, principally is within his own person, and
Princely power over so innumerable a company of kingly companions;

13 Yet you may also know, that he has a great Throne, or Palace, for the
further setting forth of his visible glory, decked with Ornaments of spititual
brightness, or immortal glittering whiteness, as beforesaid.

14 Do not all men that acknowledge a Creator, whether they understand him to
be a spirit, or a person, confess him to be boundless, immortal, unchangeable,
and eternal?

15 You know this global world is not boundless, in length, height, breadth, or
compass, but is is surrounded with a firmamental heaven, as with a brazen wall,
to keep it within its own station.

16 Moreover, if the eternal Majesty be infinite, or boundless, as he is, I
would fain know of any man, how it is possible for a glorified infinite spirit,
or person, to be contained in a finite bounded world?

17 Though the Doves of divine glory are compelled for a season, to live among
the Tyrannical Serpents of this perishing world, yet I would have you to
understand, that if an infinite, or boundless God, with his mighty Angels,
should have no other Throne to solace themselves in but this, then in stead of
spiritual liberty, they would all be in natural bondage;

18 If you ask me the reason of it, you may know, that the glorified person of
God, or Christ, is of a motion swifter then thought, and the persons of Moses,
Elias, and the mighty Angels, are of motion as swift as thought;

19 Therefore no enclosed place can contain them, but they must of necessity
inhabit a Throne, or Kingdom of infinite vastness, for ascending, or descending
at the divine pleasure, according to their motional swiftness.

20 Again, you spiritual ones may undoubtedly know that there is such a throne
as I speak of, why? because this world cannot possibly contain our thoughts,
but they nimbly pierce through the heavens, and in a weak measure they
comprehend an infinite, or boundless God, and a Throne, or Kingdom of an
infinite circumference.

21 If our bodies were answerable to our thoughts, this world could not
possibly contain them, but they would ascend through the natural heavens, to
see whether there were such a vast kingdom of eternal glory, as they had
apprehended.

22 I know all fleshly Atheistical minded men are apt to say unto me, If they
could see this infinite personal God, and glorious white Throne, I talk so much
of, then they could believe it.

23 O how fain would finite carnal eyes behold infinite spiritual glories!

24 Moreover, they may say unto me, did thou ever see this infinite Majesty,
and Throne of Glory, thy self? if thou did, where are thy miracles to confirm
it? or why do thou not make us believe it by thy spirituality? or why does
not this infinite Majesty bear witness that he sent thee, as he did to his
former Prophets and Apostles? or when will he do it, that we may see and
believe, and own thee for the truths sake?

25 Whoever thou art that thus call in question the glorious truths of
eternity, under pretense of my weakness, in reference unto miracles, that thou
might believe;

26 Little do thou think in stead of contending with me thy sinful brother,
according to the flesh, that it is that old Serpent Devil in thee, that
arraigns the glorious God that made thee at the blind bar of thy carnal
reason, and by it condemns him, and his heavenly truths, because thy
unbelieving desires are not satisfied.

27 Again, did not the Lord of Glory himself call those Jews that required a
sign, an adulterous and wicked generation?

28 Moreover, when the Lord of life by the mighty power of his word only,
wrought wonderful miracles in their sights, instead of believing on him ever
the sooner for that, the sign-mongring Jews cursedly say, that he cast out
Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

29 Furthermore, if thou should upbraid me for want of the gift of tongues,
or languages, yet I render praise unto the God of Glory by his poor light in my
poor soul, thou can not upbraid me for want of a spirit of Prophecy, though
thou at present shall slight it;

30 And what if I could speak all languages, would it advantage any sign-monger
in the world, but to his further condemnation only?

31 What says the Scripture concerning this thing, Wherefore strange tongues
are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them believe not, but
prophesying serves not for them that believe not, but for them which believe,
22 verse of the 14. Chapter of the 1. Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians.

32 Moreover, did not the Lord of Glory himself say, that John the Baptist was
the greatest Prophet under the Law that was born of women, and yet thou never
reads of any miracles, or tongues, possessed by him.

33 The Christian Dove waits for a spiritual sign within him, that he may
believe the glorious truths of the everliving God without him, but the carnal
Serpent requires a natural sign without him, to make him believe the spiritual
truths of an invisible God in the high heavens.

34 Again, if there should be no other appearing of a God, or Christ, but in
men's consciences, as thousands vainly imagine in this drunken age, what did
Christ mean by these and such like sayings in the 15. of St. Matthew, And when
the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then
shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all
nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd separateth
the sheep from the goats, and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the
goats on the left, then shall the King say to them on his right hand, come ye
blessed of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world; for I was an hungry and ye gave me meat, I
thirsted and ye gave me drink, and such like: then shall he say to them on his
left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the devil and his angels, for I was an hungry and ye gave me no meat, I
thirsted and ye gave me no drink, and these shall go into everlasting pain, and
the righteous into life eternal.

35 Again, thou that vainly boasts of a spiritual God, or Christ appearing in
glory within thee only, dare thou say that these Scriptures are fulfilled?

36 Moreover, can thou say that thou have this King on his Throne of Glory,
with his holy Angels, and all the Nations of the world within thee?

37 Furthermore, is the Devil and his Angels, and eternal blessedness, and
cursedness, within thee also?

38 My beloved friends in the Lord of life, if there were not a generation of
cursed men, that glory of a God, or Christ within them, that are not only full
of these and such like discourses, but are also given up unto all filthiness; I
could not have mentioned this thing, wherefore there are many of these Serpents
that creep into houses, telling poor deceived men, and silly women, laden with
many lusts, that the resurrection of the dead is past already, since Christ in
his glory is risen in them?

39 Moreover, if their captivated friends should seem to scruple at any kind
of fleshly community held forth by them, then these wandering Stars will say
unto them, What poor low things are these that you are troubled withal, what,
are you in Egypt still, is there any more then one pure being? and is not this
pure being within you all, and is it not he that speaks and acts all in you?
seeing there is but one power, what do ye scruple at, are ye as little children
or fools yet, do ye not see that there is no union, or true communion in the
world among those people that hold two powers?

40 Furthermore, lest their deceived friends, by whom they possess Balaams
wages, should fail them, then these cursed captives will tell them, That their
bodies are fleshly forms that turns to dust from whence they came, and shall
appear no more; therefore not to be minded in the least in reference to sin, so
that ye fall not under the civil law, or oppress nature, but your souls are
immortal, and cannot die, but ascends into its glory from whence it came:
Wherefore since ye have attained to such liberty, that all men are in foolish
bondage which know it not, let us eat and drink and be merry, whilst we enjoy
these vanishing forms, yet let us sollace our selves with all delights, even as
our divine rights.

41 O thou King of all kings, for the glory of thy great names sake, discover
these Serpents with their carnal wiles, that all thy simple hearted people may
be delivered out of their Satannical snares, and brought into that pure light
and liberty of thy own likeness, by one heavenly glance from thy eternal spirit.

CHAP. XLV.
1 The Creators withholding of his divine assistance, was the cause of the Fall
of our first Parents. 2 The ground of all spiritual or natural Curses. 3 Noah's
Ark assimulated to Heaven. 4 Of the Resurrection.

YOu that are full of the light of life may know, that whilst Adam and Eve
continued in the purity of their Creation, this whole earth and all things made
therein, were as pure in their kind and measure, as that vast kingdom of
glory, and all that therein is.

2 Moreover, as soon as ever their pure natures were defiled with the
Serpentine nature of fiery lust, you know the whole earth and all things
therein, had a curse upon them in one kind or another.

3 Furthermore, you may know that this curse did in some measure extend unto
the very souls and bodies of all creatures, with the whole world throughout.

4 Some men may say unto me, Seeing the divine nature is all purity it self,
what was that curse upon the while Creation? or whence came it, seeing they
were incapable of sin or evil in the least? From the unerring Spirit to this I
answer, It was not an infusion of any curse or evil into the natures of any
thing by the Creator, but it was a withholding the motions of its first created
blessedness, through which naturally it became barren or cursed in it self,
this was the fruit of unlawful lust.

5 Moreover, that you may clearly understand wherein the blessing or cursing of
the Lord consists, you may know that when he wholly denies the heavenly motion
of his holy Spirit unto a man, immediately that soul becomes nothing but cursed
envy against all spiritual or natural purity whatsoever:

6 So likewise when he denies the natural motions of his blessed Spirit unto
any thing that he has made, it becomes subject to all kind of putrefaction
whatsoever: this was that cursing of the Jews natural blessings, and hardening
of Pharaohs heart, by the Lord spoken of in Holy Writ.

7 Thus you that are sober may clearly see the ground of all spiritual or
natural cursings in the whole Creation; for though it was pronounced through
the spiritual mouth of the Creator himself, yet it could not possibly proceed
from that word of the Lords speaking, because of the glorious purity of his
divine nature, but that curse rose out of the natures of the creatures
themselves, for want of the motions of the spirit of God in them, as beforesaid.

8 Again you that are spiritual know, that immediately after the Lord said, an
end of all flesh was come before him, when Noah and his family, and the
Creation, were entered into the Ark, the whole world of lustful men and women,
and the glory thereof, were destroyed by water: now you know all that was in
the Ark was secured from the raging waters through their ascending above the
waters.

9 Moreover you may know that the Ark, and those creatures therein, were not
only preserved for the increase of a new world, but they were also a figure of
a world to come.

10 Furthermore, the Ark it self had relation unto that Kingdom of Glory in the
high Heavens, which is too sublime to be overtopped by any natural water, or
sire whatsoever.

11 The person of Noah, who was made a Preacher of truth and righteousness to
the unbelieving world, did represent the person of that spiritual preacher of
all truth and righteousness in the heavenly Ark beforesaid.

12 Furthermore, the other persons and creatures in the Ark had reference unto
the salvation of the elect of God, and the whole creation that are in being at
the personal appearing of Christ in his Glory, with his mighty Angels.

13 The drowning of the whole world of ungodly men, and the rest of the
creation, had relation unto the eternal condemnation of all Reprobate men in
this world;

14 The burning up of their natural delights wherewith they sport themselves in
excess of riot and drunkenness, little thinking of that eternal vengeance
coming upon them.

15 Again, righteous Noah represented the divine judge of ungodly men in this,
because he entered into the Ark, and by virtue of a great light in him, he was
made to sit as a judge in the consciences of wicked men, when the waters rose
upon them, in the remembrance of their laughing him to scorn about his Ark, and
knowing his security in the Ark, and their present destruction by water, having
no Ark of refuge to deliver them.

16 Moreover, as they sported themselves in fleshly filthiness, and vain
glorious mirth about him, his Ark, pure language, and life:

17 So likewise as a mighty Prince in his Chariot tramples rebellious subjects
with delight under his horses heels, he rode in his Ark as in a Chariot,
triumphing in the Lord for his own deliverance, and their destruction under the
feet of his Ark, as a just recompense of their unrighteous deeds, and despising
the Lord and his truth, which he had declared to them for a long season.

18 As sure as the Lord lives, thus it will be very suddenly with this lustful
bloody world, that sports themselves about the resurrection of the dead and
judgment day, saying, it is past already, or, there will never be any such
thing; for that righteous Noah, the King of Glory will open the Firmament of
Heaven, and stand in the air with his mighty Angels, surrounding his person,
and by the power of his word speaking, as he raised Lazarus out of the grave;

19 So likewise I affirm against men or Angels, the very same person, and no
other, which did that deed, is that God that will by his word speaking command
all his righteous Noah's, both dead and alive, bodily to a ascend into that holy
Ark of eternal glory in the high Heavens, and when they are safely arrived with
the whole creation, which according to their kind groaned long for
deliverance; then as beforesaid that mighty God the man Jesus in glory, with a
flood of fire will burn all the beauty, or glory of this world to ashes,
leaving all cursed Cananites, bodies and spirits, burning together like fire
and brimstone upon this earth in utter darkness, answerable unto their former
burning lusts in their natural conditions.

20 Moreover, those men and women that glory of a God or Christ within them,
and what ever filthiness they act, charge the most Holy Spirit with it, I say
from the Lord Jesus Christ, though they escape the vengeance of men by their
Satannical subtilties, yet in the remembrance of their despisings of a glory or
misery to come, in that day the divine vengeance shall burn more fiery hot in
their souls and bodies then all other men whatsoever.

21 Then those that are ascended into the Ark of eternal glory with the Son of
Man, and his holy Angels, shall sing that new song of all honor, power, praise
and glory, unto the Lamb that sits in the midst of the Throne for ever and
ever, not only because they are delivered from the eternal vengeance;

22 But also, because the most Wise and Holy God, has rewarded those filthy
despisers of his glorious truths, according to what they did, and would have
done unto Christ, and his redeemed ones.

23 O blessed are those men and women that are not offended with these plain
truths!

CHAP. XLVI.
1 The last commissionated Prophet come into the World. 2 No calling of the
natural Jews to the profession of the true Jesus. 3 Two sorts of Jews. 4 Some
remarkable signs of the approaching of the day of Judgment.

IF there be such a dreadful day of Christ's personal appearing in his glory
with his mighty Angels, some men may say unto me, may it not be a long season,
are there not many prophecies yet to be fulfilled, before his coming, as the
calling of the Jews, and the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, and such like?

2 From an unerring spirit, to this I answer, As John the Baptist was the last
Prophet under the Law, and the forerunner of the sudden appearing of Christ
Jesus the Lord in a body of flesh;

3 So likewise I positively affirm against all gainsayers under heaven, that I
John Reeve, am the last commissionated Prophet that ever shall declare divine
secrets, according to the foundation of truth, until the Lord Jesus Christ
appear on his Throne of glory, visibly to be seen by all his elect face to face.

4 But of the contrary, in that day of our God and King of glorious Crowns
appearing, none of those cursed men and women, which blasphemously said, that
God has no person at all, shall ever be able to behold his face, and live; but
according to Holy Writ, they shall cry to the Mountains, Hills, or Rocks, to
hide them from the wrath of his bright burning body, or face, that sits upon
the Throne.

5 Concerning a general visible calling of the Jews in all Nations, to the
acknowledgement of Christ being come in the flesh, I say from the eternal
spirit that sent me, that there will never be any such thing in the world;
indeed the Ministerial Artists have of a long season imagined an outward call
of the Jews, to their vain glorious seeming holiness, but the most Wise and
Holy God intends no such thing.

6 Wherefore to confound their carnal wisdom, his glorious purpose is to call
home to himself those Jews and Gentiles, elected to everlasting life by the
invisible teaching of his most Holy Spirit.

7 You that are sober may come to understand that there is two sort of Jews,
there is a Mosaical Jew, and an Apostolical Jew.

8 Moreover you may know, that those men called Independents, Annabaptists,
Presbyterians, are the literal Apostolical Jews.

9 And those men that observe Saturday for their Sabbath, are those Mosaical
legal Jews, which utterly deny that Christ is yet come in the flesh, but
ignorantly expect his appearing in a fleshly glorious manner, to reign over
them in the Throne of David his Father.

10 Moreover these Sabbattical Saturday Jews, John Tanee like, do imagine when
their fleshly Christ appears to reign over them, that he will gather them out
of all nations wherein they are scattered, and conduct them into the
inheritance of their fathers, that promised Land of Canaan; and there they make
account with their imaginary King to live in a temporal glorious condition for
a long season; and as they have been servants and slaves to all Nations wherein
they were scattered, so likewise as a reward of their servitude, they fully
expect that all Nations shall bow down to them, and bring in their riches and
glory unto them, as their vassals for ever.

11 You that are spiritual, may know, that these unbelieving Mosaical Jews,
which expect a carnal Christ to reign over them, were those Jews which at the
death of Christ said, his blood be upon us and our children; and truly you know
his blood was upon them, and their children to some purpose, in the destruction
of Jerusalem, and unto this day, yea, and so it will be to the end of the
world.

For the Lord Jesus will never spiritually gather the seed of those Jews, which
rated a bloody Barabas above the Lord of life himself.

13 Moreover those Jews which were afraid of having any hand in the death of
Christ, were the fathers of those spiritual Jews in all Nations, that are mixed
in marriages with the Gentiles, whose merciful innocent spirits are delivered
from all tyranny over men's consciences.

14 Furthermore, those Independent, Annabaptist, Presbyterian men, which hold
it lawful, just and good, to persecute men in their persons and estates upon a
spiritual account, I say from the eternal spirit, that they are for the most
part the offspring of those bloody-minded Jews that crucified the Lord of
Glory upon the account of blasphemy, as beforesaid.

15 O blessed are all unpersecuting merciful minded men and women only!

16 All innocent, merciful Independent, Annabaptist, Presbyterian men, or
women, that are preserved from a persecuting mind of divine things which seem
difficult, from the eternal spirit I declare, those are part of Gods spiritual
wheat, which are mixed with the chaffy Jews and Gentiles, which are the
offspring of cursed Cain, whom the Lord shall burn with unquenchable fire,
when he comes in his Glory with his Angels, to receive his spiritual wheat
into his heavenly barn, as aforesaid.

17 Thus you that are spiritually enlightened from on high, may clearly see,
that the calling of the elect Jews in all nations unto the knowledge of the
divine Majesty, and his heavenly truths, was not meant an outward calling of
them from a Mosaical legallity, unto an Apostolical literallity, as many men
have vainly imagined, but it was an inward calling of them by the motions of
the eternal spirit, to the right understanding of the one personal Majesty on
the Throne of Glory, and his heavenly truths.

18 Again, concerning the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, in the 24. of
Matthew and the 30. it is thus written, And then shall appear the sign of the
Son of Man in heaven, and then shall all the kindred of the earth mourn, and
they shall see the Son of Man come in the Clouds of heaven with power and great
glory; this sign of the Son of Man was that substance, or very Son of Man
himself, and the glory of his personal appearing in the Clouds of Heaven with
his glittering Angels, caused such a fiery brightness, not only in the visible
Heavens above, but the whole earth beneath also appears like a flame of fire,
or burning lightning, insomuch that all the kindreds of the earth, which never
expected that dreadful day, because their persons were not transmuted into the
divine likeness of the Son of Man.

19 Therefore their unbelieving earthly spirits did quake and tremble, lament
and howl like dogs, for very fear of the foresaid sign of the Son of Man should
rend them to pieces, and burn them and their inward God, or Christ, to powder;
I mean all those which gloried of a God or Christ within them only, and
cursedly despised this personal God on his glorious Throne without them.

20 Thus you in whose persons the King of Glory reigns by the heavenly
incomes of his eternal brightness, may in some measure see what is meant by the
sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, when he appears in his glory with his holy
Angels.

21 As the immortalized spirits and bodies are filled with astonishing
ravishments with the very sight of the Son of Man in his glorious Throne
aforesaid;

22 So likewise the carnal spirits and bodies of all Hypocrites, which gloried
in a Christ, ordinances, and salvation without them, and despised the invisible
breathings of his Holy Spirit in his innocent people, as delusion, blasphemy,
and such like, shall be full of unspeakable burning, pain and shame, through
their inability of bearing the fiery brightness of the Son of Man, that most
high and mighty God, with his elect men and Angels, as abundantly beforesaid.

23 Moreover, you know it is said, As it was in the days of Noah, and in the
days of Lot, so it shall be in the day when the Son of Man is revealed.

24 Furthermore, you know the Scripture says, They were eating and drinking
and marrying of wives, and planting, and building, unto the day that Noah
entered into the Ark; but in the day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire
and brimstone, and destroyed them all.

25 Again, you know the whole old world, and Sodomites, a little before their
final dissolution, were not only possessed with all variety of natural
comforts, but they were also given up to all manner of unnatural filthiness, and
so continued to the day of their total destruction.

26 Moreover, you know it is recorded of the men of Sodom, that they were
haters of God, and turned the truth of God unto a lie, and worshipped and
served the creature, forsaking the Creator, which is blessed for evermore, Amen.

27 Furthermore, While the meat of the unsatiable Jews were in their mouths,
you know there was a plague brake out among them. These final dissolutions you
know were not only invisible, but visible also.

28 Moreover, if the personal appearing of Christ in his Glory shall be like
unto that of Noah and Lot, and the final dissolution of the old world, and that
of Sodom and Gomorrah when it was in the midst of the height of all their
fleshly filthiness, and exceeding fullness of bread, which included all good
things, and in their more then ordinary planting, building, putting the evil
day far from them; is it not thus in these out days also, was there ever more
glorying in all manner of Sodomitical, unnatural filthiness, then now there is?

29 Did men ever deifie carnal creatures as now they do?

Moreover, was there ever such a babbling about a God, or Christ, in men's
consciences only as now there is? notwithstanding many of those cursed
Serpents villifie the very name of a personal God in a Throne of Glory above
the Stars, more then the greatest theeving, whoring, murderer, in the land?

31 Furthermore, was there ever such talk of pure love without envy upon a
spiritual account, as in these our days, and in stead of mercy toward one
another, since the world began, under pretense of conscience, and an art of
lamb-like words, do not men like roaring Lions lie lurking in every quarter,
seeking whom they may devour?

32 Again, notwithstanding such varieties of breaking forth in declaring the
sudden appearing of the Lord of Hosts, to recompense vengeance upon all sorts
of bloody-minded covetous men whatsoever, can any man living ever remember such
purchasing, such build^ng, such planting, and plenty of all natural comforts,
as now there is?

33 Moreover, was there in any man's memory such changes in Government, and
marvelous transactions in them, as in these our days?

34 Furthermore, was there ever such variety of witchcraft, voices, visions,
signs, and wonders acted as in these our days, from a pretended spiritual God,
Christ, or power within men only?

35 Besides all this, has not the God of Glory by poor and contemptable means
discovered the Serpentine subtilties of the honorable artificial Priests and
Astrologian Sorcerers in this age and land, more then ever he did since the
Apostles times, and has there not been many signs in the heavens, and in the
earth, and in the creatures, in a marvelous manner, since our civil dissentions,
with many bloody massacres at home and abroad, and does these things presage
nothing, or did they come to pass by chance, or fortune only?

36 O ye Hypocritical minded sign-mongers, and cursed despisers of the Son of
God, who is the Lord your maker, remember what effect those wonderful signs in
Egypt took upon Pharaoh, his Counselors, and people! and what effect Eliah the
Prophets signs took upon Ahab, Jezebel, and her four hundred Idolatrous
Priests, besides your forefathers that murdered the Lord of Glory, his
Prophets, Apostles, and innocent people, for the truths sake only, though they
had the gift of tongues and miracles, by calling all their miracles, languages,
or spiritual truths delusions, to deceive the people against the very light of
their own consciences, through a secret fear of losing their gain and glory
among men that perish.

CHAP. XLVII.
1 Further signs of the approaching day of Christ's coming to judgment. 2 The
Prophet writes by inspiration. 3 And gives the interpretation of several
Scriptures tending thereunto.

AS the old world and Sodom were blinded by abundance of prosperity, and plenty
of all things to the very day of their final overthrow; so likewise what ever
men shall declare to the contrary, it shall be with this bloody-minded world,
until the Son of Man come in his glory. If you ask me the reason, the main
ground of it is this, because the God of Glory, that cannot possibly lie, has
said, that they day of his appearing shall be like unto that of Noah and Lot.

2 Moreover, another reason of it is this, not only to prevent man's wisdom to
be prepared for the day of his glorious and dreadful appearing, but also to
catch those men with their own craft that counted them children or fools that
expected any such thing.

3 Furthermore, another reason is this, for the deeper condemnation of all
those men that heard the declarations of this personal appearing in his glory,
but laughed it to scorn, or put the evil day far from them, because of the
present fleshly gain and glory they lived in.

4 Again, you know it is written, That in the day Lot departed out of Sodom it
rained fire and brimstone, and destroyed them all; behold, what a dreadful and
sudden desolation fire makes in a mortal world, even within a days compass!

5 So likewise it shall be when the Son of man appears in his glory; for within
the compass of a day, or twelve hours, after man's account, the heavens without
the body of man shall be melted with fervent heat, and in stead of the former
and latter showers of water to nourish the earth, and rejoice man's heart, as a
flood of fire and brimstone, it shall pour it self upon the whole world, and
burn all the beauty, virtue, or glory thereof to dust, or powder, as beforesaid.

6 I write not against the truths of the Scriptures, but by inspiration from
the Holy Spirit, I bear record to the mind of God in them, in opposition of all
pretended spiritual lights under heaven:

7 Wherefore as an eternal witness against all sorts of men that wrest the
Scriptures to their own hurt, give me leave to recite that threefold testimony
of Peter, as a seal to this glorious truth, that shall burn like fire and
brimstone in them that despise it: the words are these. But the heavens and
earth which are now, are kept by the same word in store, and reserved unto fire
against the day of condemnation, and of the destruction of ungodly men, but the
day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens
shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with heat, and the
earth with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up, looking for and
hasting unto the coming of that day of God, by the which the heavens being on
fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with heat; a threefold
cord is not easily broken.

8 If any Hypocrite shall go about by his Serpentine Sophistry, to tell you
that are spiritually weak, those sayings of Peter had relation to the burning
up of the carnal heavens and earth in men, through the glorious appearing of
the eternal spirit, you may with ease confute those notional cheats, if you
look back upon the ground of Peter's sayings: the words are these, knowing this
first that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming, for since the fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
creation, for this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the Word of God the
heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in the water,
whereby the world then was overflowed with water, perished.

9 Thus you that have never so little truth of the true Jesus in you, may
clearly see, that the Apostle Peter in this threefold language, had not the
least thought in him concerning heavens and earth being burnt up within men,
but the burning up of the heavens and earth, and the beauty, virtue, or glory
thereof without man, which were the fruits of man's handy-works; why? because
you see the Apostle grounds his matter upon the drowning of an outward earthly
world.

10 Moreover, you may also know, that it was a burning up of a visible heaven
and earth, and the glory thereof meant by Peter, why? because the Apostle tells
you, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming?

11 Furthermore, if it had been an invisible burning up the fleshly heavens in
men only, what lustful man in the world would have scoffed at such a doctrine,
which did encourage him in his lusts, rather then discourage him in the least?

12 If you ask me the reason, my ground is this, because by lustful Serpents
like himself, he was persuaded that Christ will burn up men's lusts, and save
all their souls at the last, and who can find fault with such a burning
doctrine? or wha^ bloody-minded man, or woman in the world, would not embrace a
messenger of such tidings as this is?

13 Again, you may know I have written the truth by this token, why? because
men that are guilty of almost all manner of lusts, can go into Lumber street to
hear men speak much concerning the glorious incoming of a spiritual Christ, to
burn up all their fleshly or heavenly conceitedness, that they may see nothing
in them but God only triumphing on his Throne, I say these or such like
expressions the most filthiest of men can hear with delight.

14 Moreover, if you that speak in Lumber-street, or else where should once
attain to the foundation of all spiritual speaking, and should be able
knowingly to tell men of the sudden appearing of the Son of Man in Glory with
his Angels, to burn this visible world to ashes, and to cause the spirits and
bodies of men that glory in filthiness to burn as fire and brimstone together
to eternity in utter darkness; I am confident very few filthy persons would be
able to hear you speak twice together, and then you would soon have a thin
Congregation, and be as much affected as men are with us, for what we speak in
the name of the Lord.

15 What is the ground think you of so many dreadful fires this year in this
City, and other parts, above the memory of man? I know with Astrologian
Sophisters you may impute it to Planets plot, or peoples want of care; but of
the contrary I believe you Serpent sign-mongers will find these fires came not
merely by natural causes, but by a divine power as a forerunner of the eternal
burning this world, and all the natural glory therein to dust, powder, or dry
sand, as aforesaid.

16 Moreover, you know it is written, Blessed and holy is he that has part in
the first resurrection, for on such the second death has no power;

17 Also it is written, But our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we
look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able, even to subdue all things to himself.

18 Further it is written, When Christ, which is our life, shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory.

19 My beloved friends, who are possessed with a pure light, language and life,
I am undoubtably persuaded in my soul, that for a little season I have both
tasted and seen within my spirit, a greater measure of the eternal glory and
shame to come, then any creature now living in this world;

20 Yet for all this and the continual supply which I receive from that
fountain of glories, I know that the most eminent appearances in these bodies
of clay, are but mere shadows in comparison of that glory and shame, which many
men shall possess when the Son of Man shall appear in his glory with his mighty
Angels.

21 If a man lie under the power of any lust, how can that man be thought to
have his part in the first resurrection, because he that has part in this
first resurrection, is both blessed and holy?

22 Moreover, does not a first resurrection include a second resurrection, how
then can that man be thought to have part in this first resurrection, which
vainly boasts that he is possessed with the second resurrection of glory with a
Christ already?

23 Furthermore, you see that the Apostle never boasted that he was glorified
with Christ already, neither did he expect any glory, but rather continual
shame until Christ did personally appear to change his vile body into the
likeness of his glorious body. Again, you know it is written, if we suffer with
him, then shall we also reign with him.

24 Moreover, did Christ reign on the Throne of his Glory with his Angels,
Moses, and Elias, till he had suffered under a thorny Crown of unutterable
cruelties unto death it self, and was risen from the dead?

25 And art thou so bewicht as to think scorn to drink of thy Lord and Masters
cup, but Lucifer-like to exalt thy self above thy Creator, by conceiting thy
self in a throne of glory with Christ already?

26 Moreover, be thou never so seemingly holy, or charitable, or a great
sufferer, in reference to thy inward God or Christ, yet if thou art left to the
pride of thine own spirit, to despise the spirit of the Son of man glorified in
the highest heavens, thou and all that is within thee, will eternally perish.

27 So much does the man Jesus in glory heed thee, and all of thy blasphemous
lofty spirit: He that denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father
which is in heaven, and his holy Angels.

CHAP. XLVIII.
1 Of the first Resurrection, 2 and what it is by several Questions and Answers.

IN the next place give me leave to write a little of the new birth, or first
resurrection from a glorified Christ.

2 What is this first resurrection, that who ever has part in it is blessed
and holy, and the second death has no power? Truly it is the enjoyment of a
divine light in the understanding which a man has received by inspiration from
the spirit of a personal Christ on a throne of glory in the third Heavens.

3 How shall a man truly know whether he has this light in him or no, or when
he received it? He that has this light of Christ in him, his very thoughts,
desires, and affections, are by the power of it wholly bent upon all spiritual
and natural purity whatsoever.

4 So that the Scriptures imputes Justice, Righteousness, Holiness, or
Perfection unto that man only which has this light in him, because he is
principally guided by a light which he has received from the glorious God of
all divine perfections without him.

5 Moreover, this light of Christ sometimes is known by a glorious voice to the
hearing of the ear, through which a man is so full of inward joy, glory, or
majesty in himself, that he knows not for that present whether he be in the
condition of a God, or a man; this I certainly know, yet I believe few of the
Saints themselves have tasted of this condition.

6 Furthermore, this light of Christ conveys it self so secretly into the
understandings of most of his redeemed ones, by a low voice of his most Holy
Spirit, that oftentimes they know not the time thereof; only after this light
of life has once appeared, the soul is so delighted with it, that it thinks it
can never have too much of it, or hardly enough of it; therefore like a woman
in travail, it is full of hungring or thirsting after the knowledge of that
Fountain of Glories from whence its light and joy proceeded.

7 Again, he that has this light of Christ in him, is not only full of
longings after more of it, but his soul is also full of that new song of
praise, honor, power and glory unto the infinite unknown God, until he does in
some measure truly know him.

8 Moreover, he that has this new and true light, is not rash in judging
divine things he knows not, but by virtue of that light of life, he is
preserved with a meek and patient spirit to wait the Lords leisure for
manifesting the truth thereof.

9 Furthermore, he that has received this white Stone, or new Name of Christ
to the purpose, sees all the speakings or writings of non-commissionated men
but mere literal or notional emptiness, in comparison of that joy or glory that
he possesses from the invisible motions of the divine Majesty himself.

10 Again, by virtue of this light he is made able to discern whether men's
speaking or writings proceed from a literal, notional, or spiritual Christ* or
no.

11 Moreover, he that has this light of Christ thus grounded in him, does not
lie doting upon men's invisible God, Christ, Spirit, Light, Life, Love, Joy,
Beauty, Virtue, Power, or Glory, of mere words only; but nothing will satisfy
his newborn hungry spirit but a divine embracing of a personal God of
spiritual substance, yea too transcendently glorious for men or Angels to be
capable of the in-dwelling of his eternal Spirit, but of the in-shining virtues
or motions only.

12 So much at present concerning the first resurrection or new birth, from a
personal substantial God or Christ on the Throne of Eternity in the high
heavens, in opposition of a supposed new birth from a notional inward Christ,
or literal outward Christ only.

CHAP. XLIX.
1 Concerning Gods becoming a child. 2 None lives, and moves, and have their
beings in God, but the Seed of Faith. 3 No creature capable to be essentially
one with God.

AGain it is written, In him we live, and move, and have our being: Also it is
written, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. What did the Apostle mean
by living in the Lord, and dying in the Lord? Or how can a man be said to live
in the Lord, and to die in the Lord also?

2 My spiritual friends, though all men have their life or being, in the
Creator or in this power by virtue of creation, yet none but the elect do
spiritually live, move, or have any being in him: and that is by virtue of
redemption only, and that was the occasion of the Prophets saying, for unto us
a child is born, unto us a son is given: now you know that the Prophet spoke
them words, long after the birth of that glorious babe, and yet you see that
all his joy or glory, in reference to a life to come, was fixed only in the
person of that Child.

3 Thus the Prophet, by virtue of the true Jesus in him, did spiritually live,
and move, and had his being in the Lord of Hosts, in a full assurance that God
the everlasting Father and Creator of both worlds, and all in them, would
become a little child for the Redemption of his elect from eternal death, by
pouring forth of his most precious life: it is writted, who has believed our
report, or unto whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

4 Thus you may see, that those men which wanted the light of life in them, to
receive that prophetical report, concerning the God of Glory's coming by the
outstretched arm of his eternal Spirit in a body of flesh, to redeem the elect
world to himself, were utterly ignorant of the Prophets spiritually living,
moving, or being in the Lord.

5 So likewise this was the Apostle Paul's meaning also, when he said for in him
we live, and move, and have our being, according to that saying of his, for the
life which I now live, is by the faith of the Son of God, which gave himself
for me: Also you know it is written to this effect, that some men did live
without God in the world; so that you may understand that reprobate men are
accounted by the spirit of the Scriptures to live and to die in the devil, and
to rise again very devils in souls and bodies to all eternity.

6 The chosen of God are guided by the true light or love of Christ by virtue
of that light, they are accounted to live and to die in the Lord, and to rise
again in the Lord both soul and body, because of their God-like condition, even
to all eternity.

7 Thus you that are filled with the light of the true Jesus may clearly see,
though a natural man by virtue of creation may be said to live in, or by the
power of the Lord, yet upon a spiritual account in reference to Redemption, he
may be an absolute devil in himself, and so wholly live in the dark power.

8 Moreover, though it is said that the Saints live and die in the Lord, yet I
would not have you think that the spirits of the Saints and the spirit of the
Lord are so united, that they are but one essential life or spirit; no, that
was none of the Apostles intent in those words: but as beforesaid, his meaning
was, that those men which were possessed with the true light of life eternal,
by a continual intercourse with the God of Glory from whence that light
proceeded, they were vertually united unto the eternal Spirit.

9 Though the chosen of God are vertually united to the eternal spirit of a
glorified Christ, yet how can it be said they die in the Lord? or what is meant
by their dying in the Lord? Truly most of the elect of God themselves are dark
in this thing, it is a sealed book unto them, the Lord alone must open it.

10 My beloved brethren, as there is two lives of the elect in the Lord, a life
of grace, and a life of glory, proceeding from one and the same spirit, only
differing much in degree; so likewise you may know there may be said to be two
deaths or dyings of the Saints in the Lord also.

11 Moreover, you know by virtue of the light of Christ in the new born of God,
they become dead to all their former inward filthiness of flesh and spirit, as
namely, they are dead to covetousness, envy, pride, lust, yea and all excess of
vainglorious delights among men that perish: so likewise they are dead to all
their formal righteousness, or hypocritical holiness, to be seen of men.

12 Moreover, they are dead to all carnal Christ's in men whatsoever, whether
they be literal, natural, or notional Christ's of empty words only, arising
only from that blinde-born devil of man's imaginary reasons:

13 Furthermore, there is such a self-denying spirit in all experimental true
born Christians from the high heavens, that they abhor to put confidence in any
God, Christ, Light, or Life, to give glory unto any thing that is in sinful man
or angels in the least;

14 Because they certainly know that there is not one motion or thought of any
spiritual light or truth in man or angel, but what he received from an infinite
glorious Majesty, whose personal presence is in a world where never any actual
rebellions was committed against his Holy Spirit.

15 Thus in a small measure, through divine assistance, I have showed you what
is the first dying in the Lord, in reference to the first resurrection from
carnal darkness, to the true light of life in Christ Jesus, God-man blessed for
ever and ever, Amen. Now give me leave to write a little of the second and last
dying in the Lord, because of the eternal personal glory that will immediately
follow it.

CHAP. L.
1 Of the second and last dying in the Lord, 2 what it is. 3 Eternal life is
hid in the person of God only.

I Know the general cheat of the Priests concerning this secret, for hey tell
the ignorant people, that the body only dies, and the soul ascends to a place
of blessedness, or descends to a place of cursedness until the day of
Judgment, and they say then the soul assumes the body again, and so receives
the sentence of eternal life and death, and so enters into heaven to the Lord,
or hell with the devil and his angels, which they say are bodiless spirits.

2 If the blind lead the blind, how can they escape falling into a ditch? this
opinion of theirs is like unto most of their matters, but I Will pass them by,
and come to the thing in hand.

3 You that are spiritual may know, that to die in the Lord, is when a man's
spirit dies in a full assurance of the resurrection of his spirit and body
again out of the dust of the earth, by the spiritual power of the Lord Jesus
Christ at the last day.

4 Furthermore, he that dies in the Lord, though all that's in him turns to dust
for a moment, yet before he entered into the silent sleep of death, he knew who
would raise him to life and glory again at the end of the time.

5 You know it is written, When Christ which is our life shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory; now you may know that the Apostle meant
a personal glory that was eternal with Christ in his personal presence, and not
a particular spiritual glory in the elect, which was hid, and in stead of love
occasioned a general hatred and persecution of men, as a delusion unto them,
and the like.

6 Moreover, you know though the Apostle Paul was ravished with more glorious
incomes of the love of Christ, then the rest of his brethren, yet he had many
sorrowful afflictions mixed with those heavenly raptures:

7 Therefore you may know if you are an heir of glory, that this appearing of
Christ in glory to his suffering innocent people, was meant such a like glory
as he now possesses himself in a Throne of eternity, where is neither hunger,
nor thirst, nor affliction of sickness, nor death, nor need of any Sun, Moon,
or Stars, or any kind of natural comforts for everlasting.

8 Furthermore, though a man be full of the glorious incomes of the eternal
spirit, yet you may know that his life is hid in that fountain of spiritual
enjoyments in the new heavens and earth above this whole globe, why? because if
a man's life, or glory, were hid in that light within them, then he would not
only be full of unmovable consolations, but he would also increase in himself
with such God-like wisdom, power, and glory, that no envious man would be able
to behold his face and live.

9 Though the light of Christ in his new born ones, occasion much joy and peace
of conscience and power, to suffer persecution for his names sake; yet you may
know, that the glory of that light might well be said to be hid with God in
Christ, because the quickening power of his spiritual light in men or Angels,
remains only in his own person, which is the fountain or sea of all heavenly
glories, as aforesaid; Without me, said Christ, ye can do nothing, ye are not
sufficient to think a good thought.

10 You may know, that it is the glory of Christ's glory, which compels him to
keep the prerogative power of all his light, or life, in elect men and Angels
to himself, that they may have no confidence in the strength of that light
which is within them, but that they may cast down the crowns of their spiritual
confidences at the divine feet of his heavenly Majesty, as the only Author,
Protector, and finisher of their eternal blessedness.

11 So likewise it is with the elect also when they die in the Lord, for though
the light of Christ was given them as a seal of his eternal love, that they
might glory only in the Lamb, and be enabled to wear his Crown of thorns to
their lives end, as a preparative unto glorious Crowns at his appearing; yet I
would have you for whom these thorns and Crowns are prepared, to understand,
because the life of all light, or glory you possess, are hid in the divine
breast, or book of life with Christ in God;

12 Therefore when your soul comes to die, all your spiritual motions must
enter into death also, until time be no more; because the power, wisdom, and
glory of Christ, will be seen in this thing above all his former works.

13 Again, he being the only light and life of men, will not this be a Crown
of glory to his infinite power? seeing the spirits of mankind are mixed
together in the sea and earth in a marvelous manner, yet by a word speaking he
shall call his elect by name, as he did Lazarus, and they shall hear his voice,
and come forth of their graves as one man, with distinct persons all glorious,
yet very flesh and bone, and with those elect then living, whose bodies shall
be transmuted into glory also, ascend as swift as thought to meet their God in
the air, and sit in Thrones of Judgment with him over all the Angels of
darkness, remaining in this destroyed world for everlasting.

14 Moreover, if that error of men's bodies dying only, and not there souls,
could possible be true, then no man could die, or be put to death at all;
because the life of man's body is his spirit, and but one spirit only, though
there is a double motion in it of contrary natures and effects by the secret
decree of the Lord, for the manifestation of his eternal wisdom, power, and
glory, over the elect and Reprobate.

15 Thus you that are spiritual may see, what is meant by the Saints living and
dying in the Lord, and concerning the place of refuge where their lives are hid
both in life and in death, is not this truth answerable to those sayings of
Christ himself in John? The words that I speak unto you are spirit and life, I
am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live; and he that sat upon the throne, said behold, I make all
things new, Revelation the 20. and I will raise him up at the last day. Again,
Jesus said unto her, said I not unto thee, that if thou did believe thou
should see the glory of God? you know this was spoken by Christ, that God of
all power, wisdom, and glory, at his raising Lazarus from death to life.

16 Therefore you may know also, that the greatest glory of all will redound to
his infinite Majesty, he shall shortly come in his glory with his mighty
Angels, to call forth the living dead, to glorious blessedness, in the great
white Throne, with himself, Moses, Elias, and his Angels; and to call forth the
dead, living, into shameful cursedness of souls and bodies in utter darkness,
burning together to eternity on this earth, where they possessed all their
former glory, and acted their unrighteousness against Christ and his redeemed
ones, then will this Scripture be fulfilled: and they shall hear a great voice
from heaven, saying unto them, come up hither, and they shall ascend up to
heaven in a cloud, and their enemies shall see them, and these Scriptures.

CHAP. LI.
1 Eternal damnation is a living death, and a dying life. 2 Three Books will be
opened at the last judgment. 3 Signifying the three Commissions of the Law,
the Gospel, and the Spirit. 4 The Heathens are judged by the Law of their
consciences, having not had the Scriptures. 5 The Prophets heavenly conclusion.

AGain, But fire came down from God out of heaven and devoured them. Moreover,
and the Devil that deceived them was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone,
where that beast and false Prophet is, and shall be tormented even day and
night for evermore; and I saw the dead both great and small stand before God,
and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of
life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works, and death and hell were cast into the lake of fire,
this is the second death, these both were alive cast into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone, and whosoever was not found written in the book of
life, was cast into the lake of fire: My brethren in the spirit and in the
flesh also which are sober, you see when Christ comes in his glory with his
Angels, the Books must be opened which are three in number, the Book of the
administration of the Law must be opened in the consciences of them that were
under the Law, and made a profession of obedience unto it, but hated to perform
it, and they will have work enough with that fiery Law, and all their former
filthiness of flesh and spirit, to sit in judgment on those burning brimstone
souls, and bodies of flesh and bone to all eternity.

2 The second Book of the administration of the Gospel will be opened also in
the consciences of those that made a profession thereof, and hated obedience to
it, and that literal fiery Judge, and their former unrighteousness, will
neither want work to sit in judgment on those fleshly bodies of burning
brimstone, even world without end.

3 Moreover the third Book of the administration of the eternal Spirit, which
is the book of life, shall be opened also in the consciences of all pretended
lights in these last days, and those whose names were not found written in that
book of life, as Commissionated Messengers of the eternal Spirit to bear
witness unto a personal Jesus in the high heavens, but published a lying Jesus
in the lower heavens of their carnal spirits only, that pretended God or
Christ with all their lies spoken in the name of the Lord, and blasphemy
against his Majesty's persons, shall burn more fiery hot then any other opinion
among men, even to all eternity, as aforesaid: all is not spiritual gold that
glisters.

4 Again, give me leave to speak of one sort more, whose natural conscience
must be opened also:

5 This sort of men are those called Heathens, which never had the books of the
Scriptures among them; I say from the true God, that these men, and all the
naturalists in the world, according to their rebellions against their rational
Judge, unto which they acknowledged all obedience of righteousness between man
and man was due; this God of their own reason only, with all their rebellions
against it, shall be that dreadful Judge sitting in their fleshly consciences
with an echo of everlasting torments in utter darkness.

6 Thus in some measure I have been made to declare unto my spiritual, yea and
fleshly brethren, also the sudden, glorious, and dreadful appearing of the most
high and mighty God-man, sitting on the Throne of his Glory with his elect
Angels, to judge both the quick and dead, according to his own sayings in Holy
Writ.

7 And now as a conclusion unto this Epistle, I shall speak a few words to all
that may peruse it, in the name and power of our Lord Jesus, by whose most
blessed spirit I was inspiringly moved to write it.

8 My beloved Brethren, that has the least hopes in you of a glory to come, I
confess through unusualness of such a language, many sayings in this book may
seem to your reason very absurd at the first;

9 But if the light of life eternal qualify you with a meek and patient
spirit, they may be as plain and easy to your understanding at the last, as
the Lord has made them to me, his poor despised messenger.

10 I know if I were an University man, possessing perishing wealth or honor
among Princes, your rational spirits would be as subject to err on the right
hand, as now they are on ^he left.

11 O forget not that the wisdom of God sees it most advantageous for his
glory, to choose base and despised things to confound the honorable and
eloquent things of this vain glorious world!

12 Again, if some men should say unto me, that I have written many sayings
without book, concerning the crea^ion of Angels, and such like, I would fain
know of them, whether Moses had any books by him when he wrote of the creation
of this world, and the things therein.

13 Though the holy Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, aluded sometimes to the
former Prophetical writings to convince gainsayers, yet you know they spoke by
inspiration of the eternal spirit only; according to that saying in holy Writ,
All Scriptures was given by inspiration, and holy men of old spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.

14 Moreover, if you should ask me how shall you know whether I write by true
inspiration or no? as to that if you had the spirit of the Scriptures no man
could deceive you.

15 Furthermore, unless you have a light in you that can clearly convince me of
error in my Epistle, in questioning the truth of my writings, you also question
the truth of Holy Writ.

16 If I should write nothing but what is exactly set down in the Scriptures, I
should then write nothing at all, because they are other men's works, and you
have them already; besides many eloquent men to play upon the harp of those
records very harmoniously unto your carnal ears, which godliness of theirs, is
very gainful unto many of them, as you well know.

17 If I should write nothing but what is recorded in Holy Writ, there would be
no need of any other witness to prove me a liar but my book only, and so I
should be bound together in a bundle of literal tares, and burnt with
unquenchable fire, at the appearing of the Son of Man in his glory with h^s
mighty Angels, because I have declared my self sent forth by voice from the
Lord of Glory himself, to demonstrate some secrets to his chosen ones, that
has not been revealed since the world began.

18 And now I desire no other witness to bear record in the consciences of men
to this Epistle, whether it be truth or no, but the everliving Jehovah, or
eternal spiritual Jesus himself, with all his holy Angels. Even so come Lord
Jesus come quickly, Amen, Amen.

John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, the two last immediate Commissionated
Witnesses, or Prophets, by the eternal Spirit of the man Jesus, glorified in
the Throne of Eternity, which is far above all Gods, Heavens, Angels and Men.

FINIS.

