REFLECTIONS UPON THE MURDER OF S. Edmund-Bury Godfrey: The Design of Thompson,
Farewell, and Pain, to sham off that Murder from the Papists: The late
Endeavors to prove Stafford a Martyr, and no Traitor: And The particular
kindnesses of the Observator and Heraclitus to the whole Design. In a DIALOGUE.

With a Dedication from Mrs. Cellier.

LONDON, Printed for A. B. and Published by L. Curtiss, ANNO DOMINI 1682.

TO THE COUNTS OF THE EMPIRE, etc.
My Lords,
THere has been a great Hurly-burly about the Death of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey,
public Justice has made her Report to Heaven, that he was murdered by the
Papists; but the Papists scandalized at the Wickedness of the Action, would
fain have made the World believe that he killed himself. My Lords, it is well
known, how far I have contributed my Personal pains, before and since that my
Advice to bring this noble Design to pass. But I think the Devil owes us a
shame, we have always the ill Luck to meet either with Fools or Knaves: When it
comes to the pinch, what we well contrive is defeated, by the ill management of
our Instruments. The Observator indeed did indifferent well; for he gave a
sparring-blow at Praunce's Reputation, and backed our Friend Thompson in the
very Nick, the very morning before the Trial. I chuckl'd again when I heard of
the Vintner's Boys; they put me in mind of the St. Omers Lads. But as for F.
and P. and all their Witnesses, 'twas Money merely thrown away. But let us not
despond my Lords, if one thing fails another will hit, and we shall hit it at
last: In the mean time, it is my Advice, that you keep up the Observator's
Spirits and double his Salary. It will be a thorn i'their sides that swore him
at the Queens Chapel, as long as he lives.

Facit Indignatio Dialogos, my Lords -- And though the Heraclitick Cabal be of
little moment, let it not sink: All helps, as the Wren said: But above all
(since you may have so many Protestant Booksellers to do it) let the Ld. C's
Vindication of the English Catholics, his Memento, and the Ld. Stafford's
Memoirs be reprinted. Those Gentlemen puzzled the People with their if's and
their ands, and how is it possibles, at a strange rate. They had a brave Design
to persuade men out of their Reason and their Senses; and I am persuaded all
that believe in the Observator, and Heraclitus, will believe in Them. I beseech
you, my Lords, take these things into your Considerations; for you have leisure
enough, and believe that she will never forsake you, unless you forsake her,
who is*

Your Lordships Most devoted Servant, Eliz. Cellier.

REFLECTIONS, etc.
A. THink on it? Why I think on it as bad as ever I did: I think that the Papists
did Murder Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey: and I think it was one of the most horrid
and barbarous murders that have been perpetrated upon a private Person for many
Ages.


B. Not so barbarous neither by what I can find by the Relation, for they did
not put him to any lingering torments: they only flung the Handkercher about his
Neck, and pulled in the Devil's Name. The Turkish Mutes could not have done it
with more dexterity.


A. You must know they were in have: but had they had leisure enough, I hold
you a Wager, they would have kept him a whole fortnight a dying?


B. Why so Malicious?

A. The Papists tell ye the reason themselves, he had examined People against
them, and had got Depositions to fix odious Crimes upon them and their Religion.


B. Did the Ruin of all their designs depend upon Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's
life; or did they think they had got Caligula's wish to have all the Necks of
the English Protestants in the twisted Handkercher that strangled him?


A. What e're they thought, it fell out ill for them. For the Kingdom alarmed
by the first discoveries of the Plot, was almost hush't asleep again by the
double diligence of the Plots true Friends and Abettors: The whole Nation
seemed to have swallowed Opium for a time, till the murder of this innocent
Gentleman, no body knew why nor by whom, roused it out of that Lethargic
humor, and the loud Cries of his blood put all honest men upon a diligent
enquiry after the Authors of the Murder, neither was it long before the
discovery was fully made out.


B. And then the Plot was believed.


A. It was so -- and good reason too, when it was clearly found out that
Papists, and Popish Priests were the main Actors in the Tragedy.


B. Well but who made the Discovery?

A. Prance.


B. Pox of Prance -- He -- He Will lie and swear any thing -- He Will swear an Oyster
to be a dark Lanthorn for five shillings --


A. How! Take heed what you say -- did you ever see his Narrative --


B. No -- nor never will -- I see such a Rascals Narrative!


A. Why, this is right Hair-brain^s, right Tory all over, yet I must tell ye,
the Narrative is licensed, Sunderland, in pursuance of His Majesty's Order in
Council.


B. Puh! that was in Shaftsbury's Reign -- but alas a day there have been a
hundred since that have contradicted him.


A. Who can contradict Matter of Fact? He was an Actor in the Tragedy, and saw
the business done.


B. Hang him I don't believe a word he says -- why look ye, to confront him,
there is the Lord C. and Viscount Staffords Ghost.


A. And what of them?


B. Why the one puts the Question very solidly, I say very solidly, how it
could be? and the other says absolutely, it was impossible it should be so. Two
Arguments that are never to be answered.


A. This it is to be a man of an implicit and easy faith(...) considering that
these Murder-Shammers are parties concerned -- it behooves them with all the
cunning that Jesuitism (...)ruse into their Brains, to repair the contaminated
credit of the Romish Church. The murder of Sir E. B. G. is one of the great
Corroboratives of their Popish Plot. So that if they could but wash away the
stains of his blood, they would soon ease themselves of the burden of the
Hellish Conspiracy laid to their Charge. Therefore hic labor, hoc opus. What a
coil did they keep after this, with their Farwells, their Pains, and their
Thompsons? They thought the day had been their own: They were cock-sure that
now they had obumbrated Truth with a cloud of Witnesses: and what is become of
the project? Now the deluded Fools look like Monkeys that have swallowed Aloes.


B. Whig Juries -- Whig Juries --


A. No -- no -- that is your grand mistake -- a Jury of Transilvanians would
have done the same -- their own Evidence evicted 'em -- and so the hugeous
Mountain brought forth a Mouse -- the Tower-Politicks -- the
Newgate-Consultations, and the fair Ladies female Travel and Assistance came to
nothing.


B. Don't talk on it, the Jury did not read --


A. No -- the Jury don't use to read at the Bar.


B. I mean they did not read the Observator -- the Observator that came out
that morning.


A. What about the Scale and impertinent story of the Antipendium and the Brass
Screws.


B. No, no, not that.


A. Oh, I find ye our, ye mean the story of the Vintners Boys. A hopeful story
indeed of a Protestant Observator. Though I must confess 'twas well nicked, and
well improved to help a lame Popish Curr over the Style. By which you may see
how the Observator and Thompson hung together, and drove on, both, the same
interest. What he got by it, he may put in his Eye; if the Tories are not wholly
wedded to their own blindness, and it is thought that that mornings work has
opened the Eyes of a good many already.


B. Why did not P. swear that he never sent for L. S. the night before, when he
did?


A. What if he had sent for him, and then rashly sworn the contrary? (though
that cannot be proved neither; it being another Person that sent for him) what
signified a rash oath in a Tavern to enervate a judicial oath in a Court of
Justice? only it showed the nimble double diligence of the Observator to send
his emissaries to drill a leash of raw Boys into a sort of framed forms of
Affidavits, that signified nothing to the purpose had they been sworn, and how
zealous he was to have protected his three Friends that were running post to
the Devil to serve the Popish Cause. Wink with one Eye, and see whether you can
spy nothing.


B. There Is no such necessity Sir -- one Pope, one King of France, one
Observator's enough at one time.


A. Nay you do well to make much of him, for you will never get such another. They
say he is such a parlous Observator, that he will observe a Mutiner among the Mites
in a Cheese, and that he smells so of Loyalty, that there is never a monarchical
Be in England will offer to sting him. He labors day and night drudges like a
Camel, and so profusely fills the world with his volumes of wast paper, as if
he foresaw a famine of Bumfodder.


B. However he has done a great deal of good, he has knocked down Fanaticism
like an Ox, and Dissenterism like a Calf, he has trod upon the Asp and the
Basilisk, as Alex. He trod upon Barbarossa's Neck.

A. Yes, and you see how fairly he let drive at the reputation of the Kings
Evidence (a reputation of much more consequence to the Kingdom than forty such
as his is) on purpose to ward the stroke of Justice from Subornation, and to
ease the Papists of the load of the most barbarous murder, that the lust of
Woman, or the Ambition of a Caesar Borgio ever committed. Which could he have
done, the Coach and six Horses must have returned again, for the Popish Mints
could have done no less then have wrought a month for his satisfaction.
Hereafter too he shall be Canonized, and all the Popish Ora pro nobis's shall
be addressed to him, the most proper to be their Intercessor in Heaven, that
did them such faithful service upon Earth. But for men of sense and reason,
unless it be some few of his own Flie-blown party, they deride his Mummery and
Impertinence.


B. But I hope you will grant ther'es something due to the witty Heraclitus.


A. Not the value of a straw -- That Corporation of Duncerie has but just
Brains and Rhume enough to keep the Ship afloat. They are many, but they have
exhausted themselves like Silkworms, or rather like Gentleman Ushers in the
Harlotry service of their own prostituted Conceits; and so you may leave 'm to
the scorn and contempt where you found 'em.

As for Thompson, Pain, and Farewell, should this World deal with 'em according
to their deserts, it is resolved that they shall escape Purgatory in the other,
though it were very requisite, one would think, that they should have a little
Purgation by fire, from the dross of willful Submission to Subornation, and
premeditated Perjury: For else it can never be expected that the Popes single
Pass should ever give them Entrance into Heaven. Well but we will suppose, they
are never like to come there. Then care must be taken by His Holiness on the
other hand, and great means used to Rhadamanthus besides, that when they come
into the lower Regions, they be not thrown into Harpie's wood, under the Title
of Ruffians; for though they did not murder the poor Innocent Gentleman, yet
after he was murdered, they endeavored their utmost to assassinate the memory
of his Good name and Reputation. Now this Wood is a terrible Wood, purposely
for the punishment of Ruffians, wherein they are no sooner entered, but down
come the Harpies from the top of the Boughs, and make most miserable Havoc of
their Flesh and Sinews, and then hunt them with other Ruffians in the shape of
Dogs, into the Center of the Wood, where having no other way to escape, they
are forced to leap out of the Drying Pan into the Fire, and plunge themselves
into a great Lake of Brimstone and Flame, through which they sink down right
into utter darkness, in Secula Seculorum. Amen.


But now what says the Ld. Staffords Hobgoblin, a main stickler in this
business of Sir Edmund?

In the first place he braggs of the Education in the Flesh, and his Endowments
of Grace, which Italy indeed, according to custom, connived at, but which
Germany had like to have punished with the utmost severity of her Laws, had not
his nearest Relations been as careful then of his Redemption, as before of his
Education.

Next he tells us of his high Marriage, and his being made a Baron by his late
Majesty. The more ungrateful he to turn Traitor to his Prince, the most
gracious Son of such a gracious Father, to whom he had been so paternally
beholding.

Then he boasts his Sufferings for his Loyalty to the King. Not so much it
seems out of love of Loyalty, as out of Reward. For because K. Charl. 2d, did
not satisfy his Expectation, therefore he muttered and grumbled, and entered
into a Conspiracy to take away his Life.

For this, says he, the Lord was accused of High Treason, and because he did
not presently betake him to his Heels, as a wiser man would have done,
therefore he was innocent. But in such Cases, to outface danger is no sign of
Innocence. For Catiline took his place in the Senate, when he knew his
Conspiracy was detected; and Biron, though he knew himself engaged in a deep
design against his Prince, was so hardy as to appear before the King to
justify himself, and to demand Justice upon his Accusers; so idle a thing it
is to judge of Innocence by the daring boldness of the Criminal. Nor was the
over-confident Coleman the more innocent for approaching the Council Chambers
at the same time that his own Treasonable Letters were under examination.

After this he would insinuate, that because. as he says, the Evidence was yet
weak, for farther discovery, Indempnitys were promised, rewards proposed, and
encouragement given by Proclamation to any that would make cut upon Oath the
particulars of what was in substance already declared. Which he supposes to
have bin wrongfully done, or else why this insinuation? And thus the King and
his Parliament are by a skulking Traitor accused of injustice at the first
dash. And thus it is apparent that we are to expect from him nothing but
Calumnies thrown upon our Sovereign and obtrusions upon the People, of the
highest nature. For as for Indempnities promised, there was all the reason in
the World; it not being to be thought, that any guilty persons should run
themselves into a Halter, before they had some assurance of their lives. Nor
were they then safe neither, unless they made out to the discerning Judgment of
the King and his Council; what they alleged to be Sacred Truth; and then
assuredly they deserved their Indemnity, as it was but all the reason in the
World they should have it. But this Impartial Gentleman would have had 'em come
in of their own accords, confessed their Treasons, and so his work had bin
done, by Stiffling the Plot in the birth of Discovery. But tho this were for
his Interest it was neither for the Kings nor the Nations.

As for Rewards promised, there was no such thing at first done, any farther,
than to such as should come in and discover the Murderers of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey. Which in such cases has bin the practice of those in Authority in all
Ages and Governments.

By this, says he, and the like sedulity of the King and the succeeding
Parliaments (his Traytorship had as good have called it by some other enormous
name, for we know what he means) came in Captain Bedlow. Wherein he most
impartially tells a most notorious falsehood. For Bedlow came in of his own
accord, or rather, as he himself declared, by the Impulse of Heaven, as being
convinced by the wicked Designs of Mr. Impartial's fellow Conspirators.

Next, faith he, Dugdale and Prance: by which wilful mistake of order, he
driven on the continued fallacy of his Story: for Prance came not in, but was
accused by Bedlow and apprehended. Before Dugdale came in, Coleman and Staley
were both Executed; which gave the King such high satisfaction, that then
indeed, and not before, he issued forth a Proclamation upon the 28th. of
November, with offer of Pardon and Two hundred Pounds to any person concerned
in the Plot, that would come in before the 25. of December. For by the Conviction
of Staley, the malice of the Papists hearts appeared, tho they concealed it
with better Discretion. By the Conviction of Coleman, the whole Nation and they
that doubted most were convinced of the Truth of the Design. So that it was
then high time for his Majesty to use all possible diligence to dive into the
bootom of a Contrivance so deeply and villanously laid. However, we may from
hence take notice, that the Impudence of the Papists is arrived at a strange
height, when their Champion, Mr. Impartial, shall dare to tax the King with
Injustice for endeavoring his own, and the preservation of his Kingdom.
Certainly they have some strange Confidence of sudden Revolutions, which ought
to make all true Protestants the more vigilant.

There is one thing more observable in the first Paragraph of this Section,
where he says, that Stafford was in his Impeachment, charged together with
other Papists. Speak out Sir, You should have said, Other False Traitors. How
finely would Mr. Impartial mince the matter? But it is well known the Vicount
was not charged as a Papist, but as a Traitor. Nevertheless those words False
Traitors had too much Aloes in them for the niceness of Popish Mastication:
however he might have swallowed 'em for once, though it had bin only for
Impartialities sake. But let Mr. Impartial mince the matter as he pleases, the
Lord Stafford was Charged as a Traitor with other False Traitors named in his
Impeachment, and so fell before a High Authority, Illustrious Judges, and an
August Assembly. All which being true, it argues a transcendent Presumption in
Mr. Impartial, to encounter such a High Authority, such Illustrious Judges, and
such an August Assembly, with his dwindling Memoirs. As if so High an
Authority, so Illustrious Judges, and so August an Assembly were not competent
Judges of Vicount Stafford's Treasons, and the validity of the Evidence. Let
the whole Nation take notice of that.

After a recapitulation of the several Depositions he comes to the second
Paragraph of this Section. which he calls the Papists Plea. Wherein he has
these words at the beginning. Wherefore though it be not my design to defend
Popery, yet I think it very pertinent and necessary to insert here some of
those many things the Papists in general did and do still constantly allege
in Vindication of their Innocence. In which Lines he manifestly gives himself
the Lie. For he will not undertake to defend Popery, but will vindicate the
Papists; as if the Papists did not profess Popery. Pull off your Vizard Sir,
that we may know who you are: For there is a considerable Wager laid, that you
your self are one of the bloody Conspirators themselves. Now, if you are not,
win if you can. Else all the World will believe it impossible for any
Protestant to be so baulingly, yawlingly zealous to dishonor his Prince and
native Nation. Sir, the Protestants are Men of as much Learning, of as much
Knowledge, and as acute Judgments as ever the Papists were, since the first
Usurpation of your Pope; Men free from the blinds of silly Superstition, Men of
a clearer and more Noble Religion, which inspires a clearer and more
illuminated Reason, than ever Popery could pretend to. And you must not think
that the Sense and Reason of the Protestant English Nation is so stupify'd,
that they cannot understand Truth from Falsehood without the assistance of a
piece of Monstrosity in Nature, that appears Centaur-like, with two shapes in
one Body, Protestant before, Papist behind, or Papist before, Protestant
behind, no matter which; or if this Simile please not, like a Spread-Eagle with
two Necks. This is a mere piece of Papistical cunning, and pure sham, and
already discovered. You must profess your self a Protestant, and then the
Papists must cry out. Oh! we are innocent, for the Protestants themselves have
defended our cause. You had better have appeared as you are, for double shapes
must have double Tongues and double Hearts. Deal fairly now, and tell us what
you had of the Papists for this laborious piece of Ingenuity, and you shall
have the same piece to answer your own Book; for it is the trick of a Mungr^l to
bark at Friend and Foe. Well -- but what say your Employers the Papists? some
Papistical Pharaohs certainly, that set you thus to make Brick without Straw.

The Papists plead, that it is not the clamor of the h^inousness and horror of
a Crim imputed, but the guilt and clear Conviction of a Crime proved, that
renders a man accountable to Justice.

What a cunning Evasion has Mr. Impartial found out? The stress of this Plea
lies upon the words, imputed and proved. But Sir, Vicount Stafford did not lie
under the single imputation of a Crime, but under an Impeachment in Parliament
of the Commons of England, which is many degrees beyond a single Imputation. It
was Vox Populi, Vox Dei, no Clamor that prosecuted the heinousness and horror
of the Crime. Then for proof. He was Convicted by a proof allowed of by a High
Authority, Illustrious Judges, and an August Assembly, and therefore most
consequently be guilty.

The second Plea is, That as Treason is the worst of Crimes, so is the stain of
Innocent Blood (when shed by Perjury) hard to be washed off.

You should have told us some News, Mr. Impartial, this is that which all Men
know. Where Is your proof of any Act of Perjury committed? that you should have
made out first, before you had thus maliciously gone about to besmear the King
and the Kingdom with such a bloody stain, as if they had taken off the Lord
Staffords Head by Perjury. For the Inference is plain; and if you pretend to be
a Subject to the Monarch of Great Britain, I must tell you, Mr. Impartial, your
way of pleading for the Papists is very saucy.

Your next Plea is, That the Positive Swearing of every Person in every matter
or manner hand over head, is no Conviction of another Guilt.

I know not what you mean by hand over head, unless it be to impose upon the
ignorant. But if there are any who understand not yet so much* they are to know
that the Testimony against Vicount Stafford, passed all the sorutiny and
sifting imaginable of Both Houses; the Lords of the Council, and two Committees
of Secrecy. The Attorney General also, the Solicitor General and the Kings
Council had the scanning of the Proof -- And yet Mr. Impartial is such an
unreasonable man that nothing will satisfy him. What prodigious Parts does Mr.
Impartial aspire to, that after so much serious debate and deliberation, he
should think so many Great, Venerable and Learned Personages should not
understand whether Witnesses swore hand over head or no, as well as a Popish
Advocate. Certainly he must think so High an Authority, such Illustrious
Judges; such an August Assembly had very little to do to put themselves to the
Solemn Trouble of hearing hand over head Evidences.

The Papists next Plea is, That false Accusations may be so laid, as that the
contrary cannot possibly be demonstrated by the Party accused; seeing no mortal
Man can distinctly prove where he was, and what he did, said or heard every day
and hour of his life.

Wonderful! how condescendingly does Mr. Impartial court and flatter the
assistance of his own Dreams. Alas, Sir, you may assure your Clients, that
there was no such heavy task imposed upon his Lordship as to be so particular
or so punctual. But such Remarkable passages as Overt Acts of Treason, the
times and places of Consultations and making Promises, nay large Promises too,
are not so easily to be forgot, but that with a willing mind a man might rub up
his Memory. But what is the Grand Inference from this minute Assertion.

1. That the Accuser ought to be a credible Witness, that is not tainted with
Crimes and Villainies.

2. That Accusers be strengthened with probable Circumstances, Circumstances
that bring along with them some appearance of Truth distinct from the bare
accusation it self.

But neither of these two Essential Conditions are found in the Evidence given
of this pretended Plot. For First,

What manner of men the Witnesses are, they who make these Discoveries, how
notorious, infamous; how stigmatized with all sorts of Felonies, Forgeries,
Cheats, Debaucheries and Wickedness. -- Stop Sir -- Now we are come to the
Devil's Sheepshearing: here is a great Cry and little Wool: Why, Sir, you know
the Proverb, like will to like. Such as these were only fit for your Turns.
You have been told often enough of this, and yet you will take no notice of it,
but bring your plausible Stories over and over again. Who do you think would
undertake to Assassinate Princees but such? Who do you think would do the
drudgery of your mischief but such? I am confident if you should expect to have
had it done by any other hands you must have done it your selves. But all this
while here is only clamor and noise, and the imputation of Crimes. You tell
us indeed of intelligent Protestants that know much, and public Records, but
produce neither Persons nor Parchment. So then to give you an answer by your
own words; It is not the clamor of the heinousness and horror of a Crime
imputed, but the clear Conviction of a Crime proved, that renders a Man guilty
and liable to your Accusations. But now suppose they had been guilty of the
Crimes you lay to their charge, and had added to the rest one more of being
guilty of that Conspiracy which you so vigorously defend; if the King find they
have been so considerably employed in your Service, that they are able to do
him service in the disclosing and bringing to punishment such Traitors as your
self against his Person; and to that end give them his Royal Pardon, in full of
all Crimes and Treasons, and grant them firmam pacem fuam, whereby they become
new men, homines legales; and consequently lawful Accusers and Witnesses: Will
not you allow them so much gratitude, as to lend so great a Benefactor the
assistance of their Discovery, and their Testimony for the Preservation of
Himself and His Kingdom? It Is a common thing at every Jail-deliver to pardon a
little Rogue to hang a greater, The Pope himself would do what has been done
upon the same occasion. For Example, can any man think that Pius the 4th. was
so ungodly as not to reward those that discovered to him the Conspiracy of
Accolti: 'twas well for him there were Rogues in the Company, or else it might
have cost him his sweet life. You know these things Mr. Imparrial, well enough,
yet such is your ambition to defend a bad Cause, that you will vindicate
Treason rather than want honor.

Now for the Circumstances, they do not please him at all. There are none he
says, confirm the bare Oath. No! that is strange. There are the Circumstance of
Time and Place: there are the Circumstances, of by such and such a Token; what
would this Treason-varnisher have more? but of that let the impartial Reader be
Judge. That Is nothing: they are a mere bundle of contradictions, moral
impossibilities and nonsense. As how? Here is a Plot forsooth contrived by the
Papists. Is that such a moral impossibility? It Is not the first that they have
contrived by the first in Queen Elizabeth's Time, by the second in King James's
Time, by the third in Charles the first's Time; and now by the fourth in
Charles the second's Time. It Is their frequent Practice; you need not so much
wonder at it. But it was at a Time when they had the least or rather no reason
to seek changes; the fittest time in the world, when they thought they were
most trusted and least suspected. To kill the King; by whose merciful
Indulgence they lived in Peace. The more ungrateful Beasts they. But what is
that to the purpose? they killed two of their own natural Sovereigns; and is it
such a miracle they should attempt the Life of a Heretic? To wade through
Blood to an uncertain liberty, which they already sufficiently enjoyed; not so
sufficiently neither; they wanted their Abby-Lands; their Priests lay under the
Lash of the penal Laws; and what they enjoyed was only by stealth. To free
themselves from which Bondage, they thought themselves cocksure of one stroke
that would have done their business. And for wading in the Blood of Heretics,
it is as natural to a Papist, as bathing in a cool stream in Summer. Witness the
Massacres of France, and Ireland; the Monuments of their Cruelty all over
Germany, Piedmont; Q. Mary's Persecutions; and the implacable and merciless
cruelty of their Spanish Inquisitior. But then to overthrow the Government, for
the Re-establishment of which they so frankly in the late Wars exposed their
Lives and Fortunes. This is a fair Story, but a false one. For if there were
any that exposed their Lives and Fortunes in the late Wars, they did it merely
for their own ends, for preservation and protection, as less fearing their
Episcopal, then their Puritan Enemies. Neither will the Author of Vindiciae
Caroli Regis, who had not a little reason to examine the Popish Loyalty of that
Time allow it to be otherwise; nay, he positively asserts it for the true
reason. But they were so far from exposing their Lives and Fortunes for the
Government, that they as well fought against it in the Field, insomuch, that
Salmonet, a Popish Priest, affirms in his History of the Troubles of England,
that several Popish Priests were found dead among the slain at Edghill; and
besides that several Roman Catholics served in the Parliament Army. And in one
of his late Majesty's Declarations in answer to the Long Parlaments false
imputation of his favoring and employing Roman Catholics in his Army, we find
these words, All men know the great number of Papists which serve in their
Army, Commanders and others. So your boasting the Papists so frankly exposing
their Lives and Fortunes for the late King, is a mere Rodomontado, and the
contrary is justified by the King himself: nay it is plain by His own words in
the same Declaration, that he forbad them to come to his Succor. And therefore
let Mr. Impartial not think to flatter the Nation with such an officious lie,
under the pretense of a moral Improbability.

For it is the Roman Catholic Interest in this Nation, that Interest which they
can never recede from, not only to abrogate the penal Laws, and to become
capable of employment in the Commonwealth, but to introduce their Religion,
restore the Rights of their Church, and extirpate all that they esteem as
Heretics. They that fondly otherwise believe, do but accelerate the ruin of
their Religion, and their Country. If there were any that did well, to assist
their Prince then, they did as ill now to Conspire his Destruction. Neither is
it any reason, because there may be some Papists good Subjects, that others may
not be as wicked, Which may in part suffice to answer his next wonder. For we
have nothing else but wonders and miracles delivered for Arguments. Wonders
that any man of sense would wonder how they should be wondered at, but only
wonder-working Mr. Impartial, As for Example, This Plot, says He, must be
carried on by Persons of Quality, most remarkable perhaps for firmness and
Loyalty) that perhaps was well put in and now through Age and Infirmities,
retired from public business, and weary of the world; that is in English
Impeached of High Treason, and locked up in the Tower. Now I would fain know
where the wonder lies, that a Plot should be carried on by Persons of Quality.
Persons of Quality are most apt to think themselves injured; Persons of Quality
are most subject to revenge; and Persons of Quality are most able to head
Parties and Factions in a Nation. Nay, rather, let Mr. Imparial tell me
wherever any Plot was carried on without Persons of Quality? The very Plots of
Simnel and Perkin Warbeck were carried on by Persons of Quality against Henry
the 7th. There were more persons of Quality in Bycons Conspiracy, than Henry
the 4th. would venture to provoke by a present detection.

What was the Holy League, while it was private, but a Plot, carried on by the
Pope himself, a person certainly of very great Quality, against Henry the 3d.
And why might not their Popish Plot be managed by Persons of Quality, as well
as other Popish Plots? And if so, why not by the persons of Quality accused,
rather than others not accused. The Wonder is how those persons of Quality have
escaped their punishments so long as they have done. That Is a Wonder makes more
people wonder, than will ever admire at Mr. Impartial's silly, simple miracles
of Persons of Quality being in a Plot. But then here is another Wonder, That the
whole Body of Roman Catholics, Men before this hour, of known worth, virtue
and integrity, and unblemished Reputation, must be all involved by Vows and
Sacraments in a Design so black and execrable, that God and nature abhor to
think of it. Setting a side your Complement to God and Nature, for God we
verily believe is displeased with, and nature abhors many foul deeds, which the
Papists neither abhor, nor are displeased with; the rest of your Wonder, is a
mere Hyperbolical Fallacy, as groundless as vanity it self. For the Body of the
Roman Catholics, that is those persons which Mr. Impartial, for his Feo, calls
persons of known worth, virtue integrity, and unblemished Reputation, are the
very persons most likely to be combined together in this Design, which he has
leave from his Employers to call black and execrable; for such is the nature of
Popish Bigottism; such the infatuated heat of its professors; such the awe and
dread of their consciences under the charms of their Priesthood: so pinching
and terrible are the Chains of their Oath; such their inbred enmity to
Heretics that the more conscientious and devout they are they more religiously
they believe themselves bound to conceal what ever designs are on foot for the
propagation of the Romish Interest, and the extirpation of Heretics; so that
if Mr. Impartial mean by the whole Body of the Roman Catholics, those persons
whom he calls, men of worth, virtue, integrity and uublemished Reputation, that
is, such as the Grand Conspirators thought fit to trust with their Intreague;
it is but very weakly supposed, that such persons should think it any loss of
those high Characters which Mr. Impartial gives them; to conceal a design so
highly to the advantage of the Sea of Rome. The whole Body, Mr. Impartial*
There is the Juggle of your supposition. We do not believe the whole Body of
Roman Catholics, knew of the blackness and execrableness of your Design; but
many were told by their Priests and Confessors, that there was a Design
carrying on for the good of the Catholic Cause; and that was necessary to
procure the Milk of Contribution. And so far this Nation has all the reason to
believe, that the whole Body of Roman Catholics was concerned in this Plot.
Then for the loss of their honor, and hazard of ruining themselves and their
Families, they that were in darkness knew not their danger, and the rest knew
there was little. For had they compassed their ends, they had had their
advantages; and we are too deeply sensible that they had some strange
assurances how little they should suffer, if they (...)

He goes on with a mighty wonder, if it be not a greater wonder that he could
be so impudent as to write it; In this Plot, says he, are said to be engaged,
for several years together diverse Nations, England, Scotland, Ireland, France,
Italy, Spain, Germany, etc. What a deal of high-flown Forgery and Fallacy is
here^ a mere amusing (...)y-eatching piece of cajolry: with which, if the
English Protestants will let their indignation against the late discovered Plot
be laid asleep, they will not want for worse. Where are those Mountanous
Accusations against all England, all Scotland, all France, all Ireland, all
Spain, all Germany? No true Englishman can doubt but that for the carrying on
the Late Plot there were Romish Correspondencies, Spanish Correspondencies,
Irish Correspondencies, and for the French Correspondencies we have testimony
sufficient. But to make Inferences from National Accusations, where never any
were, was a Romance of Mr. Impartials own Hyperbolical (...). And therefore to
say truth, whoever undertook to put such fallacious shamms and tricks upon the
already too much injured English Protestants, in the Vindication of Treason and
Villainy, deserves more the Whip and the Pillory, than those persons he calls
raked out of Jayle: for no person raked out of Hell can be worse than himself.
But yet to show that there may be that thing that comes very near a National
Concealment of a Conspiracy. The Rebellion in Ireland, how closely, how
cunningly was it managed, without the least Discovery till the Kingdom ran with
Blood, and Massaere lay in heaps, yet none of all that vast number had any
remorse for so bloody a Treason, none all that while had the worth, wit of
grace to reveal it. This was somewhat hard to believe, and yet was true.

Being got into his Romances he cannot get out of 'em, but goes on raving, and
still amusing the ignorant with a noise of Armies improbable for their numbers;
which is nothing to the purpose; for all this riffraff makes it nothing the
less improbable, but that Men engaged in such Designs of Universul Massacre,
intended convenient Levies, and convenient quantitys of Arms and Ammunition for
those Levies, and therefore is a thing not so much to be wondered at. It Is no
matter for Number or Quantity, it is the intent of raising Forces against the
Established Government, and providing Arms and Ammunition for these Forces, and
that discoursed of, and consulted upon that makes the Treason our, as
effectually in the eye of the Law, as if the Men had bin Levied, or the Money
paid into the Lord Staffords hands. So then, the intent of raising Forces, and
the actual Banking of Money for Arms and Ammunition being positively sworn, as
it was, and all for carrying on this detestable, tho as detestably vindicated
Plot, Mr. Impartial must not think to bury such a Plot in the Rubbish of his
impertinent Raillery.

But he runs on in his Poetical Raptures (a very pretty way of refuting a
demonstrated Plot) and cries, We are told of hundreds of Sealed Commissions, for
all sorts of Military Officers; and God knows how many Bushels of Letters and
Papers, all containing most Damnable Treason, sent nevertheless up and down at
random, some by the Common Post, others by such Messengers as Oats, Bedlow,
Dugdale and Dangerfield, who, as bosom Counselors, were still made privy to
what was sent. Understand Sir, once more, that number and quantity signify
nothing, and all your Hyperboles of Hunderds and Bushels are not worth a Rush*
But where is the improbability of granting Commissions* who more fit, or who
had greater Authority to grant these Commissions than the great General of your
Religion the Pope, from whom you and the rest of the Conspirarators, derived
all their power. Dr. Oats, whose Testimony your ridioulous Memoirs, that have
nothing in 'em but defamation and railing, can never invalidate, tells ye of
several Commissions that he gave to several persons by name himself. That
Whitebreads Commission together with several Papers and Letters were seized, at
the same time that his person was apprehended. At another time Harcourt's
Papers were seized, and after that a plentiful Parcel of Letters were publicly
printed, full of Ciphers, all relating to the Plot, then add to this, that
several of your Seals have bin produced in Court.

More than all this, there was nothing more frequently boasted in the common
discourses of the Papists at that time one among another, then that the Roman
Catholic Religion would suddenly flourish in England, that they had
considerable Armies, raising for that purpose, and that the Lords in the Tower
had not only Commissions themselves, but had given out Commissions to several
others, Viz. One to Talbot of Langford, another to Sir H. Beningfield of
Oxborough, another to one Mr. Stoner, and several others, Ireland declared in
his own Chamber at that time, That there would shortly be fifty thousand men in
Arms, and being asked for what? We must have them speedily, said he, to settle
our Religion here, or else all will be ruined. Which argued, that there were
plenty of Popish Commissions then in England, whate'r is become of them. But
Mr. Impartial, being a Protestant, as he pretends, too easily, it is to be
feared, takes his Employers words. Where is next the improbability that your
Packets, tho full of damnable Treason, might not be sent by the Common Post?
The King has no Inquisitor that sits in his Public Office to break open
Gentlemen's Letters, and examine the Contents. More then that, there was a
Packet, and a large one too, sent by the Common Post, directed to Father
Benningfield, that by a lucky fate to you and your Employers, mist falling into
the hands of those that would have made better use of it. Lastly, Where Is the
improbability that such persons as you strive to defame, should not be trusted
by those profound Head-pieces your Employers. They were under the same, as you
called them, Sacred Oaths of Secrecy, and sent to be charmed with your
Idolatrous Eucharist thrice a Week. What great Policy had Vicount Stafford that
he might not trust Dugdale so firmly bound? What more than ordinary piercing
Wits or discerning Faculties had any of the Lords in the Tower, that they might
not trust Dangerfield under the same Sacred Obligation? Or what reach above
common Women had that busy, Lustful Cellier, she that was your Jayle-raker,
Sir, and not ours, I say, what sublimity of Judgment had she, that she might
not trust her so highly gratified Favorite? If they were not fit to be
trusted, why had they those Oaths of Secrecy given them; why were they treated
so often with those Holy Morsels at your Chapels? But if those Religious Ties
were put upon them, as most certainly they were, what wonder is it then they
should be trusted? Certainly, were they those Rakeshames that the Worshipful
Mr. Impartial makes of 'em; Solemn Oaths of Secrecy and the Eucharist go at a
cheap rate among the Papists, that they should be so often forced upon the
Whipped and the Pillory'd, and the Infamous, merely to be sent to buy Mapps for
a Jesuits College, or to pick up a Broken Merchants Debts, So then it
remains, that these persons that could not be other than Demy-Saints when they
were Papists, as having so much holy Wafer lodged in their Bodies, are only
turned Reprobates since they made their discoveries. Which being so plain, it
is not to be questioned but that they had opportunities enough to make their
discoveries according to their various Trusts and Employments, as being Persons
of Quality sacredly bound up by so many holy Obligations as they then believed
they were. Since then it was impossible that among Papists they could be
Miscreants, after so much Purification and Sanctification, tho without the
Kings Pardon, we will make no dispute to justify their Honesty, their
Integrity, and their Loyalty now they have obtained the Kings Forgiveness. For
the Papists are to understand, that the King of England's Pardon is of greater
efficacy to cleanse a man from his offenses, than if he should bath in a Tub of
Holy Water every day in the Year, and then receive Absolution from ten thousand
Lubberly Priests. Being then made good men by the high Prerogative of the Kings
Mercy, tho Fools and Knaves still take the boldness to defame them, they are
Witnesses legal, every way justifiable, and not to be disputed against by any
good or loyal Subject of the King. And since they have sworn to a Plot wherein
they were Actors themselves, designed to the destruction of the King and
Kingdom, the Nation is bound to believe 'em, notwithstanding all the frivolous
clamor of the Lord Staffords Memoirs.

From these and other the like Grounds, the Protestants do infer, That there is
no credit to be given to the bare Suppositions of a Memoir-monger, scribbling at
such a wild and incoherent rate, and so scandalous to the King and the whole
Government. And they further appeal to the Judgment of every impartial
conscientious man whether it be not more likely that the Papists, a People
generally of debauched and murderous Principles, that bear no Consciences
toward Heretics, persecuted by Penal Laws, allured by the recovery of their
Abby-Lands, encouraged and supported by great Interest in the Kingdom, should
be induced out of their hatred of the Protestant Religion, and for the
advancement of their own, which is the Popish Interest, to remove the Obstacles
of their Happiness by the destruction of a Heretic Prince, and all his most
Loyal Subjects, then that a few inconsiderable persons, without any support or
encouragement, should dare to create such a bloody and horrid Plot of their own
heads, and then venture their lives by daring to justify such a Plot to the
face of King, Lords and Commons of England, had it bin true, that so many
Noble, Prudent, Loyal and Virtuous Persons, as Mr. Impartial calls 'em, were
not really concerned in it. No, no, Mr. Impartial, had not this horrid, bloody,
tho as you call it absurd and morally impossible Plot bin true, really,
morally, unquestionably true, your Employers, who have spent so many Thousand
Pounds, besides the plodding, designing, contriving labor of Great and
Politic Headpieces, to subdue this Plot, and yet for their souls cannot do it,
would soon have trip'd up the Heels of three or four debauched wretches, of
lost Consciences and desperate Fortunes.

In the next place he comes to Coleman's Letters, tho he make but a short stay
upon 'em, as finding 'em too hot for his Fingers. He is forced to bring forth a
Confession, but disliking the Countenance of his Brat, he endeavors to murder
it again with a piece of sordid Sophistry, so palpable and notorious, that any
one but an Impartial Papist would be ashamed of it. He confesses That those
Letters manifestly denote the busy designs and activity of the Writers; yet
so far from confirming Dr. Oats Plot, that they directly evince the contrary.
As how? For the whole subject and context of those Letters, bear a plain and
open face of what the Authors intended. And did not the Trials and Convictions
of the Jesuits, and the Lord Stafford himself bear an open face of what the
Authors intended? Was not Coleman seen at the Grand Consult, at Wild House, at
L^nghorn's Chamber with Harcors and White-bread, and others, all Members of Dr.
Oate's Plot, ordering money to the Assassinates, and giving money to the
Messenger; and did not this beat an open face of what he intended and if what
he, then what the rest of his Correspondents* No, for the Writers were persons
who (had there been a Plot) were the most likely to have been the main Engines
and Contrivers of it. Whither the main or no is not material; but it is plain
they all did lend their helping hands and heads to it. No, says Mr. Impartial
again, for, we do not find one single syllable in them from whence (...) be
gathered any such design. Look you Mr. Impartial. you well know, that the
(...) discovered by Dr. Otes, was for the destruction of the King, and
subversion of his Government. Now then pray what mean these passages in
Coleman's Letters* We have here a mighty Work upon our hands, no less than the
Conversion of Three Kingdom, and by that perhaps the subduing of a Pestilent
Heresy, which has domineerd over a great part of the Northern World a long
time, there were never such hopes of success since the death of Queen Mary, as
now in our days; but the opposition we are like to meet with, is also like to
be great, so that it imports Us to get all the Aid and Assictance We can*

Again, Your Friends the Emperor and the Pope will have a fair occasion of
giving marks of their Friendship to Mr. -- to make the great Design succeed, to
undermine the Intreagues of the Merchants, who Trade for the Parliament and the
Religion; and to Establish that of the Associated Catholics in every Place.
Here is Pope and Emperor, which confirms what Dr. Oats swore, as to Emissaries
being sent into Germany. Here is designs, and associated Catholics, which
denotes that the Plot was general. Then there was 100000 Crowns promised by the
Pope himself. For what (...) to satisfy the imaginary conceits and overweening
policiey of four or five aspiring men? Sure Mr. Impartial, you could not
imagine your Holy Father the Pope to be such a Buffle head. Then observe this
Passage. The reports of a Bishop for England are chimeras, that having bee^
long since disposed of. By which it is plain, that the Bishoprics of England
were disposed of at Rome, in hopes of what? of the success of four or five
aspiring men? ridete mortules. And then you see Coleman setting up a new
Prince, in every part of his Letters, which could not be done without the
removal of the present Possesour; which is sworn to have been the intention of
your Employers. By all which it appears that Coleman's Plot, and the Plot
discovered by Dr. Otes are still the same, viz. the destruction of the King,
and the subversion of his Government. And thus you see the Plot which you would
have so sophistically divided, is again coagulated into one. Nevertheless, by
the way, let all the world take notice, that it was not only Knavishly done to
cover Coleman's Treasons with the tender Epithites, merely, of busy design and
activity, but also wickedly done, to infer the innocence of your Employers from
so notorious a Falsehood. But, Sir, it fares with you, as it does with many a
destructive Fox, who being taken by the leg in a Trap, is forced to bite off
the hampered member to save the rest of his Body.

He proceeds next to the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; to which he puts
all his strength, as if he was heaving at a Capstal; but with what success let
all the world judge.

There is nothing, says he, with an audacious arrogance, to fasten the Death of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey upon the Roman Catholics, but the bare improbable,
though gainful Oaths of two infamous persons, Bedlow, notorious for cheats and
misdemeanors; and Prance self condemned of falsehood by the testimony of his
own-mouth. And thus you see still the only four Props of the Papists defense
supposed improbability, scandal, defamation, and downright lying. Surely, had
Mr. Impartial had ever any reverence for the Lord Stafford's Memory, he would
never have stuffed his Memoirs with such gulleries and impostures. As for Bedloe,
he is since deceased, however he stood then, by the King's favor, right in the
eye of the Law, and therefore here needs no other answer than what has been
already given to this stale exception of Mr. Impartial. As for Mr. Prance, he,
it is well known was a person never taxed for his life and conversation, before
he was drawn into that vile conspiracy by the charms of those infamous (to
return Mr. Impartial his own word again) and more then wicked Popish Priects,
who assured him, that horrid Fact was meritorious both before God and man, and
a deed of charity to do it. And being freed from that Crime, by the King's
mercy and his own cordial repentance, he has made no other alteration in his
former life and conversation, then in abandoning that hateful Religion that
seduced him to that misfortune. And for the gain that he got by his Oath, he is
ready to bequeath it all to Mr. Impartial for the kindness of his calumnies.
There is yet another thing behind. That he condemned himself of fashood from
his own mouth; in which Mr. Impartial, boldly and very unmannerly gives the lie
to the whole Court, who upon the Plea of the Murderers themselves, absolutely
cleared him of that aspersion, But Mr. Impartial, in this, as in all other
things, thinks to carry the day by foul misrepresentation. He swore himself,
says he, an Actor in the Murder, and afterward before the King and Council,
unswore what he had said: which is a positive falsehood, For that which Mr.
Impartial calls unswearing, was only a bare denial, or rather a retracting in
these general and abrupt terms: he was innocent, and they were all innocent.
His Oath at large was solemnly sworn; the latter under consternation and fear,
in a distemper of body and mind. He considered the danger of his life after he
had made his confession, as having no pardon. He feared the revenge of the
bloody Priests and Jesuits themselves. He feared the loss of his livelihood,
which depended upon the work which he had from the Queen. And these were the
Circumstances which caused that sudden revolt of his reason; and that general
retractation, which Mr. Impartial, according to his papistical gift calls a
Protestation, That he knew nothing of it.

But no sooner had he overcome those disturbances of his mind, but he confirmed
his first Impeachment upon Oath; and with repentance acknowledged that his
retractation was occasioned by consternation and perplexity of mind: of which
he requested the Keeper of Newgate to give an immediate account to the King and
Council; who thereupon went accordingly, and declared the same upon Oath; the
Prisoner himself then falling desparately sick.

Having thus endeavored to sham the World with no less then three apparent
fourberies, enter his old Friend Mr. Improbable, like Volpone in the Play. Sir
Ed. Godfrey, says he, was esteem^d a moderate man, and particularly indulgent
to the Papists; and it is not credible the Papists would murder their Friend.
So much their Friend, that when none of the Justices of the Peace would meddle
with Dr. Otes's Depositions, he only adventured to take 'em. After which he
himself with his own mouth often declared, how he had bin continually dogged by
the Papists, which caused within him strange fears and apprehensions of the
danger he was in; insomuch that he forebeaded of himself, that he, to use his
own words, should be the first Martyr. Alas! before that time Sir Edmund might
have walked the Streets at all hours of the night; there was no body watched
him, no body dogged him before; but no sooner had the Papists received the
Alarm of the Discovery, and that Sir Edmond had bin so bold as to perform the
duty of his Office, and take the Depositions, but he could not stir a foot
without a private Lacquey at his Heels; which double diligence and care of his
person never ceased till they had acted their intended Tragedy. So then the
reason that Mr. Impartial urges why the Papists were not likely to commit this
Murder, was the reason why they were most likely to do it. For esteeming him
their friend, they took it heinou^ly that their friend should be so unkind as
to take Depositions against them, and dive so narrowly into their Affairs.

Next the Scene must be (forsooth) the Publick-Yard of Somerset House, a
Thorough-fare of continual intercourse, Setting aside the force of that
emphatical word forsooth, this is all a Story. For Somerset House Yard, then
inhabited by few or none but Priests and Papists, at that time of the Year, at
that time of night, after nine of the Clock, is well known to be no common
Thorough-Fare. But it was within twenty paces of the Common Guards where Watch
is kept night and day. How notably he has dropped in the word is (for he would
fain be thought to tell truth but then there were no Common Guards, no Watch
day or night, but only a File or two of Soldiers in respect to the Kings
Palace, that never watched at that time but only at the great Portal, and they
well employed by the Murderers with Drink and Tobacco; and this is the Truth.
Now where would Mr. Impartial have had the Papists have Murdered Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, but in a place* wholly at their Devotion? Then says he, to feign a
Quarrel, to call Sir Edmond out of the Street* and yet that neither Passengers,
Soldiers nor Neighbors should observe any thing of the Tumult, and this he
calls, ironically, a Notable Policy. Oh Sir, 'twas a loving Quarrel, a silent
Quarrel, a trapa(...)ing Quarrel, there was no noise or tumult for Passengers
to take notice of, or for invisible neighbors or Soldiers to hear; an
amicable Quarrel to inveigle Sir Edmond not so much to appease that Quarrel,
but to prevent a further pretended mischief. And so, Sir, it was a Notable
Policy, especially so well succeeding, and such a one that a Popish Priest for
all his high-flown Parts, might not be ashamed to own.

But then, They strangled him with a Handkerchief, a very proper instrument,
studied and contrived before hand to strangle a man. You should have put in
long Sir, for so it is in the Original. I confess. I know not what experience in
strangling or hanging Mr. Impartial may have, for he assumes to himself to be a
great Judge, and yet if he will not believe a long Handkerchief to be a proper
instrument for the business, he may, when he pleases, try the conclusion upon
himself.

But then after the business was done, they let him lie exposed in this open
place. And thus the World may see how the concatenation of this fallacious Mr.
Impartial's Imposture depends upon mere storys of his own framing. He has
exposed the murdered Carcass, he his exposed it in an open place. The Priests
were no such fools. They had done their work in a by Corner, they had set one
to watch at one Gate, another to watch another; and the Street at the same time
empty. How was this exposing him? It Is a thousand pitys Mr. Impartial had not
bin there, that he might have given a truer and better account of the passages.

This is the strangest way to vindicate a detestable Murder that ever
was-known; with Whims and Conceits and Imaginations of things done as he would
have had 'em done, to contradict one that was personally present, and saw all
the Transactions! Here is one swears he saw the Murder committed, where, when,
how, and by whom, tells ye the memorable circumstances of thumping his breast,
wringing his neck, an intention of running him through with a Sword, and the
reason why 'twas not done, lest his blood should betray the Murder, and that
memorable exultation of Girald the Priest over his body: Well if we could not
have entir'd him here, I resolved to have dogged him to his own House, and
there would have run him through with my own hand. And yet after all this, here
comes a Nicodemus of a Skeptic, and framing absurdities and improbabilities of
his own, asks how this could be done, or how this is possible? it is very true,
had they done, as he pretends they did, they had bin the greatest Coxcombs in
the World; but they knew better how to do their work. And then again, is it
likely the Papists should murder their friend? why no: for had he bin their
friend, it is very probable they would not have murdered him, but not being
their Friend, or rather their great Enemy they did. Certainly the Devil owed
the Papists a shame to set such a Memoir-Man as this at work.

In the next place, he is setting the Witnesses at odds, to see if he can find
his dearly beloved friend Mr. Perjury among 'em. Bedlow says he, deposes. Sir
Edmund was throttl'd with a Cravatt. Prance swears it was a Handkerchief. Oh, I
have hit the Scotism of the business. Mr. Impartial would have had it spruce
Crauat, a fashionable Cravat, a Cravat according to the proper acceptance of
the word (would you have had it laced or plain Sir?) for then indeed there
might have bin some glimpse of a Perjury, in calling a Handkerchief a Cravat.
But do but forgive Mr. Prance this peccadillo, and you shall have the liberty
to call any thing of Linen that a man may wear about his neck, tho it be a
sheet, either Cravat or Hankerchief, which you please.

The Names of the Assassinates cited by Bedlow are La Phaire, Pritchard, Wells
and others. But the Murderers named by Prance were Green, Hill, Bury, Girald
and Kelly. Bedlow named none for Assassinates, and therefore that is some of
your own Coin. He swears indeed that La Phair would have had him have done the
business, and proffered him Money to do it; but the business was not done by
that Gang. For you must understand, Mr. Impartial, that there were two Parties
(so eager were the Papists to destroy that poor Gentleman, their Friend)
Bedlow's Party, and Prance's Party. Now it so fell out, that Prance's Party
were too yare for Bedlows, and had dispatched their business, while La Phaire
went hawking about with his great rewards for a Chapman. But when the business
was done, both Parties joined and rejoiced together. Now Bedlow swearing that
his Party were privy to the Concealment, and intended the same thing, and
Prance swearing that his Party committed the Fact, where could be a more
harmonious Concordance of two Oaths for the Impeachment of a wicked Murder?
The Murder was said to be committed the 12th. of October 78. at nine at night,
and the Body conveyed away the Wednesday following at Midnight. In opposition
to this, he brings the long ago overruled attestations of Mrs. Tilden and Mrs.
Broadstreet* The sum of whose Testimony was, That Hill had bin a Trusty
Servant, that he never kept ill hours, but always came in by eight of the
Clock: that he could not go out afterward, because the Doors were locked up;
and that they were constantly up till eleven a clock at night. That the Room
where the body was said to be laid, was not only over against the Dining Rome,
but that the Key was always in the Door, and that every day they went into it
for something or other, and that there was but one Key to the Door. But Mr.
Impartial omits how fatally Mrs. Tilden trip'd in her Story, when she affirmed
that the Family had never bin out of their Lodging since they came to Town, and
being asked when they were out of Town, she replied in October. Upon which the
Court told her, She had spoiled all, and had undone the Man instead of saving
him. With that she would have recanted, and said, Why, my Lord, I only mistook
the Month. By which, Mr. Impartial, it was apparent, that either her Devotion
had stupify'd her Consideration, or that she appeared in Court only to say what
would serve the turn, as having bin lessened at your Swearing-School.

As for Mrs. Broad-Streets Evidence, it was delivered with more confidence than
became her Sex. For after she had denied that there were more than one Key to
the Lodgings, she confessed before the Duke of Monmouth, after Mr. Prance had
clearly made it out to her face, that there were six or seven. And in the
Question about Hills leaving the Doctors Lodgings, she had so hampered her
self, by saying and unsaying, saying one thing, and setting her hand to
another, but more especially by her stout averments that the Key was always in
Hill's Door, that the Court told her, 'Twas very suspicious, if she went so
constantly in and out, that she must either hear when the Body was brought in,
or see it while it was there; and further added, That 'twas well she was not
indicted. And thus you see what excellent Witnesses you have brought to prove
contradiction, and this after a Sentence pronounced by Judges as wise as your
self or any of your Employers. As for the Sentinels that you say kept strict
Guard at the great Gate, there was but one could be thought to speak to the
purpose. And as for him, to give you plenary Satisfaction, there was strict
Order taken with him, that tho he might see the Sedan carried in, he was better
employed than to see it go out.

And now what may the World think of such a shammoking Vindicator, that having
taken upon him to vindicate Murder and Treason in the highest degree, and the
innocence of the Papists under such a bloody Charge of Horrid Plot, and Hellish
Treachery, and following others, as if he had outdone and surpassed all others
that went before him, can find no other way to throw Defamation and Perjury
upon the Kings Evidence, and to invalidate their Testimonies against a horrid
and prodigious Murder, than by making use of the openly trapp'd and as openly
rejected Attestations of Female Papists, subborn'd by their own Bigotisme, and
ready to swear any thing to save their Popish friend (an Infamy and Perjury as
bad as can be Recorded in any Court of Justice) I say, what may the World think
of such a shammoking Vindicator as this, but that he would never have stuck to
commit the same inhuman act himself: for he that will so openly and so
zealously defend a Murder, will never scruple to commit one. And yet after all
this, he is so far from having answered expectation, that he has not done so
much as others of his fellow Penmen. However he has emptied his Quiver for this
bout, and shot all the darts of his Malice against the face of Justice,
thinking to have all deformed her lovely Countenance, but that it proves
impenetrable to the yielding weapons of such a feeble Assassinate. Certainly
it is an impudence beyond impudence it self, to throw Infamy and Defamation in
the faces of Witnesses, and bring nothing but a Tinkers Fardel of Lies and
Forgeries to disprove their Testimony. And as certainly it must be a very bad
cause that has no support but the mere invalidation of the Evidence against it;
but a worse, that after so much ineffectual toil and cunning, cannot be able to
vanquish the Evidence of 3 or 4 ordinary persons, when their Perjuries are so
apparent, and the stress of Criminals Innocence depends so much upon it.

Now to show you, Sir, what credit is to be given to Popish Witnesses when they
come to swear in a Heretical Court, especially in Points that nearly concern
themselves, I will give you now signal Presidents, not of Madam Impertinents,
or Mrs. Confidences, but of the Fathers of your Church, holy, pious, worthy
Men, Saints by this time. The one in the cause of Newnam Abbey then in Chancery,
Martin the Jesuit Trustee Plaintiff, and Savage Defendant, about the Year,
1671. Wherein those Reverend Fathers, Whitebread, Harcourt and Charles Poulton
now Provincial of the English Jesuits came in as Witnesses in their own Cause,
and under assumed Names and Disguises, very briskly swore for themselves. And
no longer since then in December last, the Reverend Father Barton, a Jesuit,
took a Journey from Liege to London, and swore under the borrowed name and
person of -- Colborn for the Jesuits, in another cause now depending also
between the King and the Jesuits.

Nay more than this, the time was here at London, and that not long ago, when
some of your Employers kept a Swearing-School, and a Perjury-Master, at what
time the St. Omers Youths were taught and lesson'd to damn their souls at the
last Trials of Langhorn and the Jesuits, the effects of which appeared in open
Court, to the shame and derision of their Instructor. And it may be very
probably from hence presumed, that they who had one, have many more of the same
kind, or that they will not scruple to erect 'em when they have occasion. So
that it is the Opinion of most men, that it had bin much more honorable and
advantageous to the Popish Religion, for that Noble Gentleman to have kept a
Vaulting School. And yet the Discoverers of your Villainies must be rogu'd and
raskall'd with Perjuries of all sorts by Perjury-Doctors and Perjury-Abettors,
Traitors, Plotters and Assassinates, ten times worse than ever they were, when
at the worst. Here Mr. Impartial, for ought I find, no better than the rest, to
vindicate the Papists from a Murder, the most barbarous that was ever
committed, has brought a company of Flams and Stories, how can it be's, and how
is it possible's? and such kind of plausible riffraff; he should do well to
have taken Mr. Prance's Narrative in his hand, and to have spent his Lamp and
his Labor in confuting the concatenated Circumstances of the Murder, which I
will defy ever a Jesuit in England to contrive with such a face of
probability had they not bin true. Which because Mr. Impartial has not done, to
find him work for new Memoirs, and to quicken the Memory of the Nation, I will
set them down with as much brevity as I can, and then let the World judge
between his Shams and the reality of the Murder committed by the Papists.

The Charge is, That the barbarous Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, was
committed by the Papists, Proved by the Oath of Mr. Prance, who was an Actor in
the whole Contrivance, and relates the matter briefly thus. He tells ye first
the reasons that engaged the Conspirators to design the Murder.

Because he was a busy man, and was going about to ruin all the Catholics in
England, and that it was necessary to destroy him, else they were all undone.
For he had examined people against them, and had got Depositions to fix odious
Crimes and Scandals upon them and their Religion.

Next the motives that induced him into the Conspiracy. Girald told him, it
would be a piece of good service to the Church; that it was no sin, but a work
of charity; that it was no murder, but for the good of the Church, and the
glory of God, and therefore he ought to do it.

The murder being agreed on, he comes to the manner. That about Saturday the
twelfth of October, Green, Hill, and Gerald dogged him from his first going
out, all the rest of the day till about six or seven at night, at what time
they fixed him in a House in S. Clements. That then Green came to him, and
missing him at home found him at a pub^ck House, and bid him hasten down to
Somerset-yard; which he did, and there found Berry and Kelly together, where
they continued, till Hill came running to them, and told them Sir Ed. was
coming. Upon which they prepared for their Work. In order to which Kelly and
Berry pretended a quarrel, while Hill, who was well-known to Sir Ed. watched
for him at the Gate to drill him in. That Sir Edmund* at first refused, but at
length was overperswaded, and went in. That thereupon Hill entered first, Sir
Ed. next, and behind him Girald and Green. That being now sure of him, Prance
went to watch the Watergate, and Berry to watch the passage up the
stone-stairs. That as Sir Ed. was going toward the pretended Quarrellers,
Berry, Kelly and Green threw a long twisted Handkerchief about his Neck; and
then immediately Girald, Kelly, Green and Hill fell upon him, threw him down
and throttled him; and drawing him behind the Rail, gave him several punches
upon the Breast with their Knees. That after all this, fearing he was not yet
quite dead, Girald would have run his Sword through him but was not permitted,
lest they should be discovered by the Blood; however that Green, to make sure,
wrung his Neck round.

Next as to the disposal of his person, the Relator tells ye, that they carried
the Body in at the door right against the place where he was murdered, and so
up such a pair of stairs, into such an entry, into such a Lodging, where Hill
was concerned, and opened the door; then up five or six steps into a little
Room on the right hand, where they set the Body with his Head leaning against a
Bed. That the Body lay there till Monday-night, and was then removed into
another Room, for fear notice should be taken of keeping the other so long
private. That on Tuesday at Night they would have removed him back to Hill's
Chamber; but he going before, and finding some Body there, they were forced to
carry it to another Room on the left hand. From thence about nine a Clock on
Wednesday night they removed it again to Hill's Lodging, by a memorable token,
that Prance coming that way, and they not knowing who it might be, they left
the Body, and began to run away, till Prance calling to them, and they knowing
his voice came back, all but Berry, who run quite to his Lodge. That there they
consulted the carrying him into the Fields, and laying him in the posture he
was found, which was done in a Sedan. That Berry opened the Gate upon a humm;
having before invited the Soldiers into his Lodge with Drink and Tobacco. To
all Persons of true Integrity, whether this were not a holy cheat beyond
guilding of shillings? The one is but a breach of a single Statute, the other
perverts the whole course of Justice, and scoffs at the whole Law of the Land.
Yet these, and their Defenders, are they that would defame and perjure the
Kings Evidence, that will not allow the King the Prerogative of his Mercy.
These are They that exclaimed against the ill Life and Conversation of Dr.
Otes; who if he were at any time guilty of those things wherewith they taxed
him; we know now from whence he learnt 'em.
That Gerald and Prance carried him to the end of S. James's Street: Then Kelly
and Green took him up, and carried him through King Street, and Rose-street to
Long-Acre-end. That then the two first carried him as far as the Grecian
Church, where they met a Horse. That there they set him upon the Horse, by this
Token, that when he was mounted, Gerald uttered these Words, I wish we had a
hundred such Rogues as s^cure as this. Then Hill, Gerald, Kelly and Green went
away with the Body, one leading the Horse, two walking by, one on each side,
whilst Hill held him on before.

There are also several material Post-circumstances; That upon the News of the
Body being found, one Vernatti, who should have been concerned in the murder,
but was absent, being at the Tavern with Mr. Prance, said to him, Lord! is this
man's Body found already, that was carried away but yesternight! That Girald
gave an exact account in writing to the said Vernatti, who read the same to one
Leneson a Priest, that should also have been concerned in it, but missed, at
the George near the Stocks-Market. Afterward at one Cusne's at Bow to one
Dethick that lived not above a mile from the place, and was sent for to rejoice
for the blessed news over a Barrel of Oysters, and a Dish of Fish.

Thus Mr. Impartial, I have lighted a Candle to your dark objections. And now,
Sir, how do you like the Story? Do you not want a Cordial to relieve your
sinking spirits? Does not the ghastly apparation of such frightful
Circumstances strike a terror to your souls? Could any but a Papist, the
Friend of Massacre, believe, that so many Circumstances of Persons, manner,
time, place, and words, besides by tokens, all cohering together, yet all the
acts of several days, be so readily contrived by a poor man in affliction,
under consternation dismayed, distempered, to be as readily, and so
particularly delivered in a verbal confession, before so aweful an Assembly as
the King of Three Kingdoms, and His Great Council, had not Truth solely taken
upon her the conduct of his utterance. Truth that needs not none of your
Frame-work-weaving, Mr. Impartial, to cover over the stains of Blood so
unhumanely shed with old objections, and studi'd absurdities new trimmed and
furbish'd. After all this, Mr. Prance was punctual, direct and positive as to
all the places where the murder was committed, and where the Body was
conveyed, at what time the D. of Monmouth, the Earl of Ossory, and Sir Robert
Southwel were ordered to take a particular account from him upon the place* And
therefore Mr. Impartial, your best way would have been to have spared these
loud cries of Nonsense and Absurdity; and to have true Champion like,
outdar'd, outboun'd, outbrav'd, outfac'd the world, that there never was any
such person as Sir Edmundbury Godfrey upon the face of the Earth; and that he
never was, or ever shall be born. Then your St George-ship had slain the Dragon
with a vengeance. Where are old Ireland's Protestations, Imprecations, and bold
summonings of God to witness the innocence of the Papists? Had ye no more
powerful charms than these to conjure down the walking Ghost that so torments
your quiet; Here Is a murder suffocated indeed by a Crown of a Hero! -- which
the dexterity of a deluded Virgin would have done more artificially. For still,
by silly justifications, it appears far fowler than ever. All the Washball
Protestations of suffering Malefactors, whether persons of meaner rank, or
Lords, cannot wash off this bloody stain; mauger all your suborned Mograffs,
and other deep-laid Contrivances; -- then let it lie on -- and it will, as long
as History can utter to the world the Story of this Age. Certainly, Villainy and
Impudence were never so unluckily coupled since the Creation. Villainy to
commit, impudence to justify the most prodigious of Crimes. But so Heaven
ordered it, That this unfortunate Gentleman should fall by the bloody hands of
those that seek the Nations ruin, to awaken the drowsy Kingdom, whenever it
should grow careless of its safety. How much then does it concern all True
Protestants to be careful and vigilant, when they see the Papists so sedulous
to exercise into perpetual oblivion the murder of that Person, whose Body
Heaven permitted them to sacrifice, that so his Soul might be, as it were, one
of the Guardian Angels of their Safety and Religion.

In the next place he endeavors to complement the Two Houses of Parliament out
of their Honor, their justice, their reason, their understanding, their
prudence, and all that advances the Luster, the Grandeur, and the high
Reverence due to the most Aweful, and most Renowned Assembly under Heaven;
telling them with a fawning -- snarle, (with all due submission to the
Government in defense of the Innocent) That it is not impossible, nor
altogether without President, That a lawful Authority proceeding secundum
Allegata and probata should be abused; and consequently drawn into a mistake by
the malice and perjury of wicked men. How meanly, how lowly, does this Mushrom
of a Memoir-monger, after his sneering complement, think of the Lords and
Commons of England? That which good manners would not impose upon an ordinary
Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, he most audaciously throws upon the Two Houses
of Parliament; weakness and mistake, and to be cajoll'd by the malice and
perjury of wicked men. After so many daily Debates and Consultations; after so
many siftings and scannings of charge and proof the high wisdom and prudence of
the Two Houses of Parliament was led away by weakness and mistake to give
credit to the malice and perjury of three or four inconsiderable, malicious and
wicked men; and so to proceed to the effusion of innocent Blood. What is this,
but to charge the Two Houses of Parliament, either with folly, or impiety the
most egregious in the world? An indignity for the Nation not to endure. There
is no question to be made, but that Mr. Impartial's allegata and probata, all
his Probables and Improbables, all his contradictions and absurdities were duly
way'd and pondered with all the thoughtful diligence and sedulity, that justice
and conscience could invent. Which not being to be called into doubt, there is
no reason in the world for the Nation to believe that so much justice, so much
conscience, so much elaborate prudence could err. The truth of which he himself
confirms, while he brings an Argument to undermine their Reputation, by saying,
All have not been convicted who were impeached and tried at the Bar; but as
some have been condemned, so others have been acquitted. Which apparently
showed the equality and impartiality of their Proceedings, and that they were
not in quest of innocent Blood, but only sought the deserved punishment of
those that were guilty. And therefore for such a Flyblow of a pretended
Protestant to go about to taint the honor and justice of the Two Houses of
Parliament, whom he confesses so fair in their Proceedings, was an unparalled
piece of arrogance, then which nothing more confirms the truth of the Plot, and
the Crimes of his Employers. So that he might have reserved his crafty Cringes,
and his Presidents for some High German Senate of Mum brewers in the Land of
Brandenbourgh.

Lastly, to excuse tho Instances given of Popish Malice, and Bloudiness from
the Examples of Q. Mary's Cruelties, the Irish Barbarism, the French Massacre,
etc. he recriminates upon the Protestants in Germany, France, Bohemia and
Holland. But that is not the Point; for there is a great difference between a
Massacre, or a Persecution, and a War, though it be a Rebellion; wherein there
are preceding expostulations, something of a seeming (...) pretended claim or
grievance; but in Massacre or Persecution there is nothing but propense Villainy
and impiety. Had the Christians bin in Arms against their Emperors, they could
not have bin called Persecutions, and the Christians had bin in the wrong; but
as they were Persecutions, we find how infamous they have rendered those
Emperors. Rebellions are headed by Persons of high Quality, as the Dutch by the
Prince of Orange, a free Prince of the Empire, that in France by the Coligny's,
and consequently reduced into a formal Hostility. Massacres are only tumultuary
Riots and Surprises of the Innocent. Rebellion pretends a seeming Provocation,
but Massacre destroys without exception of Sex or Age, those that dreamed no
harm. So that nothing can be more foul, more wicked, more malicious, more
spiteful, more inhuman, more faithless, treacherous and destructive to the
bonds of Human Society. And this is the Charge we lay upon the Papists, besides
that of Rebellion. For if we should muster up the Rebellions of the Papists
against their Princes, they are innumerable, and frequently authorized by the
Pope himself.

As for that same execrable Murder of the Late King Charles the Second, of
Blessed Memory, as it was never committed, so it was never owned, but always
condemned and abominated by all the true Professors of the Protistant Religion.
It was the nefarious Act of a nefarious Usurper, who having at his Devotion an
Army, which he had long headed with a successful and dareing Conduct, took the
opportunity, when the Nation was quite tried out with an intestine War of near
Twenty Years standing, as it were to conquer the whole Kingdom, to seize and
murder his distressed Sovereign, and instead of a King to make himself a
Tyrant. All this the Protestants lamented and bewailed, while the Tyrant,
having like Otho and Vitellius unjustly invaded the Imperial Dignity, environed
with and engadg'd and well paid Hodge-podge of Veteran Levellers,
Fiftmhonarchy-men an such like Enthusiasts, (not worth the name of Protestants)
and adored only by those that sought more the preservation of their unlawful
Purchases, then the good of the Kingdom, trampled not only over all true
Religion, but Morality.

But should we number up the Murder of Kings committed by Papists, we should
find more then one. Richard the 2d. and Edward ^d. were both Deposed and
Murdered by their Popish Subjects. Henry the ^d. Henry the 4th. of France were
both murdered by the Contrivance of their Popish Subjects, and openly justified
by the Priests of that time; nay the Murder of the one was applauded even by
the Pope himself in a Public Harangue. What does your Worship think of the
Emperor Henry the Seventh, who was by a Predicant Friar of the Order of St.
Bernard, murdered with a piece of the Eucharist sop'd in Poison? By which the
Monk evinced two things, the impiety of the Popish Religion, and the folly of
Transubstantiation, as if the Real Body of Christ could be capable of such a
damnable Infection.

The Emperor Frederick the Second was Excommunicated by Gregory IX. with that
Impudence that the Cardinals themselves were ashamed of it, and expressed their
dislike; and tho that Pope died, yet the Papal fewd continued, so that at
length the Emperor was deposed at the Instance of Innocent the Fourth. History
affords plenty of Examples to this purpose, but these may suffice for the
present. After all which, Mr. Impartial, I must be bold to tell you, that
notwithstanding all your nonsensical improbables and absurdities you have
endeavored to defend the innocent, like a fool to your friends, and to asperse
and calumnize the Kings Evidence, like a Knave and Betrayer of the Religion you
profess.

Having gone thus far, we might well here make a Conclusion, in regard that all
that follows is a mere precarious ^uddle of Impertinences, built upon a sandy
Foundation. For the Certainty of the Late Horrid Plot being still unshaken, and
the Legality and Credit of the Witnesses undeniable, there needs no further
Argument to evince the Lord Staffords guilt, and the Justice of his
Condemnation, for that the one could not be just unless the other were true,
nor the other true unless the other were just. By which means, Mr. Impartial
has brought himself into this Noose, that either he is in the right, and the
embodied Justice and Prudence of the Nation were in the wrong, or that the
embodied Justice and Prudence of the Nation are in the right, and then he
deserves to suffer severely for his boldness. However, because there still
remains behind some dashes of his malice continued upon the Witnesses, and some
sprinklings of his Venom yet remaining, with which he endeavors to bedew the
unspotted Reputation of those highly learned and most worthy Gentlemen that
managed the Trial, the pursuit of his lame Story engages me to make some
Remarks upon the most encroaching and plausible Passages of his arrogant
Raillery. For the whole Plot and Design of his Janus-like Pate, is rather to
ridicule and puzzle than evince the Truth.

To leave the rest then, to mind their own Affairs, he assailes the Dr. the
chief Eyesore of his Papistical Tribe, with his old, rusty Weapons of
Absurdity, Perjury and Contradiction.

First then, by way of premising, let me put this Question to the whole
Kingdom, why Mr. Impartial should presume to put a greater value upon the
Testimony produced on the behalf of the Lord Stafford, than the Witnesses that
gave Evidence against him. Since Mr. Impartial can never prove that ever the
Protestants kept a Swearing-School, under the quaint instructions of a
Perjury-Master, as he and his Gang did. In which it is shrewdly suspected that
there might be many more Disciples brought up than the Youths of St. Omers: of
whose industrious Education I would refer my self, were it proper, to the
Judges themselves that sat upon the Trials. Nay, was it not very pretty, that
the Master himself should be present too, to hear how well his Pupils had
profited under his Instructions? Of how little value Oaths and Perjury are
among the Papists is well known. Nay we find in that undoubted History of the
Council of Trent the Pope commanding the Emperor to perjure himself, and break
his Oath sworn to the Protestants of Germany, tho for the Public Repose of
that vast Continent. So then if Popish Princes may Perjure themselves for the
Popes pleasure, dare the meaner Rabble refuse to Perjure themselves when their
Priests shall hold it necessary? And thus the Papists having invalidated the
credit of their own Testimony, by that unsanctified custom of keeping Swearing
Schools; there is as much reason to believe that the Lord Staffords Witnesses
were forsworn as Dr. Oats. Nay far more; for they were not only not believed,
but frequently were found out, and rejected with ignominy; Dr. Oats always
still steady to the Truth, always gained Credit to his Testimony. So then all
true Protestants being to take notice, that there is little credit to be given
to the Popish Witnesses, who may perjure themselves to day, and be Absolved to
morrow, and that their own Representatives have given great Credit to Dr.
Oats, we shall now proceed to the Reflections themselves, observing this by
the way, That 'twas the Perjury of Ladislaus King of Poland and Hungary, in
obedience to a clamorous Pope, that lost him the Battle of Varna, and extended
the Dominion of the Turk, almost to the Walls of Vienna.

In the first place Mr. Impartial wonders That the Priests had no more
plausible or less dangerous Argument to convert a Protestant Minister, than by
telling him* the Church of England was upon its last legs, from whence he
infers, That surely they took the Dr. for some notorious Fool or Knave. It may
be they might, what then* Fools and Knaves are no such contemptible Instruments
to carry on a Plot. The one may be imposed upon, the other wrought upon. A
bigottiz'd Popish Fool may become Fool hardy, and then he is fit for any
mischief; and for a Knave, you cannot, Mr. Impartial, but know your self what
use may be made of such a one. But suppose they thought him a very honest Man,
and that out of that confidence, they did open their hearts to him a little;
nay I will put ye one supposition more, suppose they had taken a Cup of the
Creature, 'twas no such Miracle to tempt a Young Man with the hopes of
Preferment. All this while, these are only Suppositions; now that you should
extract Perjury from the suppositions of your own Brain, is a strange piece of
Chemistry.

Your next wonder is, that the (Sotish Careless) Jesuits, should trust a
Neophite with all their most damnable Intreagues, as the adventures of
Pickerings Flint, Whipping, Thirty thousand Masses, etc. the manner of Firing
the City, and introducing Chymerical Armies, French, Irish, Spanish, etc.
Truly, Mr. Impartial, you are in a very pleasant humor, though I Am afraid, You
laugh but a one side of your mouth. But now suppose they did; suppose those
sotish, careless Jesuits did trust this Neophyte, how can you help it? you
must blame the sottish, careless Jesuits, not him. And yet he was no such
Neophyte neither, they had tried him and trusted him, long before they trusted
him with these Damnable Intreagues you speak of. Beside they had his Conscience
under the Lock and Key of an Oath of Secrecy. Truly Mr. Impartial, in my
Opinion you are too merry with these damnable Intreagues. For it is as probable
that a Villain might seek an Opportunity as well to shoot as to stab a Prince;
and if Providence ordered the prevention of mischief, must you laugh at that?
As little reason have you, Mr. Impartial, to make Chimerical Armies the sport
of your little Wit. For so you may call them Chimerical, out of the abundance
of your fancy, yet the intent of raising Armies, and the promises and
expectations of Foreign Assistance were not only sworn by the Doctor, but
evidently demonstrable out of Coleman's Letters, and therefore you must not
think to cheat the World by burlesquing Guilt into Innocence.

But then the Dr. Deposes that some of them were so desperately mad, as to
Preach Treason to a company of Boys. You triffle with the World, Mr. Impartial,
and think to fright People with Rattles and Gewgaws. As if it were such a
strange thing that a Jesuit, within the Walls of his own Seminary, before a
Society with which he was well acquainted, before Youths under the aw of their
Superiors, and bred up in the same Principles that he Preached, and this too
out of the Kings Dominions, should be afraid to declaim Treason, and to abuse
and villifie a Prince under Excommunication, and Deposed by the Authority of
Rome. All men of understanding know that the Treason then uttered, was
accounted no Treason where it was taught. You would believe a man that should
swear he saw St. Dominic take a Caper from the top of St. Peter's Church over
the Moon, and light upon the top of Te^ariff and yet will not believe that a
craven Jesuit should crow upon his own Dunghill against a King, at the same
time Un-King'd by the Grand Disposer of Kingdoms, the Teacher's Idol, and your
adored Sovereign, the Pope.

His last Wonder, and which methinks, I see him with his Hands and his Eyes
lifted up to Heaven, looking upon with most amazing Astonishment, is the most
nonsensical and ridiculous of all. For it centers in this, That the Dr. feigned
himself a Roman Catholic to make discoveries for the preservation of the King;
yet though he knew the King to be in so many and hourly dangers and hazards of
his Life, he did not presently cry out murder upon the Lords Anointed. From
whence he would infer, that all the Dr. has sworn concerning the Plot is
damnable Perjury. Where were you, Mr. Impartial, when the Lord Staffrod was
Tried, that you did not out with your Budget, and spread these weighty
Objections before his Judges? You are certainly guilty of his Death, for not
lending him your assistance in such a Time of Distress. But I find you are a
politic man, and suffered the Lord Stafford to lose his Head, that you might
have the Honor to write his Memoirs. Now to the Point. Because the Dr. did not
make his Discovery so soon as he ought to have done, b^t did it as^ soon as
possibly he could, therefore the Dr. is perjured. Have you been in Labor, Mr.
Impartial, this three years, to bring forth such an Abortive piece of Nonsense
as this? This is true Heraclitus-like indeed, to make sportive Comments upon
the intended Assassination of a Sovereign Monarch; and then to infer, because
the Discovery was not made so soon as it should have been, that therefore the
Discovery was nothing but Forgery and Perjury. It Is well known with what
difficulties the Dr. met, when he made his Discovery: And for him to have made
it, before he was well-arm'd with Proof, (the thing which Mr. Impartial would
have had him done-was to have sacrificed the Kingdom and himself to a certain
Destruction. 'Twas not for him to cry, like a frantic, murder upon the Lords
Anointed, where there were so many ready to have stopped his mouth. Had he
discovered and failed, you would have made him perjured indeed. And therefore
since providence has ordered it for the best; it is not for any mortal Miscreant
to fix Obl^quies and Perjuries upon the Disposal and Governance of the Almighty
from strained Surmises, farfetch'd Suppositions, and sportive Burlisque upon
Impiety.

Having thus done with your particular and punie Essay, I will say somewhat in
General The World cannot but take notice, that all your endeavor is to lay the
stress and weight of your malice and fury upon the Doctor: He is the chiefest
mark of all your envenomed Arrows. Let him alone, if he be such a perjured
Monster, he will fallof himself.

The Heathens themselves will tell ye,
-- (...)
There is no avoiding the vengeance of Heaven. In the mean time to fling and
kick and wince to no purpose; to bring Evasions, Flams, Flashes and Stories; to
Bribe, to Suborn, to set up Swearing Schools, to Defame and Scandalize, to cry
out Perjury, Nonsense, Absurdities, Improbabilities; These are not Ways to
clear the Innocent, but rather Demonstrations of the Treason pretended to be
vindicated. You have some reasons to believe that you have now some paticular
advantages over the Dr. and therefore you take the opportunity to hunt him quite
down. The pitiful Wretch so contemned and dispis'd by the Benedictine Rabbis,
and Jesuitical Flamins, must be trod upon, and die the death of a Worm, because
he outwitted their Cunning: The most convincing Argument of his Integrity,
that such Goliahs of Policy and Reason, as they, should fall by his
Imbicillitie.

Now all this stir and Turmoyl, is to prove the Dr* perjured. Which makes me to
admire that Mr. Impartial, and the rest of his Fellow Jesuits, who account
themselves the Topping Order of the Catholic Religion, and conceit themselves
to have engrossed all the Learning in the World into their Societies, should so
grossly mistake themselves, as to err in the very foundation of their Design. I
cannot therefore apprehend 'em to be such Bugbears as they are, but that it is
only the fond Opinion of our deluded Gentry, that causes them to throw their
Children into the Bosom of their Education. Rather I take Mr. Impartial and
them to be like our Splitters of Causes, who only study the Snaps and Quirks
of false Practice, but know little of the Fundamentals and Body of the Law; and
that as they study only the Knavish part of the Law; so these only study the
Knavish part of Divinity, that is how to cheat and amuse by virtue of their
Profession. Now then for Mr. Impartial, to go about to prove a man perjured,
before he had asserted what Perjury was, is a very preposterous way of
defending the Innocent. A Perjurer, then, is one, that swears wilfully and
wickedly against the opinion and judgment of his heart. So that there is a
great difference between Perjury and swearing false. A perjured Person is one,
who wilfully and willingly swears a false thing. But he who swears false, does
not do it with an intention to deceive, but because he believes the thing so to
be. Non falsum jurare est perjurare, says Cicero, sed quod ex amini tui
sentencia, sicut verbis concipitur more nostro, id non facere perjurium est.
Now the Dr. swore there was a Plot, as knowing it to be really true, examini
sui sententia, but as to Circumstances, he only swore as believing them to be
so, ita rem se habere. So that it being impossible to impute animum decipiendi
to the Dr. from bare surmises and conjectures; framed impossibilities and
absurdities, which have no efficacy to force belief, but are left indifferent,
as not being the Subject of Reason, but of Passion and Interest; so is it much
more impossible (if there may be degrees of impossibility) to infer Perjury
from the triffling shifts and Evasions of guilty Iniquity, which sort of
managing the defense of the Innocent does but discover the Vermin in the Snare,
and carries such a Face of guilty Fallacy, that while Men observe the doublings
and elusive slights of the Writer, rather to disintangle, then justify his
dear Friends, it loses the reputation of a Defense, and becomes rather an
Accusation then a Vindication.

This is also a most observable Circumstance on the Drs. side, that he has
accused no man hand over head, as Mr. Impartial calls it, but charges one with
one thing, another with another, as he knew they acted in their several Spears
of Treason and Mischief. Which Charges being afterward proved by other Persons
that the Dr. had never seen or heard of in his Life, and centring exactly as he
had fixed the Delinquents in their Employments, proves that the Dr. was not so
little acquainted with the design as they would fain pretend him to be. And
therefore let Mr. Impartial get his Memoirs Translated as soon as he pleases*
and send them abroad with all the speed he can; certainly the rational part of
the World must believe, that it had been impossible for Dr. Otes to have born
up his head in the public Face of the World, to have stood the strict
Examination of a wise and discerning Monarch* His Council and His Parliaments;
which implies all the Prudence, Judgment, Policy and Justice of the Nation, had
not his Discovery been absolutely true; which could never have been so, had he
been deceived in the Persons of the Actors. Unless there be any so stupidly
Brutish as to believe, that the King and the whole Flower of the Nobility and
Gentry of the Nation were in a Conspiracy with Dr. Otes against a Company of
Tatterdemallion Jesuits, and half a dozen Popish Lords and their delued
Associates, who might all have been buried among the forgotten Crowd, had not
they like the firer of the Ephesian Temple made themselves famous by their
Infamy.

I may add this farther for the Drs. Reputation, and the Papists shame: who
though they continually tax him with Vice and Debauchery, could never yet
charge him but it proved to their treble disadvantage. Once they brought a
ridiculous evidence from Hastings, which was exploded in open Court, and when
that failed, not being able to find out any thing more, they fell to their old
Trade of Subornation, and purchased the Release of Rake-Hells out of Jayl to
taint him with the hazard, if not the Eternal loss of their Souls. Surely, had
the Dr. been so openly vicious, they did very ill to stain their own Reputation
so foully to fully his.

And now he comes to his Observations upon the Trial it self; to which there
needs little or no answer to be given, as being a ridiculous piece of Foppery,
scurrilous Mess of Instances and Inferences, Contradictions and Absurdities,
Evasions and impertinent Cavils handed into the world by a pretended Protestant
in defense of the Papists; and all depending upon a precarious Supposition,
that our Witnesses are perjured, and his not. In short, a mischievous Avernus
of Fallacy and Impudence, exhaling nothing but Scandal and Reproach against his
Sovereign and his Applauded Government. And indeed, if we consider his own
words, the daring Mr. Impartial has given such an answer to himself, that had
he not been blinded with some ponderous Bribe, or deeply engaged in the fatal
Concern that threatens both his own and his Employers Heads, might have stopped
the Career of his extravagant Pen, while he himself gives the rational world
all the sufficing satisfaction can be imagined. For he acknowledges the whole
Process was heard before a High Authority. Ilustrious Judges, and an August
Assembly. And so most certainly it was. For there was His Majesty Himself every
day present; the Greatest Peers of the Nation were the Judges; and there was a
full Assembly of the Lords and Commons of England. Now whether these were not
competent Judges of Perjury, Contradiction and Absurdity -- I am forced to
stop, because Human Invention can say no more. Earth could afford no more:
unless his Lordship expected that some Court of Angels should have descended on
purpose from Heaven. Howsoever, he had those to hear and determine his Cause to
whom Sacred Writ has attributed the solemn Character of Divinity: And yet all
this will not satisfy Mr. Impartial, nor his Crew of Diabolical Papists.
Diabolical in this, that they will be continually spurning against Terrestrial
Majesty, in imitation of their Grand Master in perpetual enmity with the
Majesty of Heaven. But on these the Viper dares not fasten his envenomed Teeth:
and therefore he endeavors to nip the Reputation of those Learned and Noble
Gentlemen that managed the Trial, that from the wounds of their Honor he might
draw a Tincture to varnish the Horrid Deformity of the Plot, and besmare the
Justice of Staffords Condemnation. For of them he says, that nothing was
omitted, nothing neglected, but every the least Circumstance enforced and
advanced to its full proportion; with such a vigor of wit and industry, etc.
As if they had laid aside their consciences, and made use of all their wit,
their industry, and their eloquence merely to advance false Accusation and
Perjury. For this is the clear Exposition of Mr. Impartials wicked Insinuation.
We Will take the rest in their order. The Lord Stafford had brought evidence to
testify, That Dugdale before his Discovery, had denied, and with Execrations
forswore any knowledge of the Plot, which the Managers said was no objection.
For he swore it at a time when he never intended to reveal the Plot, and was in
danger of Life; but that afterward he changed his mind, and discoverd all to
Southel and others.

To this Mr. Impartial answers, That 'twas strange so palpable a Perjury should
he so sligh^ly evaded. And thus Mr. Impartial, casting a mist before his own
eyes; for he cannot surely chose but know what Perjury is, throws a most heavy
aspersion upon the Sanctity of the most Illustrious Judges of the World, that
they slightly passed over all palpable Perjury. Now how does he make it out? by
crying, this is a criminal answer? meaning that of the Managers. Yes it was.
For Dugdale denying the Plot before he intended to discover it, though with
Imprecations, was only Peccatum in foro Conscientiae, not determinable by the
Law, and it is the Law that must tell you what Perjury is. Did Dugdale deny the
Plot upon his Oath before the King and Council; and upon the same Oath affirm
it again? Had you proved that, you had said something. Otherwise you have done
nothing but brought your Impartialship under the Lash of the Law, which indeed,
Mr. Impartial, you mightily deserve* for your Crime is heinous.

In the next place, he charges the Managers with common Sophisms and weak
Objections. And yet but now they were the most Eloquent and Witty Men in the
World. Here Is more work for the stripes of the common Hangman; for certainly
such Illustrious Judges knew better what belonged to common Sophisms and weak
Objections, then such an Atome of a Memoir-monger, as Mr. Impartial. And
besides. Sir, you don't know but my Lord's Servants have been at the
Swearing-School. For proof of which, it is notorious in the printed Trial, how
Furness was trapp'd by the Lord High Steward and himself, p. 83.

In p. 37. He taxes the Court of shifting off Perjury by a trifling jest. Which
requires no other then the firm answer, and the same correction. For the
scandal still lies upon the Court, who whatever the Managers said, where to
consider the weight of the Matter.

I must confess, the World may well wonder, that such a malicious Piece of
pretended Protestantism should adventure with his frivolous objections so
insinuatingly to bespatter the Learning and Integrity of those most worthy
Patriots, that so highly deserve by their great Circumspection and Industry,
from the whole Nation, and the Protestant Religion. But the Profession of true
Protestantism being the most refined in the World, it is no more then could be
expected from a Maggot of that common Proverb, Corruption optima est pessima.
Whose whole Diabolical Design being only to traduce; and by traducing true
worth and virtue, to assert the innocence of Traiterous Popery; it cannot be
thought, that reason and Loyalty will judge the better of the Lord Staffords
Innocence; because they behaved themselves so nobly and renownedly in the
prosecution of his Treasons.

And thus you see the most Gigantic force and strength of his arguments for the
injustice of the Lord Stafford being brought to the Block. A bold and audacious
Recrimination upon the United Wisdom and Justice of the whole Kingdom. What
such a foul-mouthed Mr. Cover-Plot may deserve, I will not be so adventurous as
to put the question: However, it is not to be doubted, but that all His
Majesty's most true and Loyal Protestant Subjects hope in time to see him duly
rewarded according to his deserts.

In the next place, he troubles the World with my Lords Principles of Truth and
Loyalty. What does it concern us, what his Principles were, if his actions were
otherwise? Nor will Mr. Impartial easily persuade the World, That a Traitor in
his actions could be Loyal in his Principles. The Sacred Lips of Christ himself
has taught us, that we must judge of the Tree by its Fruit. Cromwell, that
committed that unparalleled Murder of God's Anointed, was the most complete
Counterfeiter of outward Sanctity of any of his Time. So that the ridiculous
account of my Lords Principles was most unseasonable and insignificant.

As little to the purpose is that vain Recapitulation of the Cream of the
Pa(...) Tenants. For that Religion can be no Religion, that has not some
Tenants tending to (...) and Morality; but what signifies that? We know the
Rules of all the Popish Orders are very strict, and savouring of a most
Seraphic Holiness; yet none more generally wicked and dissolute then they that
live under those Holy Vows. Even the Order of Jesus cannot exempt the
professors of it from being the most pernicious of men. But Mr. Impartial,
since you have been picking and culling the Strawberries of your Religion, what
think you of the p(...)sonous Mandrake-Aples that follow? Since you have
politickly taken this opportunity, to sow the choicest of your Grain, on purpose
to seduce and win the multitude; I will take the boldness to throw a double
quantity of you own Darnel Seed among it, to prevent the growth of it in the
hear^s of the people.

To which end I begin thus, That the Popish Religion is a scandal to all
Europe, burlesqu'd and pasquin'd by those that daily behold the Foolleries and
Debaucheries of its most Exalted Aaarns and High Priest. A Religion that
maintains that inveterate, implacable and imbred hatred to Protestantism,
contrary to the Character of Christianity, that the Instances of it in History
would serve to compile a Volume.

Read but the Lives of the Popes, and there you shall find a Progeny of Christ's
Vicars, and S. Peter Successors, as they call themselves, infamous for their
Frauds, Perjuries, Blasphemies, lost Consciences, Buggeries, Defilements, and
Prostitutions of their own Daughters, Adulteries, Poysonings, Atheism; and in
short, for all manner of Villainy and Debauchery. And when the Fountains are so
filthy and impure, Let the World judge what the Streams that flow from thence
must be. Their Monasteries Sties of Bestialitie, their Nunneries Brothel-Houses.

Their Doctrine, common principles, and practice the frequent Excommunications
and Murders of Princes, the legallity of Equivocation and Perjury; that there
is no faith to be kept with Heretics; that liberty of Religion granted to
Protestants is repugnant to the Law of God: that it is the duty of the Papists
to destroy the Protestants, by Fire, Sword, Poison, Gunpowder, or any other
way most oportune. That there is no obligation or allegiance due to Heretical
Magistrates and Princes. These are the singular and genuine Principles of
Popery. Which they that will not believe, let 'em read the Works of Simancha,
Conradus Brunus, Martin Becanus, Cardinal Baronius, Mariana Peter de Ouna,
Creswel, Fresham, and the Decree of Urban the 2d. That they should not be
accounted Murderers, that kill any of the Enemies of the Roman Ctholick
Cahurch.

And thus after a rambling, impertinent, Story of his Lordships behavior, that
looks like a piece of Romance enterlanded with Love Letters, he brings his
Lordship to the Scaffold, where he avers to the World three notorious Rappers,
two of them in a Breath After a short pause he stepped to one side of the
Scaffold, and with a graceful Air and intelligible Voice pronounced his last
Speech. A very graceful Air indeed, encouraged and highten'd with stupifying,
and therefore undaunted Inebriation, which the near Spectators well observed.
However, this is as true as the next, that he pronounced his Speech, when they
that were at a distance might easily perceive he read it every word; and as
they that stood by related, very fumblingly too. And indeed it could not be
otherwise expected. For you know, Mr. Impartial, his Lordship was never
accounted a Speech-maker in his Life; and for a person under his circumstances,
and of his mean parts, to read the sense of other men intelligibly, and with a
graceful Air, is a thing more improbable then any of your absurdities. And
therefore, Mr. Impartial, you must lay your stories closer together next time.
But when the Head was held up by the Excutioner, what then? The People made no
acclamations at the sight. By which bloody untruth so bloudily averred; it is
most plainly apparent what credit is to be given to all than Mr. Impartial has
been clamouring all ^his while. It being apparent, that he who shall tell such
a public falsehood so easy to be evinced, would never scruple to make a
thousand wilful mistakes clandestinly. Surely, he was either deaf, or he had
stopped his Ears with Plaster of Paris. For certainly such a number of people
could never have filled the Sky with louder shouts and hollows, unless they
had had the Throats of Stentor himself. And therefore if there were any that
went away with confusion and remorse, or cried him up for a just man, they were
only some of his own Gang, the Papistical Tribe, of Handcherchief-dippers. It
seems there were others, that said, he was drunk with Brandy; and then 'twas no
wonder his Air was so graceful indeed. Truly, Mr. Impartial, you had better
have left that Remark out of your Memoirs, for now you put me in mind of it,
'twas so reported, nay asserted, and by many still so believed: and indeed it
is an an observation, most agreeable to your description of his behavior
toward the people, and his intelligible pronunciation.

And (...)i would this Famous Traitor, whose Cause if it were innocent, there was
never such a mistake committed since Adam was expelled the Garden of Eden.
Which because it cannot be thought within the Verge of suspicion* Therefore the
Popish Plot remains a Popish Plot still; The Lord Stafford remains a Traitor to
Posterity; The Evidence against him legal and unquestionable, and the Lord
Staffords Memoirs not worth a straw.

Post Mortem nulla Voluptas.
FINIS.

