REFLECTIONS Upon Two Scurrilous LIBELS, Called Speculum Crape-Gownorum.

By a Layman.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

REFLECTIONS, andC.
AMONG all the silly Scurrilous Libels, that have been Printed since the
Liberty of the Press, I never saw such a medley of Malice, and Nonsense, as
this piece of Plagiarism. And indeed it is an Affront to any common Reader to
suppose him not able to see how ridiculous a Trifle it is. But because I
perceive the Scribler values himself upon it, and has put out a Second Part,
and sets up for an Author; I thought fit to give him a view of himself in his
own Looking-Glass, that he may, if he have any Sense or Ingenuity left, forbear
to expose himself any further, when he knows how ridiculous he must needs
appear to all, but such as cannot, or will not judge.

I have good reason to suspect this Looking-glassmaker was expelled one of the
Universities (if he were ever so happy as to prevail with some Pedagogue to
recommend him thither) or denied Orders for his dullness, or debauchery, or
both: sure I am he deserves to be banished the Society of all Men of common
Sense for the first, whatever he may for the latter. But it is but a poor,
impertinent revenge thus to rave against the Universities, and Clergy; when all
the World knows there never was less reason. Those, which he so much contemns
of two or three years Standing, would undergo a severe Censure, if in any
Exercise they should vent so much Nonsense, as this Fop has done in his little
Scrible. And there is no part of Learning in which the conforming Clergy have
not shown themselves eminently skilful. Their Sermons are famous throughout our
Neighbour-Nations, and their Style as good generally as that of any other Order
of Men; yea many of them write in so expressive, and exact a manner, and with
so true a Genius, that they outdo all that has ever been Written in the
English Tongue, and may deservedly be compared to the Romans and Grecians
themselves. Mr. Baxter himself confesses (in his Book against Dr.
Stilling-fleet) that they are but too exact. But whatever he acknowledges, I
think, I may with modesty say, Our Sermons almost equal the powerful pious
Eloquence of the first Ages of the Church: I wish the practice of our times
were as like that of the Primitive Christians, as the Preaching is.

The People now begin to see the Difference between Enthusiastic Cant, and a
sober rational Discourse; and this makes our Libeller under Pretense of
inveighing against bad Preaching, exclaim against all Preaching in General, and
call it Prating, etc. Though this was the beloved Ordinance of his dear
Dissenting Brethren, when they inveighed, and infatuated the poor People into
Rebellion, and played worse Pranks in their Pulpits, than the most extravagant
Farce durst present upon a Stage.

But I shall only mention this, because it is notorious; but must take notice
withal, that, whatever absurdities this man pretends our Clergy guilty off, I
doubt they are collected out of Nonconformists Sermons, and he might have gone
no further, than his own Conventicle-Note-Book for 'em. Sure I am, nothing of
Style can be more slovenly, or unhandsom, than most of their Writings, as I
could easily make appear, if it were not every man's observation; and the
Dissenters Sayings will sufficiently show it, where you have the most hellish
Opinions set forth, in the ugliest Dress, being a complete Epitome of the whole
Black Art.

But I come now to examine with what modesty this man can censure other men's
Style, or pretend to be so great a Master of it himself.

The Church of England -- is the closest to Primitive Institution of any
Religion in the World. So that Church and Religion with him are all one, and
the Religion professed by the Church of England is the Church it self, and by
Church-Militant, we must mean Religion militant. But I doubt all this is but
Complement, and is not without the Phylacteries of Hypocritical Ceremonies (as
he quaintly words it.)

The Nation is so over-stock'd with Crape-Gowns that -- What? that he must
needs give his Pamphlet a silly Pedantick Title, as ridiculous as any thing
mentioned in it? Well! but he had reason for it; he was loath this pretty
conceit should be lost -- An ill Omen of sick divinity when it comes to be mant
led in the shrouds appropriated for the dead. This facetious, lucky Touch put
him upon inventing the Title, and then who could forbear writing a Book, that
had such a Title for it? A Title well chosen, that nicks the business, is
commonly the most Taking Part of a bad Book, and if it be in Latin, the Vulgar
Readers like it the better, because he does not understand it. But whoever
said, Appropriated for? I thought things had been appropriated To, and not For,
till this Critic came forth.

They will do well to accept of this Mirror here presented them new foiled and
furbish'd up, to be placed in their Studies, and looked in every Morning -- and
by reforming their contemplated blemishes, etc. Admirable! Was it not worth his
while to call his Pamphlet a Looking-Glass for the sake of this fustian
Allegory? Thus we have the reason of his Crape and of his Looking-glass; now
put these two together and you have a Scheme of the whole Work so exact, that
you may easily discern, what is stolen, and what is his own in it: for this
Title, I assure you, is a Master -piece, and all the rest is but the same at
large, that you have here in little.

Thus I have traced him through little more than his first Page, which is the
least obnoxious to Censure of any in the whole Libel, so that the Reader may
judge by this* what he must expect from such a Coxcomb, (to use a Term of Art,
by which he complements the ingenious Author of Heraclitus, and restore the
word to him, it is appropiated for.)

No Plagiary Looking-Glass, page 2. That Is a damned lie: for there is scarce
three words of sense, but what is stolen out of a Book, entitled The Reasons,
and Grounds of the Contempt, etc.

He refers the reason of the contempt of the Clergy to two very plain things;
the Ignorance of some, and the Poverty of others: but sure I am, if this man be
as poor as he is ignorant, no Clergyman in England will change conditions with
him. Then he exclaims against slavery to a few Greek and Latin words, and I
commend him, for I dare swear he understands neither in any tolerable manner;
no, nor English any more than a Ballad-singer, or merry Andrew. Next he is
mightily displeased with a tedious story how Phaeton broke his Neck: but if the
Dunce had known the moral, it might have deterred him from undertaking a Task
so much above him. Why he should be so angry with poor Tityrus's Apples and
Nuts, I cannot imagine, unless it be because he has been lashed at School for
not construing Virgils Eclogues, and so now in his Buffoon way he disparages,
what has been so highly valued by all men of Wit, and Learning, and is
incomparably better than any thing he seems ever to have read.

But I must have a care what I do, for he that writes against this Author may
disoblige more than one man; for the least Part of his Book is his own. I shall
pass therefore from the 2d page to the 15. for all between is stolen, only a
flourish or two perhaps by the by to make it look sillily, and like his own. I
confess some things there mentioned are so grossly foolish, that I can hardly
believe any one would ever please himself in 'em, but that I hope to make it
appear our Author has pleased himself in as bad. I defy him or any man else to
instance in any one of the conforming Clergy, that has vented any such thing,
and till he does, all this is at random, and impertinent malice. Most of what
he produces, I grant, is mere Cant and Jargon, only some few things, methinks
might be excused, as this, My Text divides it self into, etc. For Virgil says,
-- Parts ubi se via findit in ambas: And why a Text has not as much power to
divide it self as a way to cleave it self, I cannot understand. But I shall not
undertake to defend any man's extravagancies, I know none that are guilty of so
gross ones, nor I believe our Plagiary neither.

To pass to what is his own, I shall give you his Complements to the Clergy,
and his dull fulsom Buffoon expressions, as they come in my way, that any
ordinary Reader may judge how capable this man is of being a Critic.

The instances set down page 15. are his own, and I defy him to prove any
Minister ever said any such thing in the Pulpit or elsewhere; which if he
cannot do, he must pass for a notorious Liar?

Every Whiffler in Divinity page 16. Too much Prating in English in our great
Cities -- and all this to feed the Ostentation of our Pulpit-threshers. ib. So
then he is for Preaching in an unknown Tongue, for Preaching in English is
Prating. But, pray, mind the coherence: He blames some for going to
Coffee-houses (as if those places were appropriated for Sedition, or the
Physician were to be blamed for visiting the Pesthouse) and others, for
handing young, brisk Ladies (though St. Paul asks the Question, have not we the
Power to lead about a Sister?) as if there were not laced Cravats and Ruffles
enough about the Town for this amorous Employment; and then continues, To say
truth, we have too much Prating in English, etc. if there be any dependence in
this, I Will yield he can write sense.

Hackney-Sermon-Makers, ib. Were Sermons therefore less frequent, they would be
much more valued: for then would men have time to meditate, and their abortive
irreverences, would not drop so often from their mouths without soul or life,
as not having staid their time in womb of meditation, ib. There Is a stroke of
Art for you! Would not any one think this Fellow had served his time to a
Midwife? I will appeal to the reason of any man whether it be within the verge
of mortality (there is Language without affectation) to invent a more fulsome
Allegory? No; for a person to preach at six in Corn-hil -- by ten at St.
Martins Outwich, etc. Why not? if he have lungs enough: what does the Blunderer
mean? Well! it is impossible that such a superabundance should be other than
the Riff Raff and Quicquid in Buccam venerit of a mercenary brain. page 17. --
The light of such a Star of the first magnitude in the firmament of the Church
of England, or the clouded reflections of mere Divinity Meteors, that run
whisking up and down to vent their undigested Conceits, as the wind of their
fantastical Doctrines agitates 'em. ib. Now I should fancy this Iolthead seeks
to advance his reputation by affected words, or affected and obscure Notions.
Young Officers of Divinity, page 18. pitiful striplings, illiterate old
Mumblers, ib. some underling twelve pound a year Disciple, ib. Alms-Man-teacher
of a Parish, page 19.

But I perceive I am fallen upon his stolen goods again, I shall therefore only
take notice of his Diminitive Divine, and pass to page 21.

They who are disinabled from the Purchasing part, are no way to be entrusted
with the Teaching part. A great pity no doubt that thus it should be, for there
are certainly no doubt, etc. No doubt, certainly, no doubt! he is much afraid
he should be thought to doubt of any thing.

Next for a touch of Politics. -- Now whether it be most convenient to make
Ministers for Churches, or Churches for Ministers, is the Question, but the
Proverb is, Talk of any thing but building Churches: for if we build more
Churches, we must make more land for endowment: which cannot be done without
drying up of the Sea and that is a very difficult task. What a smart Paraphrase
he makes upon a poor Proverb!

The Latin ones (Booksellers shops) they seldom haunt as being out of their
Sphere -- Dissenters men of more understanding than themselves (than
Conformists) ib. Of this let all impartial men judge.

Crape-Gown-men page 22. Like the Disciples of Haly and Mahomet, ib. That Is an
employment without the verge of Reprehension, ib. It seems he is hugely taken
with Verges, and Spheres. Like the Popes white Boys, ib. Fanaticism and
Dissenterism is the Mode now. True; and so is Foolism, and Ignoranism.

Now his fit of gravity takes him again, and he talks pragmatically of what he
does not understand, and therefore he had better taken example of our
Crape-Gown-men; Who (he says,) think it more convenient to let them alone (the
Papists) than to betray their folly and their ignorance.

But with a jerk he puts off his Asses gravity, and is at his Monkey-tricks
again. -- a lazy Coffee-drinking life, page 15. to suffocate what God has so
miraculously detected, ib. The Plot, I suppose, he means: but when sense is it
to choke a Plot? But we must pardon him, he takes Choking and Stifling to be
the same, whereas stifling is but one way of Choking, and he might as well
have said the Plot was killed, or, in his own strain, Enecated. For in such
expressions the manner of doing is principally aimed at, and the doing the
thing only implied, and scarce attended to.

They (the Clergy) pretend themselves Sons and Children, ib. What, does he
think there are any Daughter Clergymen? Colloguing adherence to the
fascinations of Rome. That Is great! I assure you. When some men get into the
Pulpit, they are so rampant, so Hoity Toity, they know not where their Tails
hang, page 24. As others are, when they get in Print.

In the next place, commend me to that incomparable and admirable Translation
of a piece of Latin printed by the Ludgate Excommunicator, Nunquam nec Albiani,
nec Nigriani, nec Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani, i. e. Never was a
true Christian found a Traitor to his Prince. This it is to have a sharpness and
acuteness of wit beyond the common reach of mankind, ib. This it is to be dull
and impertinent! In my opinion a very little search into History might have
taught this Glass-maker, that Albiani, etc. are denominations of traitorous
factions in the Empire, and then by the help of a little Logic, he might have
concluded, that what is denied of all the Parts is denied of the whole; and
then where is the fault in the Translation? I desire him to get it translated
better, or not to meddle with things he does not understand. But what has this
Fellow to do to defame a Clergyman for doing his duty, his Function obliges
him to, in excommunicating wilful, stubborn Offenders, according to the Laws in
force in this and all other Nations in the Christian World, as well as to the
injucntion of the Gospel, and the constant practice of the Church in all Ages?
Is the Law defective, if any man act otherwise than he ought, in a matter of so
high Concern? or must men stand to the Arbitrament of every Rascally Scribler?
or do they think to scare men out of their Duty? If any man act contrary to
Law, let them accuse him Legally, and not Post him up at every Booksellers
stall. But the Laws themselves cannot escape these men's venom, if they
contradict their refractory humor; witness the Laws against Conventicles, etc.

But I have wearied my self in tracing him thus far, and therefore shall let
his Essay of a Sermon alone; and I hope by this time such an estimate may be
made of the Libeller, that no man will have any extraordinary opinion of his
Parts or Honesty. For what man that has the least esteem for Religion, or but
common Civility to the Ministers of it, would in so scurrilous a manner treat
the meanest and most contemptible of the Clergy, as if their very Function
ought not to secure them from buffoonery, and reproachful, malicious, invective
Language? Or what would expose his malice so ridiculously as to stuff out a
Pamphlet with another man's wit impertinently applied, and commit the very
faults himself, that at the same time he condemns in others, but an Idiot to
all Learning and good manners?

I am sensible, I have omitted many things, I might have taken notice of (and
so I must needs do, unless I should transcribe the whole) particularly two or
three Latin Scraps, though he derides others, that spice and besprinkle their
Harangues with Greek and Latin Sentences: but he may the more easily be excused
for not avoiding such indecencies, because those that are worth any thing, are
not his own observations, and he forgot 'em, as soon as he had transcribed 'em.

Upon the whole, I must apply his own words (his own I call 'em, but the Reader
will easily guess if any of them be stolen) and desire all men to observe how
the poor man has labored to make an Ass of himself: and to judge whether he has
not shown an equal composition of Discretion, Learning, and Charity, of each
two drams: but then how strangely conceited are they, that after a long
consideration, serious meditation (what pity it is womb of Meditation would not
come in here too!) and recollection of mind, are so vain as to put their
Conundrums, their Quibles, and their Quibus's in Print?

I suppose this taste will be sufficient to show the Scribler is not capable of
writing any thing, that will bear Censure, or satisfy any man of ordinary
understanding: else I assure the Reader, I could with as much ease have exposed
his Second Part. But because, I doubt the Reader by this time is as weary as my
self, of such Bankside and froth (to give him his Character in his own civil
Language) of this Iackpudding to the Bear-garden, I shall pass by this
Ribaldry, his slip-slap slip-slap, his Hoytie, Toytie, and all his little
Conceits, which I suppose, he took in Shorthand at some Mountebanks stage,
(for he has more ways of stealing, than one without doubt) I shall take no
notice of his So Almighty, as if there were degrees in Omnipotency; nor of his
Greek and Hebrew in Latin Characters neither: For what is that to me? he is but
a Transcriber; let every man do as he can, and take it, as he finds it, at the
nighest hand; Why should a man be troubled with more Languages than will serve
his turn? Now he took upon him to write against the number of Scholars (Part 1.
p. 1.) who knows but his next pique may be at the number of Languages?

I wish the Dissenters much joy of his Arguments ( Never was ever, etc.) in
behalf of Conventicles, which has been urged above forty times (as most of
theirs have) within this half year, and answered as often, but he has dressed
it up so apishly in false Mode and Figure, and exposed it so unluckily, that, I
hope, any one will be ashamed to use it after him.

And so I have quitted my self of the biggest part of his Book, which is
nothing but a piece of Farce between the two Dialogists, or a Trial of Skill,
which should express their Nonsense with more agreeable Grace in wretched Pun
and Quibble. I shall take notice then only of two or three choice Notions,
which are very extraordinary for their extravagance, and entirely new, and so I
suppose his own.

First, he says, Ministers ought to insist upon Generals, and leave the
Particulars to the Hearers, that is, they ought to teach Obedience in General,
but wherein that Obedience consists, or what is agreeable to it, they ought not
pretend to determine. His reason is, because the Scripture treats only of
Generals and has neither Magna Charta, nor the Oath of Allegiance in it. So
then our Casuistical Divinity is all gone at a dash, and besides the Censures,
and Discipline of the Church are quite taken away; for what can the Church
censure but by its Ministers? and what falls under Censure, but particular
Actions? And what more heinous, and so more worthy of Censure than
Disobedience? Most men understand the General Heads of their Duty, but what
particulars fall under those Heads is not so easily known, and to explain this
is the proper work of a Preacher. Every one knows an Oath obliges, suppose the
Oath of Allegiance, or the Oath taken by Jurors; but if a Minister sees men act
contrary to this Oath, whether out of wilfulness or ignorance, ought he not to
admonish them of the sin? I should think his sin as great as theirs, if he did
not; for his very Function obliges him to it, and he breaks the most solemn Vow
that can be made to God, if he neglect it. I confess the same thing falls
differently under the consideration of a Lawyer and of a Divine; the one
considers it as matter of Law, the other as matter of Conscience, yet every
Action as it concerns the Conscience, so it belongs to the Divine, and if the
niceties of Law make the Case doubtful, yet still the Divine is to direct the
doubting, or scrupulous Conscience.

Certainly our Ancestors thought Divines might judge not only whether a Law were
obeyed or no; but even of the matter it self, before the enacting of the Law,
whether it were agreeable to Gods Word; and this, I make no Question, is one
reason why our Bishops sit in Parliament. Now it is much more easy to judge what
the Law obliges to, than to know whether that Obligation be valid, that is,
allowable by Scripture and Reason, though this indeed be essential to every Law
properly so called.

His most matchless heroic Attempt is yet behind, for which, I suppose, he
promises himself no small reward from the Faction, and to keep a Hank upon
them, and to scare us to an humble submission at the same time: he threatens,
he has more to say, and if we take no care to oblige him, all shall out: so it
seems, we must buy this shrewd man off, or we are utterly undone. Well! but
perhaps there may be no such great danger yet. -- If the Presbyterians do hold
King-killing Doctrine, they learned it from the Church of Englandmen, page 21.
And then after a tedious impertinence between the two Dialogists, he adds, Why
then I say you do not read in any story, since the growth of Christianity, that
ever any crowned Head was ever brought to a formal Bar of Justice, till Mary
Queen of Scots was arraigned, tried, convicted, sentenced, and formally
beheaded by Queen Elizabeth, and the Clergy were a part of the Body, that
pressed and urged the Queen to hasten her Execution.

Here he compares the Queen of Scots to King Charles the Martyr, Queen
Elizabeth to Oliver Cromwell, the loyal Nobility and Gentry of her days to the
Doegs of the Rabble and Refuse of all the Sects in Christendom in 48. and all
this merely out of a wretched design to prove the Church of England as bad as
the Phanaticks. But what is there alike in these two Cases? The one was a
Dependant Queen, and under legal Conviction of Attempts upon the Crown: the
other an absolute Sovereign Prince, that neither had given the least reason of
suspicion to his People of any design of invading their Rights, nor ought they
to have taken Arms against him, if he had given it: the one was put to death by
Foreigners, in a foreign Country, at the command of a foreign Prince; the
other in his own Kingdom, beside his own Palace, by his own Subjects, at the
command of a most bloody Tyrant, and Usurper.

But in short, The Queen of Scots was put to death justly, or unjustly; if
justly, where is the fault? if unjustly, yet 'twas not by her own Subjects: Nor
does the Doctrine of the Church of England allow it, if it were unjust, as the
Doctrine as well as Practice of our Phanaticks does teach open Rebellion: let
them show, if they can, any one Tenet of our Church, which is seditious or any
way pernicious to Government as plainly, as their whole Doctrine and Practice
has appeared to all the World to be. But indeed since all those, whom this man
follows, are of Opinion (as a thousand Pamphlets against the Succession
witness) that she was justly put to death, it is but too plain, that this
comparison was brought to justify the latter part of it, and not to condemn
the former. As who should say, You of the Church of England charge us with
killing Charles I. and did not you kill the Queen of Scots? You did it justly
we confess, but you ought to confess as much for us; for the case is parallel.
That this is his meaning is plain from page 5. Where he says; However to talk
like a Divine it was a Supreme Power (of those Usurpers of the late times)
though set over us for our sins and our punishment, and most certain it is,
that we and the Calvinists agree in this, that etiam infideli Magistratui
obediendum est, with safety of Conscience. I only speak this to show, that men
ought not to urge upon the Conscience so severely, that were so nice of it
themselves. Here ( Infideli) must be interpreted an Usurper, or else it makes
nothing to his purpose (and by the way we may observe how aptly this man uses
his little shreds of Latin) for the plain drift of his Argument is, That those
who refused to obey Oliver Cromwell, ought to be favorable to the Phanaticks
now, because the Authority commanding then, was equally lawful to be obeyed, as
this is now, but the things enjoined were scrupled. And thus he levels our
lawful Sovereigns Authority, with the Usurpers, making it as necessary to obey
one as the other; that is, in all things, that a man does not think in his
Conscience unlawful.

He goes on, speaking of the Queen of Scots: Could you blame her for Plotting,
though she absolutely denied it, against a Person, that kept her from the
enjoyment of her Kingdom, one that had deceived her with Chains, and
Imprisonment, after she had made choice of her Kingdom for Sanctuary and
assistance? page 22. Did ever any Jesuit speak more maliciously of our Glorious
Queen of blessed memory, than this impotent wretch does? But this is the common
Cry of the Phanaticks, and a late Author in his Harmony of Non-Conformists (
etc.) has taken a great deal of pains to prove her popishly Affected. But this
new invention of our Libeller to calumniate the Church of England, is a piece
of so much folly as well as malice, that the Devil could never hope before to
prevail upon any one to publish it.

Next follow his Cavils against some few late Sermons, and them too written by
men of greater Learning and Worth, than any, his Conventicles could ever boast
of. I shall only observe from them, how false his charge in the first Part is,
which certainly he would have made good in these Reflections, if his malice had
not outrun his wit. After all his false Glosses and sinister interpretations
it amounts to but this; That a Complement, in his opinion, is strained too
high, or that a Text is understood otherwise by some Commentators. Only he is
very severe upon the Gentleman that quoted Valerius Maximus, when he ought to
have consulted Plutarch: because Plutarch he says, is the better Author, and he
and Valerius do'nt agree in that particular: but he might have considered that
that quotation is brought for illustration, and allusion, not in affirmation of
any Historical Truth, so that whether one, or the other, or neither be in the
right, it matters not. Besides, how does it appear that they disagree? Plutarch
says Sylla died of a Phthiriasis, or Morbus Pediculosus; and Valerius that he
died of Rage: What then? might not his Disease cause his Rage, and that be the
immediate cause of his death? or might not his Disease be the cause why his
Rage should so easily carry him off? so both may speak truth, though not all
the truth. However this be, I am sure, our Author may be ashamed to own, he has
ever seen Plutarch, or Valerius Maximus to so little purpose. I conclude with a
Passage out of Dr. Burnets Preface to the second Part of his History of the
Reformation (whom I the rather quote, because he is so frequently quoted by our
Dissenters upon all occasions) where after a just Character of our Bishops, he
adds -- And when I look into the Inferior Clergy, there are, chiefly about
this great City of London, so many, so eminent, both for the strictness of
their lives, the constancy of their labors, and plain way of Preaching, which
is now perhaps brought to as great aperfection as ever was, since men spoke, as
they received it immediately from the Holy Ghost; the great gentleness of their
deportment to such as differ from them, their mutual love, and charity; and in
a word, for all the qualities that can adorn Ministers or Christians; that if
such a number of such men cannot prevail with this debauched Age, this one
thing to me looks more dismally, than all the other affrighting Symptoms of our
Condition, that God having sent so many faithful Teachers, their labors are
still so ineffectual.

THE END.

