The Relation of the REJOYCINGS MADE IN ROME For the BIRTH of the most Serene
Prince of Wales, Only SON of James the Second, King of Great Britain, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

Faithfully translated into English, from the Italian Impression, as it was
Printed at Rome and Genoa.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, 1689.

The Relation of the REJOYCINGS MADE IN ROME For the BIRTH of the most Serene
Prince of Wales, Only SON of James the Second, King of Great Britain, Defender
of the Faith, etc.
THE Angelical Kingdom of England, that in times past equalled, as I may so
say, Idumaea, with so many Glorious Palms of Martyrs sent to Heaven, and which
published thousands of Volumes that her Holy Doctors wrote in Favor of the
Roman Church; with a Diabolical Impiety, rebelling against the Eternal Monarch,
became a miserable Slave of Satan. And changing the Divine Worship into the
Doctrine of Devils, continued in a most deplorable Condition for many Years, an
Enemy of the King of Kings; but at length the most Merciful God, being moved to
Compassion for so many Souls so unhappily lost, was inclined to reduce her to
her Primitive State, and make her a Worshipper of the Holy Catholic Religion,
and the Successor of St. Peter, his Vicar on Earth. And to bring so Worthy a
work to a Fortunate end, makes use of the most ardent Zeal of the Catholic
James the Second, there by the Divine Providence constituted King.

He was prepared for so Glorious an Enterprise, not regarding either Dangers,
or Oppositions, nor forbearing any Application, always Indefatigable, and all
Intent to reduce his Triple Dominion to the Adoration of the Holy Trinity, the
Confession of the True Faith, and the Obedience of the Pope. This he knew he
should effect, through the assistance of the Divine Omnipotence, which made the
lamentable Farce give way to his Power; who trampled on the Heretical
Doctrines, caused the Precepts of Jesus Christ to be publicly Professed,
called home the banished Priests, restored the profaned Temples to the sacred
Ministry, and throwing down the Banners of the Prince of Darkness, sets up the
Standard of the Catholic Faith. And offering his Scepter at the Feet of his
Holiness our Lord Pope Innocent the XI resumed it, tributary to Heaven, raising
to himself Statues of his singular Merit with the Divine Majesty, and
everlasting Fame, througout the Universe. And having driven away those Rebel
Angels that led his People to Eternal Damnation, gave them for their Guides
Priests of the Church of Rome, that would Conduct them to the everlasting
Delights of Paradise.

The Great God being pleased to reward him on Earth, before he took him hence
to receive a more glorious Recompense in Heaven, has blessed him with a
Male-child, Born the 20th. of June, in the Year 1688. being, according to the
English Style, the Feast of the Holy Trinity, betwixt the Hours of Nine and Ten
in the Morning.

The Catholic Ruler acknowledged so valuable a Grace bestowed on him by the
Creator of all, and returned his due Thanks, rejoicing that he was like to
breed up a Son himself in the Divine Precepts, that might be equally Heir both
of his Father's Greatness, and most ardent Zeal for the Catholic Religion.

By an Express from his Majesty this News arriving at Rome, the Second of July,
occasioned a Jubilee in the Breast of the most Holy Pastor, and universally
filled all with extreme Joy.

Whereof there were public Demonstrations, and for Three Days successively was
solemnized the Nativity of this Royal Infant, beginning from the 25th. of the
same Month, the Feast of St. James the Apostle, in the manner sollowing.

His Eminence, Cardinal Philip Thomas Howard of Norfolk, of the Order of the
Preachers, Titular of St. Mary at the Minerva, designing the Church of St.
Thomas of the English Nation, for the return of Thanks to God, richly hung it
with Brocard Silks and very noble Tapestries, which, with the sacred Vestments,
appeared so Splendidly, by the Reflection of a vast Number of Lights, that it
resembled a Palace of the Sun, and even dazzled the Eyes of the Beholders.

Leave being obtained of his Holiness, the Morning of the said 25th. Day there
was a Chapel for the Cardinals, where were present Eighteen of their
Eminences, who Gloried much in this, That after so many Years they were at last
met together to congratulate the Nativity of a Son of a Catholic King of
England.

Here was celebrated the High Mass, at which assisted the most Famed Musicians,
and choicest Singers, making their several Virtues to be admired by their
Angelical Voices and Harmonious Consorts. After the Communion Te Deum was
begun, which being followed by them, was accompanied by a Consort of Drums and
Trumpets, and diverse Salutes of Mortar-pieces, got ready for that purpose, that
for a long time made the Latian Fields, and Banks of Tyber to resound.

His Eminence caused Wine, Bread, and Cheese, and other Refreshments, to be
distributed to the Servants, Footmen, and Coach-men, of their Eminences the
Cardinals that were at this Feast; who, while Eating and Drinking, made
continual Huzzaes of Viva, for his Eminence and the Royal Babe.

He caused also a great Fountain of most noble Architecture, painted over like
Marble, to be erected, covered with Gold on the Corners and Edges, on the top
whereof were the Arms of his Majesty of Great Britain, adorned with a rich
Crown, supported by a Lion and Unicorn, near whereto, in the Night, were set
great Numbers of white Wax Lights, adding Beauty to this stately Structure;
that for Three Days together, and as many Nights, run no small Quantity of
exquisite Wine for the benefit of the Public, and was distributed in exact
Order by Men habited in Vests, with the Arms of his Eminence imbroidered on
them.

All the Palace of his Eminence contiguous to the forementioned Church of St.
Thomas, in the Three Rows of Apartments without, was beset with Torches of
white Wax, and below were Links on several Posts of Wood planted on the Ground
about the Palace, making that vast Fabric by an unusual Miracle more
resplendent than even the Heavens when fullest of Stars.

His Eminence also caused a Mount of Earth to be raised in the Court of the
English College, joining to the said Church of St. Thomas, on the top whereof
was made a Majestic Theater, all adorned with rich Tapestries and Greens, set
together by a curious Workmanship, in the midst of which, the First Day (to
imitate the Ancient Custom of London on their Solemn Festivals) was roasted a
whole Ox, the extreme Parts all covered with Gold and Greens, and within full
of young Pigs, and several sorts of Fowls, that from diverse Parts of the Ox
seemed, though dead, as if they would fly Death, thrusting out their Heads and
Feet at the several Holes in it, which were certain to serve either as a prey
to the devouring Flames, if they fell there, or to the People, if pulled thence.

And for the roasting the said Great Animal, there was a Machine erected,
framed with great Wheels, turned with Six Men in Coats with the Arms of his
Eminence gilded on them, and Caps with the like; who, going round that Theater,
dispensed Flesh and Bread in great Quantity to the People, making frequently
loud Acclamations of Viva, for the new Prince of England.

It gave no little Content to see the People that thronged to get the Meat, and
when some with no small Pains were come up just ready to receive it, they were
strongly beat back by a Multitude of others, that with all the Force they had
thrust up to this Machine; and in like manner was it great Pleasure to behold
the coveted Food taken out of a Man's Hand after he had got it with a great
deal of Sweat, by those that could not have it from the Distributers.

One greedily snatched the Bread and Meat, another went to Drink, a third
returned to the Theater or to the Fountain; one Clamoured, another at a
distance called for Things; one asked for Wine, another cried out to make way
that he might come to Eat and Drink. And thus Eating and Drinking (not to lose
time in the Narration) in all appearance it looked like an inward Jubilee; and
such a Spectacle was so pleasing, that all Rome unanimously confessed they had
not seen the like.

During the Illuminations, the Lights in the Air excited not only this City but
the Neighboring Places, to the greater Rejoycings.

Two good Consorts of Drums and Trumpets continuing all the Three Days and
Nights, made all that Feasting Neighborhood ring again.

And in the Palace of his Eminence was heard most incomparable Music, and
Symphonies of the best Instruments; where his Eminence gave great Quantities of
Refreshments to all those Persons of Quality that were there met together for
the Festivity of the Royal Infant.

His Eminence did also Exercise the wonted Acts of his Generosity, distributing
large Alms among the modest, indigent Persons of the Parish of St. Catherine,
where his Eminence lives, and the like to the Parish of St. Mary at the
Minerva, of which he is Titular; and besides he gave a rich Regale to all of
his Court proportionably to their respective Charges.

And other Cardinals and Princes, that were either allied by Relation to his
Majesty, or were his Dependents, or well affectioned to the Kingdom, made their
Feastings for the happy Birth of the Royal Babe, by setting up so many Torches
and Lights at their Palaces, and making so many Fires about them, that it
seemed as if they would be reduced to Ashes in the Flames.

Sir John Lytcott, Knight, Agent for his Majesty of Great Britain, illuminated
all the Windows of his Palace, which stands in the Strada Gregoriana, with a
vast Number of white Wax Torches for Three Nights, where continually, as also
the Three Days, Drums and Trumpets sounded, and at his own Expenses he made all
the adjoining Streets to his Palace to be enlightened by the hanging up many
Lanthorns with the Royal Arms of England, and Links, the whole being
accompanied with the Discharge of a great Number of Mortar-pieces.

Over the Portal of his Palace, which was all hung with red Damask, and with
Galloon and Fringe of Gold, was seen exposed a rare Picture, the work of some
able Apelles, more than 12 Hands high, on which was drawn the Royal Infant,
with the Habit of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and every way encompassed
with a great Laurel, which descended from Heaven, and was upheld by Two Angels,
and girt about with a numerous Army of the same, one whereof held the Royal
Crown of England; another in one Hand a Shield, with the Arms of England, and
with the other the Sword and Garter; another had an Olive Branch in its right
Hand, and in its left the Cross of Union of England with Scotland; and another
above the rest, in the opening of the Heaven, on a Label exhibited these Words,

Serus redeat. And over the Picture of the most Serene Prince were his Arms (
i. e. Three Feathers of an Ostrich) with this Motto,

Ich Dien, i. e. I serve. Below at a distance was the Sun rising in the East,
Figuratively expressing the Child Born to be the most Resplendent Sun of the
Catholic Heaven; and also there was seen the Sea, with a Naval Fight, where
the Invincible Courage, and Renowned Valor of the Admiral of England Triumphed
over their Enemies.

This Picture made its Beholders immovable, who, though they well knew that it
was made by Coloring and Pencil, and that it had only a Surface, nevertheless
seemed to cheat themselves; insomuch that they believed the Objects there
represented, not feigned, but true; They saw the Child stir, the Wings of the
Angelick Troops clap together, the Waves of the Salt-Element move, and more
than that, dyed with Blood, the broken Masts, the torn Sails, and the Sterns
shattered in pieces; there were seen laboring to swim, those that remained
alive out of the sinking Ship; they saw the Soldiers, and the gasping
Mariners, the Sport of the Waters, and it appeared to them, that they asked
their help; they saw the Fire of the Cannons, and if they heard not the Sound,
they fancied it, which because of its distance could not reach them; and if
many had not been thrust away from that Place by the People that came to admire
so Worthy a Work, they had been fixed there for a long time. And this Picture
was in the midst of Two, one of the King, and the other of the Queen, and above
these was that of his Holiness.

He caused also the Second Day an Ox to be Roasted, with other Animals within
it; and because the Strada Gregoriana was too straight for such a Performance,
he chose the Square of Trinita de Monti, near thereto where it was Roasted in a
spacious Place; and there the Flesh distributed with Bread in great abundance,
where the Wine run out of a fine Fountain, for Three Days, and as many Nights
together, and the same, and like accidents followed in the distribution of it,
as what were recounted in that of his Eminence Cardinal Howards.

The Scotch College set up over the Portal a very Charming Picture, where was
seen the Royal Babe in Swadling-Clothes, lying on a very rich Cushion, on one
side whereof were Painted, on a well wrought Pillar, the Three Crowns of the
Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and on the other, at an
agreeable distance, there was seen a rising Sun, alluding, as that before, to
the Birth of the Royal Prince; and over the Picture was this Motto.

Magnus Amor Matris,
Magnum Patris Incrementum.
And that Picture was placed in the midst of Two others, one representing the
King his Father, on the right Hand, and, the other, on the left, the Queen his
Mother; and all the Three were under a rich Canopy of Red Damask, edged with
Gold, whereto were set some Torches before, that made them seen as clearly in
the Night as Day.

And if the Pictures of Sir John Lytcott were wonderful, these roused, in those
that beheld them, the unusual amazement, seeming that if they stood silent, it
was not that they could not speak, but because silence became a Royal Decorum
in this Conjuncture.

And for Three Days they had Illuminations, not only all over the Front of the
Church and the College, but also of all the Houses that were near, both of one
and the other side the Street, at their proper Expenses.

And in like manner there was cast for Three Days, and Three Nights, abundance
of Wine, from a pretty contrived Fountain, placed on one side the Portal of the
College, adorned with Excellent Paintings and Greens, and on the other side
were distributed several hundred Loaves of Bread to the Poor.

And to this the People flocking together to Eat and Drink, as in other Places,
made of its self a very delightful Sight.

There they discharged, sometimes betwixt the Day and Night, 150 Mortar-pieces;
there they burnt many Hogsheads; the Trumpets sounded from the Windows, and the
Drums in the Streets.

They also made a very Splendid Banquet, for all those of the Scotch Nation
that they found in Rome.

The Vrceline Nuns, lately founded by the Pious Munificence of Mary Beatrice,
Queen Consort of England, and the most Serene Laura, Duchess of Modena, her
Mother, in acknowledgment for so great a Benefit, had Mass Solemnly Sung in
their Church, and Te Deum, with discharge of Mortar-pieces; and for Three
Nights made rich Illuminations and Lanthorns, with the Arms of the King of
Great Britain Artificially disposed over all their Cloister.

The Convent of the Dominican Fathers of the English Nation, Dedicated to St.
John and Paul, enlightened for Three Nights all their Church and Convent, and
particularly their Steeple, that seemed in the Darkness of the Night, as if
there had been raised from Earth to Heaven another Sphere of Stars.

The Irish Dominican Fathers of St. Sistus, and St. Clement, also set up
innumerable Lights on their Church at Convent.

The Religious Irish Franciscans of St. Isidore, made a very Glorious
appearance of Lights, that adorned all the Frontis-piece of their Church for
Three Nights.

Mr. Michael Plunket, Agent in Rome for the Irish Clergy, had very many Lights
at all the Windows of his usual Habitation, for Three Nights after the same
manner.

But no less considerable was the Magnificent Demonstration of Joy, both by
Fires and Lights that were made the Three Nights, by -- Selayne, an Irish Man,
Professor of Divinity in the College de Propaganda Fide, and Doctor of the
Sorbonne.

And very many other considerable Persons, in Token, either of Dependence on
His Majesty, or out of Reverence, or Affection to him, Rejoiced as others did,
with Lights, Torches, and Fires, for so happy a Birth.

All the People of Rome were only in those Places where the Rejoycings were
made, the rest of the City remaining Unpeopled.

Every one grieved that he could not be at the same time, in all those Places,
where these Testimonies were given for Joy of the Birth of so great a Prince;
so that while they enjoyed the Sight at one Place, they afflicted themselves
with the consideration of losing it at others.

And those that sought nothing but Eating and Drinking, complained against
Nature, for that it had not made them more Bellies, or those they had, larger,
and all would have been Briareus's, that they might have stretched out an
Hundred, and Hundred Arms to receive so many Portions.

In fine, all Rome Rejoiced, every Inhabitant in it Feasted, and nothing else
was heard all over, but the Glorious Name of the Happy James II. in whom the
Divine Blessings were seen apparently, to reward his Heroic Acts, in having
granted him a Successor, who treading in his Fathers Steps, should pursue the
Course of his Catholic Glories.

The Seven Hills Burned, and seemed one only Light, and one only Fire, and in
despite of the Horrors of the Night, gave a clearness more resplendent than
that of the greater Planet at noon Day; and they looked so, as when by the
Cruelty of Nero, they were made a prey to the Flames, or that they represented
the famous City of Troy, when by Treachery it was made a Trophy to the Fires.

The Consorts of Music, the Festival Sounds of the Drums, Trumpets, and
Mortar-pieces, and the common Acclamations that gave Applause to the English
Rulers, and Tributes of Joy to the Born Infant, seemed by consent even to
deafen Heaven.

FINIS.

