REMARKS ON THE LIFE OF Mr. MILTON, As published by J. T. WITH A CHARACTER OF
THE Author and his Party.

In a Letter to a Member of Parliament.

Flectere si nequeant superos Acheronta movebunt. LONDON: Printed, and sold by
J. Nutt near Stationers' Hall. Price One Shilling. 1699.

THE PREFACE.
TO some it may seem impertinent, to usher a Letter into the World with a
Preface; as to which I shall make no other Apology, but that the Importunity of
those who prevail d with me to make the Letter Public, is likewise the Cause
of this piece of Informality.

Those Gentlemen being of Opinion, That the following Remarks might do some
Service, they are exposed to the Censure of the World, in hopes that as in a
General Assault, the Endeavors of the Weak as well as the Efforts of the
Strong, are taken in good Part, the Author may escape the Censure of having
been too Officious.

No Man can be so little acquainted with the Posture of Affairs in this Nation,
as not to know that our Religion and Civil Liberties have suffered many Attacks
from Persons of different Interests and Principles. But, perhaps we Labor
under the Influences of one of the strangest Conjunctions, at present, that
ever we did since formed into a Regular Government.

Any Man that would have offered to foretell, some Years ago, That those who
were for having Property swallowed up by Prerogative, should in so small a
Revolution of Time, set up for Patriots to their Country; and that so many of
those who complained of Innovations in Church and State, should have joined
with them against a Government founded upon the Peoples free Choice, would have
been looked upon as an Enthusiast or Brain sick Person.

Yet such is our Misfortune, That we have seen the Church of England not only
deserted, but accused of Apostasy by some who pretended to be her most Zealous
and Dutiful Sons, merely because she has Recognized the Title of a Prince who
generously rescued her from the devouring Jaws of Popery, in opposition to that
of another, who made all the haste he could to offer her up in Sacrifice to the
Church of Rome. And at the same time we have seen too many of those from whose
Mouths nothing was to be heard but Complaints of an insupportable Tyranny in
former Reigns, ingratefully join with those who were the Tools and Promoters of
it, to make the Throne of a King, who Gloriously knocked off our Fetters,
unstable and uneasy.

And now, which is strangest of all, a third Party is taken into the
Combination, who, under pretext of joining with them, to assert our Liberty,
not only strike at the Foundation of the Civil Government, but have boldly laid
the Axe to the Root of the Tree, and avowedly endeavor the subversion of the
Christian Religion dealing their Blows indifferently amongst those of the
Church of England and Dissenters

This is plain from many Instances, but from none more than the Life of Mr.
Milton, latel^ published by J. T. where he endeavors to turn the Gospel
against Kingly Government, as a piece of Gentilism, forbidden by our Savior;
and seems to question the whole of the N. Testament as a Forgery, like that of
Dr. Gauden's Eicon Basilice; he represents Bps. as Gout^ Feet, Gulphs of
Benefices, and dry Pits of Spiritual Devotion; the Ministry as useless, for the
most part, to their Flocks, as to the Sheep in Smithfield Pens, and to be mere
Hire^ings if they have any Benefices; Marriage he would have dissolvable for as
trifling Causes, (as I have heard it was sometimes in his own Country) as
pissing the Bed. And abundance of other things, equally destructive to Religion
and Civil Society.

Yet he takes mighty Care to recommend the Establishment of a Liberty to the
Socinians, who treat the Godhead of our Savior with as much Contempt as they
do Church and State, and make Mahometism and Christianity all one in the main,
as I have proved in the following Sheets.

The matter being thus, it seems highly necessary to enquire by what secret
Springs such a Person is acted, and whether those of so near an Alliance in
Religion with the Turks, are not as capable of being Pe^sioners to a certain
Potentate in Europe, as those Infidels, and for that same End too.

If the following Remarks may any way excite those who are concerned, to make
such Enquiries, or be a Warning to well-meaning Persons that are deluded by the
specious Pretensions of J. T. and those of his Kidney for Liberty, to take heed
they be not drawn into a Combination, such as that of the Italian Socinians,
about an Age ago, against the Christian Religion and Civil Government, I shall
think my self abundantly Rewarded.

May the God of Heaven and Earth, by whom Kings Reign and Princes decree
Justice, direct His Majesty and His High Court of Parliament, to such Measures
as may secure our Nation and Religion from the Attempts of such blasphemous
Incendiaries, who are Enemies to all Government, deny the Lord that bought
them, encourage Libertinism, and would reduce us again to hateful Paganism,
under a Pretense of advancing Reason.

REMARKS ON THE LIFE OF Mr. MILTON, As published by J. T.
SIR,
I Wish you had saved your self and me the Trouble, when you desired my
Thoughts of the Life of Mr. John Milton, published lately by J. T. You know the
Character which that great Man has left impress^d upon the Minds of the
learned World is such, that his Ashes ought not to be disturbed, nor the
History of his Life attempted by an Ordinary, and much less by an Obnoxious
Pen; and therefore in the first place, I cannot but bewail his Fate, that under
the Notion of the History of his Life, he should now be represented to the
World in such Colors, as J. T. has thought fit to draw him in. It is storied
of the Italian Painters, That they Compliment their Mistresses by drawing the
blessed Virgin according to their Features; and in truth I am of Opinion that
the Author designed the like Compliment to himself in forming Mr^ Milton's
Character; for his natural and acquired Parts, Estate, Public Post, Great
Reputation and Universal Esteem excepted, the Parallel seems to be drawn as
near as may be. This you may perhaps think severe, but if you consult the last
two Pages of this pretended Life, you will find it to be exactly true: For
there we have an Account, That Mr. Milton in his early days was a favourer of
the Puritans; in his middle Years he was best pleased with the Independents and
Anabaptists, as allowing of more Liberty than others, and coming nearest in his
Opinion to the Primitive Practice; but in the latter part of his Life he was
not a professed Member of any particular Sect among Christians; he frequented
none of their Assemblies, nor made use of their peculiar Rites in his Family.
This, I am informed, is so exactly the Authors own Temper, that no Man, who
knows him, can doubt of it; for he was formerly a Papist, then a Church of
England Man, next a Presbyterian, and is now best pleased with the Independents
and Anabaptists; and for that very Reason too, because they allow him more
Liberty than others do; and therefore he Compliments them with coming nearest
the Primitive Practice in his Opinion. But then he gives them fair Warning,
that in the latter part of his Life, he will frequent none of their Assemblies,
nor make use of none of their peculiar Rites; a mighty Loss, and which they
ought now to bewail, as Mermaids do the approaching Winter in the middle of
Summer. Now what Man alive, that has any value for Mr. Milton's Character, can
with Patience hear that great Man represented as an Hypocrite in his Youth, a
Libertine in his middle Age, a Deist a little after, and an Atheist at last?
Yet such is the noble Character assigned him by J. T. For in his Youth he says,
Page 27. He engaged against the Bishops to help the Puritan Ministers, who were
inferior to the other in Learning. Page 30 and 34. He wrote in defense of
Sinectymnuus [which is altogether Presbyterian.] Page 61. he says, This was
only a Service to the Presbyterians by accident, for he never intended to set
up the Consistorian Tribunal in the room of the Hierarchy. And yet, Page 77. He
brings him in, enjoining the Presbyterian Model, in these words: Let them
assemble in Consistory with their Elders and Deacons, to the preserving of
Church Discipline, each in his several Charge. If this be not either to make
Mr. Milton, or J. T. his Biographer, guilty of Hypocrisy and Contradiction,
let the World judge.

Then as to the Charge of Libertinism he fixes it plainly upon him, Page 52,
etc. where he gives us an Account of, His disowning his Wife, and resolving
never to take her back again, because she refused to come to him when sent for,
and dismissed his Messenger with Contempt; and at the same time kept Gaudy-Days
with his Friends, and particularly the Lady Margaret Lee, whose sprightly Wit
and good Sense drew frequent Visits from him; that thereupon he published his
Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce. And, Page 70. says, That he was seriously
treating a Marriage with a young Lady of great Wit and Beauty, when his Wife
threw her self at his Feet, acknowledging her Fault, and begging Forgiveness;
and yet at first he seemed inexorable. If any thing of this be the Character of
a Christian, and not exactly that of a Libertine, Let Men of Sense and Religion
determine.

Then as to the Charge of Deism, we are told, p. 151. That Mr. Milton ever
expressed the profoundest Reverence to the Deity, as well in Deeds as Words;
and (...) to his Friends, that the Divine Properties of Goodness, Justice and
Mercy, were the adequate Rule of Human Actions; nor less the Object of
Imitation for private Advantages, than of Admiration or Respect for their own
Excellence and Perfection. By J. T's leave, I must make bold to say, That this
fine and high-flown period, makes either himself, or his Hero, to have a very
false Notion of the Deity; for to make the Infinite Perfections and Attributes
of God an adequate Rule for Human Actions, is, according to the literal sense
of the Word, to make Man equal to God; whereas we find, by Experience, that his
Revealed Will is more than an adequate Rule to the Holiest of Men, so that they
come infinitely short of it. But we want words to express; nay, thoughts to
conceive, how much shorter we must needs come of those Incomprehensible
Attributes just now mentioned: This is like Job's Friends, to darken Council by
Words without Knowledge. But if we are to believe God himself, his written Word
is our Rule; without which, we see the greatest and wisest of Men, who had the
highest and most refined Notions of his Attributes, have but grop'd, like blind
Men, in the dark. The luster and brightness of his Perfections, served only to
dazzle their Eyes, and confound their Apprehensions. But in his Word, he has
been graciously pleased to condescend to our Infirmities and Weaknesses, and
revealed himself so, in, and through a Mediator, as that we may have access,
with boldness, to his Throne, and a fuller knowledge of him, and our duty
toward him, than ever we could otherwise have had. This, there is no doubt, Mr.
Milton understood as well as any Man, but it is J. T's business to represent him
as a favourer of the Socinians and Deists, who not contented with Revelation,
form to themselves Notions of a Deity according to their own corrupt Reason.

In the last place, he makes him an Atheist, a perfect Separatist from all
Christian Assemblies, and a neglecter of their Rites in his Family. What he
means by their Rites, except it be Public, Family, and Closet-Worship, I know
not; and if he neglected those, by the Verdict of the Prophets and Apostles, he
was liable to the Vengeance of the Almighty, Jer. 10. 25. Heb. 10. 25. Thus
then you see, how kindly Mr. Milton is treated by J. T. he had rather subject
him to damnation it self, than not have him a Patron to his own Socinian
Principles. It must be owned indeed, that there is no such Mystery as this to be
found in Christianity.

But to pursue this point a little further, he makes Mr. Milton a perfect Enemy
to all sorts of Clergymen and Churches, which is another mighty point gained
to the Socinians. For proof of this, he tells us, p. 27. etc. That he heartily
engaged in the dispute, against the Order and Vices of the Bishops; that he
accounted our retaining of Ceremonies, and confining the Power of Ordination to
Diocesan Bishops, the chief Impediments of a perfect Reformation; That our
Ceremonies are senceless in themselves, and serve for nothing but to facilitate
our return to Popery; That our Bishops, though they had renounced the Pope, they
hugged the Popedom, and shared the Authority among themselves, and made their
prostitute Gravities the Common Stales to countenance every Politic fetch; That
the Mortalest Diseases and Convulsions of the Government, did ever proceed from
the Craft of the Prelates. P. 47. That the Bishops were the Gulphs and
Whirlpools of all Benefices, and the Dry Pits of all sound Doctrine; That
Chaplains were the Sewers, or Yeomen-Ushers of Devotion, where the Master is
too Resty, or too Rich, to say his own Prayers, or to bless his own Table. P.
48. That the Liturgy is fantastical, if not senseless, in some places; and that
the like, or worse, may be said of the Litany. So much may serve for the Church
of England.

P. 75. He brings him in upbraiding the Presbyterians, with being misled by
some of a turbulent Spirit; with falling off from their first Principles;
affecting Rigor and Superiority over Men not under them; darting against their
Brethren the wrested Laws and Scriptures thrown by Prelates against themselves,
and as being the most Pragmatical Sides-men of every Popular Tumult and
Sedition, etc. which J. T. thinks not severe enough, and therefore he is very
liberal of his own paultry Choler upon that Party, as we shall see afterward.

P. 116. he gives us an account of his railing at the Independents, and
upbraiding them with taking that Name, whilst they sought to be dependent on
the Magistrates for their Maintenance; which two things, Independence and
State-hire in Religion, can never consist long or certainly together.

Thus the Church of England, Presbyterians and Independents, are obliged to J.
T. for raking up Mr. Milton's ashes, and blowing them in their faces; but this
is not enough, though they be the three great Parties in this Nation, J. T. has a
nobler Work still to perform, and therefore he brings Mr. Milton to lash all
Churches in general, by saying, p. (...). That love of Dominion, or inclination
to Persecution, was a piece of Popery inseparable from all Churches.

It is to be observed, at the same time, that he brings nothing from him
against the Anabaptists; the reason of which is plain, J. T. has a mighty
dependence on that Party at present, he finds some amongst them that are ready
to assist him in propagating his Anarchical Notions, to the disturbance of a
wellsettled Government and therefore he must deal gently with his Friends. It Is
censure enough for them, that Mr. Milton frequented none of their Assemblies,
and made use of none of their Rites in his Family, no more do I suppose will J.
T. but so long as he finds the Pence or Porridge a coming; they may, as soon as
they fail in that, expect the same Treatment from him, that he is now so
liberal of to his old Friends the Papists, Church of England Me^, and
especially the Presbyterians, who, to say the Truth, are as apt to play the
fool, in choosing the objects of their Bounty and Kindness, as any Party under
Heaven. It Is well enough known to the World, J. T. is not the first Viper they
have hugged in their Bosoms, the stings of whom methinks, should at last teach
them something of the Wisdom of the Serpent, and make them consider better next
time who they are, toward whose ^ducation they contribute. The like may be
said of J. T's gratitude to the Church of England, and particularly to the
Memory of Dr. Hopkins Bishop of Londonderry, to whose favor I am informed he
was not a little obliged; but the best return, it seems, he can make to the
Order, is the raking up a fulsome Simile of Mr. Milton's, p. 47. viz. A
Bishop's foot, says he, that has all its Toes (maugre the Gout) and a Linen
Sock over it, is the aptest Emblem of the Prelate himself, who being a
Pluralist, may under one Surplice hide four ^enefices, besides the great
Metropolitan Toe, which sends a foul stench to Heaven. It Is true, J. T. calls
this an unpardonable Simile, but why then would he revive it? It must certainly
be for no other reason, but that he has a mind, as far as his Talent will
reach, to make Clergymen of all Orders and Denominations ridiculous.

This will appear undeniable, if we consider how, p. 66. etc. he brings in Mr
Milton ridiculing the Office of the Ministry. As the Wealthy Man's Factor for
Religion, to whom he resigns the whole Warehouse of his Religion; so that a
Man may now say, his Religion is no more within himself, but is become a
dividual Moveable, goes and comes near him according as the Minister frequents
the House, that the Wealthy Man Feasts his Religion, Lodges him; his Religion
comes home at Nights, is liberally Supped, sumptuously laid asleep, rises, is
saluted; and after the Malmsey, or some well-spic'd Brewage, (and better
Breakfasted than he whose Morning Appetite would have gladly fed on green Figs,
between Bethany and Jerusalem) his Religion walks abroad at Eight, and leaves
his kind Entertainer in the Shop, Trading all the Day without his Religion A
Parochial Minister, who is at his Hercules Pillars in a warm Benefice, is
easily inclinable to finish his Circuit in an English Concordance, and a Topic
Folio, a Harmony, and a Catena, treading the constant Round of certain
Doctrinal Heads, attended with their Uses, Motives, Marks and Means, out of
which, as out of an Alphabet, or Sol fa mi, by forming and transforming,
joining and disjoining variously a little Bookcraft, and two hours Meditation,
he might furnish himself unspeakably, to the performance of more than a Weekly
Charge of Sermoning.

And Page 177. It is not necessary to the attainment of Christian Knowledge,
that Men should sit all their Life long at the Feet of a Pulpited Divine. Whose
Sheep oft-times sit all the while to as little purpose of benefitting, as the
Sheep in their Pews at Smithfield.

No doubt but this was a pleasant Feast to J. T. and his Socinian Friends; and
to be sure they bless themselves mightily for the Invention, that they can thus
run down the Office of the Ministry in the borrowed Wit of so great a Man as
Mr. Milton; but let J. T. and his Abettors remember that our Savior has said
of his Ministers, that whosoever despises them despises him; and they that
despise him, ^espise the Father that sent him. So that the Transition from
despising the Ministry, to the crying down of the Godhead of Jesus, and from
Deism to Atheism, seems to be very Natural and Easy. It Is true, he quotes Mr.
Milton, saying Page ^6. That he speaks not this in Contempt of the Ministry,
but hating the common Cheats of both: But that is only like him who throws
about Firebrands and Darts, and says, Am not I in Sport?

I shall not insist upon his Quotation from Mr. Milton, which he makes use of
to run down Fathers, Councils, Universities, and Public Maintenance for the
Ministry; it su^ces to observe in General, That there is good Ground to suspect,
that part of J. T's Design in this Collection is, to ridicule the Christian
Religion, as established in this Nation, without any distinction of Conformists
or Nonconformists; though ^e bears harder upon the latter, because he knows he
may do so with more safety.

His Malice against the Presbyterians is very remarkable, he thinks, as was
hinted before, That Mr. Milton did not say enough against them, and therefore
he is resolved to supply that Defect out of his own Stores. As Page 64. he
says, They were more intollerably Rigorous, Severe and Tyrannical in the
Parliament times than the Bishops were before. Page 73. That the Presbyterian
Ministers, who from the beginning were the Kings mortal Enemies, were then
enraged that the Independents and other Sects should enjoy either Life or
Liberty, (not angry at the Fact but the Faction) did tragically declaim in
their Pulpits, that the King's Usage was very hard, that his Person was Sacred
and Inviolable, and that any Violence offered to him in the Field (much less by
the Hands of an Executioner) was contrary to the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches.

I am of Opinion, That J. T's new Friends, the Independents, will scarely thank
him for this Vindication of the ^resbyterians, That the Fact of cutting of King
Charles I. was not Theirs. Nor will it be very easy for him to reconcile those
two Positions, That the Presbyterians were the King's mortal Enemies, and yet
angry at his Death. They that know the History of those Times, are not ignorant
that the Presbyterians, whilst they had any Interest in the Parliament or Army,
always expressed themselves with Honor of the King's Person, and that they
Voted his last Concessions a sufficient Ground to Treat with Him; and were
altogether against his Trial and Death, as having taken Arms for the Defense of
their Liberties and Religion, and not the Destruction of their Prince. But J.
T's Friends, the Independents and Anabaptists, had other Designs in view,
nothing less than his Blood could pave the Way to their projected Anarchy in
Church and State: And therefore, as J. T. says himself in the History of
Standing Armies, which he is proud to have thought his, Oliver, who was the
Head of the Faction, came into the Parliament House with an armed Force,
behaved himself like a mad Man, turned them out of Doors, and modeled the
House according to his own Mind, or to this Effect.

Page 77. He discovers the Plot, and the Reason of a^l this envenomed Malice
against the Presbyterians, viz. Because they warmly joined with others, the
last Parliament, to promote Penal Laws against the Socinians; and therefore
says, he finds few People will believe that those in England differ from their
Brethren in Scotland about Persecution, nor that their own sufferings of late
have made them more tender to the Consciences of others. This naturally leads
Men to think that they have not repented of their Rigor in the Civil Wars, and
that should the Dissenters once more get the Secular Sword into their Hands,
they would press Uniformity of Sentiments in Religion as far as any other
Protestants or Papists ever yet have done; witness their inhumane Treatment of
Daniel Williams, a sober Man and judicious Divine, for no Cause that I can
discern, but that he made Christianity plainer than some of his Colleagues in
the Ministry.

This is Bogtrotters Sense and Gratitude twisted together. This is J. T's
Reward to the Presbyterians, for maintaining him at his Studies beyond Sea; and
as profound Sense as ever was spoke in Teagueland. Every Body knows that 'twas
the Independents that treated Mr Williams in that barbarous manner, and that it
was the Presbyterians who did then and do still espouse Mr. William's Cause:
And therefore to argue from this Passage, That the Dissenters in General, or
Presbyterians in Particular, are of a Persecuting Spirit, is like the Admirable
Wisdom of J. T's Countryman, who asked his Fellow Lackey, By my Shoul, dear
Joy, do ye think I shall overtake my Master's Coach before I come at it? Such
another proof of J. T's Wit and Ingenuity we have Page 60. where he falls foul
upon the Presbyterians, because Mr. ^aryl, an Independent, gave his Imprimatur
to an Answer to Mr. Milton's Book about Divorce. Yet this is the mighty Man
that sets up for Reformer General of Church and State; though some are of
Opinion, that he is fitter to teach his Countrymen to gut Oysters.

We must follow him a little too beyond Tweed, but shall first take Notice of
another Bogtrotting Trip Page 75. He tells us, That he hopes the Bulk of those
now called Presbyterians in England, some few leading Men excepted, are no such
Enemies to a Toleration, and that they understand no more of the Consis^rian.
Cl^ssical or Synodical Judicatories, than they allow of the Inquisition or
Hierarchy. Well, first to admit that the Bulk are no Enemies to a Toleration,
and then to except some few, is a very good Irish Distinction. But then again,
Page 78. He tells us, That few will believe that the English Presbyterians
differ from their Brethren in Scotland about Persecution: so that here is both
Nonsense and Contradictions.

But we must pardon him, his Passion was in a ferment upon the Remembrance that
Aikenhead, one of his Brethren in Blasphemy, was hanged by the Presbyterians in
Scotland some time ago, and therefore he Vows Revenge upon the whole Bulk of
those of that Name in both Nations.

That you may the better judge whether the Scotch Presbyterians deserve the
Character of Persecutors or not, for hanging that Fellow, I shall give you an
Account of what was proved upon him at his Trial, as follows, viz. That he
denied the Existence of a Deity, maintaining that God, Nature and the World
were the same thing; that Divinity and the Doctrine of Christianity, was a
Rhapsodie of fansied and ill-invented Nonsense, patched up partly of the Moral
Doctrines of Philosophers and Poetical Fictions, and Extravagant Chimera's He
called the Old Testament Ezra's Fables, saying, That Ezra was the Inventer
thereof. He affirmed the New Testament to be the History of the Impostor Jesus
Christ, who (he said) had learned Magic in Egypt; by which he made the
Ignorant believe he wrought Miracles. He also cursed our Holy Savior, and did
affirm, That the Doctrine of Redemption by Jesus Christ, was a proud and
presumptuous Device, and that the Inventers thereof are damned, if after this
Life there be either Reward or Punishment. He likewise affirmed, That if ever
there was such a Man as Moses, he was a Magician and Impostor also; and
preferred him and Mahomet, as having more Skill in their Arts (as he termed it)
than the blessed Jesus. He said, That he hoped to see Christianity much
weakened, and that he was consident, in a short time, it would be utterly
extirpated.

Now, let any Man judge, whether such a Monster of Blasphemy deserved to live,
and what sort of a Man J. T. is, who is so angry at the Scots Presbyterians for
hanging that Wretch; and at the English Presbyterians, for concurring last
Sessions of Parliament to have Penal Laws enacted against Socinians, whose
Doctrine overturns the very Foundation of Christianity. This gives me ground to
suspect, That J. T has indeed more than ordinary Reason to be concerned at the
Fate of that Scotch Blasphemer; for, if he durst freely speak out his Mind, P.
91. He seems to Balance mightily toward Aikenhead's Opinion, That the New
Testament is a Forgery; for there he tells us from the Instance of Eicon
Basilice, That he ceases to wonder any longer, how many supposititious Pieces,
under the Name of Christ, his Apostles, and other great Persons, should be
published and approved in those Primitive Times. I confess my self to be but
slenderly Versed in Antiquity, and therefore the discovery of my Ignorance in
that Point is the more pardonable; but at the same time I must needs say, That
I don't remember of any supposititious Piece alleged upon our Savior, his
Answer to Abgarus's Letter excepted, I know that the Divine Authority of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, of the Revelations, and others have been objected
against by some; and that the Liturgies, and Canons, etc. fathered upon some of
the Apostles, are rejected by many: But to question the Divine Authority of any
of those Books, of the Old and New Testament, that by Christians in General are
received as Canonical, has a dangerous Tendency. And we have the more Reason to
suspect J. T's Words, because of the Heterodox Opinions he has already
published, That another of the Party did sometime ago write a Book, called, The
Oracles of Reason, with a design to ridicule Revelation, and that it is
certainly the Interest of the Socinians to do so, because they are not able to
withstand the irresistible (...) Force of those Arguments which are brought
against them from the Old and New Testament. But, in the mean time, what
Occasion was there for J. T. in his Account of Mr. Milton's Life, to advance
such Propositions, or to trouble the World with his own silly Thoughts and
malicious Reflections? Mr. Milton's Name is indeed sufficient to procure some
Regard to the Text; but I don't know any Reason why the World should have the
least Esteem for J. T's Comment.

We have seen enough of the Vomit that J. T. has disgorged from his foul
stomach against Religion, and the Ordinance of the Ministry, and shall, in the
next place, take notice of another design he has upon our Morals; and that is,
about the Affair of Marriage and Divorce, p. 55. etc. where he gives an account
of Mr. Milton's Opinion concerning Divorce, occasioned by his Wifes refusing to
come to him when sent for, etc. as mentioned before. I shall not now enter upon
the dispute at large, that point being handled by many Authors, and of late, in
a Book called, Concubinage and Poligamy disproved, in Answer to Butler's
Defense of Concubinage. But this is evident, that if other Causes be assigned
for Divorce, than Adultery, and wilful Desertion, which are the only two Cases
we find mentioned in the N. Testament, it will be attended with horrid
consequences, and especially if the Party be allowed to be judge in their own
Case, as J. T. represents Mr. Milton to have been in his; and in defense of his
Practice, to have laid down this Position, viz. That Indisposition, Unfitness,
or contrary Humors, proceeding from any unchangeable Cause in Nature,
hindering, and always likewise to hinder the main ends and benefits of Conjugal
Society, (that is to say, Peace and Delight) are greater Reasons of Divorce,
than Adultery, or Natural ^rigidity, provided there be a mutual Consent for
Separation.

Whether J. T. represents Mr. Milton's Argument fairly or not I know not, but
any one may see, that admitting those Causes to be sufficient, there is this
great defect in the Position, viz. That there is no mention of having the
Allowance of the Church and Civil Magistrate; nor, indeed, of so much as asking
it, which, if neglected in such a Case, would quickly fill the Kingdom with
Fornication, Adultery, and a Spurious Issue. Many things might be objected
against the Position it self, as that it is contrary to Scripture, which
assigns a Meet help, and the Propagating of a Godly Seed as the chief ends of
Marriage, Genesis 2. 18. 1. 2. 8. Mal. 2. 15. whereas Peace and Delight might have
been had without it; the Man could not have fallen into Strife, when there was
no other Human Creature for him to disagree with; and he had the Perfections of
God and himself, and all the Beauties of the Creation to delight in, without
the Woman. But this is the mischief on it, when Men will become Wise above what
is written, they do but discover their own Folly and Weakness.

Then again; for Indisposition to be a cause of Divorce, is Unreasonable as
well as Unchristian. It is unreasonable; for at that rate, Sickly and
Indisposed Persons must be exposed to unavoidable Calamities, and the hazard o^
being neglected by all others, when abandoned by so near a Relation. It is an
addition unto, or rather an overwhelming them with Grief; must expose their
Children to Contempt, and occasion fatal Discord in Families, betwixt Children
of different Mothers and Fathers, and their Relations; and, by consequence, is
inconsistent with (that Peace and Profit) which J. T. says are the main ends of
Conjugal Society.

It would be Unchristian, as contrary to our Saviors Rule, of doing as we
would be done by, and of making any other Cause of Divorce, but Adultery and
Desertion. It would be as Unnatural, as for a sound part of the Body to neglect
a wounded Limb, seeing the Scripture tells us, that a Man and his Wife become
one Flesh.

Contrary Humors is yet less tolerable; for in that Case, either of the
Parties, when they had a mind to change, would be sure to be cross humored on
purpose.

Then as to unchangeable Causes in Nature, hindering the ends of Conjugal
Society, they are sooner pretended than determined, and not always easy to be
discovered.

As to the Mutual Consent, I have already said that it is not enough, without
the Approbation of the Church and Civil Magistrate; and besides, it may be
obtained by force from the Injured Party, who may be rendered so uneasy, that
they will choose rather to Consent, than to live in perpetual vexation and
danger. These are some obvious Objections, which occur to me immediately upon
reading what J. T. calls Mr. Milton's grand Position; as to his own, I think
them unworthy of a Reply, or any further Remark, than that he had nothing to do
to mix his own Impertinent Jargon with Mr. Milton's Life; but it is Natural for
one, who does all he can to sap the Foundations of Christianity, to be a Patron
of Immorality.

He knows how grateful a Doctrine it is to Libertines, which he lays down of
himself, p. 56. That the Marriage Covenant may be undone, when the Persons find
things otherwise than they promise themselves; and that it is Tyranny to punish
their so doing. The Sparks of the Town will, no doubt, congratulate his happy
Invention for such a plausible way of changing Wives into Misses; for at this
rate, when any distaste arises betwixt them and their Wives, there is no more to
do, but for both Parties to draw Stakes, as he words it, and leave Matters as
they were before. If this be the Purity of the Socinian Doctrine, we may
rationally conclude it never came down from Heaven.

Another, and which I suppose is his main design, is to promote the Cause of a
Commonwealth; but! remember it was objected against the late King James's
Regulation, that he employed mean and unfit Persons in the Design, and
therefore it was generally concluded it would not succeed. I am far from
thinking that J. T. is employed by the bulk of the Commonwealth Party, whatever
he may be by a few; but this I think I may venture to say, That his Management
and Concern will add no Reputation to their Cause. If the advancement of
Socinianism and Immorality, and an unlimited Toleration to Heresies of all
sorts, must be the Preliminaries. It Is very reasonable to think, that it will
be a long while, ere a People zealous for the Christian Religion, expressed in
the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, can think of coming to a
Treaty with those who are for a Commonwealth.

It Is pleasant to find those, who have so well, and so justly baffled the
Doctrine of the Jure Divino-ship of Kingly Government, exclusive of all others,
fall into the same dotage themselves as to a Commonwealth. And thus J. T brings
in Mr. Milton, p. 120, saying, That Christ forbad his Disciples to admit of any
such Heathenish Government as that of Kings; from that Scripture, The Kings of
the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise Authority upon
them are called Benefactors, but you shall not do so. This Text has been often
and properly urged against Lording it over the Faith of Christians, and
domineering over God's Heritage, which the Apostles themselves disclaim, 2 Cor.
1. 24. but there seems no reason (with deference to Mr. Milton's Judgment) to
apply it against Kingly Government, any more than against that by States; for
whereas Luke calls them (...), Kings. Matthew calls them (...), which signifies
any other Princes or Rulers. Mark calls them (...) and (...), those who are
accounted to Rule, and great ones; so that at this rate of arguing, no sort of
Magistrate must be allowed at all, not so much as a Mayor in a Country
Corporation, who, in respect of the Inferior Burgers and Townsmen, may well be
accounted (...). Then let J. T. see to it, how he will be able to defend any
Commonwealth, that ever was, or ha^ now a Being in the World, against this
Anarchical Interpretation, or how he can justify any sort of Magistracy
amongst Christians, which alone shows the Principle to be absurd, destructive
of Human Society, and Introducive of Confusion, whereas God is a God of Order.

Besides, it is ridiculous to call Kingly Government Heathenish, when it was
the Government of the Jews, and approved of by God himself, who gave a Law to
direct their Kings in their Administration, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 14. Our Savior
commanded Tribute to be paid to Gaesar, and did not disown, but plainly confess
his Right to be King of the Jews himself, though he declared that his Kingdom was
not of this World.

And the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. commands submission to every Ordinance of
Man, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, without any
surmise, or hint, that when Nations became Christian, they should reject Kingly
Government.

On the contrary; it is a plain and Authoritative Injunction to Christians to
behave themselves peaceably under whatever Form of Government Providence should
cast their Lot; not to use their Liberty for a Cloak of Licentiousness, but to
Fear God and Honor the King; than which there can be nothing that more
directly condemns the Practice of J. T. and those of this Kidney, who speak and
write reproachfully of all Kings, witness their Healths; that the Thrones of
Kings may be upon their own Heads, and their Crowns under the Peoples Feet; and
their sly and malicious Inclinations in their Pamphlets, about Standing Armies,
and others; against His present Majesty's Person and Administration, though the
best King that ever England had.

It Is scarcely to be supposed, That one of J. T's changeable Temper, is capable
of good Advice; but it were to be wished, that those who think a Commonwealth
the best Form of Government, would consider that the time wherein Mr. Milton
lived and ours is different, the Constitution was then dissolved, the King
beheaded, his Issue banished, the Bishops and their Form of Church Government
pulled down; so that the People had then a fair Opportunity to form themselves
into a Commonwealth, without any further Bloodshed or Trouble; and therefore
Mr. Milton and other Men might less scruple to do all that in them lay to erect
that sort of Government here; but the Case is now altered, our Kingly
Government is administered by the greatest Prince of the Universe, the Champion
and Restorer of our Religion and Laws; both of which have their free Course,
every Man may sit under his own Fig Tree, secured in his Property; the Bench
is filled with upright and learned Judges; ^ost of the Episcopal Sees are
adorned with Persons of Learning and Probity; and Dissenters have their Liberty
to worship God as their own Consciences direct: So that to disturb such a
Government as this, by endeavoring to set up another Form, must unavoidably
throw us into an Intestine War, which would quickly prove more fatal to us than
the tedious War which we are just now come out of. If the Commonwealth Party
had been able to have effected any thing, their Season was when the late King
run away, and before the present Government was established by the Convention;
but to offer to disturb a Government settled upon so good a Foundation, and
with which the People are so well satisfied, is certainly contrary to all Laws
Humane and Divine.

Another Reason J. T. had to promote the publishing Mr. Milton's Life was, his
pleading for Liberty to Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, Arians, Socinians,
and Arminians. And his disapproving the Terms of Trinity, Trinunity,
Coessentially, Tripersonality, and the like, as the Notions of Scholasticks,
who make a Mystery of that in their Sophistick Subtleties, which is in
Scripture a plain Doctrine. P. 144, 145. A little lower he brings him in,
commending the Authors and late Revivers of all these Sects or Opinions, as
Learned, Worthy, Zealous and Religious Men. This pleases J. T. so much, that he
is in a perfect Ecstasy, and says, He never met with any Person who spoke with
so much disinterestedness and impartiality of our various Sects, except Thomas
Firmin. Though at the same time Mr. Firmin, as I am informed, was so much
dissatisfied with him, that he refused to give him any Countenance: But J. T.
thinks this stroke of his Pen necessary to conciliate a Respect to himself and
his Books, among those to whom Mr. Firmin's great Charity rendered his Name
Savory. He is, however, so just, as to quote Mr. Milton's Restriction too, viz.
That the best Method to prevent the increasing of Popery in this Nation, is by
the Toleration of all kinds of Protestants, or any others, whose Principles do
not necessarily lead them to Sedition or Vice.

But what will J. T. say, if it be proved that his Principles, and those of his
Party, do necessarily lead them to Sedition and Vice? I am afraid they will
scarcely be able to evince the contrary from their Practices. We have heard
already what loose Principles, as to the dissolving of Marriage, J. T. has
endeavored to propagate. Nor do I see what good Morals we are to expect from
such as deny the Godhead of Jesus Christ, by which they make him a Liar, who
re-called Marriage to its Primitive Institution, condemned those frivolous
Causes of Divorce in the Jews, which J. T. would now revive again; and taught
such a resin'd Morality, that he censured a lustful look as Adultery. If Jesus
Christ was a Liar, in owning himself to be the Son of God, God himself, and
equal with God, which the Jews charged him with, to prove their Indictment
against him for Blasphemy, we have no Reason to believe that sublime Chastity
which he teaches in the Gospel, but may safely return to Poligamy and
Concubinage, as practiced among the Jews.

Let J. T. prove, if he can, That this is not the natural Consequence of
denying Jesus Christ to be God: And if it be so, it must be granted, That the
Socinian Principles have a vicious Tendency; and therefore, according to Mr.
Milton's own concession, ought not to be tolerated.

But much more will it appear, that they are not to be suffered, when we
consider their other Doctrines, such as that of Wolzogenius, who in his
Commentary on Mat. 20. v. 28. says, There is no such Justice in God, as does
exact Vindictive Punishment for sins; and the same is maintained by Crellius,
in his Answer to Grotius de Satisfactione, and by Socinus in his Theological
Prelections.

Then the Opinion that Socinus, and others of them, broach about Death Eternal,
that it is nothing but a perpetual continuance in Death, or Annihilation; that
Everlasting Fire is so called from its Effect, which is the Eternal Extinction
or Annihilation of the Wicked, who shall be found alive at the last Day, must
necessarily be an encouragement for Men to indulge themselves in the pursuit of
all sensual Pleasures, and cannot have any influence to deter them from the
greatest of Villainies to reach their ends, provided they can but escape the
Sword of the Civil Magistrate

Their denying of secret Assistances, and the certainty of God's foreseeing
all future Events, that depend upon the Freedom of Man's Will, must needs also
have a tendency to encourage Immorality.

I shall only add, that certainly no Christian Magistrate would ever allow the
Mahometans to form themselves into Societies, erect Mosques, and write Libels
against the Christian Religion, in their Dominions, under pretense that they
think themselves obliged in Conscience to do so; and therefore, there is much
less reason to suffer such, as call themselves Christians, to undermine the
Foundations of our Religion, and to teach, That the Jews and Turks who believe
and worship the One True God, are in a nearer proximity to Salvation than we
who believe the Trinity; and that Mahomet meant not his Religion should be
esteemed a New Religion, but only the Restitution of the true Intent of the
Christian Religion; and this the Socini^ns do, as may be seen in their Book
called An Exhortation to free Enquiry, p. 3. and the Resolution concerning the
Trinity, and Incarnation, p. 18, 19. which verifies the old Prophecy of
Si^ler, That the Socinian Doctrine would prepare the way for Mahometanism, and
bring ruin upon those flourishing Countries where it is sown, as may be seen
in Cloppen^urch's Preface to his Confutation of Compendio'um Socinianismi.

It were to be wished that most of those who have embraced that pernicious
S^cinian Error, would examine their own Consciences fairly, and try whether a
loose Conversation, and Love to an uncontrolable Pursuit of their sens^al
Pleasures, which makes up the best part of Mahomet's Paradise, did not at first
beget in them a good Opinion of that Heresy; and to consider whether the
dissolu^ Lives of most of their Fraternity ^e not a just Judgment upon them
(...) God^ for growing Vain in their Imaginations, and rejecting all those
Principles of Religion which they cannot fathom with their shallow and
corrupted Reason, according to that of the 1st. of the Romans, Because they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became Vain in their
Imaginations. Their foolish Heart was darkened; and professing th^mselves to be
wise, they became Fools. Wherefore God also gave them up to Vile Affections and
Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own Hearts, to dishonor their own
Bodies. Let J. T. mock this as a Pulpit-System, if he please; but he would do
well to remember that it is the Censure of the Holy Ghost by the Mouth of the
Apostle.

I think it is evident enough, that his Practice in writing Pamphlets against
the King's Administration, subjects him to the First Part of Mr. Milton's
Censure, as Seditious; and therefore he ought not to be tolerated. Then, as to
the Principles he advances, I have said before, that, closely pursued, they
will allow of no Magistracy at all; an Error that some of his new Friends the
Anabaptists have been formerly taxed with, and he seems to be riding Post
toward it.

As to a Liberty for Arrians and Socinians, which he presses so much, I must
beg leave to dissent from Mr. Milt^n in that Point. Mutual Forbearance in
things indifferent, as Meats, Drinks, and Days, is enjoined by the Apostle,
Romans 14. 16. 15. 17. Col. 2. 16. but at the same time he commands Heretics to
be rejected by the Church, after the first and second Admonition. Tit. 3. 10.
and calls the denying of the Lord that bought them; whereof those that deny the
Godhead of Jesus Christ, are certainly guilty; a damnable Heresy. In the 2d.
of the Revelations, the Church of Ephesus is commended for trying false
Apostles, and finding them Liars; and for bating the Nicolaitans, who are
commonly supposed to have maintained the lawfulness of a Community of Women;
toward which, J. T. seems to be making Advances. The Church of Pergamos is
blamed for suffering those that taught the Doctrine of Balaam, and of the
Nicolaitans; as is the Church of Thyatira, for suffering Jezabel, a false
Prophetess, to seduce People to commit Fornication; yet, there is no doubt, but
all these pretended to Conscience, Liberty, and good Precedents, as the
Nicolaitans are said to have done, from the Example of Nicolas, who exposed his
Wife to be comm^; and as Mr. Butler la^ely did, from the practice of the Jewish
Patriarchs, in defense of Concubinage.

If J. T. object, that those People were Vicious; I reply, that Blasphemy, of
which the Socinians are guilty, is as great a Crime as any here mentioned; and
therefore to be punished, but not permitted, by the Magistrate. Nor is it
consi^ent with Christian Ze^l to suffer any such Persons as call themselves
Christians, and yet at the same time entertain such Principl^s as must
necessarily, if our blessed Savior were now upon ^arth, oblige the^ to murder
him as the Jews did, and upon that very same account too, viz. because, as they
thought, he being a Man, made himself God, John 10. 3^. Then certainly it must
be the Duty of Kings, and Queens, and other Magistrates, who are promised to be
Nursing Fathers and Mothers to the Church, under the Gospel, Isa. 49. 2^. to
protect her from such pernicious Enem^es as would administer Poison to the
People committed to their Charge; otherwise they don't act the Part of Nursing
Fathers and Nursing Mothers fai^lly.

As to the Reviver of the Arrian, and Founder of the Socinian Heresy, Faustus
Socinus, he was so far from being either a Learned or Good Man, as J. T. would
suggest from Mr. Milton, that he never followed any Regular Study, but picked
up his Notions from his Uncle Leli^s's Papers, with which he set up to be Head
of the Sect himself; his own Companions called him a Passionate, Turbulent and
Abusive Man, upbraided him with writing too precipitantly and rashly, and that
he had too good an Opinion of himself, which may serve for a Mirror to J. T. to
view his own Face in. This and a great deal more may be found in a Letter which
Squarcia Lupus wrote to him in 1581, and is printed amongst Socinus his Works.
Niemoj^vius in a Letter writ to him in 1587. and others of his Companions,
upbraid him with Paradoxes, and horrible Opinions contrary to the Word of God.
He is also charged with saying the Arrians gave too much to Jesus Christ,
affirmed that our Savior took a Journey to Heaven after his Baptism and came
down again, to avoid the force of that Text, that no Man has ascended up to
Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, John 3. 13. he denied the Immensity
of God, ascribing him a peculiar Corner in Heaven, and alleged that he knew
only necessary Effects. Then let J. T. see to it how these Positions are
consistent with Learning or Piety.

Servetus the Patriarch of the Socinians, is charged by Stanis^aus
Lubienescius's Hist. Refor. Polon. with extracting his Opinions about the
Trinity, out of the Alcoran. Calvin charges him with reviving the Error of the
Manichees, in holding, that Man's Soul was a Portion of the Divine Substance,
and says he was the Grand Patron of the Anabaptists of that Age; so that J. T.
acts naturally and according to the Example of his Patriarch to fall in with
that Party now. Much more might be said of the Errors and Villainous Practices
of the First Spreaders of that Heresy, as Valentinus Gentilis, and Alcia^us,
etc. but this is enough to make the F^lshood of that Assertion appear, that the
Revivers of those Opinions were Good and Learned Men.

The mention of Servetus, and Valentinus Gentilis, puts me also in mind of the
Villainy and Malice they were guilty of toward Calvin and the Reformed at
Geneva, which shows also that J. T. acts naturally when he treats the
Presbyterians so Abusively, of which I shall only instance one Villainous
Slander, p. 78. That they have a Project of Comprehension now on foot, whereof
some Men of Figure among 'em seem to be so Fond, whereby the rest are easily
deceived and like to be left in the Lurch by certain Persons who for several
Years past, made the Hierarchy and Liturgy such strange Bugbears; though if the
Church will please to become a kind Mother to themselves, and show a little
Complaisance for their old Friends, they are ready to pronounce her Orders, her
Prayers, and her Ceremonies to be very Innocent and Harmless things, but
mistaken formerly for the Pillars of Antichrist, the Symbols of Idolatry, the
Dregs of Popery, etc. -- Then he concludes the Paragraph thus. The Wishes of
all Good Men are, that the National Church being secured in her Worship and
Emoluments, may not be allowed to force others to her Communion, and that all
Dissenters from it being secured in their Liberty of Conscience, may not be
permitted to meddle with the Riches or Power of the National Church.

I don't believe any of the Presbyterians have such an Esteem for J. T. as to
entrust him with their Secrets, nor that those of the National Church, or the
Two Houses of Parliament, who mus^ form the Comprehension into a Law, if any
such thing be on foot, are like to take Directions in that Affair from such a
Libertine as he The Wishes of all Good Men which he pretends to know so well, I
believe he knows nothing of at all; for scarce any that knows him, think him
worthy of their Company: And as for his Suggestion that some Men of Figure
among the Presbyterians are like to betray and deceive the rest, the World will
expect better proof than Irish Evidence for it, ever they believe it. The
Comprehension that he talks of, is like the rest of his Irish Sense; for if the
Presbyterians approve of the Orders, Prayers and Ceremonies of the Church, as
he suggests they will do, its a full Conformity, and renders a Comprehension
needless. I am so far from J. T's. Opinion that all Good Men are against a
Comprehension, that I believe the quite contrary to be true, if such an Union
could be effected, as might not bear hard upon the Consciences of either Party,
all Good Men would rejoice at it; though I know that there is nothing more
dreadful to such Pro^igates as he than the least appearance of it, because then
their blasphemous Opinions, and immoral Practices would be more narrowly
inquired into, and have a greater Force to contend with; it is the hard fate of
the Presbyterians that they are lashed on all hands. The dissenting Sectaries
hate them because they are for a National Church, and Parochial Constitution,
and have never been Enemies to Kingly Government: The High^lown Churchmen hate
them more than other Dissenters too, upon that very Account, because they think
them their most dangerous Rivals; and so much the more, that the Moderate
Churchmen and they have a good Esteem, and mutual Honor for one another. So
that if Worldy Interest, and Faction, did not prevent it, an Union betwixt them
might easily be accomplished to the unspeakable Advantage of these Kingdoms in
particular, and of the Protestant Interest in general; but as it were
unreasonable in the Presbyterians to desire, that the Church should Relinquish
any thing which they believe to be of Divine Instiiution; it were as
unreasonable for the Church on the other hand, to desire their Assent and
Consent to humane Institutions, as Terms of Communion, which in Conscience they
cannot Comply with; nor does it appear for all J. T's. slanderous Suggestion,
that they are any ways inclinable to such a Compliance, of which any Person may
soon be satisfied that reads Mr. Baxter's English Nonconformity, and yet its
known he would have gone as far toward a Comprehension as any of the Party.
But J. T. being a Changeling himself, measures other Men's Consciences by his
own, which appears to be one of the largest Size, and nearly allied to his
Countrymen's Broggs, that let out the Water as fast as they let it in. If he or
his Friends find themselves aggrieved by this sort of Treatment, let them read
his own Apology for Mr. Milton's being sharp upon Salmasius: I am satisfied all
good Christians will own, that he that denies the Godhead of Jesus Christ,
deserves as severe a Rebuke as he that condemned the Murder of King Charles;
and that he who reviles Church-of- England-Men, Presbyterians, and
Independents, nay, all that prosess Christianity in general, Socinians
excepted, with so much freedom, is as fit to be treated with Contempt, as he
that wrot^ against the Rump Parliament, especially when they consider the
Learning and Reputation of Salmasius, and how much Inferior J. T's. Character
is to his in every Respect; and that, as I have said already, he is engaged in
a Party who prefer Mahometism to the Christian Religion, as established in this
Nation, which gives but too Just Cause to suspect the Truth of that Saying,
formerly charged upon him, That he hoped to be at the Head of as Great a Sect
as ever Mahomet was, and in truth it were no loss to this Nation if he were
sent as a Present to the Grand Signior, to see whether the Mahometans think fit
to make him their Mufti. For I am of Opinion he will scarcely, according to
Mahomet's Example, be able to deceive any rich Man's Wife to forsake her
Husband, and furnish him with Money for advancing his Heresy in this Nation.
His loose Doctrine about dissolving of Marriage when he shall be pleased to
think the Match unsit, or to accuse his Wife of Indisposition, etc. is a good
Caveat for our English Women not to trust him, nor do I hear that he is in any
Condition to come to a good Composition with them for Damages in such a Case,
as he proposes, p. 56.

There are many other things in this pretended Life that deserve a Remark, as
his Vanity and Affectation in mixing his own Thoughts and Commen^s, f^sooth,
throughout the whole; his ^ulsome Flattery of many Gentlemen now a'ive, whom
he pulls into his Narrati^ By Head and Shoulders, some of whom I am satisfied
don't thank him for his Commendation; his new fangled way of denying the
ordinary Title of Mr. which the Civility of England prefixes to the Names of
any Gentlemen, or others whom they design to treat with the least sort of
Respect. But this perhaps he has done to please the Quakers, many of whom are
a sly and precise sort of Socinians; all of which, though but minute things, may
serve to discover his Fopp^shness and Affectation; and that he is ^itter to be
contemned than any way regarded, were it not that there are some Fools who
admire him, and perhaps some of a worse Character that support him, as finding
him a Tool fitted to their purpose.

It were to wished that those in Authority did more narrowly Enquire after such
Incendiaries; it being no ways improbable that such Persons, who by their
Principles, think Turks and Jews nearer to Salvation than Christians, and allow
themselves a Liberty to join with all Parties to carry on their Designs, of
bringing the Doctrines of the Trinity, and Christ's Satisfaction into doubt; as
Leonardus Abbas Busalis, Laelius Socinus, Bernardinus Ochinus, and about Forty
others of the Italian Combination, did about 1546. as we are informed by
Wissowatius's Compend. Biblioth. Antitrin. p. 18. It is no way improbable, I
say, that such Persons may be set on by the Court of Rome it self, to overturn
the Reformation, as well as Valentinus Gentilis, and Servetus, were discharged
by them, and suffered to publish their Blasphemies openly, as soon as they
understood that their design was to oppose Calvin, as we are told in Luben.
Hist. Refor. Polon. This is so much the more probable that J. T. and those he
can seduce, are the loudest in their Clamours against the Administration of His
present Majesty, who is, under God, the chief Pillar of the Protestant
Interest; and therefore finding that it would be too barefaced to attack him
under an open Profession of Popery, they now assume the Form of Socinians, and
would give themselves out for the chief Asserters of Liberty and Property.

To conclude: Whatever J. T. may have quoted in his Life of Mr. Milton, to
favor a Liberty to the Socinians, it is hardly supposeable that any Nation,
truly Christian, will ever suffer such poisonous Vipers to nestle among 'em, as
Compare the Mystery of the Trinity to the Egyptian Hieroglyphics; say, that
the Mystery is foolish, and their Hieroglyphical Language as false and
contridictory, as vain and trifling; that the Doctrine of the Trinity is the
very Genius and Spirit of the Old Mystical Hieroglyphics, that is to say,
partly foolish, and partly false. That what Cato said of the Roman Augurs, is
applicable to the A^hanasian Doctors. i. e. (those who teach the Doctrine of
the Trinity) that though their Religion be established by Law, warranted by
Custom and Prescription, for all that 'twas a Cheat so gross and palpable, that
he could not but admire they were such stark Fools, or such perfect Knaves,
that, meeting, they could carry a grave Look upon one another. These are the
handsome Reflections they make on the established Religion in a Book called,
The Trinitarian Scheme, p. 7.

Then as to the Sacraments, they treat them with a Contempt equally blasphemous
and irreligious, as may be seen in the Trinitarian Scheme considered. Let a Man
in Black, say they, sprinkle you with the Churches Water, or give you a bit of
Bread, or a sup of Wine, over which he has pronounced the Wonder-working
Words, prescribed in Mother Churches Ritual, though by Nature you are as bad as
the Devil, you shall be presently inclined to as much Good as will save you
from Hell, and qualify you for Heaven, -- else the Churches Incantation
produces only a momentary Effect, and a false Appearance of Good, no less
certainly, I say, than by tying the Norman Knot you may gain the Love of the
Person you desire. If a party that thus ridicules, and blasphemes our Savior,
and the Doctrines of the Gospel, ought to be tolerated, let the Christian World
determine.

THE CHARACTER OF J. T. etc.
I Designed to have made an end here, but it coming into my Thoughts how much
J. T. values himself upon the invective Characters of Men, Books, Sects,
Parties, and Opinions, which he has scraped together in his pretended Life of
Mr. Milton; I thought it might not be disserviceable to repay him a little in
his own Coin. For his own Character, it is scarce worth the drawing; yet any Man
who has a good Faculty at describing Ignorance, Impudence, Ingratitude, and
Libertinism, might go a great way toward it in a few Words; and besides what
may be proved from his Writings, there is Evidence enough to be found amongst
his Acquaintance to instruct the Particulars: So that if any Painter would be
at the Pains to draw his Head, and any Author bestow a few Minutes upon his
Life, it might serve as a Little Supplement to the next Edition of R^s
Panseb^ia; where, if they pleased, they might describe Ari^s v^iding his
Bowels, together with his stinking Heresies, and J. T. licking them up; at
which Employment I shall l^ave him, and take the Character of the Party, (whose
Ant^-signanus he would seem to be, a little into Consideration.

The first thing I shall take notice of, is their Agreem^nt and Harmony with
the Church of Rome, in the Words of Ruarus, one of their own Writers, who says,
That the Papists, of all others, have the most Reason to be kind to the
Socinians, because in the chief Articles of the Christian Faith, they agree
with the Church of (...) more than any other Sect, viz. in the Doctrine of
Predestination, Election, and Conditional ^eprobation; the Universality of
God's Grace, and Fruits of Christ's Death; of Free Will, and its Interest in
the Conversion of Man to the Faith; of Justification, which is made effectual
by Charity; of the Necessity of Good Works, which they urge more vehemently
than any other Church, of the Possibility of Keeping all God's Commandments; of
the Difference betwixt the Old and New Testament, preferring the New before the
Old, with respect to the Promises and Precepts; of the Difference betwixt
Venial and Deadly Sins, etc.

If this be duly considered, it will not appear to be any uncharitable or
illgrounded Conjecture for us to think that the Revival of the Socinian Heresy
with so much vigor, since the Revolution, is an Effect of Popish Subtilty and
Malice, to prevent a further Growth of the Reformed Religion, and to disturb
His Majesty's Government, especially considering their deep Silence before that
time, and that J. T. and other Socinians, of late have been so busy to create
an ill Opinion in the People of the present Administration, by virulent
illnatur'd Pamphlets, and for that very Reason fall in with the Jacobites and
Commonwealths-men. This, probabl^, is the Cause why J. T. and others, are so
much enraged at the Act against Blasphemy, last Sessions; and therefore it
appears plainly to be His Majesty's Interest to p^ess the Enacting of further
Laws against it, as he has graciously done in his Speech. We have no Reason to
doubt but the Italians are as much concerned to form a ^ombination to disturb
the Reformation now, as they did by Leonard^s Abbas Buss^lis, Laelius Socinus,
etc. in Calvin'^ Time, as has been formerly mentioned

The (...) thing I shall take notice of, is their Agreement with the Turks in
Ma^ters of Religion. I have already ^inted, that the Author of the Notes on
Athanasi^. p. 3^. sa^s, That the Jews and Turk^ who believe and worship the one
true God, and him only, are perhaps in a nearer Proximity to Salvation than
such as, against suffic^ent Opportunities of a right Information, and for
Wo^ldly Interest, have (...) from the Ch^istian Faith to the Athanasian. And
the in another of their Pamphlets, intitul^, R^solutions concerning the Trinity
and (...), p. 18. and 19. they tell us, That diverse Historians will have it,
that Mahomet meant not his Religion should be esteemed a new Religion, but only
the Restitution of the True Intent of the Christian Religion They affirm
moreover, That the Learned Mahometans call themselves the True Disciples of the
M^ssias, ^r Christ, ^ntimating thereby, That Christians are Apostates from the
most essential Parts of the Christian Doctrine.

In order to fix this Charge upon the Generality of English Socinians, we shall
make use of the Authority of Socinus himself, who in his Answer to the same
Charge of Mahometanism by (...), could not free himself and his Followers from
it by any other Argument, but that they gave Divine Worship to Jesus Christ --
And in his Institutions, of the Christian Religion, Tom. 1. p. 50. he says,
That they who are against the Worship of Christ, cannot be Christians.

But the Generality of the English Socinians reject the Adoration of Christ,
and say, that there are no Acts of Worship ever required to be paid to the Lord
Jesus Christ, but such as may be paid to a Civil Power to a Person in high
Dignity and Office, to Prophets, and Holy Men, o^ to such as are actually
possessed of the Heavenly Beatitudes. Answer to Milborn, p. 50.

Ergo, by the Authority of Socinus himself, the Generality of the English
Socinians are Mahometans and not Christians. And from the Answer to Milborn, it
likewise appears that they fall in with the Papists, in worshipping Saints
d^parted. So that their Religion is a Medly of Mahometanism and Popery.

In the next place it may be proved from the Authority of the learned Man who
favors their Party, and of whom J. T. says, that he is the greatest
Philosopher that has been in the World since Cicero, p. 1. 17. It may, ^say
say, be proved by his Authority, that the Mahometans are as good Christians as
the English Socinians; thus in his Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 26. etc.
and p. 192. he says, the great Proposition controverted concerning Jesus of
Nazareth, was, whether he was the Messiah or not, and challenges any Man to
show that there was any other Doctrine, upon their Assent to which, or
Disbelief of it, Men ^ere pronounced Believers, or Unbelievers.

But in the Second Chapter of the Alcoran, Jesus of Nazareth is declared to ^e
the Messiah, in these Words, among others: Oh! Mary, God declar^th unto thee a
Word from which shall proceed the Messiah, named Jesus the Son of Mary, full of
Honor in this World, and that shall be in the other, of the number of
Intercessors with his Divine Majesty.

Ergo, the Mahometans are according to the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, as good Christians as the English S^cinians; and indeed, for any
thing I know, they deserve the Preference, for chap. 5. of the Alcoran, they
say, God has imprinted Indsid^lity in the ^arts of the Jews, b^use amongst
other things) they boasted that they had s^ain the Messiah, jesus the Son of
Mary; whereas, as I have said before, the Socinians according to their
Principles, must n^eds approve of the Jews having put him to Death for his
Blasphemy, in making himself God.

Another thing wherein the Mahometans and our English Socinians agree, i^,
about the Worship of Jesus Christ. We have heard that the latter will only
allow him such Worship as may be given to a Civil Power, etc. and Sandius in
his Hist. E^e. lib. 3. a Work mightily ^eem'd by the Socinians, tells us the
Turks maintain that Christ ought to be Worshipped, but not with that highest
sort of Worship, wherewith the lord his God is Worship^ed; and yet at the same
time Mahomet owns, in the Alcoran, that Jesus Christ is on the Right Hand of
God, and he himself on the Left.

I shall insist no further on the Agreement betwixt the English Socinians and
the Turks: What is already done being enough to show that they subvert the very
Foundations of Christianity, and therefore ought not to be tolerated in a
Christian Nation.

The next thing I shall take notice of, is, the abominable Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation of the Socinians, by which in a Jesuitical manner, they transform
themselves into all Shapes; make no Conscience of Fraudulent Subscriptions and
Perjury, but Subscribe and Swear to what they never beli^v'd nor intended; and
don't care what Methods they make use of, provided they can thereby subvert the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and Christ's Satisfaction.

This Charge is made plain upon the Italian Combination, formerly mentioned, by
Wissowatius in his Narrat. Compend. Biblioth. Antitrin. and Lubienescius's
Hist. Reform. Polon. Calvin in his Theological Tracts, etc. and is as plainly
proved against our English Socinians by their Book of the Athan^sian Creed, not
required by the Church of England; wher^in they say the Thirty Nine Articles,
are not Articles of Faith, but Peace; though in the Title it is declared that
those Articles were agreed upon for the avoiding diversity of Opinions, and for
the establishing of Consent, touching true Religion: And the Charge given by
his Majesty, is, that no Man shall either print or preach to draw the Article
aside any way, but shall submit to it in the plain and full meaning thereof,
and shall not put his own Sense or Comment to be the Meaning of the Article,
but shall take it in the Literal or Grammatical Sense. By which it is plain
that a Socinian cannot subscribe the First Article, where it is asserted, that
in the Unity of the Godhead there be Three Persons of one Substance, Power, and
Eternity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, without the groslest
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation.

Then as to the Sacraments, according to the Principles, they have laid down in
the Trinitarian Scheme considered, they can join in them with Papists,
Lutherans, Church-of- England-Men, Presbyterians, Independants, or Anabaptists,
for say they, p. 28. They don't place Religion in Worshipping God by
themselves, or after a particular Form or Manner, but in right Faith, and a
Just and Charitable Conversation. So that if they can but persuade themselves
that their Faith is Right, and their Conversation Just and Charitable; they can
with the same Liberty go to the Turkish Mosque, the Popish Ma^s House, and the
Meetings of Protestants of all Denominations; they don't think themselves
obliged to have any regard whether the Administration be according to the Word
and Institution of God or not. The Mahometans and Papists have a Right Faith,
they believe Jesus to be the Messiah, which according to them is the only
Characteristick that distinguishes a Believer from an Unbeliever, therefore
they can frequent their Assemblies: And as to the Sacraments, they tell us in
that same Book, that he that is baptized, is only to resolve a Newness of Life,
(which by the way destroys Insant-Baptism, and declares their falling in with
the Anabaptists:) And in the Lord's Supper, they say they are only to
commemorate the shedding of his Blood and breaking of his Body. So that let it
be a mere Layman, or a Minister duly ordained, that Administers, or let it be
a Consecrated Waf^r, or Bread and Wine, it is all one to them. What a vast deal
of Blood and Treasure might this have saved to this Nation, and to the French,
and other Protestants, had they been so happy as to be thus principled! What
Millions of Men and Money might Christendom have saved, had the Gentlemen of
this Latitude been of an earlier Rise! 'Its all one to them whether the Cross
or the Crescent be predominant, nay it is much better that the latter should
carry it, for as we have heard already, Mahomet intended only the Restitution
of the true Intent of the Christian Religion. Nay, I have read it somewhere,
that the Learned Socinians ascribe the Propagation of Mahometism to their
Denial of the Trinity, and not to the Sword. Then let any Christian judge what
can be too vile or base for Men of such Principles to attempt or act, so they
can but attain their Ends of overturning the chief Principles of Christianity,
that so they may be at Liberty to take a full swinge in pursuing the Lusts of
the Flesh, and other Impurities in which the Mahometans do so much delight.
There Is little reason to doubt but J. T. and others of his Kidney, how much
soever they may be against a Comprehension amonst Protestants in this Nation,
which they know would strengthen the Reformed Interest throughout Europe, would
soon come to a Comprehension with the Mahometans, as to the point of the
Bottle, which seems to be the only material Point in difference betwixt them,
except it be, that the Turks, as Nicholaus, Cardinal de Cusa, in his Crib^atio
Alcorani informs us, have more respect for the New Testament than J. T. for
they prefer the Gospel to their own Law; whereas J. T. when a Student at one of
the Scotch Universities, threw away his Greek New Testament, because he could
not understand the Language, as some of his Co^rades have told the Story, and
in a great Rage cried Damn the Galatians, which was the Place where he was then
reading; and I am informed he now brags that he has banished all Divinity out
of his Closet, whence it is to be supposed that it was always a Stranger in his
Heart; yet this is the mighty Man of so great knowledge and Light, to whom
there is nothing Mysterious in Christianity.

Another Instance of their Dissimulation, is, That they, good Men, have a
mighty Esteem for the Church of England; they approve of known Forms of Prayers
and Praises, as also in administering Baptism, the Lord's Supper, Marriage, and
the other Religious Offices; they like well of the Discipline of the Church by
Bishops and Parochial Ministers; they communicate with the Church as far as
they can, and contribute their Inter^st to favor her against all others who
would take the Chair, as they tell us in their Trinitarian Scheme Considered,
p. 28. yet in the 24th. Page of that same Book, as I have already hinted, they
ridicule the Sacraments thus: Let a Man, say they, in black sprinkle you with
some of the Churches Water, or give you a bit of Bread, or sup of Wine, over
which he has pronounced the Wonder-working Words, prescribed in Mother
Churches Ritual, [and yet they pretend to approve of the Church of England's
Form in the Administration of the Lord's Supper] though by Nature, continue they,
you are a^ bad as the Devil, you shall presently be inclined to as much Good as
will save you from Hell, and qualify you for Heaven, and this no less
certainly if you are one of the Elect; for else the Churches Incantation
produces only a momentary Effect, and a false Appearance of Good: No less
certainly, I say, than by tying the Norman Knot, you may gain the Love of the
Person you desire, or by other Devices, recorded in the Learned Books (so Fools
esteem them) of Magic, you may cause Hatred, raise Winds, and do a thousand
other Feats which have no more Natural or Real Agreement with those Causes that
are said to produce them, than Faith and Obedience have with a bit of Bread, or
with a sprinkling of Water. Therefore, when St. Augustine defined a Sacrament
to be the Outward Visible Sign of an Inward Invisible Grace, or Energy, the
good Father should have considered that this is the Definition of a Charm.
[Thus the Socinians show their Respect to the Church of England, by Ridiculing
her Description of a Sacrament] and after some more profane Raillery of the
same Nature, they conclude. So that let them turn themselves which way soever
they can, they have turned the Gospel Sacraments into Charms and Spells.

If this be not villainous Dissimulation, and dreadful Blasphemy, there can be
no such thing. The Church of England pronounces no other Words over the
Elements, but those pronounced by our Savior, Matt. 26. 26, 27. and by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. And is that Mother-Churches Ritual, and her Wonder-working
Words? Don't those Men know that the Church of England believes nor teaches no
such thing as Transubstantiation, nor ascribes no other Efficacy to the
receiving of the Lord's Supper by Faith, but what the Scripture ascribes to it?
But perhaps this is J. T's meaning, when he tells us, as before, that he ceases
to wonder how so many Supposititious Pieces come to be charged upon Christ and
his Apostles. The whole New Testament is only Mother Churches Ritual. Yet these
are the Men that ought to have a Toleration, though they impiously ridicule and
blaspheme our Savior and his Church, whom they pretend to revere.

I have already taken notice of J. T's Respect to the Church of England, her
Bishops, Liturgy, etc. by his taking together all that Mr. Milton thought fit
to bespatter them with; yet he, good Man, is for s^curing the National Church
in her Worship and Emoluments, though impertinently, and without any relation to
a History of Mr. Milton's Li^e, he brings him in comparing the Bishops to Five
Gouty Toes with a Linen Sock over them, and the Metropolitan Toe sending up a
foul Stench to Heaven, and calls them the Gulfs and Whirlpools of Benefices.
Their Liturgy, he says, is fantastical and senseless; and in the Litany,
Neither Priest nor People speak any entire Sense of themselves, through the
(...); and it is far from the Imitation of any warranted Prayer, but has been
the Pattern of many a Jig, p. 48, 49. If J. T. does not approve of these
Sayings of Mr. Milton, why did he take such Care to extract them from his
Works, and publish them in his Life? And if he do approve them, is he not a
gross Hypocrite to wish the Church may be secured in a senseless fantastical
Worship, which is a Pattern for Jigs, and in her Emoluments, which send up a
soul Stench to Heaven? More might be said to prove the fraudulent,
hypocritical, versatile Temper of J. T. and his Party; but this is more than
enough.

The last thing I shall take notice of, is, their mighty Declamations against
Perscution; the Reason of which, is, that they know themselves to be liable to
all the Punishments appointed by those Laws which establish Christianity in the
Nation, but not that they are really against using Force in Matters of
Religion; which will be manifest, if we consider the malicious and vindictive
Temper, which J. T. and the rest of his Party have discovered against King
William, the Church of England, and the Presbyterians, for the Law enacted
against the Socinian Heresy last Sessions. Their Malice against the King has
been sufficiently evidenced by their libelling his Administration in all their
Pamphlets against Standing Armies, and by J. T's bringing the Argument in again
by Head and Shoulders into Mr. Milton's Life, p. 118. where from Mr. Milton's
saying, the Army (meaning that left by Cromwell) lately Renowned for the
Civilest, best Ordered, and most Conscientious Army in the Universe, did, for
no Cause at all, subdue the Supreme Power that set them up; if, says he, an
Army deserving this Character was capable of enslaving their Country, what may
be expected from any other, as most are, of a worse disposition? -- Their
Malice against the Church of England I have just now proved, and that this is
the Cause of their Malice against the Presbyterians; he fairly insinuates
himself p. 79. Then let any reasonable Man judge, whether a Party who have
discovered so much Malice and Rage against those that oppose them, would not
Persecute if they had Power to do it.

But I proceed to give a Proof of their Temper that way from matter of Fact, as
related by themselves in their Brief History, Letter 4. p. 48. where we have an
Account that the prevailing Party Persecuted their Brethren severely; -- That
those in Transylvania would admit none into the Ministry, without obliging
themselves beforehand, by Subscription, not to speak against Worshipping Jesus
Christ; -- They in Poland were more Rigid, Deposed and Excommunicated such as
held Christ might not be Worshipped with Divine Worship, which was so much the
more extraordinary, that the Persecutors did not think themselves obliged to
call upon, and worship Christ, but only that they might lawfully do it. -- And
Socinus himself, in his Premonition to what he wrote against Francis Davidis,
says, It is a Sin to omit the Worshipping of Christ when we join with them in
Worship who call upon his Name, or when the Spirit moves us to do it; and in
their Answer to Milborn they own that the Question about the Invocation of
Christ has very much divided them.

Nor can any Reason be given why they who are in a manner of the same Religion
with the Mahometans, as has been already proved, should not, according to
Mahomet's Command, in the 9th Chapter of the Alcoran, Break Truce with their
Enemies, Kill them wherever they meet them, take them for Slaves, detain them
Prisoners, and lay Ambushes for them: And therefore it were but just that J. T.
and such as he, who are a dishonor to the Christian Name, should be sent to
their Brethren in Turkey; for there they will have no occasion to undermine
their Religion, seeing it is the same with their own, but they may perhaps do
them some kindness as to the Inspiring them with more Masculine Principles
against Slavery; for, blessed be God, we stand in need of no such Patriots for
Liberty and Property in England, there are Orthodox Christians enough in the
Nation to defend that without the assistance of those who are for ^cino (...).
Though J. (...). sets up so ^ously to be a Dictator here, and may perhaps vie
with Mahomet ^or most ill Qualities; he is not like to be embraced as the Head
of a Numerous Sect in Britain and Ireland; therefore it were best for him to
take a turn into the Ottoman Dominions, and make a trial of skill there; the
Turks have a long time looked for Mahomet's Return, and who knows but he may
persuade them that he is the Man.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Thought to have concluded here, but cannot omit taking notice, that though
the Socinians agree in tearing up the Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian
Religion, they never could nor cannot yet agree among themselves in any one
System or Confession of Doctrine. Thus Valentinus Gentilis and Servetus
differed from one another in pretense at least, as Calvin acquaints us in his
Theological Tracts; Gentilis taking special ca^e to clear himself as much as he
could from the Suspicion of being a Favourer either of Arius or Servetus; yet
both of 'em held the Deity to be divided into three Essences. We have heard
before how Socinus and others differed about the Worshipping of Christ, to which
may be added, that though they affect to be thought the great Masters of Reason
and the Advocates of it, they will not allow Reason to be sufficient in it self
to discover that there is a God, and yet they reject the Doctrine of the
Trinity, because they cannot comprehend it in their Reason. The ascribing of
Infinite Perfections to our Savior, who at the same time they will have to be
a mere Creature, and Przipcovius calling him God in a proper sense and by
Nature, and yet saying he was but a mere Man till after his Resurrection, are
as ridiculous Contradictions as any that are chargeable upon the Popish
Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

George Blandatra differed so far from the rest of the Socinians, and feigued
an Agreement with the Calvinists so artfully, that Calvin was much censured by
the Reformed in Poland for charging him with Heresy, and yet the Italian
Church at Geneva complained of Blandatra at last for using fraudulent Methods
to Poison the Vulgar People with his Opinions, and at the same time the more
effectually to propagate his Errors, pretended a zeal for the Truth, and
subscribed the Confessions of the Calvinists, while his intimate Companion was
Alciatus, who upbraided the Calvinists with Worshipping three Devils, meaning
the Three Persons, which he said were worse than all the Popish Idols, Calv.
Ep. 257.

Then as to our English Socinians, they don't adhere to Biddle's Confession and
Catechism, no more than the Foreign Socinians do to that of Racovia, which in
the several Editions of it has had diverse Important Alterations.

Socinus wrote a Treatise to prove that it was the Duty of every good Man to
separate from the Assemblies of the Polish Protestants, as from Persons too
Impious to be Communicated with, and to join themselves to the more holy
Assemblies of those falsely and undeservedly (as he said) called Arrians: -- Yet
our English Socinians can Communicate with all sorts, and profess they join
sincerely in Communion with the Church of England, but Independantly on any
Faction; and that they place not Religion in Worshipping God by themselves, as
appears by their Books called the Trinitarian Scheme Considered, and some
Thoughts upon Dr. Still. Vindication, etc. -- And at the same time, while they
pretend to entertain Communion with the Church of England, they oppose the very
First of her Articles about the Trinity.

Some of them again profess sincerely to believe that God is truly Omniscient,
and forseeth all Events, how Contingent soever they may be to us, as in the
Consideration on the Explication of the Trinity, p. 32. -- Others of 'em again
think that it is more dishonorable to God to be the Author of all the Sin and
Wickedness that ever was, or ever will be in the World (which they falsely
charge as the necessary consequence of his Prescience) than to deny his
Foreknowledge, as may be seen in The Desence of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, against Mr. Edwards, p. 18. compared with The Considerations on
the Explication of the Trinity, page 32.

Biddles Confession, p. 21. 22. Argues strenuously for the Personallity of the
Holy Ghost, -- but the Brief History of the Unitarians, Sect. 1. p. 7. denis
it, -- and says he is only called so by the same Figure of Speech that
describes Charity as a Person. Thus it is evident that they cannot agree among
themselves, though like Herod and Pilate they agree in destroying the Foundations
of Christianity.

The last thing I shall take notice of, is, that their Principles have a direct
Tendency to Introduce Atheism, or at least Paganism. -- This was observed of
them of Old, by Bisterfield, in his Dispute against Crellius, De Uno Deo, Lib.
1. Sect. 2. Cap. 18. -- And will be evident if we consider,

1. That the Author of Answer to the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Sermon p. 5.
Ridicules the Eternity of God, thus, That to say a Person or Thing was from its
self, implies this Contradiction, That it was before it was; [and adds] I am
sorry an Eternal God must be a Contradiction. It Is true, that herein he
Contradicts Socinus, Crellius, and others in their Institution of the Christian
Religion, -- where they say God has from himself a Divine Empire over us, and
that his Nature, and whatever else is proper to the Supreme God, he received
from himself; but then we see that ou^ ^glish Socinians are worse than they,
(...) have made further advances toward Atheism; for if God be not Eternal,
and from himself, he must be Finite, and owe his Being to another, which makes
him no God at all.

2. If in the next place it be observed, That Crellius, Smalcius, and Socinus,
deny God's Immensity, Circumscribe his Essence within the Heavens, deny his
Omnipresence, the Infinity of his Essence, his Prescience and Omniscience, as
may be seen in Socin. Frag. Catech. Tom. 1. p. 685. Smalcius his Answer to
Fran. David, Tom. 2. p. 735. Socinus his Theological Praelections, c. 11. p.
549. which is in effect to Ungod him, to give up the Cause to Atheists, to
overturn all Revealed Religion, the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and to
deny the Spirit of Prophecy, in contradiction to common Sense, as may be proved
from these two Instances; the 1st is that of the Jews, whom we see every day
with our Eyes to be a despicable, hated, Vagabond People, according to what our
Savior foretold would befall them; the other particulars of which, as the
Destruction of Jerusalem, etc. are exactly confirmed to us by Josephus a Jew,
and other Historians, Enemies to the Christian Name: And the 2d is that of the
Roman Antichrist, the Seat of whose Dominion, and the Nature of it was so
exactly foretold above 1600 Years ago, as it is now obvious to our Senses.

Then again, they pretend to believe a Trinity, but cannot agree what it is:
Ruarus, Przipcovius, John Biddle and his Followers, say there are Three
Persons, Socinus, Sclichtingtius, Crellius, and the greatest part say there are
but Two: -- -The Holy Ghost is, according to them, One of the Three, but not a
Person, nor God, nor a Creature. They own that is a thing truly Divine and
Eternal, but yet not God, as may be seen in Sclichtingius against Meisner, p.
694. -- And Ostorodius in his Controversy with Tradelius, says, It is neither
God nor a Creature, -- as Gra^erus informs us, Pol. Sacr. p. 635. -- Then let
any Man judge whether their Scheme be not full of Mysteries and Contradictions;
can there be any Medium betwixt a Created and an Uncreated Being? Can the Holy
Ghost be Eternal and Divine, and yet not God? Can a derived Omnipotence, such
as they allege that of our Savior's is, be enough to make a mere Creature, as
they esteem him, a true God? And is not an Eternal and Increated Omnipotence,
which they ascribe to the Holy Ghost, sufficient to make him God? Are not these
Contradictions plain and evident? And have not those Masters of Reason (as they
love to be called) justly forfeited all Right of Pretension to it, when they
would impose Mysteries and Contradictions of their own Inventing upon the W^ld
and yet reject Mysteries of Divine Revelation, because they are above their
Reason?

Thus, Sir, you see what sort of Men they are whom J. T. has raised Mr. Milton
from his Grave to Patronize and Plead for. This is a New Socinian Invention to
make the Name of so great a Man subservient to their Cause. You have heard they
can turn themselves into all Shapes and Sizes of Religion, in order to overturn
the whole; and now they have put on the disguise of true Patriots for our
Liberty, in order to Cheat us of Christianity: But seeing God has put it into
the Heart of his Majesty and the Parliament to put a stop to this impetuous
Current of Atheism, by strengthening Old, and proposing New Laws against
Blasphemy; it is hoped they will not be able, with all their Subtilty, to give
any diversion to that good design.

We have had already too good Proof of the Usefulness of our Laws for
preserving our Religion to be prevented (by idle and crafty Outcries of
Persecution) from guarding it further that way. It Is an ordinary saying in the
Mouths of that Party, that all Religion Established by Civil Sanction is
Persecution, which is Ridiculous i^ not Blasphemous. -- The Jewish Religion,
which was Revealed by God himself, was Established by Civil Sanction, and the
Magistrates were thereby empowered to put to Death those that turned away to
Idolatry; yea, Nature it self was laid under a Force in that Case; for the
very Parents of the Idolaters were obliged to Condemn them, and to lay their
Hands first upon them in order to Execution, Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8. It is not to be
doubted but many of the poor Heathens followed their Idols out of Conscience;
nay, it is certain they did so, for the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 8. 7. that
some People eat with Conscience of the Idol; but that Plea was not regarded by
God, in Apostates at least: Nor ought it to be regarded now, they have better
and clearer means of informing their Consciences now than then, but if they be
perverse and obstinate, the Maxim holds good, pertinaciae nullum Remedium
posuit Deus.

Their Objection that the Christian Religion propagated and preserved it self,
at first without the Sanction of Laws, and in a time of Persecution, will no
more argue against Christian Nations providing for the security of their
Religion by Law, than the Increase of the Israelites and their Religion in
Egypt argues against their raising a Fence of Laws about it, when they came to
be settled in the Land of Canaan.

I have already hinted that Kings and Queens are promised to be Nursing Fathers
and Mothers to the Church of Christ in the Times of the Gospel, that the Church
her self is ordered to reject Heretics and throw them out of her Communion;
and therefore by natural Reason it will follow that the Christian Magistrate
ought to make use of the Sword God has put into his hand to prevent the
disturbance of the Peace of the Church, or the poisoning of her Children by
Heretical Doctrine, seeing they are Nurslings committed to his care by God
himself, and for whose sake if they neglect or abuse the trust committed to
them, he has not only promised to reprove Kings, Psalm 105. 14. but also to
strike them through in the day of his Wrath, Psalm. 110. 5. of the
accomplishment of which there have been several instances in our own and other
Nations, of which the late K. James, to name no more is a living Monument.

It cannot be denied but theLaws which we had got enacted by the Providence of
God, proved the chief Instruments to preserve our Religion against the Efforts
of the Papists, and therefore no just reason can be assigned why we should not
especially now that we have a Prince who invites us to it, enact Laws in the
same manner to secure it from the danger of being overturned by Socinians,
Deists, and Atheists.

This will not at all countenance or approve the practice of enacting and
executing Laws against those who may differ from the National Establishment, in
things which the Imposers own to be indifferent, and for which no Divine
Institution can be produced: In such Cases the Lord Jesus Christ who is K. of
his Church and God over all blessed for ever, has by the mouth of his Apostles
commanded a forbearance, Romans 14. and therefore the opposite Conduct is an
Invading of God's Throne, and a Rebellion against Heaven: We have a plain and a
positive Law given us as to that matter. But the Case is otherwise as to those
who bring in damnable Heresies, and deny the Lord that bought them, or teach
Doctrines tending to a dissolution of manners, as J. T. seems evidently to do
in his Book now in Question, and therefore Sir, it is hoped that you will use
your Interest in Parliament to promote such Laws as his Majesty and the rest of
our Representatives shall think meet, to prevent the growth of such dangerous
Opinions. He owes his advancement to the Throne, and the Establish. of it, to
his Zeal for the Christian Religion in opposition to Antichristian Idolatry,
and it must be owned as a grateful Retribution that he shows himself equally
Zealous against Blasphemy and Profaness. In the Prosecution of which may the
Son of God, who thought it no Robbery to be accounted equal with the Father,
strengthen his Hands and those of the Great Council of the Nation now in
Parliament assembled,

I am Sir, Your very humble Servant.



FINIS.

