A RELATION OF THE HORRID INJURIES COMMITTED BY The KING of SWEDEN, UPON The
DUKE of CVRLAND, His DUCHESS, and seven CHILDREN.

Together with the Dukes Vindication from the Swedish Calumnies.

printer's or publisher's device S M


LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

DEFENSIO Principis CURLANDIAE Suevorum Calumniis opposita.
POst ruptas in Polonia inducias, pacem vero cum Danis vix citius initam quam
fractam; post Transilvaniae Principem inter hosts, contra fidem datam,
destitutum; post temerata denique ubivis locorum Divina, humanaque Jura, nemini
forte novum aut mirum videbitur, jussu Regis Sueciae, Principem Curlandiae,
licet Medii sen Neutralis in hoc bella conditionem identidem pactus erat, and
saepius magna argenti vi redemerat, in Domo sua per insidias captum, barbaricum
in modum cum Uxore, septemque liberis, Rigam abductum esse.

Caeterum quoniam ea in pacatum Principem admissa, quae nec in host locum
haberent, in Matronam insigni pietate praeclarisque Virtutibus summum inter
foeminas locum morentem, nisi nativitas dedisset, eamque partui vicinam; in
liberos Principales, plerosque infantes, atque aetate, ut Parents, vita
innocentissimos, designata sunt: ipsis haec Suecis talia sunt visa, ut non sine
excusatione aut defensione Orbique patefieri deberent: Sed quae Dei benignitas
atque Justitia est, vix alii innocentiam Optimorum Principum illustriorem
reddunt, quam qui vel maxim oppugnant.

Dicunt equidem quod libet qui causam hanc agunt, and tamen apparet summo
studio nihil fingi potuisse, quo tanta rei indignitas vel excusaretur. Fac vera
esse quae commenti sunt in hac causa omnia; fac fides habeatur praetextibus,
quae veritati debetur; nihil hic invenies, quod innocentiae Principium
praejudicare, aut Suecorum facto vel minimum Justitiae affricare posset
colorem. Nimirum jungi potest justitiae maledicentia, nec tamen haec malos
reddere potest, aut reos, quos illa miseros effecit.

Quod ipsum patebit audienti hos Oratores, qui causam hanc dum defendunt,
produnt. Caput accusationis est, Uxorem Principis suasisse Fratri suo Electori
Brandenburgico, ut cum Poloniae Rege, cujus olim vasallus ipse fuerat, maritus
autem adhuc erat, in gratiam rediret. Adeo nec dicta nec consilia familiarium
impunia sunt, and illa quidem Uxoris, in caput Mariti expetunt, atque hic luat
necesse est, quae illa admisit. Crodo, his arbitris, merito pro host habendum,
cujus Uxor alibi, ipso absente and inscio, pacis consilia, inter cognatos,
quibusque amorem atque reverentiam debebat, commendavit. Scilicet quam a De^
continuis precibus ipsis efflagitare, pium fuerat, crimen fuisset suadere. Sed
nihil eam hic egisse, si Electori Sancte hoc asserenti non creditur, credere
ipsis rerum argumentis necesse est. Involverat illum Rex Sueciae bello
Polonico; gliscebat mox Danicum, and successit. Author Regi fuit Elector, ut,
quod proclive ipsi erat, and gloriosam sibi ut, and utilem cum Polonis iniret
pacem, Danicos vero motus aequis averteret conditionibus; sed frustra fuit, ad
eum gloriae campum quasi remissus eo ampliorem, quo pluribus insideretur
hostibus. Ergo Rex in Holsatiam movet, and foederatos, Electorem,
Transilvanumque hostibas tantum non obrutos deserit. Exuitur hic Exercitu, and
adhuc periculum est, ut Principatu fortunisque excidat omnibus. Expugnatur
Cracovia, occurrunt imminentque Electori Exercitus Polonici, Auxiliaresque
Austriaci atque Cosaci; a Suecis Suppetiae nullae. Hic Electorem nec mala, nec
pericula, nec remedia praevidere potuisse putabimus? and (quod unicum restabat)
pacem eum Polonis non confecisse, nisi Soror submonuerit? Judicet qui velit,
ecquis Electori illam persuaserit, and an non a Rege Suecia Ipso proficiscatur,
quod Optimae Principi tanquam crimen reputant?

Sed intercessit Principi, inquiunt, familiaritas insignis cum Gonzievio, and
litteris hinc inde meantibus, quas partim Principis Ministros scripsisse
perhibent, effectum, ut Anno 1656. Lithuanis eorumque vicinis Copiae Sueciae,
quae illic locorum erant, in manus quasi traderentur. Cum Gonsievio Principi
agendum erat, tanquam cum vicino amico, Regis sui Ministro, and egit; ita
tamen, ut conditionis suae memor esset, and observantiae erga Dominum, and
Neutralitatis, quam vocant, Leges integrae semper sibi constarent. Nec unquam
produci possunt literae Principis, aut Ipso indignae, aut rerum statui, quem
diximus parum convenientes: quid egerint scripserintque Ministri, viderint
ipsi, Principis hic nulla est culpa. Caeterum cum Sueci Lithuanos and Samogitas
pessime haberent, and dispersi interim securique inter eos agerent, an, quod
immanissima facta extorserunt, ad quod opportunitas invitavit, statui in Suecos
non potuit nisi Autore Curlandioe Duce? Nec hosts suos Lithuani cernere
poterant focis assidentes, lateribusque haerentes, nisi Curlandioe Duce ex
longinquo demonstrante?

Imputatur praeterea, quod Magno Muscoviae Duci consilia and rations capiendae
Rigae una cum commeatu suppeditarit Princeps Curlandiae, idque egerit, ut
Serenissimi Angliae, etc. Protectoris studium pacis inter Muscos and Suecos
conficiendae a Moschis repudiaretur, quod sinistras de Suecis opiniones Legato
Anglico insinuaverit, denique quod Polonis Moschos conciliare, hos vero Suecis
infensiores-reddere annisus: atque in eo fuerit ut Serenissimo Electori
Brandenburgico trium millium suppetias mitteret.

Utinam vero, ut ab ultimis ordiamur, tot habuisset Dux milites, atque abduci
potuisset amicorum monitis, ut hac via securitati suae prospiceret; non tam
opportunus Suecorum injuriis fuisset, and haberet forsan optimus Princeps Domum
suam bonaque omnia intacta. Nunc fiducia pollicitationum regiarum unice securo,
milite destituto, cum militum copia adhuc objiciatur, vix acerbius candori ac
innocentiae illudi posset atque insultari. Consilia autem ut suggereret Magno
Muscoviae Duci nunquam Ipsi opportunitas fuit, nec ut quicquam persuaderet
authoritas. Commeatum si Moschi exegerunt, exegerunt and Sueci and Poloni.
Damnum passus ab omnibus, injuriam nemini fecit. Infortunium illud miseratione
dignum, culpae adnumerandum non fuerat.

Pacem inter Moschos, Polonos, Suecos, omnesque denique Vicinos optavit
amantissimus pacis Princeps, and cujus eam confieri intererat, si promovere non
potuit, nullibi certe turbavit. Populos cum Populis committere non Illius sunt
arts; qui tranquillitatem sibi suam non nisi Vicinorum omnium concordia
constare intelligit: cujus omnes ex aequo observare, and humanitate cum
singulis decertare, non armis. Hoc vero studium, hanc mentem Principi fuisse
Ipse Anglicus testabitur Legatus, quem, quibus potuit humanitatis officiis, per
aliquot menses Princeps prosequutus est, and comiter habuit, non modo quod
peregrinus aut quia ab amico, sed comprimis quod pacis interpres venerat. Atqui
ille ipse, inquiunt, pessimis quibusque de Suecis opinionibus in Curlandia
imbutus est. Nimirum quae conscientia vera arguit, etiam dicta creduntur. Sed
si Suecis quibusdam mala men's, oportetne propterea Curlandiae Principios
impurum atque maledicum esse? Sed regrediamur unde digressi sumus.

Pone haec ita se habere, cum tamen Serenissima Princeps in litteris ad
Electorem Brandenburgicum Fratrem suum Deo test affirmet, causa in
conscientiae Tribunali dicta, nullam se deprehendere posse in se suisque
culpam, nisi quod, cum nihil mali patrassent, nihil mali metuerent, nimiumque
confisi essent Christianismum and Evangelicam Doctrinam professis.

Largiamur autem hoc hostibus, Principes, pactorum observantissimos, and quos
sua pietas, probitas atque conditio facile absolvit, and ista quae objiciunt
illi, and graviora, si placet, commisisse; Postquam novis cum Suecici Exercitus
Praefecto, Vetera Neutralitatis pacta confirmata, non sine coagulo amicitiae,
quo opus est cum isto hominum genere, transigentibus, pecunia scilicet
praesentanea, oegre a Principe confecta, and vero paucae admodum horae inter
conventionem hanc initam, and eruptionem in Arcem Principis factam
intercesserunt, atque adeo Sueci omne crimen, quod in Principe vel fingi
posset, sive dederunt, sive occuparunt ipsi, nullius Eum accusari posse, nemo
deinceps dubitaverit. Alia igitur omnino sint necesse est, quae ad hoc triste
malum Domui Curlandiae acc^lerandum, Regem Sueciae impulerint. Et sunt qui
putant aegre Illum Electori Brandenburgico facere voluisse, quod cum armis
validum, nec fraudibus opportunum amplius invadere non potuerit, inermes
invaserit. Dolei equidem Elector tristem suorum casum, and dolent optim^
quique; sed solatur Ipsum Eorundem innocentia juxta ac Divina Justitia, quae
and coronare illam prosperrimo etiam malorum eventu, hosts vero Ipsius ita
habere solet, ut ubique and benignum Patrem and severum se ostendat Judicem.
Novit talia patrantes hoc citius Vindictam provocare Divinam, eamque acriorem,
(...) innocentiorts laeserint.

Alis situm Curlandiae Mari Balthico imminentis illius Dominium affect anti
salivam movisse putant; Coeterum cum accessio vineae Nabothi res Achabi parum
auxerit, optimi quique expectant, quis Regni non unius affectati, Principatus
non unius erepti tandem finis exitusque futurus. Et vidimus jam Justitiae
Divinae non tardantis argumentum. Nam cum 28 die Octobris Principes Curlandiae
in cavtivitatem abducerentur, luce quae secuta est, proxima, paucae foederati
Belgii Naves, (pleraeque enim in conflictu non fuere) Suecis quibusdamexustis,
quibusdam captis, nonnullis submersis, effecerunt, ut Haffniae obstdio
solveretur, and Orbis videret Illos, qui, cum Maris Dominium jactent, miniman
ejus partem, fretum dico Danicum, licet Castella utrique imminentia littori
insiderent, defendere non potuerunt: scilicet, qui in Dania Liberatorem se
atque innocentiae Vindicem probavit, hostiumque superbiam fregit, idem and
aliis sub idem tempus Injuriam passis, praeterque meritum afflictis aderit,
sine dubio, sine mora: Illi sit laus and gloria in saeculis, etc.

A VINDICATION Of the Duke of Curland against the Swedish Calumnies.
AFter the Violation of the Polonion Truce, breaking of the newly Concluded
Peace with Donmarck, destitution of the Transilvanian Prince, in the midst of
his Enemies, contrary to Engagement; yea, after the Universal profanation and
contempt of Divine and Humane Laws every where: No body (likely) will think it
any great wonder or novelty, that by Command of the same King of Sweden, the
illustrious Duke of Curland (notwithstanding his Highness had in the beginning
of the late Polish War, agreed upon a perpetual Neutrality, and since was
forced oft-times to redeem and buy the same again with a vast Treasure,) was
perfidiously surprised in his own Castle, and in a most barbarous manner
(together with his Duchess and seven Infant-Children) carried away captive to
Riga.

Mor^over, Whereas such things were committed against a Peaceable Prince, which
would not have place in an Enemy: Against a Princess, (who for her
unparalled Piety, and most illustrious Virtues, (to say nothing of her Birth)
may justly claim the the highest place among Women) drawing near the time of
her Delivery: Yea, against his Princely Children, almost all Infants, and most
innocent in their age, as their Parents in their lives. It seems they have
appeared to the Swedes themselves, to be of that nature, as that they ought not
to be published to the world, without some kind of excusation or defense: But
such is the infinite Benignity and Justice of our God, that hardly any other
could have demonstrated manifested more brighter, the spotless Innocence of
these best of Princes, then the most unjust opposers of the same.

Those who patrocinate this cause speak (indeed) their full, pleasure, and yet
it appears, that with all their study and Industry, they have been incapable to
forge any thing, whereby so great an indignity might be rendered in the least
excusable. Suppose all their manifest forgeries in this business to be true,
and attribute that Faith (which is due to the truth) to their frivolous
pretenses, yet you will find nothing at all in them, that either can be any
ways prejudicous to the Innocence of the Duke and Duchess, or yet give any
the least color of Justice to that inhumane action of the Swedes. Besides, to
the said notorious injustice, may be also added the slanderous aspersions,
which yet will not be able to render those either bad or guilty, whom they have
made miserable.

And this will clearly appear, to him that hears these Orators speak, who
striving to defend this cause, do betray the same. The head of the Accusation,
is, That the Duke's Lady, did persuade her Brother, the Prince Elector of
Brandenborgh, to reconcile himself to the King of Poland's Majesty, whose
vassal he had eretimes been, and to whom he still stood engaged. After this
rate, neither the words nor counsels of familiar friends are unpunishable; yea,
even those of a Wife, would exact the head of her Husband, and he were to
suffer for what she committed. I believe that (according to the Opinion of these
Arbitrators) that man may lawfully be termed an enemy, whose Wife in his
absence, and unknown to him, has otherwhere made good overtures for, and
endeavored the Recommendation of Peace betwixt her nearest Friends and Kindred,
to whom she owed love and reverence; and that it is a crime to counsel or
recommend Peace, when it is godly and most commendable, by incessant fervent
Prayers to beg the same of God. But, that the said Princess did nothing of
this nature (if we will not believe the Prince Elector, religiously asserting
the same) yet must we give credit to the Arguments of the matter it self. The
King of Sweden having involved the said Elector in the Polonian War, and the
Danish suddenly creeping in thereupon, and succeeding; his Electoral Highness
advised the said King to make up (as he easily might) a Peace both glorious and
profitable for himself, with the Poles, and to divert the Danish motions with
equitable Conditions, but all in vain; the said Elector being (as it were) sent
back by the King with derision, to that height of glory held so much more ample
and illustrious, by how much more enemies he was surrounded; and so the King
moves toward Holstein, deserting his Confederates the Elector, and
Trasilvanian Prince, even in a manner overwhelmed by the Enemy. Whereupon he of
Transylvania, shortly after was deprived of his Army, and to this hour, runs
hazard of the total loss of his Country and Fortunes; the City of Cracovia
was recovered; and the Prince Elector immediately (quasi) surrendered by the
threatening formidable Armies of the Confederate Poles, Austrians, and Cossacks,
being altogether left destitute of the least hopes of succor from the Swedes.
And can we think that all this while, the said P. Elector could foresee neither
Evils, nor Perils, nor Remedies? And that (which only was remaining) he could
not have had thoughts of a Peace with the Poles, without the Admonition of his
Sister? Judge whomsoever, who it was that persuaded the Elector thereunto, and
whether it proceeds not from the King of Sweden himself, what is as a Crime
imputed unto our most Virtuous Princess.

But (they say) the Duke kept great intimacy with Gonzieusky, and, that by
interchangeable Letters (which partly they assert to have been written by the
Duke's Ministers) it has been brought to pass, that in the Year 1656. the
Swedish Forces in those parts, were (in a manner) betrayed into the hands of
the Lithuanians and their Neighbors. The Duke was forced to (and did indeed)
Treat with Gonzieusky, as with a Neighboring Friend, and the Ministers of his
King; yet so, as that he was altogether mindful of his Condition, and how much
it behooved him Sacredly and Inviolably to preserve no less the Laws of
Neutrality, then the respect due to his Lord. Nor can ever any Letters of the
Duke be produced, either unworthy of himself, or in the least contrarying the
premised State of affairs; what the Ministers have either done or written, they
themselves must answer, the Prince for his part, is herein most innocent.
Moreover, when the Swedes most basely treated the Lithuanians and Samogitians,
and yet in the mean time, were securely and confusedly dispersed among them,
could not that, which their most horrid actions did extorte from, and whereunto
the fairest opportunity invited the said Lithuanians, be executed upon the
Swedes, but by Instinction of the Duke of Curland? And could not they see their
Enemies, when sitting at their fire sides, and hanging upon their very backs,
except the Duke of Curland had afar off pointed at them?

It is further imputed, that the Duke did give Counsel and Directions to the
great Duke of Muscovy, for the taking of Riga together with Supplies for his
Army; as also, that he did effect (or cause) that his most Serene Highness the
Lord Protector's of England, etc. endeavoures for Peace betwixt the Muscovites
and Swedes, were rejected by the said Muscovites: That he did insinuate
sinister Opinions of the Swedes to the Ambassador of England: And lastly, that
he did endeavor to reconcile the Poles and Muscovites, but to render these
more incensed against the Swedes; yea, that he was upon it, to have sent a
succor of 3000 men of his own, to the most Serene Prince Elector of
Brandenburgh.

It were to be wished (to begin with the last) that the Duke had had such a
number of Forces, and could have been induced and disposed by all the
seasonable Admonitions of his Friends, to have provided for his own security
that way; he would not then have been so liable and obnoxious to the Swedish
injuries, but perhaps (Good Prince) have preserved his House and Estate entire
and safe to this hour: whereas now, Integrity and Innocence could hardly be
more cruelly eluded and insulted over, then to object a numerous Power of
Forces to him, who, securely relying upon, and only confiding in the Royal
Promises, was altogether destitute of Soldiers. As for his (pretended)
suggested Counsels to the great Duke, he neither ever had opportunity
thereunto, nor yet authority to persuade any thing. If the Muscovites exacted
passage and free quarters, the Swedes and Poles exacted no less; he suffered
Damage by all, but did Injury to none. This misfortune had been more worthy of
pity then of punishment.

A Peace betwixt the Muscovites, Poles, Swedes, and all other his Neighbors,
the Prince (as a most perfect Peace Lover) did cordially wish, and being so
much concerned in the confection of the same, if he could not promote; yet
leastwise, he was far from (any where) perturbing or obstructing it. To stir
up Nation against Nation, are not his Practices, who understands his own
Tranquillity and Preservation to depend only from his Neighbors general
Concordance and Unanimity, and whom it behooves to give equal respect to all,
and rather to win the heart of every one with Civility, then by force of
Arms. Now, that this has been the real mind and endeavors of the Duke, the
English Ambassador himself, cannot but witness, whom the Duke did prosecute
with all possible demonstrations of Civility, and entertained most lovingly for
many Months together, not only for being a stranger, or the Minister of a
potent Friend, but chiefly for coming as a Peacemaker. But he, himself (they
say) was possessed with most finistrous Opinions of the Swedes in Curland; as if,
what Conscience does but argue to be true, must be granted to be spoken also.
But if any of the Swedes have an ill heart, must it therefore follow that the
mouth of the Duke of Curland is impure and slanderous? But let us return from
whence we have made a Digression.

Suppose all these things to be so, notwithstanding that the Serene Duchess
in her Letters to the Prince Elector her Brother (taking God to witness, and
having pleaded and discussed the Cause, in the Tribunal of her own Conscience)
does sacredly affirm, That she cannot find any other fault in her self or hers,
but, that having committed no ill, and therefore not fearing any, they had too
much confided in those that make profession of Christianity and Evangelical
Religion.

But let us (I say) grant this to the enemy, that those Princes (the most
Religious Observers of their Compacts, and whom their very Pretty, Godliness,
and Condition alone does easily absolve) have committed all these objected
Crimes, and yet more grievous ones, if they please; yet after that the old
agreement of Neutrality was again renewed and confirmed, with the General of
the Swedish Army (not without a cementation of friendship, which they that mean
to transact with such kind of people, must ever have ready at hand; I mean
ready money, but newly, with much ado, raised by the Duke:) and (as is
manifest) but very few hours interceding betwixt the making of the said
Covenant, and immediate ensuing irruption into the Castle of the said Duke; in
as much as the Swedes must either have taken away, or else anticipated
themselves, all the Crimes that can possibly be forged against his Highness;
No man (surely) can believe, that after all this, the said Duke can justly be
accused of any thing. There must then be osher Reasons which moved and impulsed
the King of Sweden to accelerate and hasten this deplorable misfortune unto the
House of Curland. And indeed, there are, that think that he did it, to vex and
spite the P. Elector of Brandenborgh, in that, when he was not able to invade
him (who was now too powerful in Arms, and more wary of being circumvented
then heretofore) he did overpower the unarmed and incapable of Resistance. The
P. Elector indeed, deplores the hard fate of his Friends, and all honest hearts
condole with them: But their unspotted innocence does powerfully mitigate and
allay his sorrow, as also the infinite Justice of God, which is wont generally
to Crown the same with a most prpsperous issue even of the affliction it self;
and contrarily to behold the Enemies thereof with such an eye, as does every
where witness him no less a most Severe Judge and Avenger, then a tender and
gracious Father: He knows that those that commit such enormous Actions, do but
so much the more speedily provoke, ripen, and augment the just vengeance of the
Lord, by how much brighter the Innocence of the oppressed party appears.
Others think, that the commodious situation of Curland, upon the Baltique, made
the teeth of him, that affects the Dominion thereof, to water. But as the
acquisition of Naboth's Vineyard yielded but small increase to the Estate of
wicked Ahab, so also all good people, expect to see what will be the end and
issue of the affectation of more then one Kingdom, and violent ereption of more
then one Dukedom and Principality. And indeed, we have already beheld an
eminent sign of the (not retarding) Justice of God, in that, the very next day
after the barbarous carrying away of the Princes of Curland into Captivity,
being the 28th of October, a few Ships of the United Neatherland States (the
most of the Fleet not having been engaged in the fight) did, by the burning of
some, taking others, and sinking not a few Swedish Ships, most happily
effectuate the raising of the Seige of Copenhagen, and cause the world to smile
in beholding those, that did boast the Dominion of the Sea, incapable
(notwithstanding the two imminent Castles upon either side of the Shore) to
defend or maintain the most inconsiderable part of the same, viz. the Danish
Sound. And even so, we trust, that the same God that has approved himself the
gracious Deliverer of Denmark, and just Avenger of oppressed Innocence (having
broken the most insolent pride of the Enemy) will also in his own due time, be
present with, and powerfully deliver those, who about the same time, have
suffered the same Injuries, and been wrongfully afflicted with others. To him
be praise and glory for ever and ever.

An Authentic Copy OF THE ASSECURATION
Given unto his Highness the Duke of Curland, by the Commander of the Swedish
Forces in Livonia, General Douglas (after the late Renewing, and Solemn
Confirmation of the formerly Concluded perpetual Neutrality, betwixt the King
of Sweden and his said Highness) in the Name of the said King, under his own
hand and Seal, which notwithstanding, after the Duke had given a vast Sum of
Money, and great store of Provisions unto the said Douglas; and so on his part,
had performed all and every the Particulars of the said (enforced) Covenant of
Renovation, was immediately most unworthily violated by him, by falling upon,
and seizing his Highnesses Person and Family, in manner as the Precedent Paper
does largely relate.

By me Robert Douglas, Privy-Counsellor, General Field Marshall, and Counselor
of War to his Majesty of Sweden, Earl of Schoning, Lord of Schelby, etc.
Whereas for the Subsistence of his Majesty of Sweden, my most gracious King
and Master's Army, a considerable quantity both of Money and Provisions has
been anew Promised, Granted, and Allowed by his Princely Highness, the Duke of
Curland, his Council and States, for his Highness Dukedomes, the Stift Pylten,
and whole Territories, witness his Highness Reverse given for that purpose. I
therefore, in the Name of my said most gracious King, do in liew thereof,
faithfully Promise, Engage, and fully Assure the said Duke, that his Highness,
with his whole Country and Subjects, as also the Stift Pylten (none, besides
those who have made themselves unworthy of the said Benefit, excepted) shall
remain fully Assured of, and be secured in the Neutrality formerly Granted his
Highness by his said Royal Majesty; as also be wholly freed of all manner of
Hostile Attentations, Invasions, Free Quarterings, Contributions, and all other
Executions, Robberies, and Depredations whatsoever, etc.

In Testimony whereof, I have hereunto put my own hand and Seal, this 19th of
September, 1658. L. S. R. Douglas.


FINIS.

