RELATION OF The most Remarkable Proceedings at the late ASSIZES AT
Northampton. Containing Truly and Fully, The Trials, Confessions, and
Execution Of a Most Mischievous VVitch, Of a Notorious High-way-man, Of a
Barbarous Murderess. The First being Mary Forster, who by witchcraft destroyed
above 30 Sheep belonging to one Joseph Weedon, and afterward burned to the
ground his Dwelling House, and Two Large-Barns, full of Corn and Hay: To his
Damage above 3^0l. With her Confession of the Fact, how, and why she did it:
and asking him forgiveness for the same. And a Wonderful Experiment of her
Divelish Skill showed in the Goal, after she was Condemned. The Second a
High-way-man, who had been 14 times in Goal, and before his Death discovered
several others. The Third a Young Wench that Killed her Child, with the Strange
Means how the same was Discovered, and her Penitent Behavior at the Execution.
Who all suffered at Northampton aforesaid, Saturday, Aug. 22. 1674.

Printed for Nathaniel Sav^gds.

NEWS FROM Northampton Assizes, OF Witchcraft, Robbery on the Highway, and
Murder, etc,
THe Assizes being holden at the Town of Northampton, for that County, on the
18th. of August, Instant, Amongst other Criminals there brought to their
several Trials, one Mary Forster was indicted for Witchcraft, and also for
Felony, upon the statute against burning of Houses, her case after a long
debate, and full hearing of Evidence appeared to be thus.

This Woman aged somewhat above fifty years, lately lived at a place called
Estoat near Fosters-booth in Northamptonshire, being Wife to an Honest poor Man
there, by profession a Translator, or mender of Shoes; near unto her lived one
Joseph Weedon, a Farmer of good ability or repute, being generally respected
and beloved as well as most in the Country. It happened that last Spring this
Man keeping a considerable stock of Sheep several of them were drooping, and
like to dye as it is supposed of the rot, but being willing to make what might
be of them, he caused them to be killed in time, and several poor people for
cheapness were very glad to be his Customers for his Mutton; amongst the rest
this Gammer Forster came for a Quarter of it, but would give but Twelve-pence
for that which he asked Fourteen-pence for, or he would not let her have that
part which she desired, so that they did not agree, but she went muttering
away, being heard to say these Words. You had been better let me have it, for
you shall have more Mutton shortly lie upon your hands then you know what to do
with.

And accordingly the next morning he found no less than seven of the best and
soundest Sheep he had lying in a miserable condition, with all their Legs
broken to pieces in several places, the next night more were served in the same
manner, and the Night after that still more; so that in four or five nights
space he had above thirty good Sheep thus strangely destroyed: Whereupon he was
advised by some that suspected it to be done by Witchcraft, to take one of
these Sheep whose bones were so broken, and shattered whilst it was alive, and
burn, for that (according to their tradition) would make the Witch come to the
place, that so they might know who was the Author of the Mischief; this is
most certain whilst the Sheep was burning, this Gammer Forster (though it is
not known or believed she had any business there or that way) came up to the
fire, and asked them what they were doing, which the remembrance of her former
threatening words, confirming the Farmer in his suspicions of her, he (according
to another old observation) endeavored to draw blood of her by scratching her,
but finding his nails not sharp enough for that service, he in his passion cut
her over the hand with his knife, and thereby made a small wound, which for
want of looking after in few days rankled, and she threatened to sue him for the
damage; whereupon he agreed to give her twenty shillings, which she had no
sooner received, but she boasted amongst the Neighborhood, that it was the
devil in her shape that received it of VVeedon, and that now she had thereby
power to do him further mischief, which about two days after she put in
Execution, one of his Barns which stood some distance from his House, and was
full of Hay, being on a sudden set on fire, although there was no fire known to
be near it before, but being timely discovered and the Neighbors called in was
for the present quenched, but two days though it were kept watched by several
persons, it was no body could imagine how set on fire again and burnt down to
the ground.

Some time after this he had another greater Barn nearer to his house, and full
of Corn, set on fire several times, and put out as often, keeping above twenty
persons continually to watch it, and fearing that his house might be set on
fire suddenly to the danger of their lives, he removed with his Family to
another House, and continued out of it above three weeks, during which time
there was no fireing or disturbance, so that he hopeing the danger past
returned, but the fourth day afterward this great Barn was again set on fire
so furiously that there was no stopping of it, but it caught hold of the
dwelling house too, and burnt them down to the ground, with the most part of
his Toe, the poor Man's damage above three hundred pounds, besides his
disappointment of an Habitation, etc.

In the mean time this Woman being violently suspected was several times
examined before a Justice of the peace, but would at first confess nothing:
however she was ordered to be searched by a Jury of Women, who affirmed that
she had five several strange and unusual excrescencies which appeared exactly
like a Sows Teats, and seemed to be usually sucked by something.

Being carried again before the Justice, after a long Examination she did
confess, that she fired the aforesaid Barn, and being asked how, she replied
that she lighted Touchwood, and the Devil carried her* up by the Arms to the
top of the Roof, and there with her Touchwood she set fire in the Thatch, she
likewise did acknowledge that she destroyed his Sheep, and that she had several
Confederates hereabouts, but refused to discover any of them. Hereupon she was
committed to Northampton Goal, where Mr. VVeedon several times visited her, to
whom she acknowledged the injury she had done him, that it was in revenge not
only for refusing to let her have the Mutton, but for denying her another thing
another time, saying he had none of it, however she desired his forgiveness,
etc.

At her trial she said little, but denied her being a VVitch, yet seemed to
confess that she had done what she stood charged with* whereupon, and on her
former confession she was condemned to be hanged, though she most desired to be
burnt, alleging that if she were not, there would more prejudice happen to Mr.
VVeedon, who replied, that he pitied her condition, she must suffer as the
Law* had ordered, and for his own part he would put his trust in God, whom he
hoped would keep him against the malice of Hell.

After Sentence a Citizen of London being there went out of curiosity to visit
her as scarce believing any such thing as Witches in nature, after much
discourse he desired her to show him some trick, or experiment of her skill,
which at last she condiscended, bidding him get a large Basin, but be sure not
wet it, he going out wets a basin on purpose, and wiping it dry again, brings
it, she gets in it standing upright, and after the muttering a few unknown
words, was carried several times round the room, and at last up the chimney,
but being about half way up, the basin fell down, and she after it without
hurt, but scolded at the Gentleman for wetting it, saying that otherwise she
had got clear out of the chimny.

At the Place of Execution she would not speak a word, save only to desire
that her hands might not be Tied, and so she wretchedly finished her life.

The Second that was executed, was a person that went by several Names, he had
several Indictments against him, for Robing on the Highway, on which he was
Convicted by evident Proof. He confessed he had been Fourteen times in Goal, and
after the Sentence upon Private Examination, it is said he discovered several
other High-way-men. At his Death he seemed very penitent, and declared that
what Confession he had before made in private, was true in all respects.

The Third was a Young VVench that being new come to a Service, one day as her
Dame and she were washing a Buck, complained very much of her being Ill, and
the cupon went up into a Chamber to Lie down, where she was delivered of a
Bastard Child, which she pretended was still Born, but however, the Law makes
it Death in such case, to go about to conceal it, which she did by wraping it
up in her Apron, and flinging it up over the Bedsteaster, which was not done so
cuningly, but that she left the Apronstrings hanging down, which her Dame
afterward coming up to see her, observing, and thinking it had been a fovvl
Apron accidentally escaped the VVash* pulld it down, and therein, to her great
amazement, found the Murdered Infant.

This Girl seemed seriously to repent her of this abominable Wickedness, but
when she came to the place of Execution, was not easily persuaded to forgive
one Lolomon that was appointed for the Executioner, alleging a Vovv that he
had made to her, being before her fellovv Prisoner, not to do it: but at last
she was prevailed with, and did freely forgi^ him, and so suffered according
to Sentence.

FINIS.

