A RELATION Of what most Remarkably happened DURING The Last CAMPAIGN IN
IRELAND, BETWIXT His Majesty's Army Royal, And the Forces of the Prince of
Orange, Sent to Join the Rebels, under the Command of the Count de Schomberg.

Published by Authority.

DVBLIN, Printed for Alderman James Malone, Bookseller in Skinner-Row. 1689.

A Relation of what most Remarkably happened, during the last Campaign, in
Ireland, betwixt His Majesty's Army Royal, and the Forces of the Prince of
Orange, etc.
AT a time when his Majesty's thoughts were wholly laid out and employed,
chiefly to reinforce his Army, and repair those losses which he sustained by
the Siege of Londonderry, and the unfortunate Defeat of his Forces at
Cruon-Castle near Iniskilling, his Majesty received certain Intelligence, That
on the 12th of August last, Monsieur de Schomberg with a Powerful Army, and a
great Train of Artillery, sufficiently provided with all Ammunition, and
Materials for War, did come to an Anchor in the Bay of Carickfergus, in the
North-East part of Ireland, and that the Invaders the same day Landed 200 Men,
who immediately Entrenched themselves near the Seaside to secure the Landing
of the rest.

Brigadier Maxwell, Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Forces in those
Northern parts, finding himself too weak to make Opposition against so Potent
an Enemy, thought he was obliged in prudence, to retire back to the Newry,
leaving only Macarty Moors Regiment of Foot, and nine Companies of Cormack O
Neils in Carickfergus, to divert the Enemy, and hinder him, by the longest
defense they could, from advancing too soon toward the King. The very next day
Count de Schomberg Disembarqued his whole Army without any opposition, and
immediately Detached the 200 Men he set ashore the day before, to Belfast (a
small open Town, situated in the inmost part of that Bay) whither he presently
marched with his whole Army, and met there ready to join him, a considerable
Reinforcement of Horse from the Rebels of the North; he stayed at Belfast till
the Nineteenth, and then sent to Summons the Garrison of Carickfergus to yield,
which was Commanded by the said Colonel Ma^carty Moor, who slighted the
Summons with that Resolution and Bravery, as became a good Officer and a Loyal
Subject.

The next day being the 20th. of August, Count de Schomberg began to open his
Trenches, and then played upon the Town from four Batteries of Cannon, and two
Mortar-pieces; at the same time the Castle was furiously battered from the
Fleet attending him in the Bay, so that in a short space both the Town and
Castle were almost levelled with the Ground. However, the Governor bravely
defended the place for Nine days, till he was reduced to the last Extremity,
having but one Barrel of Powder left, and without any hope of Relief, he then
quitted the Town upon very Honorable terms, though afterward his Capitulation
(almost in every Article) was most barbarously broken by the Troops of Monsieur
Schomberg, who suffered (in his own presence) some of the Soldiers to be
stripped of their Clothes, Disarmed, and otherwise basely used, and he himself
(directly contrary to the Agreement) detained some Officers Prisoners.

The Garrison thus abused by the Rebels and their Adherents, marched to the
Newry, a little open Town, seated on the passage of the Mountains which divide
the Northern Province of Vlster from that of Leinster, in which is Dublin, the
Metropolis of all the Kingdom. To this small Town his Majesty had sent before
his Grace the Duke of Berwick with a detachment of Horse, Dragoons, and Foot,
to divert the Enemies March, and hinder his too speedy approaches, time being
then very precious in respect to the circumstances of his Majesty's Army; who
on the 26th. of August, leaving Dublin, came to Drogheda, attended with his
Troop of Guards, and 200 Horse of the Regiment of Colonel Parker, accompanied
by Monsieur le Count D Avaux, Ambassador Extraordinary from his most Christian
Majesty, by Marquess De Rosen, Marshal-General of the Armies of Ireland, and by
many other Commanders and Officers of the Court, leaving the rest of his Army
Encamped near Dublin, to be put into a condition to follow his Majesty, by the
Care and Conduct of his Grace the Duke of Tyrconnel, (whose Zeal and Fidelity
to the Crown in the worst of Times, can hardly in History find their Parallel)
who in a short time managed matters so well, that a considerable Army, well
equipped and in good Order, marched after the King to Drogheda: where the
Troops that daily arrived, Encamped on a rising Ground, on the side of the Town
next to Dublin, having the River and Drogheda before them, and toward the
Enemy, so that this place was conceived to be the most advantageous to Oppose
him, in case of a speedy March.

His Grace the Duke of Berwick, one of his Majesty's Lieutenant-Generals, being
at the Newry to observe the Motions of the approaching Enemy, had notice that
Count Schomberg was coming forward with his whole Army, consisting of 22
Battalions of Foot, Six Regiments of Horse, and Two of Dragoons, besides the
Iniskilling Band of Rebels, and that his Advance Guard was already in sight;
his Grace finding himself too weak to make any considerrable Opposition (after
he had viewed an Advanced party consisting of Ten Squadrons of Horse and
obliged them to Retreat) Fired the Town, and to render the Enemies Passage more
difficult, broke up the Highways, and made a good Retreat to Dundalk, a place
situated on this side the Mountains, eight Miles from the Newry, and sixteen
from Drogheda.

The Marquess D' Escots, who Commanded then in Chief at Dundalk, upon
consideration with his Grace, that their United Forces could not maintain the
Town, being an open place, and all its Fortification Demolished long since by
Oliver Cromwell, thought it best and most safe for the Kings Service, to
preserve their Men, and join the King, then Encamped with a good Army at
Drogheda, which they did accordingly.

About this time a Trumpet came from the Enemy to Drogheda, with a Letter
directed to the Commander of Dundalk, in the Front of which, at first view, was
represented a long List of Titles, (viz.) Governor of the Ducal Prussia,
Grandee of Portugal, Commander of several places, etc. But the greatest Titles
were Duke de Schomberg, Generalissimo of the Armies of their Majesty's of
Great-Brittain in England, Seotland, and Ireland: after which, he severely
complains of the Burning of Newry, and grievously threatens Vengeance against
the Prisoners in his Custody, if any further provocations in that kind should
be offered to him. To the haughty temper of which Letter, his Majesty thought
fit to return a suitable Answer, as from the Governor of Dundalk, in which he
threatens Schomberg, That if speedy reparation was not made for the Barbarous
Usage offered to the Garrison of Carickfergus; contrary almost to every Article
of their Stipulation, he would take satisfaction for that breach of Faith, upon
the Persons of the Rebel Prisoners in his custody; which Letter was thus
directed.

The Commander of Dundalk to the Commander of the Enemies Army. And was sent by
a Trumpet, but produced no Answer.

The Right Honorable my Lord Mou^tcashel, one of his Majesty's
Lieutenant-Generals, sometime Prisoner of War, and very much indisposed by
great and dangerous wounds, lying then at Iniskilling, (a place most unwholesome
in its situation) believing he had to do with a Generous Enemy, and according
to the usual Method of Honor, did therefore reasonably enough propose to
himself, that he might obtain his Liberty of Count Schomberg, upon his Parol,
to go to Dublin, where he might have better Accommodation for his Cure, and then
to return Prisoner. To which purpose (...) Lord writ to Sir Richard Neagle his
Majesty's Secretary of (...) him to write in his own Name to Monsieur de
Schomberg, (...) ^ection of which Letter was to the Marshal de Schomberg, (...)
sent by a Trumpet, who met him Northwards upon (...) beyond the Newry. The
Letter was delivered to his Secretary, who soon after returned it to the
Bearer, telling him, that his Master could not receive it, because it was not
directed to him as Duke, which Quality (he said) was due to him: And the
Secretary at the same time delivered a Letter from himself to Sir Richard
Neagle, in which he gave the same Reasons for refusing his Letter; and further
added, that his Master had renounced his Title of Marshal, when he (...) France
for his Religion. During all this time, his Majesty prepared himself with all
diligence and expedition imaginable, to Rendezvous his Army at Drogheda, which
was the better effected by the time the Enemy lost in the Siege of
Carickfergus, and by the slowness of Schombergs March through the difficult
Passages of the Mountains, with his great Train of Artillery and Baggage, and
through the deep Ways from those Mountains to the Newry, which his Grace the
Duke of Berwick had left very uneasy to the Enemy, and almost unpassable, by
digging up and breaking all the Calce-ways thereabouts. By this time his Grace
the Duke of Tyrconnel having settled all things in very good Order in Dublin, on
the 12th. of September came to the King at Drogheda, with all the Horse, the
Infantry being arrived there some days before. Which, when all together, his
Majesty reviewed, and found them to consist of about Twenty Thousand Men,
Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, and was abundantly satisfied with the whole, but was
most pleased in the good appearance of the Horse, and particularly with the
Regiments of Horse of the Duke of Tyrconnel, and of my Lord Galmoy, and with
the Lord Dungan's Regiment of Dragoons. But what gave the King the greatest
satisfaction was, that he was sure of his Army, not only as to their Fidelity,
but also as to their Courage, by the impatience they expressed in any delay, to
Encounter the Enemy.

By this time Count de Schomberg was advanced to Dundalk, upon which, his
Majesty resolving to loose no opportunity of Fighting the Enemy, and not any
ways to baulk the vigorous resolutions of his Soldiers, marched September the
14th. directly to Atherdee with the whole Army, in Order of Battle, upon two
Columns (as he himself had directed it,) this place is half way betwixt
Drogheda and Dundalk) the be ter there to observe the Enemies Countenance,
where he thought fit to mark out his Camp, and sent immediately Orders for the
Foot to hasten their March, not judging it safe to be so near the Enemy without
them: Upon which, the whole Brigade of his Majesty's Foot-Guard came up at
Midnight, and the rest of the Infantry joined them the next day. The Army in
its two Lines, with the Reserve, Encamped in their Order of Battle upon the
Hills fronting toward Dundalk, having the River of Largan before them, which
had two Bridges opposite to each Wing of the first Line, Affain-Bridge at the
Right, and Knockbridge at the Left, which were secured by Dragoons, though the
River was passable in several places. His Majesty contented himself with his
Head Quarters in some very mean Cottages, at the right of the first Line, where
his Bedchamber was a poor Irish Cabin (hard to creep into) without either
Door, Window, or Chimney; the French Ambassador, and the Duke of Tyrconnel, had
suitable Apartments in his Majesty's Quarters, and the other General Officers
were Accomodated after the same fashion in their respective Posts.

All the Ground from the River Largan toward Dundalk, is a continued Rise of
Hills, until you come to a Valley, in which there is a Narrow Bogg, which
beginning from the left, runs the whole length of the Town, and so continues to
the Seaside. His Majesty's Advanced Guards on the Top of these Hills, stood
constantly in View of the Town, and of those of the Enemy, separated only by
this Bogg, through which there were several narrow Passes or Defiles.

The King went every day on Horseback to view and observe the Enemies
Postures; there did not happen many Skirmishes between both Armies, but upon
all occasions that any of the Kings Party had to pass the Bogg, or to Charge
the Enemy, they had ever the better of it, taking several Prisoners, either
Forraging or in other Circumstances: And many Deserters from Schombergs Army
came over to the Kings.

Count Schomberg had disposed his Camp upon two Lines in the plain Ground, at
the Foot of the Hills which were Northward of Dundalk, having the River before
him, and the Town behind it; where he had taken up his own Quarters, with some
Horse and Foot of his own, and of the Iniskilling Rebels, who had joined his
Army: His Left Wing was secured by a large Arm of the Sea, which came up to the
Town, by which his Ships brought him from the North of this Kingdom, and from
England, all Provisions of Biscuit, Beer, etc. and Forage for his Horses: To
secure his Right Wing, which lay most Exposed, he made some Retrenchments, and
put a strong Garrison into a Castle of my Lord Bellew, situated upon a Rising
Ground; for his greater safety, he Fortified all the Avenues to Dundalk, with
strong Retrenchments, to Defend which, he there Posted a Battalion of the
Prince of Orange's Guards, and a Regiment of French.

Four days after his Majesty had Encamped at Alers-Town, he resolved to observe
Count Schomberg's Countenance a little closer, and endeavor to Engage him to a
Battle. Upon this Design the King Marched with his whole Army toward him in
excellent Order. His Grace the Duke of Tyrconnel, Captain General, Commanded
the Right Wing; the Marquess de Rosen, Marshal of Ireland, the Left. The King
himself drew up his Army in full view of the Enemy, so that the Extent of the
Right Wing of the first Line, was within less than Cannon-Shot of them: Both
Lines being ranged along the Hills, extending to the Left, a little more remote
from the Enemy, whose Advanced Guards from their Posts, did plainly see the
Disposition and excellent Order of the Royal Army.

The Day was very clear, so that the brightness of the Arms, with the
glittering reflections from the broad Syths, (which most of the Foot were Armed
with Instead of Pikes) seemed to strike some Terror into the Enemies Army.

His Majesty, attended by Count d' Avaux and some Persons of Quality of his
Court, was upon the Deseent of the Hill, nearer advanced toward the Enemy than
the Right Wing: A Squadron of about 60 Volunteers (being for the most part
Officers of his Majesty's Household) were upon a lower Ground, and somewhat
nearer to the Enemy, at the very Entrance of the Pass toward the Bogg, which
Party was Commanded by the Right Honorable my Lord Hunsdon, and some other
Reformed Officers of Note: My Lord Thomas Howard Riding Right-hand-Man of the
first Rank, and Marched directly up to the very Entrance of this Passage (which
leads through the Bogg to Dundalk;) to secure which, the Enemy at the Mouth
thereof, had strongly Entrenched themselves with a party of Dragoons.

Schomberg conceiving his Majesty intended to force his Pass, and so to enter
Dundalk, Commanded his Iniskilling Foot to Advance to the Entrance of it
toward the Town, and supported them with a Squadron of Horse, and strongly
Lined all the Entrenchments behind them toward the Town, with Musketeers.

His Majesty observing these Motions of the Enemy, Posted some Dragoons on each
side this Pass, further Advanced beyond the Volunteers, to Flank the Enemy in
case they should attempt to Advance; and some Foot-Granadeers ware
advantagiously put into several little Cabbins at the winding of this way, not
a Musket Shot from the Enemy, who stood at the Head of the Defiles. Here
happened some little Skirmishes, but no considerable loss to either side. And
after that his Majesty's Army had been thus drawn up for three hours in view of
the Enemy; during which time several Acclamations and Shouts Ecchoed from them,
as Men full of Courage and Resolution to Fight; nothing of which could provoke
the Enemy from their Holes, nor was any thing else attempted by them. His
Majesty Commanded the Army to March back to Alers-Town, the left Wing of each
Line being then the Vanguard, the the King himself remaining in the Rear of
his whole Army, there expecting the Enemy would Detach some strong Party to
observe his March, but not a Man of them stirred.

No sooner was Count Schomberg come into Ireland, but he presently sound he had
great reason to suspect the French Troops, especially those who were newly
raised, and had Deserted in Flanders, as well as the Irish, and most of the
English which he brought over with him, and this could not well be prevented;
for the Prince of Orange being extremely put to it for want of Men to Invade
Ireland, was forced to Inlist every body he could get, without further
Examination, having even admitted without any Distinction, all the French
Deserters which his Adherent had sent him from the Low Countries. But what
increased the Doubt and Jealousies of this Old General, was the Proclamation
set out by his Majesty, and the Conditions he therein offered to such as were
his own-Subjects, and those that were Foreigners, in case they would Desert
the Enemy, and embrace the Justice of his Quarrel against them. And also the
Declaration of his Excellency the Count d' Avaux, pursuant to the Pardon
Granted by his most Christian Majesty, to such of his Subjects that had
Deserted his Service, and were then in Schomberg's Army, in case they would
forsake it, and Inlist themselves in the Service of his Majesty of
Great-Brittain. Reflecting on these things, with the several Notes dispersed to
the purpose thereof through his Camp, he thought himself obliged more to Guard
himself against the growing Dangers in his own Army, than to think of advancing
any further against the Kings. He presently enjoined every body, upon pain of
Death, not to stir out of his Camp. The Provost-Marshal was always abroad, and
he promised a Reward of five Pistols for every Deserter that should be brought
to him; and to strike a terror into every body, he caused several to be Hanged
upon a bare suspicion that they intended to Desert. Distrusting 500 French, he
Disarmed and stripped them of their Clothes, all in one day, and presently
Shipped them back for England, from thence (as credibly reported) to be sent
into the Islands of America.

Notwithstanding all this severity, Deserters came daily to the King, who from
time to time gave an account of the great numbers of the Sick, and the mighty
scarcity of Schomberg's Camp, though supplied with all Necessaries by his
Shipping, as much as they could possibly bring him.

His Majesty having Notice of these advantages against the Enemy, resolved to
reduce them to greater straights, by destroying all the Forage they had yet
left before their Camp, and along the Seacoast: To effect which, he Detached a
considerable Body of Horse and Foot to defend another Party that were sent to
bring with them all the Forage they could carry, and then in sight of Dundalk,
they Burnt all that was left for four Miles together, without the least
opposition of the Enemy.

Count Schomberg suffering all these things, made us easily believe, he with
his Army was but in a bad Condition, and not able to undertake any considerable
Action; and to prevent the Danger of a panick fear in his Army, he amused them
with the Expectations of 10000 Danes, which he expected daily, and deluded them
with false News of great Defeats, which the Rebels (his Adherents) had given
his Majesty's Forces in other parts of the Kingdom; and caused them to make
public Demonstrations of Joy for those Fancied Victories. It would have been a
Mistory to the King's Party even to this minute, had we not been informed by
several Deserters, why he caused three Volleys of small Shot, and three Peals
of his Cannon, both from the Ships, and from the Shore, which they say was for
Joy of a Great Victory obtained by the Rebels against the King at Connaught,
that his Majesty could never hear of to this day. Sometimes he kept up their
drooping Spirits by giving out, that Dublin would be suddenly surprised by some
Troops that he had sent thither for that purpose by Sea, which were actually
Landed there, and that all the Inhabitants of that great City, had joined his
Party, and Declared themselves for him. It Is true that their Ships came to an
Anchor in Dublin-Road, and that they began to Land some Men, when many Persons
of Quality (as Volunteers) with the Militia of that County, both Horse and
Foot, Marched in good Order to the Seaside, to oppose their Design, (being
Conducted by the Right Honorable the Lords High-Chancellor, and Chief Justice
of that Kingdom) who soon obliged them to retire to their Ships, which then
immediately put to Sea; and that City was so well managed, that it remained
still in perfect Peace, by the great Care and Conduct of the Honorable Simon
Luttrell, Colonel of Dragoons, and Governor of the Place, where by his
Prudence he had so well ordered every thing, that no attempts from abroad, or
from any Faction within the City, could produce any Mischief, or give the Enemy
any advantage.

Charlemont being the only place in the North of any strength remaining in his
Majesty's possession, the King believing the Enemy might be considerably
annoyed by Excursions from thence, if they had a Garrison sufficient for that
purpose, sent thither a Detachment of Foot, and so soon as they arrived Major
Regan, Governor of that Important place, sent a strong Party immediately and
took Dunganron, where he made a considerable Booty from the Enemy: And further
to reinforce this Garrison, another Detachment of Foot was sent them, not only
to defend the place against the Enemy, but also to enable them to disturb and
annoy the Rebels as much as possible, during the Season of the Winter.

Before Schomberg made his descent into Ireland, the Town and Castle of Sligo
were possessed by the Rebels of Iniskilling; though the Town is an open place,
yet the Castle is very strong, and is the chief inlet from the North, into the
Province of Con^aught, in the West of Ireland, from whence they made frequent
Incursions into that Province, and put the strong Town of Galway it self into
great apprehensions of Danger, particularly from the notice of some private
Intelligence held betwixt Colonel Russel and the disaffected party of that
Town, of which he had been formerly Governor, and was now joined with the
Enemy.

The King receiving certain Advice, that Count Schomberg was about sending some
French and English Granadiers, with other Troops, to carry on the Designs of
the Rebels of Sligo, gave Orders immediately for Brigadier Sarsfield, with the
Regiment of House Commanded by Colonel Henry Luttrel, Sir Neile OF Neile's
Regiment of Dragoons, and the three Regiments of Foot of Charles O Bryan, Moor,
and Obara, to March forthwith to Sligo, and to clear that Province wholly of
the Rebels: The said Brigadier (whose Loyalty and Courage had already rendered
him susticiently terrible to the Enemies of the Crown) being come to Athlone,
Detached several Parties to possess the Passes, one of which meeting a Party of
the Enemy, gave them an entire Defeat, and reprized a great number of black
Cattle: Another of his Parties joining with some of the Militia, and some
Gentlemen Volunteirs of the Country, took a place called James-Town, and put,
all the Garrison there to a shameful flight, which they so closely pursued,
that they were forced (to secure themselves) to Swim three Rivers, where many
of them were Drowned, and the rest totally dispersed.

Sarfield now Advancing into the Province of Connaught, Detached Colonel Henry
Luttrel with a considerable Party, to hinder the Forces sent by Schomberg, from
coming to Sligo, but a Body of Rebels issuing out of the Town to sustain the
Enemy, Luttrel found himself as it were shut in betwixt them both, having only
his Party of Horse and Dragoons with him, the Foot being not yet come up, by
reason of the difficulty of their March; at which surprise, this brave
Commander no whit dismayed, but he presently divided his Men into two Parties,
and Commanded them to face both ways to the Enemy, which they did, and Charged
them so vigorously, that they Routed them entirely, and pursued them to the
very Gates of Sligo, where by fresh supplys, they were enabled to make
Opposition; but Brigadier Sarsfield following immediately after, the Rebels
abandoned the Town, save only about 500, which retired into the Castle, which
was presently Invested, and soon after formally Besieged. They defended
themselves for four days after the opening the Trenches, but then thinking an
early Capitulation best, they obtained good Terms; after which they Marched
away, only some French Granadiers took Party with his Majesty's Forces. The
taking of this place was of great Importance to the King, the Enemy by this
being wholly shut up into the Ruined Country of the North, where they must
certainly be reduced to great Extremities. This success was sollowed by another
no less beneficial to his Majesty's Affairs, which was the taking of a Castle
possessed by the Rebels, situated on a most considerable Pass into the same
Province: At the first appearance of the King's Forces, the Enemy desired to
Capitulate, though it was otherwise impossible to take it, without Cannon, if
they had been endued with Courage to make any Resistance. Forage now growing
scarce about Alers-Town, nothing almost remaining betwixt Dundalk and Aberdee,
and the Enemy being in no Condition likely to make any Attempt, his Majesty
(the 15th. of October) thought fit to break up his Camp, and March back to
Atherdee, where the Infantry Encamped on two Lines, having the Town behind
them, from the Enemy; the Horse were divided into several Quarters thereabouts,
for their better Accommodation, they beginning to suffer by the badness of the
Season, and also for want of Forage. The King resolving to Fortisie Atherdee,
the Fortifications were begun before his Majesty came thither, and were
afterward carried on with all possible diligence during one whole Month whilst
he stayed there, all which time the Enemy attempted nothing, but upon Parties
the King sent out, there was some of them killed, and several taken Prisoners;
and such as frequently Deserted Schombergs Camp, brought constant Tidings of
their great Sickness, and general want of almost all Necessaries for Humane
support.

Atherdee being now sufficiently capable to defend it self, and continual Rains
growing very troublesome, his Majesty disposed his Army into Winter Quarters,
he himself returning to Drogheda, (upon the 13th. of November) where he made a
stay only of five days; and to preserve the Forage there, came the 18th. of
the same Month to Dublin, and soon after received Intelligence, that Schomberg
not being able to stay any longer at Dundalk, had left that place, and in it
many of his Sick Men behind. Monsieur de Boissleau, Major General and Governor
of Atherdee, having the first notice of it, sent a Party of 24 Horse thither;
the Officer who Commanded having found no body in the Town, sent 12 of his
Party after the Enemy, to take an account of them, three Miles beyond the Town;
toward the Mountains they overtook some of the Enemies Baggage, Guarded by 100
Foot, whom they Charged and put to flight, made two Officers Prisoners, and
several Soldiers, and made a considerable Booty.

The Mighty Expectations of the Great Schomberg, and his Rebellious Adherents,
being thus Defeated, he Marched into the North of Ireland toward Belfast, with
the week remainder of his Army, being diminisht much above one half, by extreme
Sickness, and want of necessary Subsistence, though he had a Fleet to attend him,
and a whole Province behind him.

The Success of this Campaign has no ways been answerable to what Count
Schomberg (had with the greatest assurances) proposed to himself, but much
contrary to the hopes he had given to his Troops of Quartering in Dublin, and
to divide amongst them as Cromwell had done, the Possessions and Inheritances of
the Loyal Party; he not doubting in the least, with the Army he had brought,
and with the help of the Rebels, to be a complete Conqueror of the whole
Kingdom before the end of the Campaign; otherwise, a General of his Character,
would never have attempted a Design so great and Hazardous, to the loss of that
Honor and Reputation which he had been so many years acquiring.

And to add full Measure of Grief to the Retirement of this General, amidst all
the Frustrations of his Designs, my Lord Mountcashel most ingeniously wrought
his own Deliverance from his Consinement at Iniskilling, being pretty well
recovered of his Wounds, and came to the King at the Castle of Dublin, with
several Officers and others, from the Enemy, on Tuesday the 17th. of December,
where his Lordship was very kindly received by the King with a Hearty Welcome,
and Carressed by all the Great Officers and others his Friends, with all
demonstrations of Joy and Gladness imaginable.

FINIS.

