prisoner flanked by two guards with axes on a cart drawn by three horses,
whose reins are held by a man wielding a whip; at lower left, another prisoner,
his brother, chained to back of cart by the neck; at upper right, inset
portrait of the rebel Stepan Razin RAZIN the Rebel

his Brother



A RELATION Concerning the Particulars of the REBELLION Lately raised in
MUSCOVY BY Stenko Razin; Its Rise, Progress, and Stop; together with the manner
of taking that REBEL, the Sentence of Death passed upon him, and the Execution
of the same.

Published by Authority.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1672.

A RELATION Concerning the Particulars of the Rebellion lately raised in
Muscovy by Stenko Razin.
THere are two sorts of Cosacks, some are called Saporogsky, and others Donsky.
The former do from ancient times belong to the Dominions of the King of Poland,
and have their ordinary abode in the Isles of the River Borysthenes or Nieper.
At a good distance from the Town Kiof, in the same River, is to be found a
Rock, from which the Water falling with great violence, makes above Fifty
Isles; and this Rock, whence the Water falls, is called Poroch, and gives to
those Cosacks, which are seated in those Isles that lie behind the Poroch, the
name of Saporogsky. Their business is, to be watchful against the Incursions of
the Tartars, and other enemies of the Kingdom of Poland.

The Name of Cosack is said to be derived from the Sclavonian word Cosa, which
signifies Spirit; and it is thought, that that name was given to that people
by reason of their Agility or Nimbleness.

The Donsky-Cosacks are those that have their habitation upon the famous River
Don, anciently called Tanais, and belong to the Czar or Emperor of Muscovy and
Russia, to whom they yield a voluntary, rather than a compelled obedience. They
are by the said Czar endowed with many Privileges, enjoying their own Laws,
and choosing their own Governor. They have so great Privileges, that if any
Slave run away from a Russian Nobleman or other great Person, and come unto
these Cosacks, the Proprietors loose their claim to them.

Of these Donsky-Cosacks was Stenko Razin, the Person that four years since
rose up in Rebellion against the great Czar Alexis Michalowitz. The reason or
rather pretense of that Insurrection was, the death of the said Razin's
Brother, inflicted by the Bojar Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek. For in the year 1665. he
was with an Army in the Field, about the Town Kiof, against the Polanders,
having under him, among others, a Troup of Donsky-Cosacks. Autumn being come
in, and that Troup esteeming to have done good service against the enemy,
desired to be dismissed by the said Commander Dolgeroek, who possibly standing
yet in need of their service, would not consent to it. Whereupon these Cosacks,
unwilling to hearken to the command of their General; but following the
persuasions and example of their chief Officer, which was the Brother of Stenko
Razin, did disband, and went every one to his home. Dolgeroek being extremely
offended thereat, gave order, that this Ringleader should be taken; which
being done, he commanded him presently to be hanged.

This is the cause, pretended by Razin, when he was upon the Rack, of his
raising this Rebellion, to revenge the death of his Brother, innocently
executed, as he understood it. But that this was but a mere pretext, is
sufficiently apparent, in regard that this Insurrection was made not only
against the Czar, but also against the King of Persia, from whom he never could
allege to have received any injury. So that nothing but his malicious, and
rebellious temper, has impelled him to this infamous undertaking.

The beginning of his villainous attempt was, his robbery upon the River Volga,
An. 1667, where he took several great Boats laden with Commodities, belonging
partly to Cloisters and Ecclesiastics, partly to private Merchants of
Jereslaf, Wologda, and other places. Thence he went to the Town Jayck, which he
took by force, assisted by his Cosacks. Soon after he proceeded to the Caspian
Sea; and from thence he returned to the Volga, where he did great mischief in
giving interruption to Fishing, and in ruining many Houses. Thence he marched
to the Town Teock, and further to the Frontiers of Persia, where he did great
damage to the Subjects, both of the great Czar of Muscovy, and the Chach of
Persia. The Inhabitants of a certain small Persian Town, being informed of his
approach, betook themselves to a Neighboring Fort for security. Whereupon
Stenko sent them word, that they had no reason to fear, and invited them to
return, assuring them, That he and his Men were not come to do them any hurt,
but for Money to buy Provision, and other Necessaries for his Troops. They came
back with great confidence to their Town, and opened their Shops, where Stenko
and his Soldiers bought what they needed, and paid for what they bought that
time; but afterward he gave a sign to his Cosacks, that passing over the
Marketplace, when he should put his Cap into a certain posture, they should
fall upon and kill all the Inhabitants; which was executed accordingly, and
practiced in several other places upon the Borders of Persia.

To stop these cruel actions, the Kneas Jwan Simonewitz, then Waywode or
Governor of Astracan sent some Troops against him. Whereupon Stenko, finding
himself too weak, and apprehending a bad issue, asked pardon; to which, the
said Governor returned this answer, That if he would desist from his violence
and robbery, he doubted not but the great Czar would show him Mercy. He came
with his companions to Astracan, almost all sick and swelled, because having
been a little before, upon a certain Island in the Caspian Sea, beset by the
Persians, they had been necessitated to drink Salt Water. And he at length
received pardon from the Czar for his crimes, and promised, That he and his
Company would henceforth serve him with all faithfulness, nor exercise any
robbery on the Volga, or the Caspian Sea, or elsewhere.

Stenko being recovered, showed his generosity to the Inhabitants of Astracan.
For as he was walking thorough the Streets, he scattered among the people store
of Ducats and other Coin he had robbed, and thereby was applauded by all; which
then sufficiently manifested his aim. And so he, with his associates, went away
to their own Country about the River Don; where he began to act afresh his
villainy in Ecclesiastical Matters, driving away many Priests, and hindering
Divine Service, and intruding himself into Church affairs. For a pattern of the
glorious Ceremonies, which this Cosack-Pope introduced, take this, that instead
of the usual Ceremonies of Marriage performed by the Priests in Russia, he made
the contracted couple to go several times round about a Tree dancing, and thus
they were married after Stenko's mode. He also cast out blasphemous words
against the Savior of the World; and scrupled not forthwith to break that Oath
of Fidelity, which a little before he had sworn to the Great Czar; and put to
death diverse ancient Cossacks, that had more integrity than to combine with him
in his rebellion. The like he acted upon the Waywode of the same place, and
upon those that had been sent by the Czar with Letters of Grace and Pardon, and
others.

From the River Don he returned to the Volga, together with his Associats, and
came to the Town Saretza, where he persuaded the Inhabitants, that the Army of
the Great Czar was at hand to put them all to death; whereas on the contrary
that Army was come to assist them against Stenko: and thus the Town was
surrendered to him; and he having made his entry, killed the Commander and all
the Citizens that refused to join with him. He marched out again to meet the
Army of the Czar; which he defeated, taking and putting to death the General,
with many others. He took also the Town Sionejaer; where he put to the Sword
the Governor, all the Officers, and many Muscovian soldiers.

Thence he marched to the City of Astracan, seated at the mouth of the River
Volga, not far from the Caspian Sea, walled about, and having in compass more
than two miles. The Suburbs lying round about it, are most of them bare, and
exposed to the incursion of any Enemy. Some years since was this Town possessed
by the Tartars, from whom it was taken by the Czar Jwan Waselowitz, An. 1553.
About it grows no Grain at all, but it is provided from above. It is rich
chiefly in Salt and Fish; the Caspian Sea furnishing the people, living on that
shore, with store of Salt water, of which they make whole mountains of Salt.
And the Volga about Astracan abounds in Fish above all Rivers. There they catch
those great Fishes, Ossotrina, Belouga, some of the latter being three fathoms
long, one of which can hardly be carried by thirty men. In Astracan is great
Commerce, managed by foreign Nations, Persians, Indians, Boucharen, Armenians,
and others, it has for its ordinary Garrison Twelve thousand Soldiers. Stenko
Razin coming to this City, sent some of his Cossacks into it, to stir up the
Soldiers against the Governor; which wrought so well, that it was concluded the
Town should be delivered to him, and he received into it: which was executed
according to his wish.

Kneas Jwan Semenof Prosorofskie, being at Church, in the midst of Divine
Service was thence pulled away, and made to go up that high square Steeple,
which stands in the midst of the Castle of Astracan, for a Beacon to direct
those that Navigate the Caspian Sea, or travel in the vast and little
frequented fields called Steep. From this Steeple the said Governor was cast
down headlong. It Is said, that Stenko a little before whispered him something
in his ear, at which he shook his head, being doubtless tempted by this Traitor
to take his part, which the Kneas refusing to do, was forced to make this high
and Tragical leap.

Stenko Razin immediately hereupon committed great slaughter and robbing. The
Brother of the Governor, and many Noblemen and others, that would not come in
to him, he put to the sword, as also many Dutch and other Officers, and some
Holland Mariners, which though they run into the Caspian Sea, yet are said to
have been fetched back and killed. Colonel Thomas Belly, and Lieutenant Colonel
Jacob Wanderow, and others, were put to the Sword, being in Arms upon the walls
of the Town. The Churches, Cloisters, and the Houses of the richest Citizens
were plundered; the Writings of the Chancery burnt, the Czar's Treasure of the
Kingdom of Astracan carried away, many Merchants strangers, being there at that
time, as Persians, Indians, Turks, Arminians, and others, were put to death
with the rest: both the Sons of the Governor Prosorofskie he caused to be hung
up by the Legs upon the Walls of the Town, and to be taken down again, putting
one of them, after much torture, to death, and causing the other to be beaten
half dead, and so carried to the Metropolitan. His Lady and Daughters he
delivered to the Soldiers, his Companions, to take them for their Wives, or, if
they pleased to abuse them. This taking of Astracan happened July 28. 1670.

After this, Stenko marched to Tzaretsa, and thence to Tzarataf, which were
also delivered to him, and the Governors of them put to death, together with
many Noble men; and the Treasure carried away.

The like happened to the Town Tzamatof; from whence Stenko went to the Town
Simbierske, which he besieged, took by storm, and burnt to ashes, after he had
lost a great part of his Cossacks before the Castle of that place. The Governor
of it was the Lord Jwan Bochdaenwitz Micoslafsky, who with extraordinary
courage defended it against this Traitor: so that Stenko, conqueror of all the
places upon the Volga, was stopped here from going further; without which he was
resolved to have marched to the Royal City Casan, not far distant from
Simbierske.

Although Stenko was now hindered to pass further, as being beaten, and wounded
himself, insomuch that he was constrained to return to his Astracan-Quarters,
yet did he much mischief in Russia by his Emissaries, who here and there
stirred up the people to insurrection. In Galitz the fire began, but was soon
quenched. About the Town Oestiga some of those Emissaries were caught, taken,
and hanged. Every where he promised Liberty, and a redemption from the Yoke (so
he called it) of the Bojars or Nobles, which he said were the oppressors of the
Country; In Mosko it self, men began to speak openly in his praise, as if he
were a person that sought the public good and the liberty of the people; for
which cause the Great Czar was necessitated to make a public example of some,
to deterr the rest.

A certain aged man being asked, what should be done in case that Stenko should
approach to the City of Mosko, answered, that the people should go and meet
him with Bread and Salt, which among the Russians is a token of Love and
Friendship. For which this man was taken and hanged.

About the same time, there was brought into the same City, one of the
principal Associats of Stenko, that had undertaken to debauch the people up and
down in the Country from their obedience: but he had his due reward; for one
of his Arms, and one of his Legs were cut off, and he presently hanged on the
Gallows.

All sorts of imaginable mischievous devices were set on foot by Stenko to
ruin the Russian Empire, and to seduce the common people.

Amongst other Artifices, he had prepared two ships, one of which was lined
within round about with Red Velvet; and he gave out, that in it was the Lord
Czarawitz, of Glorious memory, Alexis Alexewitz, the Great Czar's eldest Son;
who yet in the year 1670. on the 17th of January in the presence of his Father,
in the Palace of Mosko, departed this life, and the next day was buried in the
Metropolitan Church of S. Michel. Stenko boldly pretended, that this Prince was
yet alive, and with him. And to color this lie the better, he kept in the said
ship a Youth of about 16 years of age, descended of one of the Peregorsky
Circassian Princes, whom Stenko in his former depredations had taken prisoner:
which young Prince has received the Great Czar's pardon, because he was
compelled to act such a person; and he is still in Mosko, at the house of Kneas
Jacob Codonietewitz a Circassian. And to drive on these devices, he spread
abroad, that this Lord Czarawitz had made an escape from the violent hands of
the Bojars and great Lords, and taken his refuge to him; adding, that he,
Stenko, was come by order of the Great Czar to put to death all the Bojars,
Nobles, Senators, and other great ones, (that were too near to his Majesty,) as
Enemies and Traitors of their Country. By these base practices invented and
push't on by Stenko, the ignorant people was inflamed to fight furiously, and
those of them that were taken prisoners underwent death with a wonderful
resolution, as being possessed with the persuasion of dying for a good cause.

At Smolensko was hanged a certain person, who said, that he died upon having
seen with Stenko the Prince Czarawitz, whereas he saw but a counterfeit one.

The other ship, that Stenko had, was lined with Black Velvet, and he gave out,
that there was in it the late Patriarch Nikow, who in the year 1666. was, upon
the Condemnation passed by the Patriarchs of Alexandria and of Antioch, by his
Majesty, the Great Czar, deposed from his Dignity, and sent to the Monastery of
Belooser, where he is yet at this day.

By these Arts Stenko had so far advanced his design that the whole Tract of
Land about the Volga and farther up into the Country was engaged in this
rebellion, as far as to the Towns Accateur and Arsa: And the number of the
Rebels was augmented to two hundred thousand, and part of the Czernische
Tartars, and all the Ruffian Contrymen living in this Tract, and belonging
to Muscovian Lords, rose up against their Governors killing and hanging them;
and the fire of this Rebellion gained at length so much ground, that it began
to burn not above twelve miles from Mosko it self.

Hereupon the Great Czar raised a great Army, and under the conduct of the
Noble Kneas Jurge Alexewitz Dolgeroek sent it, about the end of September,
against the Enemy, of whom he met a party of Fifteen thousand men, who though
they fought resolutely and rallied three times, yet were at length beaten and
put to slight, very many remaining dead upon the place, and a great number
being taken, who were immediately executed. Six Field pieces fell into the
hands of Dolgeroek; who encamped under the Town Arsamas, where he exercised
severe judgment upon these Rebels. The place was terrible to behold, and had
the resemblance of the Suburbs of Hell. Round about it were Gallows, each of
which was loaded with Forty or fifty Men. In another place lay many Beheaded
and covered with Blood. Here and there stood some impaled, whereof not a few
lived unto the third day, and were heard to speak. Within the space of Three
Months, there were by the Hands of Executioners put to death Eleven thousand
Men, in a legal way, upon the hearing of Witnesses.

Dolgeroek himself remaining upon the place of Judgment, sent his Army out by
Parties, that found out, defeated, and dispersed Stenko's forces. It was of
great importance to Russia, and a great Mercy of God, that the Rebels lay here
and there divided; as also, that they could not agree amongst themselves, about
the Supreme Command. For if this power of the Rebels, consisting of Two hundred
thousand Men, had been united and unanimous, it would have been difficult for
the Forces of the Czar to have resisted and mastered the same.

The German Officers were highly applauded by His Majesty, for having acquitted
themselves so well in leading on their Men. The most resolute of the Rebels,
were those of the small Towns of Lisko and Morasko, who had more than once
attempted to take by storm the Cloister of Macariof, and lost a great number of
Men before it, taking it at last by the treachery of a Jew, and putting to
death all the Monks that were found in it, and carrying away a rich prey,
because the people living thereabout had carried their Goods thither for
security.

Morasko held out; but those of Lisko rendered themselves in good time, and
delivered Thirty of the Rebellious Cosacks, together with a Nephew of Stenko
Razin, and so they were pardoned.

Amongst the Prisoners, there was brought to Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek a Nun in
Man's habit, put over her Monastical dress. This Nun had commanded Seven
thousand Men, and done bravely in this War, till she was taken prisoner. There
appeared not any alteration in her, nor any fear of death, when the Sentence of
being Burnt alive was pronounced against her. Amongst the Russians the
deserting of a Monastery, is esteemed a black and capital crime. A little
before she died, she wished that many more had behaved themselves, and fought
as courageously as she had done; that then certainly Kneas Jurge would have
found his best safety in his heels.

Being now to die, she signed herself after the Russian manner, with the cross
on her forehead and breast, and so laid her self quietly down upon the Pile, and
was burnt to Ashes.

There was also brought to Judgment, one of Stenko Razin's Confederates, and
his best Counselor, who had been his right hand. His Arms and Legs were cut
off, and so he was Beheaded and Hanged.

The Prisoners were commonly put upon the Rack, and being examined, what they
designed in this Rebellion; they answered, That they intended for Mosco, and
would have the lives of the Nobles, and other great ones, Their word was
Not'schay, that is to say, Unexpected; intimating, That the Czarawitz Alexis
Alexewitz was come as it were from Heaven, besides their expectation.

Thus has Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek in the space of Three Months made an end of
this Rebellion, in the Quarters about the River Don; but in other places the
Fire was not yet extinguished, when the Czar called him back with his Army.

Mean time Kneas Constantine Czarbatof was by His Majesty commanded to march
toward Taneboef, there to subdue the Rebels of those parts; which also by the
assistance of God was effected. So that all the Disquieted and Rebellious
Countries have been, by Hanging, Burning, Beheading, Slaughtering (besides the
Eleven thousand Executed by the Hands of Hangmen,) and by killing in the Field
above an Hundred thousand Men, reduced to their former obedience.

But to return to Stenko Razin; after that he had been routed about Simbierske,
and was retired downwards, he chose a freer Air for his abode, and remained for
a while in the Wilderness of Steep, leaving to one of his Confederates, called
Sjorte-Ous, that is the Devils Knuckle, the command of Astracan: Stenko in the
mean time, wandering up and down, until at length by the Captain Cornelius
Jacolowitz, and those of the Donsky-Cosacks that had remained faithful to the
Czar, he was secured and brought into Mosco. This Cornelius Jacolowitz was
Godfather to Stenko, and always honored by him, as if he had been his Father;
whence he never in the least imagined, that that person should contrive any
mischief against him. But he that was so perfidious to his Prince, deserved no
better recompense.

He was laid hold on about Tzarietza, and carried that long way of Two hundred
Miles to Mosco, entertained all along with the hopes, that he should speak with
the Great Czar himself, and before him, by word of Mouth, plead his own cause,
he always imagining, that he had many things to say, very important for the
Czar to know.

His Brother Frolko was extremely sad on the way, and, it seems, of a better
nature than Stenko, whom he charged with all he had done. And Stenko seeing his
Brother at a certain time more than usually troubled, comforted him by
representing, that coming into the City of Mosco, they should receive great
honor, thousands of people, and the greatest of the Land being (doubtless)
ready to meet, and to see them.

Stenko coming within a mile of Mosco, the Wagon met him that had been made to
bring him into the City according to his deserts. In the hind-part of it was
erected the Gallows; himself was stripped of his Silken habit, which he had
worn hitherto, and an old ragged Suit put upon him; and so he was placed in the
Wagon under the Gallows, with an Iron-Chain about his Neck, fastened to the top
of the same. Both his hands were locked fast to the Side-beams of the Gallows,
and his Legs divaricated. His Brother Frolko was with an Iron-Chain fastened to
the Wagon, and went a foot on the side of it.

Thus entered Stenko with his Brother into the City of Mosco, Thousands of
People, of great and mean condition, beholding them, and so fulfilling his
Prophecy of the honor he should have in entering this Town. And though he
comforted his Brother with this honor, yet himself standing in the Wagon
looked on no body, but held his Face continually downward.

They were both put to the torture, but what they there confessed, is not well
known; only that Stenko did very much lament the death of his Brother, who by
the command of Kneas Jurge Dolgeroek had formerly been hanged.

His Brother Frolko behaving himself most pitifully under the torture, Stenko
went about to comfort him again, and said, That he must remember the good
things he had enjoyed; that he had lived so long among his Friends with great
credit and reputation, and had commanded thousands; and therefore he was now to
bear this hard fortune with patience.

The Russes use this manner of Torture; they shave the Crown of the Head of a
Malefactor, and drop cold Water upon it, which they say causes very great
pain. It is related, That when the Crown of Stenko, and his Brother was shaved,
Stenko said to his Brother, I have often heard, that none is shaved for a
Priest, but he must be Learned; we are both unlearned, and yet they do us the
honor of shaving our Crown.

Four days after that he was brought in, he was with his Brother carried to the
place of Execution in the Citadel. The Sentence of Death was read before him,
wherein were expressed the Principal Villainies he had committed. He seemed not
at all concerned, and spoke not a word, but stooped. And when the Executioner
was going to do his office, he crossed himself several times, directing his
face toward a certain Church, called Pretsietse Bogorodietse Casaneche; that
is, The most Holy Mother of God of Casan. And thereupon he bowed his head
thrice toward three several places of the people assembled, saying, Prostie,
that is, Forgive me. And presently he was laid down between two Beams, and his
Right Arm cut off to the Elbow, and his Left Leg to the Knee. After this, his
Head was cut off with an Hatchet: All which was done with great speed in a very
short time; and Stenko gave not the least sigh, nor showed any sign of sense.

His Brother coming to the place of Execution, cried out, That he had the
Czar's word; a manner of expression, when a person has any secret to reveal,
which is to be manifested to none, but to the great Czar alone. Being asked
what it was, he said, It was to be told to none but to the Czar. Whereupon he
was reprieved; and they say, That he has discovered the place of the Treasure
dug under Ground by his Brother Stenko.

This was the end of Stenko Razin; his Deputy Sjorte-Ous whom he had left to
command in Astracan, is said to have raised new commotions; putting to Death
the Metropolite, and others that are contrary to his design. God Almighty give
to the great Czar, Alexis Michaelewitz, the Victory over all his Enemies.

Arch. Angel, Sept. 23/23. 1671. on Board of the Ship, the Queen Esther.
The Sentence of Death read before STENKO RAZIN, on the Place of Execution.
June 6. 1671.
THou Villain and Renegado Rebel Donsky-Cosack Stenko Razin, in the year 7175
alias 1667. abandoning the fear of God, and forgetting thy Duty and Oath,
whereby thou art bound to His Majesty the great Czar Alexis Michaelowitz,
Emperor and Defendor of the Greater and Lesser, and the White Russia, have
Rebelled against His said Majesty; and having raised other Cosacks, have
marched with them to the River Volga, there to act thy Villainous Designs: And
coming there, thou have done great mischief to much people, taking the Nasaisky
great Boats, laden with Salt-fish and Salt, belonging to the Patriarch,
Cloisters, and others: As also the Boats of many Merchants: Which Violence and
Robbery, thou have acted as far as to the very Walls of Astracan.

Again, Thou Villain, have, betwixt Astracan and the Sorneiner, Robbed, Killed,
and Thrown into the Water, the Waywood of the great Czar, Simon Bellemisch, who
was sent to speak with thee. The like villainy thou have committed upon the
Muscovian Officer Susover, that was likewise dispatched to thee for the same
end.

When out of Astracan to the Town Jayck were sent a Waywood, and two Russian
Colonels, with some Soldiers, to confer with you in an amicable way, and to
persuade you to desist from your Villainous attempts, and to beg his Majesty's
pardon, thou did hang both the Colonels, and betake thy self with thy Cosacks
to Sea from Jayck, and return from Sea into the Volga, ruining all places of
Fishery, and burning the habitations of the Tartars.

Thou Villain have also been under the Town Tarchi, and have exceedingly
endamaged the adjacent places; as also part of the Dominions of the King of
Persia. Being upon the Caspian Sea thou did rob the Subjects of Persia, and
take away the Goods of Merchants, and their lives also* Thou have also ruined
several Towns in Persia, and thereby caused great difference between the Two
Empires. Besides, the Soldiers of Astracan upon thy orders, have killed their
Colonel, and joined themselves to thee, doing great mischief in many places.

An. 7177 alias 1669. The Governor of Astracan, Kneas Jwan Simonewitz
Prosorofsky sent against you the Waywood Kneas Simon Leibof with His Majesty's
Army, who had girt you all about; which thou Villain seeing, did dispatch to
that Waywood two of thy chief Confederates, praying in the name of all the
Cosacks, that His Majesty would please to pardon them, promising, That
thereupon you would return home, and act no more mischief, but serve the Czar
with all Fidelity, without occasioning any difference between His Majesty and
the King of Persia, as also without taking any thing upon the Volga, or the
Caspian Sea: Whereupon those two Cosacks having taken an Oath in the name of
the whole Body, and sent to His Majesty Seven persons to implore his pardon
(which was granted,) and your Forces being permitted to go with safety from
Astracan, to the River Don, the place of your dwelling; notwithstanding all
this, thou Villain have forgot the Grace and Favor of the great Czar, and have
by the way exercised on the Volga, great robbery, and coming to Tzaretsa,
beaten the Waywood, and committed enorm outrages.

An. 7178 alias 1670. Thou Villain, together with thy Companions, forgetting
the Fear of God, and deserting the Holy Catholic Apostolic Church, did,
when you were upon the Don, speak blasphemous words against our Lord Christ,
and prohibit to build Churches, and to perform Divine Service in those that
were in being; driving away all the Priests, and making such people, as would
marry, instead of practicing the usual Ceremonies of Marriage, to go round
about a Tree.

Thou Villain also, slighting the Grace of the great Czar vouchsafed to thee
and thy Associates, have afresh rebelled against His Majesty, and returned to
the River Volga, acting the like villainies, with Robbing and Killing as
formerly, and particularly plundering and putting to death some honest ancient
Cosacks, that refused to join with you, and to approve of your Actions.

Thou have likewise killed and cast into the Water, those that by the great
Czar were sent with Letters of Pardon to the Captain Cornelius Jacolowitz and
to other Donsky Cossacks; and caused the rest to be so beaten that they died of
it.

Marching from the River Don with thy confederate Cossacks, and coming to the
Town of Tsaretza, thou have fraudulently persuaded the people of that place,
that the Czar's Army was coming to put them all to the sword; whereas on the
contrary his Majesty's Army went to assist that Town against thee and thy
villainous practices: upon which ungrounded persuasion the said Town surrendered
themselves to thee, and received thee amongst them. Entering into it, thou have
put to the sword the Commander Turgonova, and all those Citizens, that would
not be partakers in your villainies, and thrown them into the water; and
thereupon thou did march out against the Army of the Great Czar, and by fraud
rout the same, and did fling into the water their Colonel Jwan Lapatin, and
their Lieutenant Colonel Tedor Jeckschym, and others, after having put them to
very great torments. Besides thou have taken away the Czar's Boats laden with
Rye, and robbed many Merchants; and after that thou did march to the Town
Tzornojaar, and there kill the Governor Jwan Sergeof and all Officers, and many
Moscovian Soldiers.

Coming before Astracan, thou made some of thy villainous Cossacks enter into
it, and by them induce the Soldiers to deliver up the Town, and the Bojar and
Waywood into thy hands: which was done accordingly; the Astracan soldiers
thereupon joining themselves with thee, and upon thy Orders pulling the Bojar,
Kneas Jwan Simonowitz Prosorofsky, out of the Church, whom thou did cast down
headlong from a high Steeple, commanding also his Brother, together with many
Noblemen, Officers, Soldiers, and Merchants, after grievous Tortures, to be
put to death; and robbing the Houses of God, Churches and Monasteries, as also
the Czar's Treasure, and many Houses of the principal Citizens, and burning all
the Papers of State in the Chancery, with the addition of such scoffings as
cannot be paralleled.

Moreover, thou have caused, without any shame, many Priests, Monks and Nuns to
be stripped naked, and many other people besides. Thou have also commanded most
inhumanly to be beaten very many, to make them confess, where they had hid
their Treasure, without sparing little children. Further, thou have put to
death some of the chief Merchants of the King of Persia, and many other
Merchants strangers, Perfians, Indians, Turkish, Armenians, and Boucharen, who
upon the account of Traffic, were at that time in Astracan; robbing them of
their Goods, and occasioning matter of discontent to the Great Chach of Persia.

Again, thou Villain have been insatiable of Blood, and continued to spill the
most innocent; and thou have not scrupled to hang up by their Legs upon the
Wall both the innocent Children of the Bojar, Kneas Jwan Simonowitz
Prosorofsky, and after great Torture to worry the one, and so to beat the
other, that thou thoughtest he could not live. And thou have also caused the
Clerks, that served the Great Czar, and would not consent to thy designs, to be
put to painful deaths, commanding them to be hanged up by their Ribs.

Besides, Thou Villain, after having killed in Astracan many good people, have
delivered many Wives and their Daughters to be abused by your confederate
miscreants; commanding also the Priests that they should marry none at the
Metropolitan's Order, scoffing at the Church of God, and the Ordinances of the
Holy Apostles, and annulling the Sacrament of Marriage, and throwing such
Priests as refused to comply with thee, into the water.

Thou Villain have also robbed the Treasure of the Great Czar in Astracan; and
after an effusion of much blood, thou did march out of that City to
Tsarietza, and thence up the River to Tsaratof, whose Inhabitants surrendered
themselves unto thee; and there thou did rob the Corn-Moneys of his Majesty,
and great store of Provision, putting to death the Waywode Koesmakotesin and
many Noble men.

From Saratof, Thou Villain, persisting in thy malicious designs, did come to
the Town Samarof, which also was surrendered to thee, and whence thou did
carry away the Czar's Treasure, putting to the sword the Governor Jwan
Alsienofsky, and many Noblemen and Citizens, that would not take your part.

From Samarof, thou Miscreant did proceed to the Town Simbierske, to which
thou laidst a Siege, and tookst it by storm, doing much mischief there. Thou
did also send to many other Towns some of thy villainous Companions, by false
Writings bearing them in hand, that the Eldest Son of our Great Czar, of
Glorious memory, our Czarawitz Alexis Alexewitz, Great Duke of the Greater,
Lesser and the White Russia, was yet living, and that thou by Order of his
Majesty, wast come to put to death as Traitors, all Bojars, Counselors, Noble
men and Officers, being in his Majesty's service: whereas, on the contrary, the
said Son of our Great Czar, departed this mortal life, and passed into the
everlasting Rest of Heaven; and that in his Palace, in the presence of his
Lord Father, in the year 7178, alias 1670. the 17th of January; his Corpse being
buried in Mosco in the Cathedral of S. Michel, amongst his Progenitors, the
very next day after his death, likewise in the presence of his Lord Father the
Great Czar, and of the Lords the Patriarch of Alexandria, Paysy, and the
Patriarch of Mosco; Joseph, and of many Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and Priests: which departure of our Lord Czarawitz of Glorious memory,
is not only notorious here, but in other Kingdoms also. But Thou Traitor did
devise this with a design to discompose the people, and to occasion the
shedding of innocent blood.

Thou have also craftily given out, as if the Monk Nikow was with thee; whereby
thou have scandalized many; for this Nikow was, by the Order of the Great Czar,
according to the condemnation of the Patriarch, deposed from his Office, and
sent to Beelooser into the Cloister Verapond, where he yet is.

Moreover, thou did also like a Villain, send thy Associats and Traitors into
the Army of the Bojar Kneas Jurge Alexewitz Dolgoroeck, to entice them to join
in Rebellion with thee: which design yet, by the good providence of God, has
been frustrated.

But, Thou Villain, lying about the Town Simbierske, was it not able with all
thy storming and cheating to effect any thing; forasmuch as by the goodness of
God Almighty, and the aid of our blessed Lady the Mother of God, the comfort of
the Christians, and upon the intercession of the Holy Father and Wonder-worker
Sergius, and by the Military strength, and the prosperity of our Great Czar
Alexis Michalowitz, Great Duke of all the Greater, Lesser, and the White
Russia, as also of the Highborn Lord our Czarawitz and Great Duke Jwan
Alexewitz; and likewise by the prudent and careful Conduct, and the valor of
the Soldiery of our Great Czar; Thou Villain and Traitor, with thy Confederates
and Abettors, have been, near the Town Simbierske, and in many other places,
discomfited, and with a few of thy company did then escape, and retreat
downwards.

In many other places have the Inhabitants, upon thy villainous solicitations,
rebelled, and killed their Governors, and thrown them into the water: And Thou
Villain have joined thy self to the villainy of thy Brother, and you to gether
have fallen into diverse Frontier-places, where you have shed much innocent
blood, and done great mischief.

In which your divellish practices, you perfidious Villains, Stenka and Frolko,
together with your Companions, did contemn and deride the Church of God, not
understanding the Grace of the most Holy Mother of God, the Hope of Christians,
and of the Holy Wonderworker Sargius; designing the ruin of the Imperial City
Mosed, and of the whole Moscovian Empire.

You, with all your adherents, went so far in your wickedness, that you refused
to obey the Laws of our Great God, who is Glorious in Trinity, and slighted the
Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Hope of the Christians; putting all your
confidence in your divellish practices: In which villainous design you have
been engaged since the year 7175 (1667.) unto the year 7179 (1671.) April 4th;
during which time you have shed store of innocent blood, without sparing that
of poor harmless young Children.

April 4th of the year 7179. (1671.) through the great mercy of the Almighty,
and by the wise Conduct and the valor of the Army of the Great Czar, Alexis
Michalowitz, Thou Villain wast taken prisoner, and have been brought to his
Majesty, and in the Examination and upon the Torture have confessed thy Crimes:
For which thy abominable Attempts and practices, committed agarnst God
Almighty, and against our Great Czar, Alexis Michalowitz, Great Duke and
Defender of all the Greater, Lesser, and the White Russia, for thy Rebellion
and Treason, and for the Ruin and Desolation caused by thee to all Russia, the
Great Czar has commanded, and the Bojars have assented, that thou should be
condemned to be Quartered.

FINIS.

