A RELATION Of the TAKING of PREVESA By the ARMY of the Republique of Venice.
SEigneur Morosini General of the Venetian Army; after having taken St. Maure
with the Auxiliary Troops of the Pope: The Great Duke of Tuscany and those of
Malta, was obliged to rest his Soldiers some days: In the mean time he gave
necessary Orders for the Reparation of the Fortifications of the Place, but
'twas so much Damnified by the Cannon and the Bombs, which had ruined the
greatest part of the Houses, that 'twas impossible to advance the Work in so
little time as 'twas hoped for. He was therefore forced to part the Work
between the Soldiers and the Galley-slaves, that it might be the sooner
finished, having a resolution not to end the Campaign without some considerable
Action; and that it much concerned him not to part from St. Maure, till it was
in a good condition, in case the Turks should have any design to Attaque it, as
they had given out. He likewise commanded they should carry in several
Mortar-pieces, together with a great quantity of Bombs, and all sorts of
Provisions, as well of War as others, if the place might have occasion, to make
a Vigorous Defense.

The 22 of August Seigneur Girolomo Cornaro Providor General of the Sea arrived
at St. Maure, and Seigneur Morosini having let him see the necessity of
finishing those Works he had already begun, prepared for his departure upon a
new Expedition he had but newly resolved upon. But after having made a general
re-view of his Troops, and chose out those that should enter into the Garrison
of St. Maure, there remained but two thousand Venetian Troops that were fit to
March, by reason of the Sickness and Fatigues which had killed abundance of his
men. He therefore sent the Colonel Angelo of Decima into the Neighborhood to
Assemble as many Greeks together as possible, the better to Fortify his Army,
and to put him in a condition to Attaque Prevesa, following the Resolution he
had taken, and which he had not 'till then declared. He learned almost at the
same time that the Turks had caused five hundred men to enter into the place,
and that they had got together a number of Troops to form a Body, which was
Encamped under the Cannon of the Town, and was well Entrenched. This advice did
not at all hinder the General Morosini to think of means for the execution of
his Designs, how difficult soever the Enterprise seemed, with that small number
of Troops he had Shipped off.

He set sail with a part of his Army, and Anchored in the Port of Petala; there
to hear news of Colonel Angelo, who was already advanced within 26 Miles of
St. Maure; and upon the advice he received, he drew toward the Port of
Dragamette, where a landing might be made without any difficulty.

The 10th. of September he Embarked his Troops, the Army consisting of 2000
Venetians, about 1000 Auxiliaries of the Pope; the Duke of Tuscany, and those
of Malta, and 15 or 1600 Greeks.

These Troops being advanced in the plain Country, instantly charged some
Turkish Squadrons which were posted in different places for the Guard of the
passages, who immediately retired upon the approach of the Christians. One
Party of these Squadrons consisted of the Troops which the Infidels had
Assembled after the taking of St. Maure, and who had Encamped about Prevesa;
Saban Bassa Governor of the place had sent them to observe the motions of the
Christian Army. Being made believe after that Action which they came from
doing, they could have no design on Prevesa, he was therefore gone out, and put
himself at the head of his Troops to harrass and surprise it.

The Christians entered into four or five Villages of the Turks, which they
burnt, after having made several Slaves, and ravaged the Country for 4 or 5
days space, they then re-embarked at the Port of Petalla; the General in the
mean time, was with his Galleys within sight of Patras, and Lepanto, to amuse
the Turks, and to draw them to that side, upon the hopes that they might more
easily Charge the Venetian Troops, while they were dispersed in the Plain
Country.

The 15th. they came to the part of Demata. The 17th. they called a Council,
where 'twas resolved to Attaque Prevesa, because without the Conquest of that
Place, St. Maure being but newly reduced to the obedience of the Republique,
might be readily Besieged by the Infidells.

The Fortress of St. Maure is within twelve Leagues of the entrance of the
Golph of Arta, by the Ancients called the Golph of Ambracia: The City of Arta
is Situate on the extremity of this Golph, which is about 25 Miles in compass,
being able to contain a great number of Ships; at the entrance of the Golph, on
the West side, stands the Fortress of Prevesa, upon the ruins of the Ancient
Nicopolis, built by Augustus in memory of a Victory he gained against Mark
Anthony; the place is less than St. Maure, but the Situation is more
advantageous, commanding the entrance of the Golph, and those that are Masters
of it are also of a considerable Trade which is at Arta

Seigneur Morosini taking the Resolutions of the Council of War, caused five
Galleys and six Gallyasses with Order to approach near the Castles to a place
called Gomenizze, which are almost within sight of Previsa if possible, to
oblige the Turks to separate their Forces, and to force back those Troops which
they had drawn together to Fortify the Body which lay Encamped under the
favor of the Cannon of the Town.

These stratagems had all the success the General proposed; Saban Bassa
believing the Venetians durst not hazard the Siege of Prevesa, Attaqued the
Castles, and sent back thither all the Troops he had already drawn, and the
greatest part of those that lay round Prevesa, thus persuading himself he
should ruin the Designs of the Generals: The Turks the more to Insult over the
Christians, and to let them know they were sensible of their Designs, caused a
general Salute of all their Cannon, with other demonstrations of joy, when they
were received into the Castles.

The 20th. the Army parted from Demata, and arrived about nine in the Evening
at the entrance of the Golph of Arta, where they Anchored. The 21st. the
Captain Manetta with 24 Barks and some Brigandines Armed, entered in the Golph
of Prevesa, and there landed with part of the Troops; in the mean time the
Turks discharged eight pieces of Cannon and aboat 200 Muskets, though not a
man was wounded: The Galleys that were Anchored over against an Eminence called
the Hill of Mahomed Effendi, advanced about the dawning of the day within
Musket shot of the place, to make a Diversion, and to facilitate the Landing
of those part of the Troops that were already by means of Galliots past an Arm
of the Sea about a Mile and half over: In mean while the Galleys made a
continual Firing in their turns, which hindered the Turks from coming near the
Shore.

In effect the Infidels bel^eving the Christians would put their Troops ashore
on this place, Fired their whole Cannon and Muskets with much Confusion, and
little Damage to the Christians. The Troops being thus landed without any Loss
began to advance nigh the place under the Command of General Strasoldo.

The Turks that were commanded to hinder their Landing, having perceived the
Fault they had committed, detached 500. Spahies, who came full speed to Charge
the Christians before they had finished their Landing, but being already in
Order of Battle, and vigorously Firing upon the Turks, they killed and wounded
a considerable number, the others, without any further Dispute, betook
themselves to Flight, and retired in so great Disorder, that the most part of
them could not enter the Town, the Christians immediarely advanced without any
further hindrance, seized upon the Town, and posted themselves upon the Hill of
Mahomet Effendi, which commanded the City within Musket shot.

The 21. the Generalissimo having made the Galleys and Galliots approach near
Prevesa, sent to summon the Turks to deliver up the Place, threatening them to
give no Quarter if they attended the last extremity. Saba Rassa Governor, that
was parted to put himself at the head of 4000. Men, to observe the motions of
the Christians, was not yet got in; but the besieged hoped his Return in three
or four days, and that he would bring Troops enough to raise the Siege: So the
Officer that commanded in his absence would not receive the General's Letter,
and ordered to shoot him that brought it; mean time Signiour Morosini caused
two Cannons, and two Mortar pieces to be landed.

The 22. he landed as many more Cannon and Mortar pieces, and accompanied with
the Nobless of his Galley, visited the Posts, ordered the Attacques, and placed
the Cannons, and the Mortars upon the Batteries.

The 23. was more than 300. Bombs thrown, which beat down many Houses, and set
fire to several Quarters, and dismounted several Pieces of the Enemies Cannon,
the Artilery of the place was in a very ill condition, and did no effect, the
Besiegers fired with so much success against their Batteries, that there was
left but one piece of Cannon that was in a condition to serve them. That day
there was but one Soldier killed, and five wounded.

The 24. Seigniour Morosini visited the Works, and the Batteries, and gave
order for the making a Descent into the Ditch, where he immediately made a
Lodgment,

The 25. Twenty Turks that night got out of the Town, by several Florentines
which they found asleep, they killed one, took another Prisoner, and wounded a
third.

The 26. the Breach was considerable, and the Enemies made very little fire
with their Muskets.

The 27. the Works advanced with so much Success, that on the morrow the 28.
they made a Lodgment in the Ditch. The Sieur Bachili, who commanded a Party of
the Troops of Malta, was killed with a Musket Shot, the same day the Mine was
thought fit to be ready to play, and Orders were given to go to the Assault, in
case the Turks should obstinately endeavor the Defense of the Place.

The 29 the Feast of St. Michael, they put out the White Flag, and demanded to
capitulate, sending six of theirs to propose Articles, and the Governor sent
Hostages five Gentlemen.

The Turks demanded that He would agree with them, on the same Capitulations as
he had done with those of St. Maure; but he declared he would make no
Conditions with them, otherwise than that Thirty of the most considerable of
them, should go out of the Town with Arms, and Baggage, and the rest should go
without Arms, and that they should carry nothing but what they ought, and that
all the Christian Slaves should be set at Liberty. The Turks were obliged to
submit to these Conditions.

The 30. they departed out to the number of 200. Men by the Sea-Gate, and were
thence conveyed by certain Greek Barks within four Miles of Arta.

The Generalissimo Morosini caused 20. Malteses, 30. Venetians, 6. Soldiers of
the Troops of the Pope, and 10. of the Florentines, to enter the Town, who had
order put guards to the two Ports, and the several Avenues, to hinder the
Pillage, and for the Conservation of the Magazin. He ordered also at the same
time the Standard of St. Mark to be put up, and those of the Turk to be taken
down, which were carried to the General's Galley.

There was found more than 46. Pieces of Cannon in the place, eighteen of which
were Brass, and at 50. pound Ball, a quantity of Muskets, 500. Quintals of
Powder, Bullets, and all sort of Ptovision in abundance, and about 1200.
Inhabitants in the Place.

The Republic, by this Conquest, remains in Possession of the Golph, and all
the Places on that Coast: And the Turks in loosing that Fortress, have lost one
100000. Crowns a year, which they drew from the Fishing on the Coast. The Sieur
Grimano Patriarch d' Aquilie, and heretofore General of the Pope's Galleys,
having some time since in vain attacqued it without any Success:

During this Progress of the Venetian Army, under the Conduct of the General
the Sieur Alassandro Molino Captain extraordinary of the Ships, hearing that
the Captain Bassa, after having several times avoided the Rencounter of the
Venetian Army, was retired in the Port of Chio, resolved to go there to fight
him.

He sailed that way with six Ships, and was no sooner in the mouth of the
Chanel, but he discovered a Galley, which the Turks had left to observe the
Motion of the Venetians. This Galley, after having given several Shot, which
served as a Sign to the Bassa, retired with all possible speed; and at the same
time, the other Galleys that were at the mouth of the Chanal, entered in the
Port of Chio, the Venetians following them, and the 20. they anchored at the
Mouth of the Port: Having in the sight of the Enemies Army, taken a Saick
loaded with Wood from Constantinople, the Wind proving contrary that day,
hindered the Ships from coming nearer the Land.

The 21. the Sieur Molino, having put his Ships in form of a Half Moon, and
posting himself in the Head of them, advanced under the Cannon of the Castle,
from whence they fired several upon him; but that did not hinder him at all
from giving a whole Broadside upon the Castle, and the other Vessels doing the
like: The Turks answered with the Cannon from the Castle; and likewise from a
little Fort newly built by the Sea side, since the Damage received from the
French Squadron, under the Command of Monsieur du Quesne.

The Turkish Galleys, to the number of 16. together with three Ships, stirred
not in the Action, waiting only a fair opportunity of Retiring without
Fighting. The Venetian Ships remained at the Entry of the Port, in the same
Posts they had taken, and to shut up the Passage.

The 21. and 22. at night, the Sieur Molino detached the Captain Bassagnani,
with a Ship to recover the Port, which he found would be very difficult to
assault, because of the new Fortifications the Turks had made. He was therefore
resolved to cast up several Batteries of Bombs ashore, to incommode the
Enemies, and to oblige them to abandon the Port. The Sieur Delkino Captain
Ordinary, advanced with the Jupiter thundering, with two other Ships, firing his
Cannon upon the new Fort the whole day, but without doing much Damage; 'twas
found impossible to land the Cannon, and therefore contented themselves to
advance four great Barks with Mortars, to throw the Bombs against the Galleys.

In the mean time, the Sieur Molino giving Orders to make ready the Batteries,
perceived toward the beginning of the Night, eight Galleys drawing out of the
Port, and with all speed making toward the Coast of Rhodes, the Venetians
immediately weighed Anchor to follow them, vigorously firing upon them, but the
Wind falling, they could not follow them further; mean while the other Galleys
got out of the Port, making a favorable use of the calm, to follow the others.
It Is reported that afterward that 3. of those Galleys were sunk by the Shot
they had received, that the others were in a very ill condition, and that the
Town and Castle of Chio, were very considerably damaged.

LONDON, Printed for Randolph Tailor, 1684.


