ADVICE TO LOVERS: OR, Certain RULES of BEHAVIOR, Showing them how to Demean
themselves, so as not to Miscarry in the Grand Affair of Love.

Wherein also The Pretty Tricks, odd Humors, and Fantastic Carriage of some
Paramours, Together with several Pleasant Passages relating to Amors, and
Courtship, are Observed and Described.

By W. R. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Shirley, at his Shop under St. Dunstan's Dial.
1680.

To the Reader.
A Tract, though never so small, without a Preface, the Bookseller says, looks
like a Play without a Prologue: The Similitude may pass; for generally, One's
as much to the Design and Purpose of the Work, as the Other. Rather than want
this, he will scribble an impertinent one himself; so that whatsoever the House
is, there must needs be a Porch to it, tho of the Tuscan Order. He Is as
solicitous for a Preface, as he is diligent in scraping to an Author, whose
happy Labors have been blessed with two Impressions; or thanking a Gownman for
the Sermon he never heard. But to leave off Satyr and his petty underdesigns,
let us fall to the Business of Amor. Which has often made mighty Monarchs stoop
to its Empire, made grand Conquerors, Statesmen, and the Religious confess its
Power. Love's force excells that of Famine, breaks through sacred Cloisters, and
praecipitates a Pious Ignatian into Incest. It befools the Philosopher, and
draws in the Man that was resolved never to game: Nooses the most of Men into
the Curse of Noise, Nonsense, Penury, Horns and Distraction. Makes Mankind
adore Shadows and the Varnish, that lasts but a few Years, to dote on Pride,
Folly and Impertinence. His Holiness has acknowleg'd its Omnipotence, having
forced him to bequeath his Keys to a Donna Olympia, who infallibly governed
Catholic Nations, instructed erring Cardinals, received with more than
Machiavillian Policy all Embassies, and distaft it over a great part of Europe.
Love made-the Cardinals play at Leap-Frog, and Caesar Borgia (that blessed Son
of Infallibility) express his Affection to a Bishop in his Pontificalibus at
the Altar. Made Nero believe a Transmutation of Sexes, and the nimble Tailor
pine away for the want of a Queen Bess. It Is no Fiction of the Poets, that
Cupid wanted Eyes: For Lovers are the blindest Creatures in Nature. For what
else makes a Lord humble himself to Cyndars and Oysters; Great She Is admire the
Architecture of a Brawny Coachman, and the Countrey-Knight leave the chaste
Embraces of his Spouse, for the poor allurements of a tatling, leering
Chambermaid. Love or Lust, for Philosophers make no great Distinction between
them, hurries Academics into the Arms of Bedmakers, and She-Tapsters; causes
Physicians to mistake the Seat of the Pulse, and Joan to be startled at the
pleasant Strangeness of Carnal Application. To regulate these kind of
Enormities, the following Sheets are designed, which upon Experiment have been
found to be infinitely successful, and I can assure you, That the ensuing
Recipe's, taken according to the Author's Directions, have handsomely cured,
what all the Herbs about Town could never yet effect. They lead you handsomely
to Enjoyment, and make you happy without sighs and looking pale and silly. I
keep you from your Remedies, and Lovers I am sure are hasty Creatures, and
would fain be at the Business.

Yours, etc.

ADVICE to LOVERS: OR, The Art of Love.
LOVE is so Universal a Monarch, and his Catholic Majesty has so Large an
Empire throughout the World, that there are scarce any but are subject to his
Dominion, and have felt the Effects of his Tyrannick Power; so that not to be
wounded by his Dart, fettered in his Chains, nor melted in his Flames, is to
Live a Wonder: But yet the Resisters of his Charms are not so Prodigious, as
the Yielders to them are Miserable and Unhappy; neither do we stand so much
astonished and amazed at the Former, as Pity, and Commiserate the condition of
the Latter; For to be listed a Soldier under Cupid's Banner, and not to
understand his Martial Discipline, is to be exposed to the greatest Dangers;
whereas a Prudent Deportment in the Camp of Venus, may secure from Perils, and
crown our Passion with much Happiness: For either through the Wiles and
Stratagems of the subtle Lover, or the Simplicity and Innocence of the
credulous Mistress; either through the close Siege of the storming Man, or the
too easy surrender of the yiedling Woman, or through other miscarriages of
both Parties, it mostly comes to pass, that we hear of nothing but Infelicities
in the Affairs of Love, of Improsperous Addresses; Neglects, and Slights; with
shipwrack't Fames, and Reputation. Whereas a Prudent Behavior in ^ll
circumstances that attend Amors, and a discreet Management of that Passion in
all its Intrigues, will prevent Mischiefs, and yield those Pleasures, that are
the perpetual Concomitants of such Amorous Entercourses.

Now the Design of these few Lines is to Direct those th^^^^^ ^^ ba^k't for
Love, that they may not split upon those Shelves, but may have a Prosperous
Voyage to the Cyprian Island, and pay their Adorations successfully to the
Shrine of the Goddess Venus -- In the prosecution of which Discourse, I shall
make mine Address, First, To the Female Votaries of the Blind god; And then
Secondly, to the Masculine Adorers of the same Deity.

The First PART.
SECT. I. Of Ladies Behavior in the Affairs of Love.
I Hope that Blessed Sex will not be Disobliged at my Sentiments, if I presume
to tell them, That I am apt to think, that they want Precepts concerning the
Art of Love; few of them being well instructed in the Intricacies of that
Mysterious Passion; For generally their Beauty is so Severe, and their Charms
so Barbarous, that they for the most part make those Persons the Objects of
their Rage and Cruelty, who make them the Idols of their Adorations; and
Despise them most, who most faithfully Honor them; striking them Prostrate, by
a Darted Frown, who voluntarily kneel, as Religious Worshippers of their
Admired Deity's; whose Virtues and Integrity deserve kinder Returns, and may
challenge the Gratitude of a more Noble Reward: But if not so coy and shy, then
they basely yield to the slovenly Importunities of stupid Idiots, who are
fitter to be entertained with the circle of an Halter, than caressed with the
clip of a kind Embrace, who rather deserve to imprint a smack on the Rear
behind, than seal a Kiss on the Cheeks before.

Now to avoid these and many other Errors, it may not seem Impertinent to lay
down some Rules to Demean themselves by, during the time they are Mistresses,
and the Objects of Love, and Courtship; as (1). How they should answer, and
stand affected to a sincere Paramour. (2.) How to Counter-work the Wiles and
Stratagems of mere Pretenders. To (3) show, whether they should Dissemble the
whole Matter, or in some fort acknowledge it; or (4.) Whether altogether avoid
and shun Addresses.

II.
Now the First thing a Lady is to be taught, who is besieged by Lovers, is to
know a true Servant from the formal Disguizes, or Counterfeit Formalities of
Hypocritical Pretenders; And indeed to give a true Characteristick Note, nay,
probable Conjectures of a feigned Kindness; and to distinguish it from a real
Affection, is a thing not very Feasible; For so great is the Subtlety and Craft
of Dissembling Woers, that they personate Grief, and (with Crocodile-Tears) act
a Sorrow, when they are big with Jest, and Pregnant with Scoffs and Laughter.
How gloomy their Aspect and full of clouds! how Pale their Complexion! how
Mournful their Voice, interrupted with sighs, and repeated Groans! How will
these officious Ghosts (like ghastly Apparitions) watch her steps and observe
her motion; and in the Church, and Theater, nay at every corner, at once both
infest and affright her with the horror of their Presence? How will they Dun
for Love by importunate style of Courting Letters! and Wheedle out a Kindness
by the winning and persuasive Rhetoric of obliging Present! What Passionate
Whinings! and silent Dialogues weaved by the Amorous Intercourse of Mutual
Glances! How will they dart, and convey their Sentiments by an expressive
Twinckle, and discover their Thoughts by the silent speech of a Languishing
Eye! What shall I say of the pompous Festivity of splendid Treatments, and the
Diverting Magnificence of Masquerades; All which are solemn Institutions
Devoted to the Honor of their Admired Lady: whose Slumbers in the Night are
pleasantly softened with charms of Music; or her Repose disturbed with the
ruder Serenade of Ungrateful Sighs. What Insinuations into the Favor of her
chief Attendants, that they may corrupt, and bribe them into a close
confederacy? who must occasionally discover how cruelly they are scorch't in
the insupportable Flames, and Tormented in the Tophet of Burning Love; how that
they value neither Life, nor Fortune, but are ready to offer up both as a
Sacrifice for the Favor and Mercy but of one Smile; and that they design
nothing but what is Honorable and Virtuous, the utmost of whose Ambition is to
converse with her; whose Blessed Company is almost the only Heaven they wish
for or desire; the Fruition of whose Presence but one moment, almost equals the
Ecstasies and the Eternal Transports of the Beatifick Vision. If she willingly
Listens to such Discourse as this, and the Language seems not a little
pleasing, then there is no Difficulty, but what is already conquered, then
False Keys and Opiates and Ladders of Ropes are immediately produced; all
things are represented Facile and Easy, and appear with so good a Face, and
Aspect, that to consummate all, there is nothing wanting but her bare Consent.
Which if she Denies, and is resolved to stand out against the Siege, then they
more vigorously attaque her, reinforce their persuasions, and raise such
Importunate Batteries, as will force, and compel that Inexorable Fort of her
self to surrender. Some, when they have Despaired of Victory, have turned the
sweetness of their soft Courtship, into the harshness and bitterness of
threatening Language, and have pointed their Panegyricks with the sting of
Satyrs. Others charm them with the Magic of Spells, and Philters, and by an
entangling Potion, have deprived them of that Liberty that Nature gave them.

These are the subtle Artifices that Suitors make use of to circumvent their
Mistresses: And how can those Innocent Professors of Honesty and Simplicity a
void so many Snares in Ambuscado for them? And therefore what wonder if an
Harmless Virgin be entrap'd by Cupid, when she perceives her self to have been
so long adored by so Passionate a Young Gallant, who scruples at no Dangers to
purchase her Favor?

III.
But that she may not miscarry in her Amors, nor become a Prey to the most
subtle Passion; Let her be sure to observe this General Rule, viz.

Not too easily Believe (more than is meet) that she is Beloved. It Is a common
Infirmity of Women, presently to apprehend all Discourses of Love, though Dark
and Mysterious; and even at first Dash to acknowledge the most Extravagant
Commendations: or if by chance they do disown them, yet they do it so faintly
and coldly, that seem rather to invite an Address, than reject it; and to add
Fuel to the Flame, rather than extinguish it.

In all offices therefore of Civility, and Dialogues of Love, Let her beware of
thinking, That any Man Admires her, because he Discourses volubly of the
Passion; And if he be Immodest that talks with her, Let a Blush discover her
Dislike of his Language: If he speaks Obscurely, and Artificially of Love, Then
let her pretend not to understand him; and when she has turned his Expressions
to another Sense, by an Ingenuous Sagacity, let her decline the subject: But if
the Thing be so Plain, that she cannot Dissemble, let her Divert it with a
Jest, and interpret all things heartily; for by this means will she purchase
the Reputation of Wisdom and Discretion, and will not so easily be imposed upon
and deceived.

But now suppose a Man be truly enamored, and should be really Tormented with
those Affections, and be wounded with those Darts, that are wont to perplex and
stick in the Souls of Men, What? shall the Rhetoric of his Miseries avail
nothing? Will not Lasses at all be moved with solemn Protestations, Sighs and
Disquietudes of an Anxious Breast, those usual Arguments of Devoted Affections?
Must they thus add an Artificial Cruelty to the Natural Barbarity and
Unkindness of their Sex? In answer to this, I must confess, it is hard to give
rules in this Particular, in regard of Men's different Natures, and
Dispositions; only let Young Ladies always remember, [That Men make greater
Professions of Love than Women.]

But it further may be demanded, What? Must a Young Lady make no Returns of
Kindness? Will not a spark glowing in the Breast of her Paramour, kindle a
Flame in her Bosom? Must she Echo back no Sighs, and make no Reflection of
Amorous Groans? When her Courtier advances, must she then retreat? By doing
thus, she will wholly deprive her self of that Homage, and Obsequiousness,
which Young Gallants are wont to pay to their Mistresses. Must she be so
Inhumane as not to give the least Countenance, and Satisfaction to her
Importunate Suitor? What? Not one Cheering Look? Not one Amorous Glance of a
sheep's eye? No Gomfort and Refreshment from obliging Dimple? No Courteous
Pressure of Treading Toe? or Private Invitation of Mystic Twitch?

Now by way of Reply to this, Psay, If she smile on any, Let him enjoy that
Sunshine of her Face, to whom she intends to resign up her Dear Self, and to
Honor with the Espousals of her whole Person; so that, if sometimes she
recreates him with the Pleasure of a Glance, or gratifies him with the Blessing
of a dropped Glove, or caress him with other loosely scattered Expressions of
Kindness, we censure not her Civility; But if she be Fleering and Gamesome; and
too Prodigal of her private Treads and Twinckles; of her secret Squeezes and
Twitches, and other Love Tokens, when no Marriage Noose is e're intended; Her
Petulant Forwardness creates a suspicion of Unlawful Desires, and consequently
eclipses the Luster of her Fame.

But however, let her be so Prudent in the Displays of her Civilities, and in
giving signs of her Favor, as to take away even the least glympse of Dishonest
Hopes.

IV.
Wherefore another Caution to be observed by these Objects of Courtship, is,
Not to have too great a Conceit of their Handsomness.

It Is an Infirmity to some of the Sex, to ascribe too much unto it; who,
because they are Attended with Throngs of Admirers, and are honored with the
Ceremonies of Bare-heads, and Bended-Knees, are reverenced with supple Coopees,
and Congees, and pelted with the Addresses of Battering Epistles; they think
these Foppish Observances to be the Effects of their Features, and undeniable
Proofs of their Charming Faces; and therefore are Ambitious of a whole Legion
of Suitors; and by this means oftentimes take occasion to hop over, and
transgress the bounds of Modesty, and degenerate into Impudence, which they
Lasciviously express in their Looks, Words and Gesture; and fancy they are
observed, and Loved for their Bonny Carriage; But they are much deceived: For
if there be any Mouths that water at them, or any Bellies that wamble after
them, the Inclination proceeds not so much from an honest opinion of them, or a
virtuous Passion toward them, as from the Dishonest hopes of Easiness of
Enjoying them.

Let not a Mistress be so Light and Vain, as to draw the eyes of all Men after
her. But let her be so virtuous in her Conversation, so sweet in her Actions,
that every Beholder may be her Votary; and then all Filthy Desires, and Smutty
Flames will die and vanish. Whosoever is Blessed with the Love of such a
Person, let him sit down satisfied with the least hint of her Favor; and value
the happiness but of one smile, above a Monopoly of all the Felicities of the
whole World.

V.
But perhaps it may be said, That this Doctrine of Love is somewhat severe; in
regard it prescribes such Lessons of Coyness, which so confines the Speech,
Looks, Gestures of Young Ladies, as that it not only takes away all Hope from
their Gallants, but even drives them to the very Brink of Despair: Men desire
not those things, that are impossible to be obtained: And though some ^emales
puff't up with the conceit of their imaginary Beauty, in the first Encounters
of Love, are Satirical in their Expressions, yet a little Familiar Converse
with the sweets of that Passion, will soften their Rigours, and dissolve their
Expressions into Courteous Periods. But if Ladies be so Morose, and Gloomy, as
not to clear up sometimes into a pleasant Gayety, either in Speech or Gesture;
they will not be adored by so many Votaries; but will Discourage the Religion,
and Cool the Fervency of their Devour Admirers.

Now in answer to this, I would not have Mistresses take away all Hope: But
only frustrate Dishonest Expectations; which a true Gentleman will never
cherish: For if Beauty, and Modesty; Candor and Piety, and a numerous cluster
of other Perfections, were the Incentives of his Passion, and the only
Magnetisms that drew him after Her, then it must needs follow, that his
Affections are Virtuous. And if an honorable Genealogy, the Reputation of
Valor, Learning and Civility, and a Graceful Mein in every Action attended
with the Advantage of other Accomplishments, are the Things that purchased the
Ladies Favor, then certainly, the end of this Love must be of the same Nature
and Complexion; that is, most worthy, like the Means that first caused it.

VI.
Men's Humors differ according to the variety of Female Tempers: Some, when
they observe a comely seriousness, either in a Ladies Motion, or Conversation,
have such a veneration for her Phlegm, as that they dare not offer up an
obsequious Amor, nor presume to discompose the Gravity of her Bum, with the
Merry Touch of an extended Hop-pole; wherefore wheeling about to the Sanguine
Lasses, they fall down Adorers of their Inviting Briskness; whose Aerie
Frolicks enlivened with the Charms of winning Language, do Tempt their
Affections, and swell their Hopes, even to strong Expectations of the sweets of
Fruition.

Others, to avoid the Snares of Tricks, and Fallacies, do affect those Ladies
most, who in the very glance of the eye, in every word and action, are so
Transparent, as that their most inward Conceptions are Plain and Legible.

Others fancy those most excellent, whom they find most difficult, and glory in
the surrender of that Fort, which to others has been Impregnable, and love to
hover in Addresses, and Flutter in Courtship about Reservedness and Austerity;
Thinking it Honorable to quell a Rebellious, and melt an obdurate Soul with
the Irresistible Power and Heat of Love. These Persons too much confiding in
their own Wisdom, and supposing they cannot be deceived, or circumvented, do
oftentimes Dote on those Girls, who by their subtle Wit, conceal a thousand
snares under an indifferent Aspect: Nay sometimes have a Kindness, and nivel
after those, who affect, as a Grace, a scornful Look, Few words, and a little
Smile, and that on purpose merely, to seem to slight an Admirer, and despise
the obsequionsness of an Officious Servant.

Lastly, there are others, so Curious, who think none worthy of their Love,
unless composed of Beauty and Eloquence; Civility and Prudence; and have in
them a general Muster, or whole Randezvouz of all Perfections; unless she be
the Result of all those Elegancies the Painter borrowed to consummate the
Pourtraicture of his most Absolute Beauty.

Though a Young Lady be not admired by such Gallants, as make their Addresses
for some Dishonest Design, yet she will have Servants to celebrate her Worth,
and to adore her Virtue.

The Second PART.
SECT. II. How Young Gentlemen should behave themselves in the Business of
Love, so as to purchase the Favor and Affections of their Mistresses.
WHosoever undertakes the Task of Love, and is resolved manfully to fight under
Cupid's Banner, so as to return Triumphant with the spoils of Hearts and Souls
of Pillaged Virgins, must first study to please, and to frame, and accommodate
himself to the Inclinations and Affections of them, and so comply with the Beck
of his Mistress, as that all his Senses must be Vassals Devoted to her Service;
Nay, his very Soul must be her Slave and Lacquey: He must not be so constant to
himself, but, if occasion shall serve, must change himself into a thousand
shapes.

These are the duties and offices of Lovers; And indeed, what greater Happiness
can there be, than for two Souls thus to be governed by one Will?

It Is certain, Suitors adapt their studies, thoughts and endeavors to the
Fancies and Humors of their Mistresses; But if their officious obsequiousness
is not visible enough, They must make them so public and manifest, that the
Lady cannot but understand them, cannot pretend to be ignorant of them; but yet
it must be done so modestly, that nothing may be diminished of her Esteem or
Veneration. My meaning is, If the Lover be so sheepish and Bashful, that he is
ashamed to speak, yet let him not fear to write; And, if he be wise, before he
transact any such thing with a Woman, let him be sure that he do not offend in
it. All Women desire to be ask't and entreated, though they resolve to deny the
Favor. Now in trying whether he shall have a repulse or not, let him do it
either by Word or Letter so modestly and warily, and withal so doubtfully, that
she may have room and scope (if she please) to pretend and dissemble that she
understands nothing of Love in the case; and so by this means, if there be any
danger, he may excuse himself, and say he did it for some other end; namely for
that enjoyment of that Communion and Familiarity, which ought to be cherish't
amongst Friends; But he must not affirm it so religiously, but that afterward
he may deny it, if, what he does be received a Pledge, and Testimony of his
Kindness.

II.
For those that are too Rash, and Bold, at the first Adventure do usually, by
their abrupt Blundering into the sacred presence of their Mistresses, make
their Prayers Ineffectual, in regard their Impudence very much disobliges, who
pretend Love without the Ceremony and Preface of their officious Civility.

It Is more Convenient therefore rather by Signs and Proofs, than by Words and
Letters, to signify their Passion. One Sigh attended with respect and awful
Fear, is a more certain Token of Affection, than Curiosity of Eloquence in a
Flood of Words. Besides, the Eyes are the truest Nuncio's, which will
faithfully perform an Embassy from the heart; For these will kindle a Flame in
the Breast of her that is so much adored; For the visive rays, being darted
into her eyes, never rest till they arrive to her heart, where mingling
themselves with the blood and spirit, do at length infect them, which being a
little warm, and assimilated to the Agent, receive the impression of the
arrived Image: And thus whilst the sparks of Beauty through the casement of the
Eyes, do mutually light upon each others hearts, the wisp of Love begins to
blaze, whose Vestal Flames will never die, being nourish't by the Fuel of
never-failing Hope.

So that, we safely affirm, [That the Eyes oftentimes are the Authors and
Dispensers of Love] especially, if they retain a Natural, Majestic sweetness;
or a pleasant Blackness; or a cheerful caeruleousness; or lastly, have such
piercing glances, which dive, and enter into the very Recesses of the Soul. The
Eyes (like expert Soldiers) lie in ambush; and if the composure of the other
Parts be Uniform, and Decorous, they entice Spectators, and inveigle them at a
distance; whom, as they nearer approach, they wound with their Darts, and
fascinate with their Charms; and that chiefly when they mutually stare with
Direct glances; For in that pleasant encounter (as distempered Optics corrupt
the sound one) they mutually partake of each others Natures.

And thus you see how by this way, a Lover may twinckle out his Inclinations
and Desires, and discover the Grumblings of his Gizzard to his Dear Lady. But
now, if these Betrayers of Love are not artificially managed, they will be apt
to blabb, by an untoward Goggle, the Disorders and Perturbations of an
enamored Soul, to those from whom we would have them concealed; Cupid will be
likely enough to peep out of these crystal windows: Let a Prudent Lover
therefore (as time and place shall require) tie up his Looks, and not suffer
them to straggle and rove unseasonably: What though a Prospect of her Beauties,
be a Refreshment and verdure to his Soul, and Sight, yet let him divert his
Pigs-neys from the luxury of that Look, which may in the least proclaim the
Hanckerings of Love.

But is it not more Prudent to do all things openly, and in the eyes of the
World? Is it not better to Bill in open view, and to Toy it in public, where
there is witnesses of your Friskings, than to smack it in the dark, and to be
jumbling in hugger-mugger behind the door? For the Freeness and Publickness of
these Actions, will take away the suspicion of all Love, seeing it is not
regarded whether they are seen or not; whereas a sly Colt, that loves to Lecher
it in a corner, will, give occasion of Jealousy. Besides, by denying nothing,
but by public professing of all, the Jolly Lover has the Liberty to Bow and
Complement; to meet and chatt with her without the least suspicion; whereas
these Privileges are denied to Privateers in Love.

It has been observed, That where there has not been glowing the least spark
of Love, there has broken out the whole Element of that Passion; which was
only kindled by a bare Report. A common Bruit has tickled so much the Fancy of
some Women, that they have been smitten by Hearsay. Fame plays the part of an
Amorous Courtier, whose Rhetoric is more prevalent than the melting
Expressions of the most Passionate Gallant; and she has been more prosperous
in wooing, and has kindled more Love, than their Personal Addresses; so that
Rumors are so far from cooling the Fervours and Heats of Love, as that they
Fan the Embers, and blow them up into a great Combustion.

IV.
But how many Gallants always keep the Love and Favor of their Mistresses?
Certainly, by the same means they first obtained it, namely, 1. By Pleasing
them. 2. By being Obsequious to them. And, 3. By offering no occasion of
offense.

It Is hard to advise in this case, in regard those that are troubled with the
Simples, and are not very Judicious, do fall into a thousand Errors; which,
although they seem Light, and Trivial perhaps to others, yet do much exasperate
and vex the Women. Those Men are most obnoxious to them, who are possessed with
greater Ravings of Love, than others; who as often as they meet their
Adored-She, do break out into such Extremities of Grief and Sorrow as that they
are always expressing it with the odd solemnities of wringed hands, and shaken
Noddles; of wreath-Chops, and Antic Grimaces; who require such strange and
difficult Things, that they are rendered Contemptible, and Odious, even by
their clinging Importunity.

Others, unjustly Jealous, are so severe against those they suspect, that they
will not allow their Ladies so much as to speak, and look or leer upon them: By
which Madness and Folly they do not only incense the Women, but make them
twitter after those, whom before they minded not: That Fear that Firks, nay
Torments a man's Soul, lest his Mistress should twine about the Limbs, or
mingle with the Embraces of another Man; I say that Fear does insinuate that
his Person is more Virtuous, and more Deserving, than himself is: And the more
he does Detract from another, the less he is Believed, by his Mistress, though
he speaks Truth; Nay, she conceives a greater Opinion of his worth, and thinks
within her self, that the Gentleman's charms are the more Attractive

V. Let our Suitor therefore have a care that he do not bespatter and Disparage
his Rival.
It Is an old Proverb, If thine Enemy be in the water up to the middle, Lend him
your hand to help him out; but if he stands up to the Chin, set your Foot on
his Head to thrust him in. Some deal with their Rivals so; who pretend
Friendship till they have an opportunity mischievously to prevent them. When
they can handsomely Defeat them, then neither Calumnies and Reproaches are
spared, nor Subtlety and Art are omitted, whereby they may craftily Deceive
them. But I would not have our Gallant to deal in Stratagems, nor so
degenerously to Triumph over his Defeated Competitor; If he would glory in the
Frustration of his Counsels, and in the overthrow of his Designs, Let him
endeavor to do it, by the offices of Love, and Achievements of Valor; by
Obsequious Insinuations, and by worth and merits; by the contempt of those
Follies, and Dis-ingenuous Methods, which Imprudent men fall into, and do
frequently use.

Some do Accost, both in Discourse and Letter, in Rhetorical Flourishes; other
Braggadochio's do nothing but Trumpet out their own worth, and are always
prattling their own Praises. A Third sort does blabb that inconsiderately out,
which oftentimes proves Prejudicial to them, as those Ridiculous God-heads, who
are always saying, [I could never find a Woman yet that Loved me;] whereas all
the World knows, that they are scarce good enough for the mannerly Dogs to hold
up their Legs against, and civilly to piss upon. Many, to render their Rivals
Odious, do usually draw them in such a character, viz. That Fellow is the
happiest Fool in the World; For though he is not endowed with the Charms of
Beauty, nor with the Gravity of Prudence, nor Resolutions of Valor, nor
eurich'd or adorned with any other Excellency, yet all the Women in the
Country stick up their Tails and gad after him; and are at Cuff and Kick for
the Enjoyment of Him. Thus whilst they spit their venom, and envy his good
Fortune, and though he is in no wise taking, yet the Women suspect some hidden
Virtue to ly Dormant in him.

VI.
But how may the Mysteries of Love be best concealed?

Answ. By avoiding all Occasions which may Discover them.

The First of which, is Affecting too great a Secrecy, so that Men will not
Trust, confide in, or give credit to any Body, and hereby think so closely to
lock up all things; wh^reas it is the ready way for the disclosing of them.

For seeing every Lover desires to have the inward Sentiments of his Soul to be
declared to his Mistress, he is therefore upon necessity forced to make broader
signs, than if he had committed the Business to a Faithful Friend; and those
Tokens that proceed from a Lover breed greater suspicions, than those that are
carried by a Messenger; and because it is natural, curiously to pry into others
Business: wheresoever therefore is sprung the least Jealousy, there will not
be omitted the least opportunity of Enquiry, which when once found out, you
cannot imagine how pleasant it is to divulge and blab it. But now these
Inconveniences do not happen, when the Passion is communicated to a True
Friend, who can counsel, and assist, and would prevent those Errors, which a
Blind Lover would blunder upon, and can cover all things, and foresee
Futurities, which a Doting Paramour has no Prospect of, and can participate
of his Affections either of Grief, or Pleasure.

Another Herald that proclaims Love, is Female Ambition joined with Cruelty.
For all Women do covet to be followed, and (as it were) to have their Tayls
tag'd with a long Train of Lovers; although (like Cupid's Martyrs) they are
calcined into Ashes by Amorous Heats, yet does that Sex wish earnestly their
Resurrection, that they might again exspire in the midst of Flames. And though
Women love to have a Thump on the Breast with that Pleasant Dart, yet do they
insult and Triumph over the Miseries of their wretched Paramours; They neither
altogether revive their Drooping Souls with Dawning Hopes, nor wholly Damp
their Spirits with Black Despair, but hold in suspense, and poyse their
Passions and Desires; which sometimes they Discourage by the invectives of a
Threat, and sometimes invite with the Flatteries of a Reward, whose Behavior
(sinally) is so Tyrannical and severe, that one obliging Nod, and one Gracious
Leer must be thought the sweetest Morsel of Happiness that was ever tasted.

There are some Women, who, if they can wheedle Men into an Opinion [That they
are Belov'd] will, by an unequal Division of their Favor, stir up such
Emulations in the Breasts of their Servants, that they fhall to scuffling for
the Title to an entire Inheritance of a Smile or Kindness: When they have
Lulled them into that Persuasion, then with their ambiguous Language do they
shake their Hopes, and stagger their Belief, and wound them with the Pretenses
of Love to others; Hence follow Quarrels, Animosities, and open Murder.

There are others that think it not sufficient to raise Tragedies among Rivals,
but after the Puling Lover has used all the Arguments imaginable of Love,
Fidelity and Obsequiousness; and after he has been encouraged by all the signs
of Mutual Kindness, I say, after all this, other are some who will accuse
(without any reason) of Indifferency, and coldness in the offices of Love, will
invent new Jealousies and Suspicions, and thereupon are ready to kick them out
of Doors; And then the Miserable Creature is forced to begin afresh with new
signs, and as if now just entering upon his Slavish Servitude, he has his daily
Perambulations about the Streets; and if his Mistress chance to appear in
public, he Tantonies after her, wheresoever she Figs, and dare not shirk so
much as one Glance, to bestow or throw it any otherwise. And now Behold his
Fresh Tears, and New Face; his New Religion, and New Perjuries.

Now all these Tragical Affections are as obvious as the Sun, and are more
easily Discovered by others, than by the Authors of them; and, when once taken
notice of, are always the Objects of a thousand Eyes.

But now, when Women perceive a Calamitous Lover so terrified by their Tyranny,
as that he begins to retreat, and is almost ready to bewray his Breeches, and
to give up the Ghost for Fear, then they begin to caress him with some Baits of
Kindness, and endeavor to revive him with the Cordial of pretended Love, lest
he should throw aside his Desires, and so they be Depliv'd of the officiousness
of an obsequious Servant.

FINIS.

