A RELATION OF THE Bloody Massacre IN IRELAND; Acted by the Instigation of the
Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, who were Promoters of those Horrible Murders,
Prodigeous Cruelties, Barbarous Villainies, and Inhuman Practices Executed by
the Irish Papists upon the English Protestants: With an Account of the Spanish
Inquisition.
Licensed December. 23.

WHen their Plots were ripe for Execution, we find their first proceedings
against the English various; some of the Irish only stripping and expelling
them; others murdering Men, Women, and Children without mercy; all resolving
universally to root out all the Protestants of Ireland: so deeply malicious
were they against the English Protestants, that they would not so much as
endure the sound of their Language.

The Priests gave the Sacrament unto diverse of the Irish, upon condition they
should neither spare Man, Woman, nor Child of the Protestants. One Hulligan a
Priest, read an Excommunication against all those, that from henceforth should
relieve or harbor any English, Scottish, or Welch-man, or give them alms,
whereby many were Famished to dearth. The Friars exhorted them with Tears, not
to spare any of the English.

The day before this Massacre began, Anno, 1642. the Priests gave the People a
dismiss at Mass, with liberty to go out, and take possession of all their
Lands, as also to strip, and rob, and despoil them of all their goods and
cattle.

The Irish, when this Massacre began, persuaded many of their Protestant
Neighbors to bring their Goods to them, and they would secure them, and hereby
they got abundance peaceably into their hands, whereof they cheated the
Protestants, refusing to restore them again; yet so confident were the
Protestants at first of them, that they gave them Inventories of all they had,
and dug up their best things that were hidden in the ground, and deposited
them in their Custody. They also got much into their hands by fair Promises,
deep Oaths and Engagements, that if they would deliver them their goods, they
would suffer them, with their Wives and Children, quietly to depart the
Country; and when they had got what they could, they afterward murdered them.

Having thus seized upon their goods and cattle, ransackt their houses, got
their persons, stripped Man, Woman, and Child naked, and so turned them out of
doors, strictly prohibiting the Irish under great penalties, not to give them
any relief; by means hereof many miserably perished through cold, nakedness, and
hunger,

In the Town of Coleraine, many of these poor people that fled thither for
succor, many thousands died in two days, so that the living could not bury the
dead, but laid their Carcasses in ranks in vast and wide holes, piling them up
as if they had been Herrings.

One Magdalen Redman deposes, that she, and diverse other Protestants, amongst
whom were two and twenty Widows, were first robbed, and then stripped Naked, and
when they had covered themselves with Straw, the bloody Papists threw in
burning straw amongst them, on purpose to burn them; then they drove them out
into the Woods in Frost and Snow, where many of them died with extreme Cold,
and those that survived, lived miserably by reason of their many wants.

Yet though those bloody Villains exercised such inhumane Cruelties toward the
poor Protestants, they would commonly boast, That these were but the beginning
of their sorrows, for indeed they made it good; for having disarmed the
English, robbed them of their Goods, stripped them of their Cloths, and having
their Persons in their power, they furiously broke out into all manner of
abominable Cruelties, horrid Massacres, and execrable Murders.

For their were multitudes Murdered in cold Blood, some as they were at Plough,
others in their Houses, others in the Highways; all without any provocation,
were suddenly destroyed.

In the Castle of Lisgoole, were about one hundred and fifty Men, Women and
Children consumed with Fire. At the Castle of Tullah, which was delivered to
Mac Guire, upon compofition, and faithful promises of fair quarter, as soon as
he and his entered, they began to strip the People, and most cruelly put them
to the Sword, Murdering them all without mercy.

At Lissenskeath, they Hanged and Killed above one hundred of the Scottish
Protestants. In the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were
more numerous, their Murders were more multiplied, and with greater cruelty.

Mac Guire coming to the Castle of Lissenskeath, desired to speak with Mr.
Middleton, who admitted him in, he first burnt the Records of the County, then
demanded one thousand Pounds which was in his custody of Sir William Balfores,
which as soon as he had, he caused Mr. Middleton to hear Mass, and to swear
that he would never alter from it, and then Hanged him up with his Wife and
Children; Hanging and Murdering above one hundred Persons besides in that place

At Portendown-Bridg, there were One thousand Men, Women, and Children, carried
in several Companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River. Yea, in that
Country there were four thousand persons drowned in several places.

Some aged Men and Women, these barbarous Papists enforced their own Children
to drown them; yea, some Children were compelled unnaturally to execute their
own Parents, Wives forced to hang their own Husbands, and Mothers to cast their
own Children into the Waters, after which themselves were Murdered. In Sligo
they forced a Young Man to kill his Father, and then hanged him up. In another
place they forced a Woman to kill her Husband, then caused her Son to kill her,
and then hanged the Son; yea such was their malice against the English that
they taught their Children to kill English Children.

The Irish Rebellion.
depictions of Protestant martyrs during the Irish Rebellion One hundred
drowned in a River.


Boys forced to kill the Protestants.




In one place and hundred and forty English were taken and driven like Cattle
for many miles together. Other companies they carried out to a place sit for
execution, and then murdered them. One hundred and fifteen Men, Women, and
Children, they sent with Sir Philem Oneal's Pass till they came to
Portendown-Bridg, and there drowned them.

At another time One hundred and forty Protestants, being thrown in at the same
place, as any of them swam to shore, the bloody Villains with the But ends of
their Muskets knocked out their Brains.

At Armagh, O Cane got together all the Protestants thereabouts, pretending to
conduct them to Coleraine; but before they were a days journey, they were all
murdered, and so were many others, though they had Protections from Sir Philem
Oneal. The Aged People of Armagh were carried to Charlemont, and there murdered.

Presently af^^^ the Town of Armagh was burnt, and Five hundred Persons
murdered and drowned. In ^^^^oman were Forty eight Families Murdered. In one
house Twenty two Protestants were burned. In Kilmore all the Inhabitants were
Stripped and Massacred, being Two hundred Families; the whole Country was a
Common Butchery; many thousands perished by Sword, Famine, Fire, Water and all
other cruel Deaths, that rage and malice could invent.

At Casel they put all the Protestants into a loathsome Dungeon, kept them
twelve Weeks in great misery. Some they barbarously mangled, and left them
languishing; some they hanged up twice or thrice, others they buried alive.

In Queens County, an English Man, his Wife, five Children, and a Maid, were
all hanged together. At Clowns seventeen Men were buried alive; some were
wounded and hanged upon Tenter-hooks.

In Castle-Cumber, Two Boys wounded and hung upon Butchers Tenters. Some hanged
up and taken down to confess money, and then murdered. Some had their Bellies
ripped up, and so left with their Guts about their Heels.

In Kilkenny, an English Woman was beaten into a Ditch, where she died; her
Child about six years old, they ripped up her Belly, and let out her Guts. One
they forced to Mass, then they wounded him, ripped his Belly, took out his Guts,
and so left him alive.

A Scottish Man they stripped and hewed to pieces, ripped up his Wifes Belly, so
that her Child drop out; many other Women they hung up with-Child, ripped their
Bellies and let their Infants fall out; some of the Children they gave to Dogs.

In the County of Armagh they robbed, stripped, and murdered abundance of
Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the Sword, some they
hanged, some they starved to death; and meeting Mrs. Howard, and Mrs.
Frankland, with six of their Children, and themselves both with Child, they
murdered them all, ripped open the Gentlewomens Bellies, took out their Children,
and threw them into a Ditch. A young Scottish Woman's Child they took by the
heels, and dashed out its Brains against a Tree; the like they did to many
other Children.

Anne Hill, going with a young Child on her Back, and four more by her side,
they pulled the Child off her Back, trod on it till it dyed; stripped her and
the other four Children naked, whereby they dyed of Cold.

Some others they met with, hanged them up upon a Windmill, and before they
were half dead, cut them in pieces with their Skeins.

Many other Protestants, especially Women and Children, they pricked and
stabbed with Skeins, Forks, and Swords, slashing, cutting, and mangling them in
their Heads, Faces, Breasts, Arms, and other parts, yet killed them not, but
left them wallowing in their own Blood to languish, starve, and pine to death.

The Castle of Lisgoole being sat on fire by these merciless Papists, a Woman
leapt out of a Window to save her self from burning, whom they presently
murdered; many fled to Vaults and Cellars, were they were all murdered. One
Joan Addis they stabbed, and then put her Child of a quarter old to her Breast,
and bid it Suck English Bastard, and so left it to perish.

One Mary Barlow had her Husband hanged, her self with six Children, stripped
naked in Frost and Snow, after which sheltering themselves in a Cave, they had
nothing to eat for three Weeks but two old Calve-Skins, which they beat with
stones, and so eat them hair and all.

In the cold weather, many thousands of Protestants of all ranks, ages, and
sexes, being turned out naked, perished of cold and hunger; thousands of others
were drowned, cast into Ditches, Bogs, and Turf-pits; multitudes miserably
burnt in Houses; some that lay sick of Fevers they hanged up; some Men, Women,
and Children, they drove into Boggy Pits, and knocked them on the heads.

The Irish Trulis that followed the Camp, cried out, Kill them all, spare
neither Man, Woman, nor Child. They took the Child of Thomas Stratton, being
about twelve Years old, and boiled him in a Cauldron. One good wise Lin and her
Daughter they carried into a Wood, first hanged the Mother, and then the
Daughter in the hair of the Mothers head.

In some places they plucked out the Eyes, and cut off the Hands of the
Protestants, and turned them into the Fields, where they perished. The Women in
some places, stoned the English Women and Children to death. One Man they shot
through his Thighs, dug a hole in the ground, set him in upon his Feet,
filled up the hole, left our only his Head, where he languished to death.
Another Man they held his Feet in the fire, till he was burnt to death.

In Munster they hanged up many Ministers i^ a most barbarous manner. One
Minister they stripped naked, and drove him through the Town; pricking him with
Darts and Rapiers, till he fell down dead.

These barbarous Villains vowed, That if any Parents dug Graves to bury
their Children in, they should be buried therein themselves. They P^^^ped one
William Loverden naked, then killed him before his Wife and Children. Diverse
Ministers-bones that had been buried some Years before, they dug up, because
they were, as they say, Patrons of Heresy.

Poor Children that went out into the Fields to eat weeds and grass, they
killed without all pity.

In one place they burnt two Protestant Bibles, and then said, It was Hell fire
they burnt, Other Bibles they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them; saying,
They would do the like to all Puritan Bibles. They took the Bible of a
Minister, called Mr. Edward Slack, and opening it, they laid it a in puddle of
Water; and then stamped upon it, saying, A plague on it, this Bible has bred
all the quarrel.

At Glastow, a Priest, with some others, drew about forty English and Scottish
Protestants to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then told them, They
were in a good Faith; and for fear they should fall from it and turn Heretics,
he with his companions presently cut all their throats.

In the County of Tipperary, near the Silver-works; some of these barbarous
Papists met with eleven Englishmen, ten Women, and some Children; whom they
first stripped, and then with Stones, Pole-axes, Skeins, Swords, etc. they most
barbarously Massacred them all.

In the County of Mayo about sixty Protestants, whereof fifteen were Ministers,
were upon Covenant to be safely conveyed to Galway by one Edmond Burk, and his
Soldiers; but by the way, this Burk and his company began to Massacre these
poor Protestants; some they shot to death, some they stabbed with their Skeins,
some they thrust through with their Pikes, some they drowned: The Women they
stripped naked, who lying upon their Husbands to save them, were run through with
Pikes; so that very few of them escaped with life.

In the Town of Sligo, Forty Protestants were stripped and locked up in a Cellar,
and about midnight a Butcher provided for the purpose, was sent in amongst
them; who with his Axe butchered them all.

In Tirawly thirty or forty English, who had yielded to go to Mass, were put to
their choice, Whether they would die by the Sword or be drowned? They chose the
latter, and so being driven to the Seaside, these barbarous Villains, with
their naked Swords forced them into the Sea; the Mothers with their Children in
their Arms, wading to the Chin, were overcome by the Waves, where they all
perished.

The Son of Mr. Montgomery a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with his
Schoolmaster, who drew his Skein at him; whereupon the Boy said, Good Master
whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me. Yet this merciless Tiger
barbarously murdered him without all pity.

In the Town of Sligo, all the Protestants were first robbed of their Estates,
then cast into Goal, and about midnight were all stripped naked, and were there
most cruelly and barbarously murdered with Swords, Axes, Skeins, etc. Some of
them being Women great with Child, their Infants thrust out their Arms and Legs
at their Wounds; after which execrable murders, these Hellhounds laid the dead
naked bodies of the Men upon the naked bodies of the Women, in a most immodest
posture; where they left them till the next day to be looked upon by the Irish,
who beheld it with great delight. Also Isabel Beard, great with Child, bearing,
the lamentable cries of those that were murdering, ran out into the Streets;
where she was murdered, and the next day was found with the Child's feet coming
out of the Wounds in her sides: Many others were murdered in the Houses and
Streets.

Mr. Starkey, Schoolmaster at Armagh, being above one hundred years old, they
stripped him naked, then took his two Daughters, being Virgins, whom they also
stripped naked, and then forced then to lead their aged Father to a Turf-pit,
where they drowned them all three.

To one Henry Cowl, a gallant Gentleman, they proffered his life, if he would
marry one of their Truils, or go to Mass, but he chose death rather than to
consent to either.

Many of the Protestants they buried alive, sollacing themselves, whilst they
were digging down old Ditches upon them.

They brake the Backbone of a Youth, and left him in the Fields, some days
after he was sound, having eaten the Grass round about him; neither then would
they kill him outright, but removed him to better Pasture, wherein was
fulfilled that saying, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruelty.

In the County of Antrim, they murdered Nine hundred fifty four Protestants in
one morning, and afterward above Twelve hundred more in that County. Near
Lisnegarvey, they forced Twenty four Protestants into a House, and burnt them
all.

Sir Philem O Neale boasted, That he had slain above Six hundred at Garvah, and
that he had left neither Man, Woman, nor Child alive in that Barony of
Munterlong. In other places he murdered above Two thousand Persons in their
Houses; so that many Houses were filled with dead bodies.

The Lord Mont Garret, caused diverse English Soldiers that had been taken
about Kilkenny, to be hanged, hardly suffering them to pray before their death.

One Fitz Patrick an Irish Papist, enticed a rich Merchant, that was a
Protestant, to bring all his Goods to his House, promising safely to keep them,
and to re-deliver them to him, but when he had got them into his possession, he
took the Merchant and his Wife, and hanged them both. The like he did by diverse
others.

Some English-mens Heads they cut off, and carried them to Kilkenny, and on the
Market Day, set them on the Cross, where many, especially the Women, stabbed,
cut, and slashed them.

A poor Protestant Woman, with her two Children, going to Kilkenny, these
bloody Miscreants baited them with Dogs, stabbed them with Skeins, and pulled
out the Guts of the Children, whereby they died; and not far off they took
diverse Men, Women and Children, and hanged them up; one of the Women being
great with Child, they ripped up her Belly as she hanged, so that the Child
fell out in the Cawl alive. Some after they were hanged, they drew up and down
till their Bowels were torn out.

How many Thousands of Protestants were there thus inhumanly butchered, by
sundry kinds of death, we cannot ascertain.

In the Province of Vlster, we find vast numbers murdered, as before; what the
number of the slain was in the three Provinces. I find not upon Record, but
certainly it was very great, for you have these passages in a general
Remonstrance of the distressed Protestants in the Province of Munster. We may
(say they) compare our woe to the saddest parallel of any Story: Our Churches
are profaned by Sacrifices to Idols: Our Habitations are become ruinous heaps:
No Quality, Age, or Sex, privileged from Massacres and lingering Deaths, by
being robbed, stripped naked, and so exposed to cold and samine. The famished
Infants of murdered Parents swarm in our Streets, and for want of food perish
before our Faces, etc. And all this cruelty that is exercised upon us, we know
not for what cause, offense, or seeming provocation it is inflicted upon us sin
excepted saving that we were Protestants, etc. We can make it manifest, that
the depopulations in this Province of Murder, do well near equal those of the
whole Kingdom, etc.

And thus in part you have heard of the merciless Cruelties which the bloody
Irish Papists exercised toward the Protestants. Let us now consider, at least
some of Gods Judgments upon the Irish, whereby he has not left the innocent
Blood of his Servants to be altogether unrevenged.

These bloody Hell Hounds, themselves confessed, That the Ghost of diverse of
the Protestants which they had drowned at Portendown-Bridge, were daily seen to
walk upon the River; sometimes singing Psalms; sometimes brandishing naked
Swords; sometimes shreaking in a most hideous and fearful manner. So that many
of the Popish Irish which dwelt near thereabouts, being affrighted herewith,
were forced to remove their Habitations farther off into the Country. Catherine
Cook testified upon Oath, That when the Irish had barbarously drowned One
hundred and eighty Protestants, Men, Women, and Children at Portendown Bridge,
about nine Days after, she saw the apparition of a Man bolt-upright in the
River, standing breast-high, with his hands lifted up to Heaven; and continued
in that posture from December to the end of Lent, at which time some of the
English Army passing that way, saw it also; after which it vanished away.

Elizabeth Price, testified upon Oath, That she and other Women, whose Husbands
Children were drowned in that place, hearing of those Apparitions, went thither
one Evening, at which time they saw one like a Woman rise out of the River
breast-high, her Hair hanging down, which with her Skin, was as white as Snow,
often crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge, which so affrighted them that they
went away.

A View of the Spanish Inquisition, and the Torments used toward such as fall
into their Merciless Hands.
THis Inquisition was Erected by King Ferdinand of Spain, when he Conquered
Granado, of a long time possessed by the Moors, and Jews, and designed to
oblige them to confess the Christian Faith; but was soon (at the Instigation of
the Pope and his Clergy) turned against the true Professors of the Gospel. The
manner is, as soon as any Information is given in, to cite the Party, who dares
not refuse to come; or if he fly, they have their Scouts to find him out: When
he is come, they wheedle him to make him accuse himself, pretending they are
ignorant of the Cause of his coming; in which Cause, to deny, he knows is the
best; otherwise, they send him to Prison and Triumph, they have what to accuse
him out of his own Mouth: Or, if he denies, one or other steps up and accuses
him, then is he sent to Prison in a dark Dungeon strictly examined: When if he
comply not with all their Demands, they put him to the Rack: The first Torture
they use, is the Pulley, when binding Hands and Thumbs, and hanging heavy
Weights at his Feet, they draw him up, and then suddenly suffering him to sink
half way, with the Jerk, dislocate all his Joints: When he cries out, the Lords
Inquisitors roars as loud, calling him Heretic Dog; or if he call upon Christ,
they revile him, bidding him let Christ alone, and tell the Truth. When they
have tortured him a long while, they demand of the Tormentor (who is dressed up
in black Canvis, like a Devil) if he has his other Torturing Engines ready, to
which he replies No. Then they bid him get them against to morrow, telling the
Prisoner, if he recant not, all that he has suffered, is but a Flea-biting to
what he must feel, when three days after they torture him again upon a Wheel
or Roaler, or by laying him in a Trough, pour Water down his Throat, driving
before it a Rag, at the pulling out of which, a great quantity of Blood
follows: They likewise anoint their Feet with Lard, and set them on hot Irons,
and stretch them on a Rack; put lighted Torches to their Armpits: Nor do they
spare Matrons or Virgins, stripping them stark naked: And if at twice Racking
they recant not, then they are burnt. And thus a young English Gentleman was
served, for throwing down the Host, as the Priests were carrying it through the
Streets of Rome, whilst the ignorant Vulgar kneeled as it passed, and
Worshipped it; he at the same time saying, Ah Wretches that you are! Do you
Worship a Morsel of Bread?

And so much of Popish Cruelties. From which, the Lord deliver all such as
Worship Him in Spirit and in Truth.

These Particulars, with many more, were Attested, before the Commissioners
appointed for that purpose.

See more of such Cruelties in Clark's Martirology.

London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, 1689.

The Spanish Inquisition.
depictions of tortures during the Spanish Inquisition One Burned for throwing
down the Host.


Some tortured in the Inquisition.


Others Racked in the Inquisition.





