A RELATION OF THE Invasion and Conquest OF FLORIDA BY THE SPANIARDS, Under the
Command of FERNANDO de SOTO.

Written in Portuguese by a Gentleman of the Town of ELVAS.

Now ENGLISHED.

To which is Subjoyned Two Journeys of the present Emperor of CHINA into
Tartary in the Years 1682, and 1683.

With some Discoveries made by the Spaniards in the Island of CALIFORNIA, in
the Year 1683.

London: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry over against
the Compter. 1686.

THE PREFACE.
IT is not without reason that men admire those first Conquerours, who boldly
ventured their Lives to discover to us a New World; and the Obligation that
Mankind has to them upon that account, is acknowledged on all hands. We owe no
less, however, to those who have taken the pains to preserve the memory of
their Conquests; and without exposing us to the fatigues and dangers, which
those great men so bravely surmounted, make us by their Writings relish that
pure and unallayed pleasure wherewith the first discovery of things commonly
tickles and flatters the Imagination, no less for their Novelty than Renown.
Now this being a pleasure mingled with a great deal of instruction, since
according to these Models men are to take their measure^ for the like
Enterprises, it must be granted that the public cannot have too many Histories
of Expeditions of that nature. This is apparent enough by the many Relations of
the Conquest of Per^ and New-Spain, which have been all generally approved of
abroad: For according to the diversity of humors, men ^ye things curiously,
and give the public the view they have had of them. Some love Fights and
Battles, and describe them very well in general; others who are pleased with
the same subject, apply themselves to the relation of singular Actions: One man
makes it his business to write the Natural History of the Plants and Animals of
a Country; another again, the Customs and Inclinations of the Inhabitants. In a
word, it may be said that this diversity of humors produces different
Relations, which serve reciprocally as Commentaries one for another; and from
whence the Curious who read with discretion, draw the complete knowledge of the
History of a Country or Nation. The truth is, there are not so many Relations
extant of Florida (which is the name the Spaniards gave to all that part of
America, that lies to the Northward of Mexico or New-Spain, before the English
and other Nations settled Plantations there) as there is of Peru and New-Spain:
however, they are no ^ess curious, especially this Relation now published,
which has the preference in Spain not only for its Rarity, but for the Merit
of its Author also. As to its Rarity, there was but one Manuscript of ^t in
Spain, which was taken out of the Library of the Duke of Sessa to be printed,
and but few Copies of the Impression in any other Country besides. It has the
advantage to be an Original, and to come from the first hand, whereas that of
the Ynca Garcillasso de la Vega, came abroad but since; and how pompous soever
it may appear in Language has no greater Authority than the bar^ Report of a
private Trooper, and by consequent cannot be compared to this since the Trooper
who served Fernand^ de Soto in that Expedition, might for want of good
intelligence have in many things been mistaken, as well as Garcillasso, for
want of memory and application.

The truth of this seems more tha^ probable, seeing Garcillasso in the
beginning of his Florida, affirms confidently that So^o went thither
accompanied with thirteen hundred men, whereas our Author says, and that upon
better ground that he had but six hundred; whereupon it is to be observed, that
a Gentleman, as he was, has commonly more knowledge and a greater respect for
Truth, than a private Soldier. The Title of the Relation informs us, that our
Author was a Portuguese Gentleman of the Town of Elvas, and that he accompanied
Soto in all that Expedition. He is certainly one of those who are named in the
second Chapter, though he cannot be particularly known, since he has been
unwilling to name or any other way distinguish himself from the rest; and that
instance of a modesty which is not to be found but amongst men of the best
breeding, is a very good voucher for his sincerity. It is very probable that
his Birth and Quality made him to be admitted into the most important Councils
and Deliberations; and the particular account he gives of them, is sufficient
to confirm this Opinion. It is not at all to be doubted then, but that his
Information was good; and they who take the pains to examine his Book, will be
convinced of it by his way of writing. His style is natural, plain, and without
any Ornaments, such as the style of a Discourse ought to be, which has Truth
only for its object. He never wanders from his subject into useless
digressions, as Gareillasso de la Vega does, who seems to have had no other
scope, but to relate the Exploits of Gonsales Sylvester, whom, in a manner, he
makes the Hero of his Romance; and who, nevertheless, is not so much as named
by our Author. In short, he engages no farther in descriptions than is
necessary to illustrate what is fit to be known; and therefore he has referred
to the end of the Book, all that he says concerning the Nature of the Country,
and its Inhabitants.

As to the Discovery, he traces it with so much exactness and perspicuity, that
nothing can be compleater in its kind; nor is he less happy in his manner of
describing to us the two Generals, Soto and Moscoso, when it comes in his way;
wherein without giving himself the trouble of drawing their Pictures like an
Author of Romance, he paints them out with such lively touches, as visibly show
us the Qualities of their Persons and Inclinations. He lays open so plainly the
reasons that moved Soto to pursue that Expedition, contrary to the Opinions of
all that were with him, and the motives which obliged Moscoso to quit the
design, notwithstanding the opposition he met with; that the Judgment of the
Author is therein no less remarkable than his Integrity. So that this History
is not then to be considered barely as a curious piece, but as a Work that may
afford good instructions for the conduct of those who undertake the like
Expeditions, and for the knowledge of the Countries that border upon, or may be
useful to the English Plantations on that Continent, which perhaps have never
been heard of as yet by those who only inhabit the Coast.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this BOOK.
CHap. I. The Birth of Don Fernando de Soto^ and how he obtained the Government
of Florida. Chap. II. Cabesa de Vaca comes to the Court (...) Spain with a
Relation of Florida: The Assembly held at Seville for the Conquest of that
Country. Chap. III. The Portuguese go to Seville, and from thence to St. Lucar.
Captains are named for the Ships and Soldiers who were to make the Voyage.
Chap. IV. The General parts from Spain; he arrives at the Canaries, and from
thence at the Antilles. Chap. V. Of the Inhabitants of the Town of St. Jag^ and
other Villages of the Island of Cuba: Of the quality of the ground, and the
Fruits it produces. Chap. VI. The Governor sends his Wife and Ship^ to the
Havana, whither he with the rest of his men go by land. Chap. VII. Our
departure from the Havana, and our arrival in Florida. Chap. VIII. Of
Incursions made into the Country, and how a Christian was found, who for a long
time had been in the Indians hands. Chap. IX. Who that Christian was; how he
went into Florida; and what he told the General. Chap. X. The General sends the
Ships to Cuba: He leaves an hundred men at the Port of Ucita, and enters into
the Country. Chap. XI. The General comes to Caliquen, and carries the Cacique
thereof to Napetaca with him: The Indians are resolved to take him from him by
force; many are killed upon that occasion. Chap. XII. The Governor comes to
Palache, he is told that there is a great deal of Gold farther up in the
Country. Chap. XIII. The Governor leaves Palache to go in search of the
Province of Yupaha, and what befell him in that Expedition. Chap. XIV. The
Governor leaving the Province of Patofa, meets with a Desert, where he and all
his men were reduced to extreme misery. Chap. XV. The Governor departs from
Cutifachiqui to go to Cosa; what happened to him during his march. Chap. XVI.
Fernando de Soto escapes a great danger in the Town of Acoste by his prudence
What happened to him upon the way, and his arrival at Cosa. Chap. XVII. The
Governor leaves Cosa, and goe^ to Tascaluca. Chap. XVIII. The Indians rise
against the Governor, and what happened upon it. Chap. XIX. The Governor draws
up his men an^ enters Maville. Chap. XX. The Governor leaves Maville to go t^
Chicasa; what happened to him in that Journey. Chap. XXI. The Indians return to
attack the Spaniards, and are beat off. The Governor goet^ to Alimamu, and the
Indians in Arms expec^ him on the way. Chap. XXII. The Governor goes to
Quizquiz, an^ then to Riogrande. Chap. XXIII. The Governor goes from thence t^
Casqui, and from thence to Pacaha, where he finds a Country different from the
other part of Florida. Chap. XXIV. The Cacique of Pacaha comes an^ offers his
service; Casqui withdraws, but comes again to excuse himself: The Governor
makes them friends. Chap. XXV. Soto goes in search of the Province o^ Quigate,
from whence he goes to Coligoa, an^ thence to Cayas. Chap. XXVI. The Governor
goes to see the Province of Tulla; what happened to him upon the way. Chap.
XXVII. The Governor goes from Tulla to Autiamque, where he spends the
Winter-Quarter. Chap. XXVIII. Soto leaves Autiamque and goes to Nilco, and from
thence to Guachoya. Chap. XXIX. Which treats of the Message the Governor sent
to Quigaltan; of the Answer he received, and of what happened thereupon. Chap.
XXX. The Death of the General Don Fernando de Soto: Louis Moscoso de d'Alvarado
is chosen in his place. Chap. XXXI. The Governor Louis de Moscoso leaves
Guachoya, and goes to Chaguate, and from thence to Aguacay. Chap. XXXII. The
Governor goes from Aguacay to Naguatex: What happened to him. Chap. XXXIII. The
Cacique of Naguatex comes to wait on the Governor: He parts from Naguatex, and
arrives at Mondacao. Chap. XXXIV. The Governor leaves Mondacao, and goes to
Socatino and Guasco. The Army marches through a desert Country, and returns to
Nilco, for fault of an Interpreter and Guide. Chap. XXXV. The Army returns to
Nilco, and at Minoya Vessels are made to carry them out of Florida. Chap.
XXXVI. Seven Brigantines are built: The Army departs from Minoya. Chap. XXXVII.
The Indians of Quigaltan attack the Spaniards upon the River; and the success
of that Engagement. Chap. XXXVIII. Of the headstrongness of the Indians in
pursuing us during our course in the River. Chap. XXXIX. The Fleet comes to the
Sea; what befell the Spaniards before they put out into it, and in the beginning
of their Voyage. Chap. XL. A Storm disperses the Brigantines; they join again
at a rock or little Island. Chap. XLI. The Spaniards arrive at the Town o^
Panico. Chap. XLII. The Spaniards go to Panico, and i^ what manner the
Inhabitants received them. Chap. XLIII. Of the civil and generous manne^ how we
were treated by the Viceroy and Inhabitants of Mexico. Chap. XLIV. Of some
singularities of Florida, o^ Fruits, Fowl, and Beasts which that Country
produces.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 22. read Officers. p. 23. l. 10. r. Danhusco. p. 2^ l. 10. r.
Narvaez. p. 50. l. 10. r. Yupaha. p. 90. l. 14. r thru^ p. 112. l. ult. r.
tell. p. 122. l. 5. r. Pacaha. p. 151 l 23. r. t^ was. p. 193. l. 26 their two
p. 225. l. 16. r. Mandarins, and throughout. p. 227. l ult. r. By what. p. 242.
l. 7. r. thirtieth ye^ of his Age. p. 265. l. 3. r. Fort. p. 2. l. 11. r. an
hundred a^ fourscore thousand.

A RELATION OF THE Invasion and Conquest OF FLORIDA.
CHAP. I.
The Birth of Don Fernando de Soto, and how he obtained the Government of
Florida.

CAptain Fernando de Soto was the Son of an ordinary Gentleman of Xeres de
Badajos, and went to the Indies that are subject to the Crown of Castille, when
Pedrarias d'Avila was Governor of them. All the Estate Soto then ^ad, was no
more but a Sword and Buckler; nevertheless, his Merit and Valor obliged
Pedrarias to give him the Command of a Troop o^ Horse, and to send him with
Ferdinand or Francis Pizarre to the Conquest of Peru. He rendered himself very
remarkable in that Expedition, not only in the taking of Atabalipa, King of
Peru, but also of Cusco, and in all occasions where Honor was to be gained. He
got there also a great deal of Wealth, and had so good a share in the Treasure
of Atabalipa, that in a short time he made a hundred and fourscore Crowns of
Gold, of the pieces that ^ell to his Dividend. He brought them into Spain,
where the Emperor took part of them, which he paid with threescore thousand
Reals, to be raised out of the Customs of the Silks of Granada. The rest was
remitted him by the Chamber of Seville, established for the payment of the
Kings Duties, which they call La Casa de contratation. Soto then put himself
into magnificent Equipage, and entertained a Steward, a Majordomo, Pages, a
Gentleman of the Horse, Lackeys, and all the other Offices of a great Lord. In
this state he came to Court, accompanied with John d' Anusco of Seville, Louis
Moscoso Alvarado, Nunho, Touar, and John Rodriguez Lobilho: All th^se
Gentlemen, except John d' Anusco, came with him from Peru, where they had got
fourteen or fifteen thousand Crowns of Gold a piece: They were magnificent in
Clothes, Horses, and Arms, because Soto upon his first appearing at Court,
resolved to make himself be taken notice of by a sumptuous expense, though
otherwise he had no inclination to Liberality. The Gentlemen whom I have named,
attended him in all places, besides his Servants, and some others who followed
his Fortune. At that time he made love to Isabella de Bodavilla, Daughter to
Pedrarias d' Avila Count of Punho in Rostro; and being married to her, the
Emperor gave him the Government of the Isle of Cuba, with the Title of General
of Florida, and Marquess of the Lands which he might Conquer.

CHAP. II.
Cabesa de Vaca comes to the Court of Spain, with a Relation of Florida. The
Assembly held at Seville, for the Conquest of that Country.

SOto being thus appointed Governor and General, a Gentleman named Cabesa de
Vaca, came from the Indies to the Court of Spain. He had accompanied Narvaez in
the Expedition of Florida, and gave an account of the loss of that Governor
and of all his men, who were shipwrackt, he with three others only having
escaped upon the Coasts of New-Spain. Cabesa brought with him a relation of
what he had seen in Florida, and it was written in such a manner, that in some
places he said, I have seen this, and more also, which I reserve to be declared
to his Majesty. He enlarged much upon the misery of the Country, and the
fatigues that he had endured: But when some of his Relations, who had a design
to go to the Indies, pressed him to tell them, if he had found any Riches in
Florida; he made them answer that he would not satisfy them as to that,
because he resolved to return into that Country with Orantes, one of his
Companions whom he had left behind in New-Spain: That he was come on design to
beg that Government o^ the Emperor; and that they had taken an Oath not to
discover what they had seen, lest they might be prevented in their design of
obtaining that favor of his Majesty. That made it b^ believed that Florida was
one of the riches^ Countries in the World. Fernando de Soto had (...) design to
engage Cabesa with him, and offered him considerable advantages; but after
their agreement made, they clashed, upon account that Sot^ had refused him some
money to buy a Ship with* In the mean time, Balthazar de Gallegos, an^
Christopher d'Espindola, Cabesa's kinsmen, being resolved to go with Soto to
Florida, one day prayed their Cousin to advise them what they ha^ best to do?
to which he answered, that if he followed not Soto, it was because he was in
hopes o^ obtaining another Government, and that he would not march under the
Command of another: That his intention was to have begged the Government of
Florida, but that Soto being already provided to it, the Oath he had taken
hindered him from discovering what they desired to learn of him. However, that
he counseled them to sell their Estates and follow Soto, that they would have
no cause to repent of the design. At length Cabesa had Audience of the
Emperor, whom he fully informed of what had happened in the Expedition of
Narvaez; so that the Marquess d'Astorga, who knew the particulars of that
Audience, resolved to send with Soto his own Brother Don Antonio Osorio, who
was accompanied with two kinsmen, Francis and Garcias Osorio. Don Antonio
disposed of sixty thousand Reals a year which he had in Benefices, and Francis
Osorio sold a Manor of which several Gentlemen held: Having done so, they went
to the General at Seville, where he was, attended by Nunho, Touar, Louis
Moscoso, and John Rodrigues Lobilho, who had engaged for that Expedition all
the profit they had made in Peru. Moscoso carried with him two Brothers also;
and that Company was increased by the coming of Don Carlos, who had married a
Cousin of the Governors: He carried the Lady along with him; and his example
brought from Badajos, Peter Calderano, with three of the Generals kinsmen,
Airs Tinoco, Alonso Romo, and Diego Tinoco. Soto came to Elvas, where Andrew
de Vasconcelos ha^ occasion to discourse Moscoso. He prayed him t^ speak to Don
Fernando de Soto, and to show him the Commission he had from the Marquess o^
Villareal, for the Captains place of Ceita: The General having seen it, wrote
to Vasconcelos, tha^ he might expect all favor from him, and that h^ would
give him an honorable Employment i^ Florida. So Vasconcelos engaged to follow
him with Fernando Pegado, Antonio Martinez Segurad^ Rois Pereyra, John
Cordeiro, Stephen Pegado, Bennet and Alvaro Fernandez, all Portuguese of the
City of Elvas. This gave so much reputation t^ the Enterprise, that a great
many Gentlemen came to Seville from Salamanca, Iaen, Albuquer^ que, and other
Towns of Spain; so that many honest men, who had sold their Estates in prospec^
of this Voyage, were left behind at St. Lucar; an^ the reason was, because
ships were wanting for transportation of men; which are many time^ wanting to
go into Countries even whereof the Riches is known. The Conferences that Cabes^
had had with the Emperor, and other Persons o^ Quality produced this effect.
But though Sot^ endeavored again to engage him into his Interests by very
advantageous offers, he still refused them; and at length obtained from the
Emperor the Government of Rio de Plata, which ye^ hindered not his two kinsmen
Espindola and Gallegos, from sticking to Soto. Gallegos sold his Houses,
Vineyards, and Corn-land, besides fourscore ^d ten Acres of ground planted with
Olive^ees, in the Territory of Seville. He had the ^arge of Serjeant-Major, and
carried his Wife ^ith him. Many other Cavaliers of Quality followed Soto, and
obtained considerable Places from ^m, to the disappointment of several
Competitors ^at earnestly desired them. So Antonio Viedma ^d the Office of
Intendant, John d' Anhusco was ^ade Comptroller, and John Gaytan, Cousin to the
Cardinal of Ciguenca, Treasurer.

CHAP. III.
The Portuguese go to Seville, and from thence to St. Lucar. Captains are named
for the Ships and Soldiers, who were to make the Voyage.

VAsconcelos, and the other Portuguese Gentlemen, parted from Elvas the 15th of
Ia^ary, and arrived at Seville on St. Sebastian's Eve. These Cavaliers went to
the General's Lodgings, and as they entered his Court, Soto perceived them out
of a Gallery where he was, and immediately came down to receive them at the
foot of the stairs which led up into that Gallery. When they were come up, he
caused Chairs to be set for them all: Then Vasconcelos told him that he was
come with these Portuguese Gentle men, to offer him their Company and Service
in the Voyage he had undertaken: For which Soto thanked them, testifying a
great deal of jo^ and satisfaction at their arrival, and for their obl^ging
Offers. Seeing the Cloth was already laid, he invited them to sup with him;
and during Supper-time, he ordered his Steward to find out Lodgings for them
near his own. The Governor, with all those who were to accompany him, went
from Seville to St. Lucar, where h^ resolved to Muster his Men. The Portugues^
appeared there in the Equipage of Soldiers, in neat Armor, and the
Castillians gallantly apparelled in Doublets and Cassocks of Silk pinckt and
embroidered: But that unseasonable gallantry did not please the General; and
therefore he appointed another review, where all should appea^ in Armor. The
Portuguese appeared again very well armed, and the General placed them near his
Standard, carried by his Ensign, whereas the Castillians for the most part had
no more but old rusty Coats of Mail, and all Head-pieces with Spears or naughty
Lances. Some endeavored to pass Muster with the Portuguese; and as they filed
off, they were all reckoned one by one, according as Soto had ordered, and set
down in a Roll to the number of six hundred men, who went with him to Florida.
The General bought seven Ships well provided with all sort of Ammunition, and
well Rigged: He named the Captains, and gave to each a List of the men they
were to take on Board.

CHAP. IV.
The General parts from Spain: He arrives at the Canaries, and from thence at
the Antilles.

IN the Month of April, 1538. the General assigned Ships to the several
Captains, who were to Command them: For himself he chose one that was newly
built, and an excellent Sailer: He gave another to Vasconcelos for the
Portuguese who had followed him. And so they set sail from the Road of St.
Lucar, on St. Lazarus's Sunday-morning, in the Month of April, with extreme
satifaction of all the Fleet, sound of Trumpets, and discharges of Artillery.
After four days sailing with a fair Wind, they were becalmed, and met with
Tides from the Levant, that hindered them for eight days from making any way; at
length the Wind freshned again, and they arrived at Gomere, one of the Canary
Islands, on Palm-Sunday-Morning; fifteen days after they set out from St.
Lucar. The Lord of that Island, who bears the Title of Count, wa^ clothed in
white from head to foot, Hat, Cloak Doublet, Breeches, and Shoes; so that he
look like a Captain of Bohemians: He joyfully received our General, and
provided him with a very good Lodging: All the Cavaliers of the Fle^ were also
very well received and lodged, and for their Money, had what refreshments they
stoo^ in need of, as Bread, Wine, Meat, and all that wa^ wanting in the
Equipage of the Ships. In fine the Count gave one of his natural Daughters to
Dona Isabella the General's Lady, to serve her i^ quality of a Waiting-Maid.
Sunday following the Fleet parted from Gomere, having staid there just eight
days, and came to the Antilles on Whit^ sunday, where it entered the Port of St.
Iago, in the Island of Cuba. When the Governor came on shore, he sound a
handsome Horse richly furnished, which a Gentleman of the Town had sent him,
with a Mule for Dona Isabella, and all the Burghers, some on foot, some on
horseback, who came to receive him at the Port. They waited on him to his
Lodgings, which were very commodious, where he was visited by all the chief
Inhabitants, who came to offer him their Services. All the Officers and
Soldiers were lodged, and they who had a mind to go out of the Town, were
received and well treated in Country-Houses, where their Landlords did what lay
in their power to provide all sorts of refreshment for them.

CHAP. V.
Of the Inhabitants of the Town of St. Jago, and other Villages of the Island
of Cuba: Of the quality of the ground, and the Fruits it produces.

THe Town of St. Iago contains fourscore large Houses, commodious for Lodging,
though ^ost part of them be built but of boards and ^hatched; some are built of
stone and lime, and ^overed with tile. The Inhabitants have large Gardens,
where there are many Trees far diffe^ent from those of Spain; there are some
that ^ear Figs as big as ones sist, but bitter and unsa^oury. They have a Fruit
there which they call Ananas, of the shape and bigness of a Pineapple, which
has a very good taste: In the fields there ^re other fruits of the same
figure, but much bigger, that grow upon very low trees, or rather ^hrubs, and
resemble those other Fruits which have a very pleasant smell and agreeable
taste: Other Trees bear a fruit called Mamejas, of the ^igness of a Quince,
which the Inhabitants pre^er before all others. There are also Guavers ^here as
big as Figs, and shaped like a Filbeard: ^ut the most extraordinary Tree they
have, is about the height of a Lance, with one single stem and no branches; its
leaves are of the length of the head of a Pike, and its fruit of the figure and
bigness of a Cucumber; they grow in clusters of twenty or thirty at a time;
according as the fruit ripens, the tree bends with it: This fruit is called
Bananas, has an excellent good taste, and ripens after it is gathered; but
those that ripen on the tree are the best. These trees never bear but once, for
then they are cut down, and another sprouts from the stock, which the year
following yields fruit. There is also another kind of fruit of great use for
many of the Inhabitants, and especially for the Slaves, and these are Potato's,
which grow in the Terceras depending on the Kingdom of Portugal; they grow in
the Earth, and resemble Chestnuts in taste. The Bread of that Island is made of
Roots also, like to Potato's: The Timber that grows from these Roots, comes
near to that of the Elder-tree. They make little beds of Earth, and in each of
them plant five or six sprigs; the Roots whereof are not plucked up till
eighteen Months after. If any one mistaking them for Potato's, which they
resemble, do but eat the least bit of them, it will endanger his life and this
experience made out upon a Soldier who died upon the spot, though he had but
hardly tasted of them. These Roots are prepared by rasping them; and the
raspings being pressed and separated from the juice, which is mortal, and has
a strong smell, there remains a dry flour; but the Bread that is made of it has
but very little taste, and far less substance. As to the fruits of Spain, they
have Fig Trees, and Orange Trees, which bear all the year round, because of the
heat, and the fertility of the Soil. This Island breeds a great many Horses,
and store of Cattle, which never want green grass: It has abundance of Cows
and wild Hogs also; so that the Inhabitants are in no want of meat for food;
nor of Fruit of several sorts, which grow wild in the Woods and Fields;
insomuch, that Spaniards who have wandered in the Woods for a fortnight
together, because of the different tracts which the wild Cows make in the
Forests, have had nothing to live on but these fruits, and the Marrow which
grows in the heart of a kind of Palm Tree, that abound all over the Island, and
bears no other fruit. The Island of Cuba is three hundred Leagues in length
from East to West, and thirty or forty in some places over from North to South:
There are in it six Towns of Christian Habitations, St. Iago, Baracoa, Bayamo,
Princes Port, the Holy Ghost, and the Havana; each of these little Towns
contain thirty or forty Families, but St. Iago and the Havana, have at least
threescore and ten or fourscore houses a piece: Every Town has a Church, and a
Priest to Administer the Sacraments; besides, there is a Convent of Cordeliers
at St. Iago, where though there be but a few Friars, yet they have good store
of Charity, by reason of the riches of the Country; nay, the Church of St. Iago
has also good Revenues, and is served by a Curate, some Beneficiaries, and
several Clerks, as being the Parish of the Capital Town. There is a great deal
of Gold in this Island, but few Slaves, because many have hanged themselves to
be rid of the miseries that they were forced to suffer in the Mines. An
Overseer belonging to Vasco Porcalho, who was one of the chief Inhabitants,
knowing that the Indians under his charge had resolved to go hang themselves,
went and staid for them at the place where they intended to put this dismal
resolution into execution, with a Rope in his hand; he told them that they must
not imagine that any of their designs were hid from him, and that he was come
to hang himself with them, that he might torment them in the other world, an
hundred times more than he had done in this. This discourse made them quit the
resolution which they had taken, and came back with him ready to do whatever he
should command them.

CHAP. VI.
The Governor sends his Wife and Ships to the Havana, whither he with the rest
of his men go by Land.

FRom St. Iago the Governor sent his Cousin Don Carlos, to wait on Dona
Isabella on shipboard, to the Havana, which is a Port at the head of the Island
on the North West Side, distant from St. Iago an hundred and fourscore Leagues:
As for himself, having bought Horses, as all the rest of his company did, he
resolved to go by Land. The first habitation they sound was Bayamo, where his
men were well received, and lodged four and four, or six and six together,
according as they had associated themselves: They had all charges born, except
for the Maiz which they gave their Horses; and that also, because Soto in
visiting that Country, imposed some Duties upon the Tribute and Services which
they drew from the Indians. Bayamo is twenty five Leagues from St. Iago, and
near it runs a great River called ^anto, larger than the Guadiana; it feeds
great and surious Crocodiles, that sometime carry away ^he Indians that venture
to foard it over: These ^re the most dangerous Animals of the Island; for it
breeds neither Wolves, Foxes, Bears, Lions, nor Tigers. There are indeed wild
Dogs there which run away from the Houses into the Woods, where they live upon
wild Hogs. There are Snakes also bigger than a man's thigh, but very unwildy and
harmless. From Bayamo to Princes Port they reckon fifty Leagues of way cleared
with a great deal of labor and care; and which when it is not kept clear,
fills so full of bushes, that no tract appears; so that it is impossible to
travel it without Indian guides, because of the paths which the Cows make in
several parts. The Governor took a Canoe at Princes Port to go by Sea to the
habitation of Vasco Porcalho, and to learn news of his Wife, who at that time
was in extreme danger, (as was found afterward) for her Ships were scattered
in a furious Storm, so that two of them were driven in sight of the Coast of
Florida, and all put into great streights for want of fresh water and
provisions. When the storm was over, they gathered together again, and made
Cape St. Antonio in a place of the Island of Cuba, which was not at all
peopled: There they took in fresh water, and after forty days sailing from the
time they set out from St. Iago, they arrived at the Havana: The Governor had
intelligence of it, and immediately parted to go meet his Wife: They whom he
left to the number of an hundred and fifty Horse, divided themselves into two
bodies, that they might not incommode the Inhabitants of the Island by
Quartering. Their way was by the Holy Ghost, about sixty Leagues from Princes
Port, and their Provision was the Cassadoe-bread that I mentioned, which
dissolves in Broth so soon as it is put into it. So many of that Troop were
reduced to eat flesh without bread. They had Dogs with them and an Huntsman of
the Island; and when they came at night to their Quarters, they killed wild
Hogs, proportionably to the number of men; for they had no want of Hogs and
Cows during the whole march; but they were horribly tormented with Muskettoes,
especially in a Marish which they call La Cenega do Pia: They spent from noon
till night in passing that Marish with a great deal of pains; for it was at
least half a League in length, and a good Bow-shot over, which was to be past
swimming. In the rest there was water up to the middle, and mud to the knees;
but the ground was so pestered with brambles and bushes which tore the feet,
that neither boots nor shoes could hold out whole one half of the way. The
Baggage and Saddles were conveyed over on rafts made of the bark of Palm Trees:
These fatigues were increased by the persecution of the Muskettoes, who rising
in all parts of the Marish, fell upon the men that were stripped; and so soon as
they had pricked in any place, a great knob presently swelled up with an
intolerable itching; immediately the hand went to the place, and scratched at
so prodigious a rate, that the blood trickled down arms and legs like a little
brook; so the whole night was spent without any repose, which happened also in
other places. From thence they went to the Holy Ghost, which is a little Town
standing upon a Rivulet, containing about thirty Houses: It is a very pleasant
and fertile place, abounding in Fruits both in those of the Country, and in
excellent Oranges and Citrons. One half of the Governors Cavaliers lodged
there, and the other advanced as far as the Trinity, which is another little
Town twenty Leagues from this: in it there is an Hospital, the sole that is to
be found in the Island; and that habitation is said to have been the best
peopled of any in those quarters, and that before the Christians settled there,
a ship which sailed along the Coast, left a man very sick on shore, who had
earnestly begged of the Captain to do him that kindness: The sick person lying
there, was found by the Indians, who carried him away, and took so great care
of him that he recovered, and married a Daughter of the Captain of these
Indians. He was in War with all his Neighbors, whom he overcome by the skill
and valor of that Christian, so that he became very powerful. Long after Diego
Velasquez undertook the Conquest of that Island, from whence he went upon the
discovery of New-Spain, after he had reduced under his Obedience all the
Indians of Cuba, by the assistance of that man who had a great deal of
authority over them. There remains threescore Leagues from the Trinity to the
Havana, and no habitation to be found in all the way; at length all the
Cavaliers arrived in this Town, where they found Fernando de Soto, and the rest
who came from Spain with him; from that place he sent Danhusco and fifty men,
in a Caravel, and two Brigantines, to find out a Port on the Coast of Florida;
who brought back with him two Indians whom he took on that Coast. This
exceedingly rejoiced the Governor, not only because these Indians were to
serve for Guides and Interpreters, but also because by their signs they had
given to understand, that there was a great deal of Gold in that Country: All
the Fleet shared in his joy, and thought the hour of departure would never
come, so fully were they possessed that Florida was the richest Country as yet
discovered in the Indies.

CHAP. VII.
Our departure from the Havana, and our arrival in Florida.

BEfore our departure from the Port of the Havana, the Governor gave to Vasco
Porcalho de Figueroa the charge of Captain General, which he had granted to
Nuno de Touar. He preferred Vasco to that Office to reward him for the care he
had taken in providing the Fleet with all things necessary; and he deprived
Nuno of it, because of an intrigue of love which he had managed with the
Daughter of the Count of Gomere, Waiting-maid to Dona Isabella. Nuno durst not
show any resentment for the loss of his place; on the contrary, seeing he
thought it best to entertain the Governors favor, and that the Maid was with
Child, he married her, and went with Soto into Florida. The Governor left Dona
Isabella at the Havana, accompanied by the Wife of Don Carlos, and the Wives of
Gallegos and Touar; and appointed for his Lieutenant in the Island, a Gentleman
of the Havana, called John de Roias: Having so ordered all matters, the General
parted from the Havana with his Fleet, consisting of five Ships, two Caravels,
and two Brigantines, on Sunday the Eighteenth of May, 1539. The weather being
very fair, and the wind in poop, we discovered the Coast of Florida on
Whitsunday the five and twentieth day of May, and came to an Anchor within a
League of the shore, because of the banks. Five days after the General put on
shore two hundred and thirteen Horse which he had, to the end that the Ships
being lightened, they might draw less water. This descent was made within two
Leagues of the habitation of an Indian Lord, named Ucita; then all the Army
landed, and none remained on board but the Seamen, who advancing still by
little and little with the Tides, came at length, in eight days time, to an
Anchor near the habitation of the Indians. So soon as the Soldiers landed,
they entrenched themselves on the Seashore, near the Bay that adjoined the
Village. After that, the Captain General Vasco Porcalho took seven horsemen to
go and discover the ground farther in about half a League from the Camp; they
met six Indians, who stood upon their defense with their Arrows, which are the
Weapons they make use of in fighting; but the Horsemen rushing upon them,
killed two, and the other four betook themselves to ^light into a Marish full
of bushes, where the Horses wearied, and, in a manner, seasick, stuck and fell
down with their Riders. The night following the General with an hundred men in
the Brigantines, attacked a Village, which he found abandoned, because the
Indians had discovered the Christians so soon as they appeared upon the Coast,
and had given the signal all over by fires and thick smoke. At break of day,
Louis de Moscoso Camp-Master-General, drew the Army up in Battalia, and formed
them into three bodies, the Vanguard, Main body, and Reerguard, assigning a
Squadron of Horse to every body. In this Order we marched that whole day and
the next, and fetching a great compass about the Marish which made that Bay, we
came to the habitation of Ucita on Trinity-Sunday the first of June: that
Village consisted of seven or eight Houses; the Lords House was near the shore,
upon an eminence made purposely to serve for a Fortress; the Temple was at the
other end of the Village, where, over the entry-door there was a wooden-sowl
with the eyes gilt; and some Pearls were found in that place, but spoiled and
of small value; for they pierce them in the fire, that they may thread them
into Chains and Bracelets, which they carry about their necks and arms, and is
the Ornament they most esteem. Their Houses were of Wood, covered with the
leaves of Palm Trees. The General lodged in the Lord's house, with Porcalho and
Moscoso; the Serjeant-Major Balthazar de Gallegos took his quarters in the
houses in the middle of the Village, where all the Provisions that were brought
from the Vessels were laid up in store; the rest of the houses and Temple were
demolished, and the Soldiers made baraks of them, where they lodged three or
four together. The Country about that Village was full of very thick bushes,
which Soto caused to be cleared a Cross-bow-shot round, for the convenience of
his Horse, and that the Indians also might not approach without being
discovered, if they had a mind to fall upon him in the nightime. He placed
double Sentinels at all the Avenues, and at other places of danger: They were
relieved every quarter of an hour; the Horse visited them, and went upon the
scout in a condition of fighting if any allarm happened. In this place the
General made Captains; four of Horse, who were Andrew de Vasconcelos, Peter
Caldeiran of Badaios, and his own two Cousins Airs Tinoco, and Alfonse Romo;
and two of Foot, to wit, Francis Maldonado of Salamanca, and John Rodriguez
Lobilho. Whilst we were still in that Post of Ucita, the two Indians whom Don
Husco had taken upon that Coast, and whom the General designed for Guides and
Interpreters, made their escape one night by the fault of those that had them
in keeping; the General and whole Camp were extremely afflicted at that loss,
because we had already made several inrodes without being able to take one
Indian, by reason that the Country was fenny, and covered with very high and
thick bushes.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Incursions made into the Country, and how a Christian was found who for a
long time had been in the Indians hands.

IN that place of Ucita the General commanded out Balthazar de Gallegos with
forty Horse and fourscore Foot, to enter into the Country, and try if he could
take some Indians. Lobilho was also commanded to go out another way with fifty
foot, most of which had no other arms but a Sword and Buckler, and the rest
Harquebuses and Cross-bows. They marched by Marshes where the horses could not
enter, and about half a League from the Camp they found some Cottages near a
little River, into which the Indians threw themselves so soon as they perceived
us: Four Indian women were taken, which obliged twenty Indian men to turn upon
us, who pressed us so hard, that we were forced to retreat toward the Camp;
for these people are so dexterous, fierce, and nimble, that Foot can gain no
advantage upon them. The reason is, because they fly when men march against
them; but so soon as ever the enemy retreat, they are at their heels. They
never fly farther than out of reach of Arrow-shot, and when they advance
toward the enemy, they are always in motion, running from one hand to the
other, that they may not give aim to the (...) and Cross-bow-men; besides that,
one Indian will shoot four Arrows, before a Cross-bow-man can make one
discharge; and they shoot so just, that seldom they miss. An Arrow that meets
with no Armor, pierces as deep as a Cross-bow-shot. Their Bows are strong, and
their Arrows of hard heavy Canes, so sharp, that they will pierce a Buckler:
Sometimes they head them with the bone of a fish as sharp as an ^wl; others do
it with a stone as hard as a Diamond: these many times pierce Armor when they
light upon the joints; but those made of Canes, are the most dangerous, because
they break or enter through the Coats of Mail. Lobilho returned to the Camp
with six men wounded, of whom one died, and brought with him the four Indian
women whom he had taken in the Cottages. As for Gallegos, about two Leagues
from the Camp he found a plain, where he espied ten or eleven Indians, amongst
whom there was a Christian stark naked, and all scorched with the Sun, having
his arms painted with several colors after the manner of the Indians, from
whom it was impossible to distinguish him. These Indians dispersed and fled,
some threw themselves into a Wood, but two that were wounded were taken. A
Horseman run full tilt with his Lance against the Christian, who cried out,
Sirs, I am a Christian, do not kill me nor these poor men who have given me my
life. He called to the Indians to come, assuring them that they should have no
hurt done them, so that they came out of the Wood. Thus the Horsemen having
taken them all up behind them, returned to the Camp, where they were received
with extreme joy by all the Army, and many complements from the General.

CHAP. IX.
Who that Christian was: How he went into Florida; and what he told the General.

THat man was born in Seville of a Noble Family, and called John Ortiz; he had
been twelve years in the hands of the Indians of Florida, whither having gone
with the Governor Narvaez, he came back to Cuba, from whence he was sent again
by Nartaez his Wife to Florida, with twenty or thirty more in a Brigantine.
When they came in view of an habitation of Indians, they perceived a Cane fixed
in the ground, and cloven at the end, wherein there was a Letter, which Ortiz
imagined to have been left by the Governor to give in^lligence of him, when he
took the resolution of entering into the Country. He informed himself of four or
five Indians on the shore, who made a sign to him to land and take the Letter;
which he and another did, notwithstanding all the resistance that those who
were on board the Brigantine could make. So soon as they were come ashore, a
multitude of Indians came running out of the Village, and beset them; so that
it was impossible for them to escape: Ortiz his Companion, who offered to make
a defense, was killed upon the spot, and he himself carried away to Ucita,
those on board the Brigantine not daring to come ashore to his relief:
immediately by Ucita's orders. the poor Ortiz was tied to four poles supported
by stakes, under which they kindled a fire to burn him alive; but a Daughter of
Ucita's told him, that that Christian being alone could attempt nothing against
him, and that it would be sar more honorable for him to keep him in Irons. In
sine, she begged his life, which Ucita granted her. Ortiz had his wounds
dressed, and being cured, was put to guard the Temple, whither the Wolves came
often, and carried away the Bodies that were laid there: The poor Spaniard
recommended himself to God, and undertook his Office of keeping the Temple. It
happened one night, that the Wolves carried away from him the body of the Son of
an Indian of great note; Ortiz ran after the Wolves, armed with a long staff,
and by good luck overtook the Beast that carried the body, which he made it let
fall, having with all his force given the Wolf a blow, of which it died not far
from the place; Ortiz did not know so much, because it was night, only about
day break he perceived that he wanted the body of the young Indian, which
extremely afflicted him, as well as Ucita, who resolved to have the Christians
life for it. Some Indians were set to trace the Wolves, who found the body, and
a little beyond it the dead Wolf; this pacified Ucita, who was very well
satisfied with the vigilance of the Spaniard, and began to treat him more
kindly. Thus he spent three years; at the end of which, another Indian Lord,
called Mocoso, who had his habitation two days Journey from the Port, came and
attacked the habitation of Ucita, and burnt it to the ground, whilst Ucita
saved himself in a Village that belonged to him also upon the Sea: By this
means Ortiz lost his place, and therewith the favor of Ucita. Seeing the Devil
holds these people in deplorable bondage, they are accustomed to offer to him
the life and blood even of their Subjects, or of any body else that falls into
their hands. They say that when the Devil would have such Victims, he speaks to
them, and tells them, that he thirsts after Sacrifices; and for that use Ucita
designed his Christian slave: Ortiz learned it from the same Daughter who had
saved him from the sire, and who advised him to sly toward Mocoso, who would
use him well, seeing she had heard it said, that he often enquired about him,
and passionately desired to see him: But seeing he knew not the way, she
brought him going half a League out of the Village; and having given him good
instructions, returned without being taken notice of. Ortiz marched all that
night, and found himself next morning upon the bank of a little River, which
divided the. Territory of Ucita from that of Mocoso: There he saw two Indians
fishing; and seeing they had Wars with those of Ucita, that he understood not
their Language, and that so he could not tell them the cause of his coming, he
was afraid they might kill him as an enemy; therefore he ran to the place where
their Arms were, and seized them: The Indians betook themselves straight to the
Village, though he called to them and assured them they were in no danger; but
they not understanding him, ran on still. Their cries allarmed the Village, so
that several Indians sallied out, and surrounded Ortiz, ready to kill him with
their Arrows, whilst he sheltred himself under some trees, and cried as loud as
he could, that he was the Christian of Ucita, whom he had left, that he might
come and serve his Lord Mocoso. By the providence of God, an Indian came who
understood the Language of Ucita; he knew what the Spaniard said, and pacifying
his Companions, told them what he had heard: Four Indians went to carry the
news to Mocoso, who came a quarter of a League to meet Ortiz, and expressed a
great deal of joy for his arrival; so that after he had made him take an Oath
after the manner of Christians, that he would not run away to look for another
Master, he promised to use him kindly; and that if the Christians came into
that Country, he should give him his liberty and leave to go to them; which on
his part he also swore after the manner of the Indians. Three years after, some
of his Subjects who were a fishing out at Sea, came to inform Mocoso that they
had seen Ships; wherewith he acquainted Ortiz, giving him permission to go and
look after them; which he did with much earnestness: But when he found no
Vessels upon the Coast, he thought that the Cacique or King had put a trick
upon him, to discover his intentions: however, he came back to him again; and
continued so in all nine years, with little hopes of ever seeing any of his own
Religion again. At length Don Fernando de Soto arrived in Florida, which
presently came to Mocoso's ears, who told Ortiz that the Christians had made a
descent at the Village of Ucita: Whereupon the Spaniard, who believed it to be
another snare laid for him, made him answer, That neither Christians, nor any
worldly thing else went so near his Heart, as the desire he had to serve him.
But the Cacique seriously confirmed the news, and permitted him to go to them;
adding that if he did not do so, and that the Christians returned back, he
would not be to be blamed, seeing he performed what he had promised on his
part. The news was so pleasant to Ortiz, that he could not persuade himself
they were true; nevertheless he thanked the Cacique, and took his leave of him:
Mocoso appointed ten or twelve Indians of best note to accompany him; and with
them it was that he met Gallegos. So soon as he was come unto the Camp, the
General ordered a Suit of Clothes, Arms, and a good Horse to be given him; and
asked him if he knew of no Country where there was Gold or Silver. Ortiz
answered, No; because he had never been farther up in the Country, than ten
Leagues beyond the habitation of Mocoso: But that thirty Leagues from that
Village, Paracoxi, the most powerful Cacique of all that Country, held his
Residence; that Mocoso, Ucita, and all the other Lords of that Coast paid him
Tribute; and that that Cacique might give them intelligence of what they sought
after: besides, that his Country was far more abundant in Maez, and other
Provisions, than those of the Coast. This extremely satisfied our General: so
that he had no other thoughts but of making Provisions for entering into the
Continent; and the rather, because he imagined that Florida being of so vast an
extent, on one side or other there must needs be some very rich Country. Some
days after Mocoso came to see the General, and made him this Discourse.

Most High and Potent Lord, the most inconsiderable in my judgment, of all that
are under your Obedience, and yet the most zealous to serve you^, does here
present himself to your Lordship, with as great confidence of obtaining some
favor from you, as if I had testified my desire by effects: For the small
service that I have done you, in giving liberty to that Christian whom I had in
my power, is no more but a consequence of the obligation that lay upon me of
performing my promise. But as it is the custom of great men to show their
generosity by great favors, I am persuaded, that as you are above other men in
the extraordinary Qualities of your Person, and in the Command you have over so
many gallant men; so also you surpass them in Liberality, and in all other
Virtues: And this gives me hopes that I may obtain the favor which I beg of
your Lordship, that you would believe me to be wholly at your devotion, and
think of me when you have any occasion of Services. The General made him
answer, that though he had given Ortiz his liberty, to comply with the promise
he had made, yet he was very much obliged to him for it, and esteemed it a
greater kindness than any could be imagined* that therefore he would ever look
upon him as his Brother, and testify to him his gratitude on all occasions. He
thereupon caused a shirt and other presents to be given him, with which the
^acique was wonderfully well satisfied; and having taken leave of Soto,
returned to his habitation.

CHAP. X.
The General sends the Ships to Cuba; he leaves an hundred men at the Port of
Ucita, and enters into the Country.

THe place where the Vessels were near the habitation of Ucita, was named by
the General, the Port of the Holy Ghost; and from thence he sent Balthazar de
Gallegos with fifty Horse, and some Foot into the Province of Paracoxi, to view
that Country, and to inform himself of the nature of those that lay farther up
in Florida, with orders to give him advice of every thing he discovered. Soto
took a resolution also of sending his Ships to Cuba, to bring from thence
Ammunition and Provisions. Vasco Porcalbo, who was preferred to be
Captain General, (...) no other design in accepting of that charge, but to get
Slaves from Florida, which he might send to Cuba where all his Estate lay: But
having made many incursions to no purpose, because of the thick bushes and
swamps with which that Country is naturally fortified; he showed a dislike to
the Service, and a great desire to return back to Cuba. So that although he had
had some misunderstanding with the General, which made them live together with
a dryness; yet he asked him leave to be gone, and received it with great
demonstrations of friendship. In the mean time Gallegos being arrived at
Paracoxi, found the Cacique* was removed; but he sent him thirty Indians, who
told him that the Cacique, whose Vassals they were, had sent them to know what
he sought for in his Country, and wherein he could serve him. Gallegos made
answer, That he was obliged to their Lord for his Offers; that they should
entreat him to return to his habitation, where they might dis^urse together,
and confirm a sincere peace and friendship, which he desired to enter into with
him. The Indians carried these words to the Cacique, who sent them back to
acquaint Gallegos that he was indisposed, which hindered him from coming. The
Sergeant - Major asked them if they knew of any Province where there was Gold
or Silver: They assured him that there was one to the Westward, called Cale;
the Inhabitants whereof were in War with the people of another Province, where
the Spring lasted all the year long, and where Gold was to be found in
abundance, because they make War against those of Cale with Head-pieces of
Gold. So Gallegos finding that the Cacique did not come, and that he only fed
him with these false hopes, that he might have time to provide for his own
security; and fearing besides that if he let these Indians go, he would see
them no more, he caused them to be put in Irons, and sent eight Troopers to
acquaint the General with what he had done. Soto and all the Camp were
overjoyed at this, thinking that the report of the Indians might be true. The
General left for the Guard of the Port, Captain Caldeiran with thirty Horse,
and threescore and ten Foot-souldiers, and marched with all the rest to join
Gallegos at Paracoxi, from whence without making any stop, he took his march to
Cale. He found two small Villages upon the rode, Acela and Iocaste, from whence
he marched before straight to Cale, with fifty Foot and thirty Horse: Some
Indians having retreated into Marish or Swamp, near to a place unpeopled that
lay upon the rode; Soto sent his Interpreter to them, who persuaded them to
come back and give a Guide, who led the General to a River that ran with a most
rapid stream: We were obliged to make a little Bridge upon the trunk of a tree
which stood in the middle of the River, to pass over the Foot. The Horse swam
over by the help of a Cable that led them from the one side to the other;
because one who had taken the water first, was drowned for want of that
invention. From thence the General sent two Troopers to the rest of his men,
who were coming after, to bid them make haste, because the way was longer than
had been believed, and that they wanted Provisions. When he came to Cale, he
found the Town abandoned by all, except three or four Indian Spies who were
taken. In this place Soto stayed for the rest of the Army, who were extremely
tired out by fasting, and the badness of the way; for the Country was poor, and
not much cultivated, by reason that the Land is low, and in many places
overflowed, or covered with very thick Woods. And all the Provisions that were
taken out of the Ships were spent; so that they ran to the habitations of the
Indians, where they found some leaves of Beets, which the more diligent plucked
and eat with water and salt: Such as could get none of them, went to the fields
of Maes; and seeing the Corn was not as yet ripe, they pulled up stalks and eat
and fed on all together. The stalks of Palm-sprouts were a great relief unto
them; and they found a great many when they came to the River which the General
had passed with so much trouble: These sprouts grow upon the Palm Trees as low
as those of Andalousia. In this place two other Troopers met them from the
General, and assured them that there was plenty of Maes at Cale: this news put
life into them again; and whilst they were upon their march to Cale, Soto
caused all the Maes which was ripe in the fields, to be cut down, and laid up a
store of it for three months. When the Christians were a reaping, the Indians
killed three of them; but one of those who were taken, told the General that
seven Leagues from that Town, there was a very large Province fruitful in Maes,
which was called Palache. Whereupon he immediately parted from Cale with sixty
Foot, and fifty Horse; he left the Camp-Master-General Louis de Moscoso with
the rest of his men, and express orders not to decamp from thence without a
warrant under his hand. Seeing no body had any Servants or Slaves, every one
pilled the Maes his own self, which they pounded in a Mortar or Trough of
hollowed wood, with a pestle or pounder made of the end of a beam; and some
boulted the flour through their Coats of Mail. They baked the bread in pot-lids
which they set upon the fire, in the same manner as they practice in Cuba: That
way of grinding was so tiresome, that several Soldiers chose rather to eat no
bread, than to grind in that manner; but they roasted or boiled the Maes, and
eat it in the grain.

CHAP. XI.
The General comes to Caliquen, and carries the Cacique thereof to Napetaca
with him. The Indians resolve to take him from him by force; many are killed
upon that occasion.

DOn Fernando de Soto parted from Cale the Eleventh of August, 1540. and came
to lodge at Itara; from thence at Potano; the third day at Utimama; and then at
an habitation, which the Spaniards call de Mala paz, bad Peace; they called it
so, because an Indian came who called himself the Cacique, and offered himself
and all his Subjects to the Generals service, provided he would be pleased to
set at liberty twenty Indians men and women, who had been taken the night
before; that as an acknowledgment for that favor, he would furnish him with
Provisions and good Guides. The General caused them to be sat at liberty, and
put the Indian under guard. Next day several Indians appeared, and drew up
round a little Village near to a Wood; the Indian desired to be had near to
them, that he would speak to them and re-assure them, and that they would do
whatever he should command them. When he was got pretty near, he made his
escape out of the hands of those that guarded him; and ran away so swiftly,
that no man was able to overtake him; and at the same time all the Indians fled
into the Wood. The General let slip a Hound which had already fleshed upon some
Indians; and that Dog passing through all the rest, went and seized the
counterfeit Cacique, and held him till some came and took him. From thence the
General went to Cholupaba, which the Spaniards called Villa Farta (fat Town) by
reason of the plenty of Maes that they found there. They made a wooden-bridge
to pass the River which is near to that habitation; and having marched two days
over a desert Country, they arrived at Caliquen the Seventeenth of August. In
that place, when Soto informed himself about the Province of Palache, he was
told that Narvaez had advanced no farther in, than the place where then they
were; and that he had embarked there, because there was no way to go farther,
and that there were no more habitations to be met with. It was urged to the
General, that he should return to the Port of the Holy Ghost, and leave
Florida, where he run the risk of being lost as Narvaez was; that if they
engaged farther in, there would be no getting back again, because the Indians
would spend that little Maes which they had left in maintaining themselves. The
General made answer to these grievances, That he would never turn his back
before he saw the danger nearer; and that he was not persuaded of the truth of
what the Indians said. Thereupon he ordered the Horses to be kept sadled, and
in a condition to march, and sent orders to the Camp-Master-General instantly
to come and join him. Moscoso and many others believing that they should
advance no farther than Palache, buried underground all the Iron which they
had at Cale; and came to Caliquen after they had suffered much hardship, by
reason that the Country through which the Governor had marched, was utterly
wasted. When all the Army was joined, Soto parted from Caliquen the Tenth of
September, taking the Cacique along with him. At the end of three days, some
Indians came to visit their Lord; and all the days following they attended him
on the march, playing on a certain pipe, which serves for a signal that they
come as friends: They said that the Army would soon come to the habitation of
Uzachil, a kinsman of the Cacique of Caliquen; that he expected the Spaniards,
with intention to render them all sorts of service, and at length prayed the
General to set their Cacique at liberty; but he would not, for fear they might
make an Insurrection, and refuse him Guides: however, he used civil pretexts,
and made a fair excuse. In this manner were five days spent, until the Army
arrived at Napetaca the Fifteenth of September. Fourteen Indians came to the
Governor there, praying him to send back their Cacique; he told them that he
detained him not by force, but that he desired he might accompany him as far as
Uzachil. In the mean time John Ortiz learnt from an Indian, that they were
resolved to assemble, and endeavor to set their Lord at liberty: Ortiz
acquainted the Governor with it, who gave orders that all both Horse and Foot
should arm, and be ready within their Quarters, to the end that the Indians
suspecting nothing, might be so bold as to venture into the Town: Thereupon
four hundred Indians in Arms being posted within view of the Camp, sent two men
to the Governor to demand their Cacique. Soto took six Troopers with him, and
holding the Cacique, to whom he talked, by the hand to re-assure the Indians,
he advanced to the place where they were posted; but when he perceived that
they prepared to fight, he commanded his Trumpeter to give the allarm: At that
sound all the Spaniards Horse and Foot sallied out of their Quarters with so
great rage, that the Indians being surprised and amazed, minded nothing but how
to escape; nevertheless they killed the Governors Horse and another, but lost
forty men that were run through with Lances; the rest threw themselves into two
Lakes distant from each other. We pursued them to the side of the Lakes, and
shot at them as they were swimming to save themselves: but not many shot did
hit; so that the Governor commanded one of the Lakes to be beset, the few men
that he had not sufficing to encompass both. The beset Indians endeavored to
save themselves in the nightime, swimming softly to the shore; and that they
might not be discerned, they covered their heads with the leaves of
Water Lillies: but the Troopers perceiving the water to bubble, spurred in
their Horses up to the counter, and drove the Indians in again. The night was
thus spent without any rest on either side: Ortiz called to them to render
themselves to the Governor, seeing they could not escape; which at length they
did, being constrained by the sharpness of the cold that they endured in the
water. So the first who could hold out no longer, cried to Ortiz, that if they
would not kill him, he would render himself; and before the break of day, they
came all out one after another, except twelve of the bravest, who all resolved
to die in the water before they would yield: But the Indians of Paracoxi, who
were not in Irons, jumpt into the Lake; and swimming, took hold of these
desparado's by the hair, and dragged them ashore, who were immediately put into
Irons. All the rest were divided amongst the Christians to serve them for
Slaves. The disgrace and misery of that slavery, made them resolve to rebel;
and they charged one of their number, who served for Interpreter, and whom they
highly esteemed for his Valor, to strangle the General when he should speak to
him, by throtling him with his two hands. This blade finding a favorable
occasion, sell upon the General; but before he could get his two hands to his
Throat, he gave him such a furious blow with his fist upon the face, that he
put him all in a gore of blood: All the Indians at this signal bestirred
themselves; he that could make use of his Masters Arms, or of the Pounder
wherewith they pounded the Maes, set upon his Master therewith, or on the first
that fell into his hands. They made use of the Lances or Swords they met with,
as skilfully as if they had been bred to it from their childhood; so that one
of them with Sword in hand, made head against fifteen or twenty men in the open
place, until he was killed by the Governors Halbardiers. Another armed with a
Lance got up into a Granary where they kept the Maes, and making as great noise
there as if there had been ten men together, he defended the door so well, that
they were obliged to shoot him through a hole in the roof. They were to the
number of two hundred Indians, who were at length beaten and reduced. The
Governor gave the younger to those who had good Chains, and commanded them to
secure them well: all the rest were tied to stakes in the middle of the place,
and shot to death with Arrows by the Indians of Paracoxi.

CHAP. XII.
The Governor comes to Palache; he is told that there is a great deal of Gold
farther up in the Country.

WE parted from Napetaca the Three and twentieth of September, and went to
encamp by a River, where two Indians brought the General a Stag from the
Cacique of Uzachil: next day we passed by the Pelaya, a large Habitation, and
from thence went to Uzachil, which we found abandoned upon the report that was
spread of the Massacre of Napetaca. The Town was full of Maes, little Beans,
and Cucumbers, which were very agreeable refreshments to us, as more suitable
to our way of living: The Maes was like Millet, and the Cucumbers better than
those of Spain. The General sent out two Captains several ways to take Indians,
who brought in an hundred as well women as men, that were all divided in this
manner: The Captain who took the prize set one or two apart for the Governor,
the rest were divided betwixt the Captain and Soldiers. They were chained by
the neck, and served to carry the Baggage, pound the Maes, and in other
employments wherein the chain incommoded them not too much. But seeing the love
of Liberty makes any enterprise easy, the Indian who was led to the Wood to
provide fuel, or to cut Maes, sometimes killed his Master, and ran away with
the Chain; others filed it with Flints, which they used instead of Iron. They
who were catched in any of these actions, paid dear for it, to the end they
might take from them the boldness of attempting the like another time. When the
Women or Children were an hundred or six score Leagues from their own Country,
they were let go without Chains; these were very serviceable, and learned
Spanish very soon. The Governor, at length, left Uzachil, that he might go to
Palache; and in two days march came to Axille, where the Indians did not at all
expect us; but seeing the Woods were near, most part fled into them, and
escaped. Next day, being the First of October, we set forward, but first had a
bridge made over a River that we were to cross in our way; at the bridge it was
a stones throw over, where no ground was to be found, and at the sides there
was water up to ones middle: The sides were covered with high and very thick
bushes, where the Indians made a show of defending the passage; but the General
ordered his Cross-bow-men to advance, who made them retreat; and some Soldiers
past over upon pieces of wood that were shoved across, to defend the entry of
the Bridge. So the General crossed over with all his men, on Thursday St.
Francis his day, and came to Quarters at Vitachuco, a Village of the Province
of Palache. The Indians had set it on fire, and the Houses were still burning;
however, we entered the Province, which we found to be very well peopled, and
plentiful in Maes. We met every where almost with Houses like to our
Farm-houses in Spain; and large Towns, as Uzelu, where we arrived on Sunday the
twenty fifth of October, and on Tuesday after at Anhayca of Palache, where the
Cacique who commanded the whole Province had his Residence. The Camp-Master or
Quarter-Master-General, whose place it is to quarter the Army, assigned us
Quarters round the Town. There were other Villages at half a League or at most
a Leagues distance, from whence we had good store of Maes, Cucumbers, small
Beans, and dried Prunes better than those of Spain; the Trees that bear these
Plums, grow naturally in all the fields. These Provisions were brought to
Anhayca of Palache, in sufficient quantities to serve us all the Winter. The
Governor knowing that the Sea was but ten Leagues off, sent thither a Captain
with some Horse and Foot; who having past Ochete, six Leagues from our
Quarters, came to the Sea-shoar, where they found a great Tree cut down, and
shaped in form of a Manger; they saw also the bones of dead Horses, which made
them conclude that that must be the place where Narvaez built the Barks wherein
he was cast away: the Governor being informed of that, sent Danhusco and
thirty Troopers to the Port of the Holy Ghost, with orders to Caldeiran to
leave that post, and come to Palache. Danhusco parted the Twentieth of
November, and found that the Indians were returned to Uzachil and to the other
Villages; yet he took none of them, fearing that might stop his march, and give
them time to draw together. He passed by their habitations only in the
nightime, and took his rest for three or four hours in some by-place; so that
he made but ten days Journey to the Port, from whence he sent two Caravels to
Cuba, on which he embarked twenty Indian women for Dona Isabella, according to
the Governors orders. He went on board the two Brigantines with all the Foot;
and coasting along the shore, ^ame to Palache. Caldeiran made the Journey ^y
Land, with the Troopers and some Cross-bow-men; but the Indians set upon him on
his march, and wounded some of his men. So soon as he was come to Palache, the
Governor sent to the Port, planks, nails, and all other materials necessary
for the building of a Bark; which he fitted ^ut and manned with thirty men well
armed, to ^ruize in that Bay, in expectation of the Brigan^ines: They had some
engagements with the Indians, who skulked in their Canoes about that Coast. In
the mean time, an Indian undiscovered by the Sentinels, came and set fire to
our habitation, on Saturday the Nine and twentieth of November; and seeing it
blew a high wind, one half of the Town was burnt down. It was Sunday the Nine
and twentieth of December before Danhusco arrived with his Brigantines. The
Governor having resolved to discover the Country to the West, commanded out
Maldonado with fifty Foot-souldiers to march along the Coast, and search for
some Harbors; and at the same time he detached Troopers to go upon the scout
about the Town, because the Indians were become so insolent, as to come and
kill men within two Cross-bow-shot of our Camp. These Troopers found two
Indians and a woman gathering small Beans; and though the Indians might have
saved themselves, yet they chose rather to die than to abandon the woman, who
was Wife to one of them: They wounded three Horses, whereof one died. Some days
after, Caldeiran with those whom he Commanded, entered into a Wood that was upon
the rode to the Sea; there he was set upon by Indians, who forced him back, and
took from him the Provisions which were carried by his men. In the mean while,
the time which the Governor had prefixed to Maldonado for his return, was
elapsed by three or four days, which did not a little trouble him; and he had
resolved not to stay for him but eight days longer, when that Captain came,
bringing with him an Indian of a Province called Ochuse, threescore Leagues
distant from Palache: There he had found an Harbor of good Anchorage, and safe
against all weathers; this extremely satisfied the Governor, who always hoped
to find on that side some Country rich in Gold. He sent Maldonado to the Havana
for Ammunition and Provisions, and gave him orders to return back to him again
to the Port of Ochuse, whither he was to go by Land: That if any obstacle
intervened that might hinder the Army from being there the Spring following,
Maldonado was to return to the Havana, and come back again the next Spring
after, to wait for the Governor in that Port, because he would engage in no
other Enterprise, before he had found Ochuse. Maldonado being gone with these
orders, and his Company being given to John de Guzman, the Treasurer John
Gaytan brought a young Indian to the Governor, who had been taken at Napetaca:
He told him that he was not of that Country, but of another very remote toward
the East; and that when he was taken he was come on his Travels to Napetaca:
That his Country, called Yupaha, was governed by a Lady, whose Town was of a
prodigious bigness; that she had Tribute paid her by all her Neighbors, by
some in Goods, and by others in Gold. Whereupon he described the manner how
that Gold was dug, how it was melted and refined, as if he had seen it done a
hundred times, or as if the Devil had taught him; insomuch that all who
understood the manner of working in the Mines, averred that it was impossible
for him to speak so exactly of it, without having seen the same; and so the
relation of that Indian past for a real Truth, because of the circumstances
wherewith he confirmed it.

CHAP. XIII.
The Governor leaves Palache, to go in search of the Province of Yupha; and
what befell him in that Expedition.

UPon this encouragement we left Anhayca of Palache on Wednesday the Third of
March, 1540. no man having any thing in his thoughts but to go in search of the
rich Country of ^upaha. The Governor ordered Provisions to be made for
threescore Leagues of desert, which much incommoded the Foot, who were obliged
to carry* their Victuals on their backs; because the Indians that served us,
going naked and in Irons during the bitter cold of Winter, were almost all
starved to death. After four days march we came to a River, where the Governor
caused a great Canoe to be made, by means whereof Chains were fastened to both
sides of the River, which served for Cables, to bear up the Canoe in passing
against the current of the water. The Horse swam over by the help of Ropes that
pulled them, and that labor stopped us a day and a halfs time. At length we came
to Capachiqui on Saturday the Eleventh of March; the Indians were in Arms in
all that Country; so that five Spaniards being gone to seek Mortars to pound
their Maes in, in some scattered Cottages, met with several Indians who came
upon the scout: Five of them detached from the rest, and attacked us so
furiously, that a Spaniard ran away and came and gave the allarm in the Camp.
The most diligent went out to assist their Comrades, and found one Christian
dead, and the other three dangerously wounded; but the Indians fled into a
swamp to secure themselves from the Horse. The Governor leaving Capachiqui,
past over a a desert Country, and came to Toalli the One and twentieth of the
Month. In that Country we began to find houses far different from those which
hitherto we had seen: Those were only covered with Herbs, whereas these of
Toalli had for their Roof little Canes placed together like Tile; they were
very neat, some had the walls made of poles so artificially interwoven, that
they seemed to be built of stone and lime: For that being a cold Country, every
Indian has a House to live in in the Winter, inside and outside made tight
with these Poles. The door is narrow and low: they shut it well in the
nightime, and kindle a fire within the house, which heats it like an Oven so
that one has no need of being covered. They have other Habitations for the
Summer, and Kitchins adjoining their Houses where they bake their Bread. The
Granaries wherein they lay up the Maes, are raised upon four posts, boarded on
the sides, with a floor made of Canes. The Houses of the Caciques and persons
of Quality amongst them, are to be distinguished not only by their greatness,
but also by the large Balconies that they have over the Entry, and by seats
below made of Canes in the manner of benches. Every house has several
Granaries, where they lay up what their Subjects and Tenants bring them in for
Rent; as Maes. Stags skins, and Mantles of the Country, made like little
Cassocks of the rind or soft part of the bark of certain Trees; nay, and some
also woven of the thread of a certain Herb, which being well beaten, becomes
like flax. These Mantles serve them for Clothes; one they have which covers
them from the girdle down below the knee, and another on the left shoulder,
thrown back under the right arm, which they wear always abroad, in the same
manner as the Bohemians do. The Indians have never more than one about their
shoulders, and cover their lower parts with Breeches made of a Stags skin, much
like to those that are used in Spain: The leather is extraordinarily well
dressed, and they give it what color they please, with so perfect a dye, that
their firered color is not surpassed by the finest Scarlet. Their Black is
good also, and of this they make Shoes; they give the same color to their
Mantles with as much perfection. We parted from Toalli the Twenty third of
March, and on Friday the Army came to a little River, which they passed upon a
Bridge made of one single Tree, from which Bennet Fernandez a Portuguese fell
into the water and was drowned. The Village of Achese was pretty near, where
the Indians had no intelligence of our march; to our view they threw themselves
into a little River near the Village; but some were taken, and amongst these,
women: One of them understood the Language of that Lad who conducted the
Governor to ^upaha, which much confirmed the relation he had made, because we
had passed through Countries where different Languages were spoken, nay and
some which he understood not. The Governor sent one of the Indians whom he had
taken, to call back the Cacique, who was got to the other side of the River: He
came and made him this following discourse.

Most High, most Mighty, and most Excellent Lord, things that are rarely seen,
cause admiration: How could we then be affected at the sight of your Lordship,
and men who were altogether unknown to us, mounted upon so furious Beasts as
these seem to be, and breaking into my Country so impetuously, before I knew
any thing of your coming? This has appeared to us so extraordinary a thing,
and has struck such terror in our minds, that it was not in our power to stay
and receive your Lordship with that Honor which is due to so High and
Illustrious a Prince. But the confidence I have of your Generosity and Virtues,
makes me hope that you will not only pardon my fault, but gives me also
boldness to desire Favors of you: First, that your Lordship would dispose of
my Person, Country, and Subjects; and then that you would tell me from whence
you come, whither you go, and what you seek, that so I may be in a better
condition to render you service. The Governor answered, That he was as well
satisfied with his Offers and good will, as if he had presented him with a
great Treasure; that he was Son of the Sun, and that he came from the places of
his abode, in search of the greatest Lord, and richest Province of that
Country. The Cacique replied, That beyond his Territories there was a great
Lord, whose Country was called Ocute; and gave us an Interpreter and Guides.
This obliged the Governor to set at liberty all the Subjects of this Cacique,
whose Village he left, marching along the River through a very wellpeopled
Country. We parted the first of April; and at our departure, by orders from the
Governor, erected a wooden-Cross in the middle of the Marketplace of the
Village; and being in haste, we only told the Indians, that that Cross served
to put us in mind of what Jesus Christ suffered for our Redemption, that he was
both God and Man, and that he created Heaven and Earth; that in consideration
thereof, they should bear a reverence toward that sign; which they promised to
do. The Fourth of April we came to Altaraca, and the Tenth of the same Month to
Ocute: The Cacique sent two thousand Indians to the Governor, with a Present
of Rabbets, Partridges, Maes-bread, two Pullets, and a great many Dogs. These
last were no less esteemed in the Army, than the best sheep, because meat and
salt were very scarce there, insomuch that the sick had no kind of
refreshments; which was the cause that the smallest indisposition which would
have been made nothing of in other places, reduced a man to extremity of a
sudden, so that he died of mere weakness: And it was sad to hear the poor
wretches in their agony sigh and say, Alas! had I but a bit of meat, or a
little salt, I should not die. The Indians are not put to such streights; for
with their Arrows they kill store of Fowl, and Venision, as wild Hens, Rabbets,
Stags, and other Beasts: They are expert in catching wild Fowl and Beasts, and
have a thousand inventions for that; which the Christians had not; and though
they had had, they wanted time, being constantly on the march, and not daring
to leave their Ranks. This want of meat was the cause that of the six hundred
men who followed Soto, he who could catch a Dog in any Village thought himself
a very happy man; (for sometimes we found thirty in a place) but the Soldier
that killed one, and sent not a quarter* to his Captain, suffered for it,
paying dear for his incivilities when he was to go Sentinel, or upon any guard
of fatigue. Tuesday the Twelfth of April, the Governor parted from Ocute, the
Cacique having given him four hundred Indians for Service. He went to Cofaqui,
and from thence to Patofa; the Cacique of this Province who was in peace with
the Cacique of Ocute, had information of the Governors march; and being
desirous to procure his friendship, he came to him, and spoke in this manner.

Illustrious and Potent Lord, I should now demand of F^tune that she would be
pleased by some small cross only to make me pay for the Honor to which she
advances me, in making me so happy as to obtain the thing I most desired in
this life, which is to see your Lordship, and be able to render you service.
Though my Tongue bear the image of what is in my heart, and that my heart
cannot dissemble the satisfaction which it receives on this occasion, yet it
wants power fully to express it. What can the Country which I govern have
merited, to be honored with the sight of so great a Man, and so excellent a
Prince, who ought to be served and respected by all men in the world? And the
Inhabitants of this Country being the most inconsiderable of all others, whence
can they have this happiness? the thought of which alone, is enough to preserve
them from all the calamities that may befall them according to the course of
Fortune. Seeing if to day we be so happy as to be reckoned amongst your
Lordships Subjects, we cannot fail of being protected and maintained by true
Justice, and Reason, and of taking to our selves the name of men, seeing they
who have neither Reason nor Justice, may justly be ranked among Beasts. I
heartily then* and with all due respect, offer my self to your Lordship,
beseeching you that in recompense for the sincerity of my will, you would be
pleased to Command me, my Country, and Subjects. The Governor told him, that
he was much obliged to him for his kind expressions, of the effects whereof he
was already sensible; that he would remember his good will as long as he lived,
and honor and favor him as his Brother. For the space of fifty Leagues from
Ocute to Patofa, the Inhabitants whereof are of a gentle and peaceable nature;
the Country is very pleasant, and the Soil fat, being watered with a great many
Rivers which contribute to its fertility. But from Ocute to the Port of the
Holy Ghost, where we first entered Florida, that Country, which is no less than
three hundred and fifty Leagues ^n extent, is a light and soft Land, full of
swamps and very high and thick bushes, where the wild and warlike Indians
defend themselves against the attempts of the Spaniards, because Horse cannot
break through those strong places; which was very incommodious to us, not only
because of the want of Provisions, which in all places they carried away, but
also for the difficulty we had in finding Guides.

CHAP. XIV.
The Governor leaving the Province of Patofa, meets with a Desert, where he
and all his men were reduced to extreme misery.

IN this Habitation of Patofa, the young Indian who served for Interpreter and
Guide, fell upon the ground foaming at the mouth as if he had been possessed with
the Devil; the Gospel was read over him, and he recovered. After that, he
assured us, that four days Journey from thence toward the East, we should find
the Country he spoke of. The Indians of Patofa on the contrary affirmed, that
they had no knowledge of any Habitation that way, but that they knew there was
a plentiful and populous Province to the North-West, called Cosa; however, the
Cacique told the Governor that he would furnish him with Guides and Servants
what way soever he resolved to go, whether toward Cosa, or toward the
Province which that Indian designed. Soto demanded six hundred Indians of him,
and so they parted with testimonies of reciprocal affection. We took Maes for
four days, and marched six by a way that grew narrower and narrower still till
at length it altogether failed us. The Indian marched in the Van, and made us
foard over two great Rivers a Cross-bow-shot broad, where we had water up to
the girts; but seeing the Current was very rapid, the Horse were forced to make
a Lane, to secure the passage of the Foot, who passed through holding by the
Horses. Our fatigues were doubled in passing a broader and more rapid River,
where the Horses were forced to swim a Pikes length: This put the Governor
into a great perplexity; he made a halt under some Pine-trees after we had
passed the River, and threatened the young Indian, that he would have him thrown
to the dogs, because he had deceived him, in telling him that it was but four
days journey, whereas we had spent nine, marching seven or eight Leagues a day;
and the Horses being quite spent by reason that the men themselves had short
allowance of Maes. The Indian confessed that he knew not where he was; and that
acknowledgment would have certainly made him a prey to the dogs, had not he
been the only person whom John Ortiz understood. The Governor left the Army
encamped under the Pines, and with a Guide and some Horse and Foot advanced
five or six Leagues into the Country to find out a way; but he returned at
night extremely troubled that he could find no sign that that Country was
inhabited. Next day it was debated in Council, whether we should return back
again, or take some other course. The Country which we had left behind us, was
ruined and laid waste, and our provision of Maes spent. Both men and horses
were so heartless, that it was doubted whether we could be able to get to a
place of refreshment: besides, the Indians taking their advantage from that
disorder, might have had the boldness to attack us; so that we had cause
equally to fear War and Famine, if we resolved to turn back again. Wherefore
the Governor resolving to send out some Troopers on all hands to search for
some habitation, dispatched four Captains several ways, with eight Troopers a
piece. They came back at night, dragging their Horses by the bridle, or driving
them before them, they were so quite spent; and yet found neither rode nor
habitation. Next day four others were commanded out, accompanied with eight
Troopers who all could swim, mounted on better horses, with orders even to
cross the Rivers they might meet with. These Captains were, Gallegos who
marched upwards along the side of the River; Danhusco who followed the course
of the River downwards; Romo and Lobilho who crossed the Country. The Governor
had brought with him into Florida an hundred Swine, which had already bred him
three hundred Pigs; some of these he caused to be killed, and half a pound of
flesh given to every Soldier a day; for all the Maes was consumed three or
four days before. Thus the Soldiers kept Soul and Body together, with so small
an allowance of meat and some boiled herbs; for the Indians of Patofa were sent
back so soon as Provisions began to be scarce, though the poor men showed an
extraordinary desire to serve the Christians in that necessity, and a great
deal of trouble to leave them, before they saw them in a good Country. Sunday
in the Evening Danhusco returned, and told us that he had found a little
Village about twelve or thirteen Leagues from the Camp; which so rejoiced the
Governor and whole Army, that they seemed to be raised from death to life
again. Monday the Six and twentieth of April, we decamped to go to that little
habitation, by the Indians called Aymay, and by the Spaniards the Village of
good Relief. The Governor left a Letter buried at the root of one of the Pines
in the Camp, and these words cut in the ba^k of the Tree: Dig at the root of
this Pine, and you will find a Letter. It was to give notice to the other
Captains who were abroad upon discovery, what was become of the Governor, and
what way he was gone. The way was no otherwise to be known, but by the trees
and bushes which Danhusco had broken down in his passage. The Governor being
accompanied with those who were best mounted, arrived at the Habitation on
Tuesday, all doing their utmost to follow him in the march; so that some lay
all night two Leagues short of the Village, others three or four, according to
their courage or strength. In this habitation we found a Granary full of
parched Maes, and some Maes in grain, which was distributed by allowances: We
also took four Indians, who constantly affirmed that they knew of no other
Habitation, till the Governor commanded one to be burnt alive; then one of
them told us, that two days Journey from thence, there was a Province called
Cutifachiqui. On Tuesday Gallegos, Romo, and Robilho joined us; they found the
Letter, and had followed the tract of the Army; but Lobilho lost two of his
men, whose horses could not march: The Governor was much offended at that
negligence, and gave orders to search after them. In the mean time he parted
for Cutifachiqui, and took three Indians by the way, who told him that the Lady
of that Country had already had notice of the Christians, and that she expected
them in one of her Habitations. The Governor sent back one of these three
Indians to offer the Lady his friendship, and tell her that he was coming to
see her. So soon as he was in sight of the Village, four Canoes, in one of
which was the Sister of the Cacique or Queen, came to receive him; and that
Indian Lady coming ashore, told him, That her Sister had sent her to kiss his
Lordships hand; and that she did not come her self, because she was taken up in
giving orders to make ready all her Canoes for transporting the Army, and for
the reception of so great a Lord, to whom she had devoted all her Services. The
Governor thanked her; and some time after she was gone back, the Cacique
appeared in a kind of Litter, carried by four of the most considerable of her
Subjects to the waterside. She went into a Canoe which had a Tent in the stern
supported by a Lance, with a Carpet and two Cushions on which she sat,
accompanied by some Indian women of her Retinue, and many Canoes with men. In
that equipage she came to the other side, where the Governor expected her, and
spoke to him in these terms.

Most excellent Lord, may all happiness attend your arrival in this Country
which belongs to you. Though my Ability comes short of my Will, and the
Services we render you suit not with my Desires, nor with the merit of so
powerful a Prince; nevertheless, since the Will is more to be esteemed than all
the Treasures in the World, if they be presented without it, I offer your
Lordship a firm and constant good will, with my Person, Country, Subjects, and
mean Services. Having said so, she presented the Governor with Mantles and
Skins, which were brought in the other Canoes, and pulling from her neck a Lace
of large valuable Pearls, she put it about the Governors, whom she entertained
very pleasantly till a number of Canoes were come, sufficient to carry over the
Army: And so long as he stayed in that Village, she took care to send him* a
great many Pullets daily. That was a very pleasant Country, fruitful and
watered with a great many Rivers. It produces but a few bushes, but Nut-trees
and Mulberry-trees in abundance. The Indians told us, that the Sea was but two
days journey distant. Within a League round the Village, there were a great
many forsaken houses, wherein the grass grew, which was a sign that they had
been a long time uninhabited: We were told by the Indians that the Plague had
been the cause of it; that it had raged in the Country two years before our
coming, which had obliged the Inhabitants of these Villages to seek out other
Habitations. In their Storehouses were still to be seen a great many Mantles
made of stuff, of the bark of a tree, or of white, green, red, and blew
feathers, very convenient for the Winter, and very neat according to their
fashion. Besides these, there were a great many Deers skins rarely well dyed,
and cut into breeches, hose, and shoes. Seeing the Cacique observed that the
Spaniards highly esteemed Pearls, she bid the Governor send and search in some
Tombs that were in her Town, telling him that he would find abundance there;
and that if he caused those also of the other Villages to be searched, they
would furnish Pearls enough to load all the horses of the Army. The Tombs of
the Town were indeed searched, where we got fourteen bushels of Pearls; and the
figures of Children and Birds made also of Pearl. The people are tawny, well
shaped, and more polite than any we had as yet seen in Florida: They all wear
Clothes and Breeches after their own fashion. The young Indian told the
Governor that they began to enter into the Country he told him of; and seeing
there was some probability in it, he understanding the Language of the
Inhabitants, Soto suffered himself to be persuaded; which made the Indian
desire of him that he might be Baptized, and had it granted: he was named
P^dro, or Perico; and the Governor ordered the Chain which he had hitherto
carried, to be taken off. That Country, according to the relation of the
Indians, had been well peopled; it was reckoned plentiful; and probably the
young Indian who led us thither, might have heard of it, though he affirmed
that he had seen it, having devised all the rest of his story according to the
best of his imagination. We found in the Town a Dagger and some Coats of Mail;
whereupon the Indians told us, that many years before, the Christians had
landed in a Port two days journey from thence (this was certainly Aylhan, who
undertook the Conquest of Florida) that the Governor died upon his landing,
which had occasioned great factions, divisions, and slaughter amongst the chief
Gentlemen that had followed him, ev^ry one pretending to the supreme Command,
so that at length they left the Port and returned to Spain, without discovering
the Country. It was thought fit by all that we should stop here, and people
this place; which was so advantageously situated, that all the Captains of
ships of new Spain, Peru, S. Mart, and of the Continent, would be overjoyed
to come and Trade in this Port, since it lay in their way to Spain: That the
Country was exceeding good, and that it might afford a good Trade and very
considerable profit. But since nothing run in the Governors mind but the
Treasure of Atabalipa, and that he hoped to find the like; the fertility of
that Country, and the abundance of Pearls, could not satisfy him, though in
reality a great many of them were worth no less than Gold; and those which they
might have made the Indians fish, would have been of another-guess value, if
the Country had been peopled, because they spoil their luster by piercing them
in the fire. Nevertheless, though the Governor was much pressed to comply in
that with the desire of all his men, he answered, That that Country could not
supply us with Provisions enough for one Month; that we could not excuse our
selves from going to the Port O^se, where Maldonado was to wait for us; and
that, in fine, that Country would be always open to us, and we might retreat
thither if we found none richer: That in the mean time the Indians would sow
their Land, and so we should find Maes in greater plenty. He always informed
himself of the Indians, whether they had not heard talk of some great Lord, and
rich Country; and the Indians telling him that twelve days journey from
Cutifachiqui, there was a Province called Chiaha, subject to the Lord of Cosa,
he immediately resolved to go in quest of that Country; and as he was a dry and
severe man, though he took pleasure to hear the opinions of all, yet so soon as
he had declared his own, he could not endure to be contradicted, but did what
he judged best himself. Thus all were feign to obey, insomuch that though the
leaving of this Country appeared to be a great fault seeing we could have got
Provisions from the Neighbors about, until the Indians had sown their Land,
and the Maes been ripe, yet none durst oppose the decision of Soto.

CHAP. XV.
The Governor departs from Cutifachiqui to go to Cosa: What happened to him
during his march.

WE left Cutifachiqui the Third of May: The Indians were up in arms, and the
Queen showed some indifferency toward us, nay and some design of flying
without giving us Guides or Indian Servants to carry our Baggage. Her disgust
was occasioned by the bad usage which the Indians had received from some of the
Christians; amongst whom, as generally in all great Companies, there were some
of a low and base mind, who for a little interest committed such actions, as
exposed themselves and those that were with them. These broyls obliged the
Governor to command the Cacique to be arrested, and carried away, in a manner
unsuitable to the kindness she had showed him, and of the reception he had had:
she was forced to walk on foot with her Maids. In the mean time, that she might
deserve a little consideration to be had for her still, she caused Indians to
come out of all the Habitations by which the Governor past, to carry the
Baggage from one place to another. We marched an hundred Leagues in her
Territories, and everywhere we perceived the marks of the reverence and
obedience which were rendered to her in the promtitude and zeal wherewith all
the Indians executed her orders. However, Perico told us that she was not the
Lady of the Land, but the Cacique's Cousin, who had sent her to that Town to do
Justice upon some Lords who had revolted; but he had lost all manner of credit
by the lies he had told; however, he was born with, because he was useful to us
as an Interpreter. During seven days march, till we came to Chalaque, we past
through the most wretched Country in all Florida; the Indians there ^eed on
Roots which they search for in the fields, and Fowl they kill. They are a
peaceable people, go naked, and are extremely feeble: their Cacique brought the
Governor two Stags skins as a very considerable present. There is such plenty
of wild Herns in that Country, that one Habitation presented the Governor with
seven hundred; and indeed in all the rest, they offered him what they had. That
Province is five days journey distant from the Province of Xualla: In this
last, we found very little Maes, and that made us after six days stay, to leave
it, though both men and horses were both equally tired. From Ocute to
Cutifachiqui, they reckon an hundred and thirty Leagues, of which fourscore are
desert; and from Cutifachiqui to Xualla two hundred and fifty through a
mountanous Country. We found some very bad ones in our way from Xualla to
Quaxule: and whilst we were upon the march, the* Cacique of Cutifachiqui stole
away from the Indian slaves who carried her, upon pretext of going to do some
needs in a Wood near the rode; but so soon as she was there, she fled into the
thick of the Wood, where she hid her self, so that she could not be found. It
was the Governor's design to take her along with him to Quaxule, where the
Lands of the Indian Caciques that paid her Homage, ended: She carried away with
her also a little Box, which the Indians call Petaca, and which is made of
Canes: That Box was full of unpierced Pearls, which those who had skill judged
to be of very great value. An Indian woman that waited on her carried the Box,
which the Governor left in her custody that he might not afflict her too much,
but with an intention to ask it of her when he dismissed her at Quaxule. She
had a care not to forget it, and went to Xualla in company of three slaves who
had fled from the Army, and a Trooper, who being left behind sick of a Fever,
had lost his way in the Woods. Alimamos (that was the Troopers name) told so
many things to these slaves, that he made two of them change their resolution
and return with him to the Governor in the Province of Chiaha: They brought
him news that the Cacique was at Xualla, with an Indian the slave of
Vasconcelos; that she would by no means consent to come back with them; and
that the Indian and Cacique lived together like man an wife, being resolved to
return to Cutifachiqui. In five days we arrived at Quaxule, where the Indians
made a present to the Governor of three hundred Dogs, knowing that the
Christians eat the flesh of them, which these people did not. Quaxule was not
provided of Maes no more than the rest of the Country that we had past; which
obliged the Governor to send an Indian to the Cacique of Chiaha, to pray him
to make provision of some Mae^ ^n his Country, where the Army was to refre^ for
some days. Two days after on ou^ way to Canasaqua, the Governor met twenty
Indians all loaded with baskets of Mulberries, which they presented him with;
for from Cutifachiqui all along to this Province, and farther in in Florida,
there are a great many Mulberry-trees, Walnut-trees, and Plum-trees, which grow
naturally wild in the fields, but yet as large and bear as fair fruit as those
which are cultivated with care in our Ochards. Leaving Canasaqua, we marched
five days through a desert Country; and two Leagues from Chiaha, fifteen
Indians loaded with Maes met the Governor from the Cacique, who told him that
their Cacique expected him with twenty Granaries full of provisions which he
offered him, as he also did his Person, Country, Subjects, and all that he had.
The Governor entered Chiaha the Twenty fifth of July, where he was very well
received by the Cacique, who having made him this discourse, left his lodgings
for him.

Potent and Excellent Lord, I esteem my self so happy to see that your Lordship
is pleased to make use of my Services, that nothing can give me greater
satisfaction, nor be more esteemed by me. Your Lordship being at Quaxule,
ordered me to make provision in this Town of Maes for two months, and I have
filled twenty Granaries with the best that could be found in this Country. If
your Lordship ha^ not been received with the honor that is due to so great a
Prince, I beg of you to consider my Youth, which excuses my fault, and to
accept of my Will which shall always be ready with a constant and sincere zeal
to render you service. The Governor assured him of his gratitude and
affection. The Indians of this Town had a great deal of Butter, or rather
Sewet, in pots that run like Oil; they said it was Bears grease: We found
Walnut-Oyl there also, as clear as the Sewet, and of a very good taste, with a
pot of Honey, though before nor after we found neither Bees nor Honey in all
Florida. The Town stands upon the branch of a River that parts into two a
Cross-bow-shot from the place, and unites again a League below. The Island or
Land betwixt the two branches was at most two Cross-bow-shot over, and the
Channel on each side pretty large, so that they might be soarded over the
fields on both hands, being sowed with Rice: Seeing all the Indians staid in
their Habitations, none but the Governor lodged in the Town, and the rest of
the Army encamped abroad under the trees, without any order, the Soldiers
being even at a pretty distance from one another. The Governor allowed, or at
least connived at that disorder, because the Indians were peaceable, all quiet;
and to have done otherwise, would have incommoded us very much; for the horse
were so tired out that they were fit for no service, having had but very little
Maes all the way from Cutifachiqui, and no leisure to recruit since the
hardship they had sustained in the desert of Ocute: And seeing a great many of
the Troopers were in no condition of fighting, they turned out their horses
into the Pasture-grounds about a quarter of a League from the Camp. We were
very happy that our weakness tempted not the Indians to fall upon us; for all
of us were but in a bad condition to make a defense. The Governor allowed us a
full mouth to refresh our selves; and during that time, the ground being
extraordinary good, the horses grew wonderfully fat. When he was ready to
march, some who pushed their desires beyond the bounds of Reason, importuned
him so much that he demanded of the Cacique thirty Indian women for slaves: The
Cacique told him, that he would communicate the matter to the chief Indians of
the Habitation: but before he gave his answer, all the Indians in one night
fled with their Wives and Children. The Governor resolved to pursue them, had
not the Cacique come to wait upon him; he told him, that he appeared before him
with a great deal of shame and confusion, because that his people being gone,
though contrary to his will, he had followed them without daring to take leave
of him; but that being sensible of his fault, he was come to deliver himself up
to him as a faithful Subject ought to do: That his Subjects obeyed not him as
yet, but his Uncle who governed the Country for him, until he should be of Age
to manage the Government himself: That if the Governor had a design to find
them out that he might punish them for their disobedience, he offered to serve
him as a guide, seeing he was so unhappy as not to be able to render him other
services. The Governor at the very instant set out with thirty Horse, and as
many Foot, to go and find out the revolted Indians; and as he passed by the
Habitations of the most considerable deserters, he cut down and destroyed all
the Maes they had sown. He was conducted to a River which formed an Island,
into which these people had retreated to avoid the attempts of the Horse: There
he sent an Indian to bid them come back to their Habitations, assuring them
that he would demand no more, but some of them to carry the Baggage, as all the
other people had done; that since they had so great an esteem for their women,
he desired none of them. The Indians embraced these proposals, and returned to
the Town. In this place the Cacique of Acoste came to offer his services; and
as Soto asked him if he knew any rich and fertile Country, he told him that
Northwards he would find the Province of Chisca, where they melted Copper, and
another metal of the same color, but much more lively and perfect; that it was
a metal which seemed to be more precious than Copper, but yet was not made use
of, because it was softer. This relation agreed with what Soto was told in
Cutifachiqui, where we saw some little Axes of Copper, which they said was
mingled with Gold. But since to go from that Town to Chisca, there was a desert
Country to be past, and that they told us we should meet with Mountains
unpassable to the Horse, the Governor would not go to Chisca by the straight
rode, but thought it better to take his way through a peopled Country, where
the men and horses might better subsist; and from whence being fully informed
of the truth, he might divert his march toward that Province; he therefore
sent two Spaniards with an Interpreter and Indians that knew the Country to
Chisca, to make discoveries and bring him back news at a place which he
assigned them.

CHAP. XVI.
Fernando de Soto escapes a great danger in the Town of Acoste by his prudence:
What happened to him upon the way, and his arrival at Cosa.

SOto being resolved to go to Acoste, sent for the Cacique of Chiaha, and took
his leave of him, giving him some presents which satisfied him very much.
Acoste is seven days journey distant from this Town, and we arrived there the
second of July. The Governor made us encamp two Cross-bow-shot from the Town,
whither he went with a guard of eight persons: The Cacique expressed a great
deal of kindness to him, in outward appearance; and whilst they were in
discourse together, some Foot-soldiers came to the Town to get some Maes; but
finding it was not good, they fell a ris^ing and pillaging some of the Indians
houses: The Indians startled at that proceeding, ran to Arms, and some of them
with slaves and cudgels ^ell upon five or six of the most insolent Soldiers,
and banged them soundly. Soto very well perceived the danger he had run into;
he saw the Indians incensed, and himself amongst them with ^o few of his men,
so that he resolved to get off by a piece of cunning contrary to his humor,
for he was open and free, and disguised his passions as little as any man;
besides that, he could not endure that any Indian should be so bold as to fall
foul upon a Christian right or wrong; but sincerity was out of doors at that
time: He therefore took a cudgel and ran to the assistance of the Indians in
mauling the Christians, which exceedingly re-assured that people; but at the
same instant he sent one to the Camp to order the horse to arm and advance; and
having taken the Cacique by the hand, whom he entertained very affectionately,
he insensibly wheadled him out of the Town, with a great many Indians more,
until he came to an open way in view of the Camp: There the Troopers advancing
in file, without any sign of what they intended, environed the Cacique and his
Indians, whom they carried to the Camp, where the Governor caused them to be
put into Prison near to his Tent; then he declared to them that they should not
budge from thence, until they had given him Guides and Indians for service, and
until some sick Soldiers who were coming in a Canoe from Chiaha, and those
whom he had sent to Chisca were arrived. Those of Chisca came three days after,
and told him that the Indians had led them through so barren a Country, and
over such rough Mountains, that it was impossible the Army could march that
way: That finding the way to be so long, and that it would have taken up much
time, they had thought fit to come back again from a little Habitation, so poor
that they found nothing fitting for use. They brought only with them a Cows
hide that the Indians had given them, which was an inch thick, and had hair as
soft as the wool of an ordinary sheep. The Cacique granted Guides, and Indians
for service, and so was set at liberty. July the Ninth the Army parted from
Acoste, and marched to Tali; the Cacique whereof came to meet the Governor,
and made him this discourse.

Most excellent Lord and Prince, worthy to be served and obeyed by all the
Princes of the world, as may be judged by the Virtues which at first sight
appear in you. It is not now the first time that I come to know who you are,
and what your power is: And I will not consider my own meanness when I hope
that my services may be acceptable to you, seeing where Power is wanting, yet
the Inclination and Will may be praised and accepted: That Is the reason which
makes me take the boldness to beg your Lordship that you would only have
regard to my desires, and think wherein I can serve you in that Country which
is your own. The Governor made him the ordinary Compliment, that he was
obliged to him, and that he would consider him as his own Brother. The Cacique
caused two days Provisions to be brought to the Army; and at parting he gave
the Governor four Indian women, and two men, whom he needed for carrying of
his Baggage. We marched six days in the Country of the Cacique of Cosa; and
Indians came from him daily to Compliment the Governor, who at length arrived
at Cosa on Saturday the Fifteenth of July; the Cacique met him two
Cross-bow-shot out of the Town; he sat on a Cushion, and was carried in a kind
of Litter upon the shoulders of four of the most considerable of his Subjects;
his upper Garment was of Martin skins, made in the same fashion as the Ladies
Mantles are in Spain; on his head he wore a kind of Diadem of Feathers; and
several Indians sung and played upon Instruments round the Chariot: He
respectfully saluted the Governor, and spoke thus to him.

Excellent and mighty Lord, above all the Lords of the Earth, though I come now
to receive you, yet it is long since I received you in my heart; and since the
day I came to hear of your Lordship, I have had so great a desire to serve you,
and it would be so pleasant and satisfactory to me to do so, that all I can
express here, is nothing to what I feel, nor no way comparable to it: This you
may be assured of, that the Empire of the whole World would not so rejoice me,
nor make me in my opinion so happy. Expect not that I should offer you what is
your own; that is to say, my Person, my Country, and Subjects. I will only make
it my business to command my Servants, that with all the care and respect that
is due to you, they divert you by singing and playing upon Instruments till you
arrive in the Town: There your Lordship shall be lodged, and served by me and
my Subjects, and shall dispose of all I have, as of that which be longs to your
self; wherein your Lordship will do me a singular favor. The Governor thanked
him; and so they entered the Town with extraordinary joy. The Cacique lodged the
Governor and all the Spaniards in the houses of the chief persons of the Town.
The Granaries were full of Maes and small Beans: and the Country was so
populous, that the Villages and fields sowed with Maes touched one another: It
is very pleasant, because of several little Rivers which make most lovely
Meadows; and in the fields there are a great many Spanish Plum-trees, as well
as of those of the Country, with plenty of Vines upon the sides of the Rivers,
whose stocks rise as high as the trees. There are others distant from the
Rivers side, whose stock is low, and carry very large sweet Grapes; but seeing
there is no pains taken about them, there stones are of an extraordinary
bigness. The Governor most commonly set guards over the Caciques to hinder
them from running away, and he carried them along with him till he was gone out
of their Jurisdiction, because their Subjects waited for them in the Villages,
and furnished Guides and Indians for service; but when he was about to enter
into another Province, he sent them back again, as he did likewise the Indians
who of their own accord carried the Baggage, when he was come into the
Territories of another Cacique that supplied him with new ones. In the mean
time the Indians of Cosa could not endure that their Cacique should be kept
under restraint; they made an Insurrection and fled into the Woods, not only
those of the Town, but also the Subjects of the other Indian Cacique's who
paid Homage to the Cacique of Cosa. Soto sent four Captains to attack them in
four several places: they took several Indian men, nay and women also, whom
they put in Chains; so that these people finding how little advantage they had
by flying, came back and told the Governor, that they were ready to serve him
in whatever he pleased to command; whereupon at the entreaty of the Cacique,
some of the chief were set at liberty; the rest were kept as slaves by those
who had taken them, no more to return again into their own Country. Nor indeed
did any of those who were put in Chains ever return again, if Fortune and the
pains they took neatly to file off their Chain, did not restore them to
liberty, or unless upon a march through the negligence of their guards they
straggled away Chain* Baggage, and all together.

CHAP. XVII.
The Governor leaves Cosa, and goes to Tascaluca.

AUgust the Twentieth we parted from Cosa, after twenty days stay there; and
the Governor according to his usual way, took the Cacique along with him as
far as the Province of Tascaluca, whither he intended to go. Our first quarter
was at Tallimuchase, a place abandoned, and next to Itava depending on Cosa,
where we sojourned six days, by reason that the River which past by that
Village was extreme high. When the water was a little fallen, we continued our
march to Ullibali, whence ten or twelve Indians were come in name of the
Cacique, to offer obedience to the Governor: All of them had Bows and Arrows,
with a great many Feathers about them; and they waited on the Governor to the
Town, which he entered attended by twelve Horse, and some foot. The Indians were
all in Arms, and the Governor judged by their countenance that they had some
bad design: we were informed afterward, that they were resolved to rescue the
Cacique of Cosa by force from the Governor, if he had seemed to approve their
design: The Governor made the rest of his men to march into the Town, which
was fenced in. It is a little Town upon a small River, very well pallissado'd
round, as all the rest were which we found farther up in the Country: The
Palissado was of great stakes driven deep into the Earth, with poles of the
bigness of ones arm cross-ways, both in the outside and inside, which were
fastened with pins to knit all the work together, that was about the height of a
Lance; but the Cacique was in a Town on the other side of the River. Soto sent
for him, and he came without any resistance; so that after some reciprocal
Compliments, he furnished us with Indians for service, whom we stood in need
of, and thirty Indian women; There we lost a Spaniard called Mancano, of a
Noble Family of Salamanca, who strayed in the Woods whilst he was a looking for
Grapes, which that Country produces in great plenty. Leaving that Town, we
found another, subject to the same Cacique; and from thence the Governor went
to Toasi, where we also took Indians for service, and thirty women. Our march
was commonly five or six Leagues a day, in Countri^ inhabited; but in the
desert, we marched as far as we could go, that we might not be straightened in
provisions. From Toasi we marched five days in the Territories of the Cacique
of Tallise, where we arrived the Eighteenth of September: This is a great Town
lying upon a very rapid River, on the other side whereof the fields were well
cultivated, and covered with Maes, which that Country is plentifully furnished
with: But seeing the Indians had abandoned their Habitations, the Governor
sent word to the Cacique that he should come to him; which he did; and after
many offers of his Services, gave forty Indians. In this Town one of the chief
Indians of Tascaluca came to salute the Governor in name of the Cacique, and
made him this discourse.

Most mighty and most virtuous Lord, the great Cacique of Tascaluca my Master,
has sent me to kiss your Lordships hand, and to let you know, that he is
informed you gain the affection of all men by your Perfections, Power, and
Merit; and that all the people of the Countries through which your Lordship
has passed, serve and obey you: This he acknowledges to be your due, and
desires more than life it self to see you, and serve you; and for that reason
he has sent to offer you his Person, Country, and Subjects. So that when your
Lordship pleases to come into his Country, you shall there be received, served,
and obeyed, with all affection; and he craves no other reward for the desire he
has to render you services, but that you would do him the favor to let him
know when you will come; and the sooner you resolve to do it, your favor and his
joy will be the greater. Soto received that Indian very civilly, and sent him
back with a present of some trifles, which he cared not much for, and another
more considerable for the Cacique. He dismissed the Cacique of Cosa, and at
Tallise took as many Indians for service as he stood in need of; so having
refreshed in that place for the space of three weeks, he set out for Tascaluca.
Our first quarter was at Casiste, and the next in another Town under the
jurisdiction of Tascaluca, from whence we went and encamped in a Wood two
Leagues short of the Residence of the Cacique; Soto sent the
Camp-master-General Louis de Moscoso to acquaint him with his arrival. He found
the Cacique under a Balcony before his door; presently a Carpet was spread upon
an eminent place out of doors, with two Cushions upon it, one over the other,
where he sat down, environed with Indians at some distance from the place where
he sat; those of greatest quality were next him, one of whom to keep the Sun
off of him held over his head an Umbrello of Bucks-skin of the bigness of a
Buckler, and party-colored black and white, with a St. Andrew's Cross in the
middle; at a distance one would have taken it for Taffetay, the colors were so
exceeding good: It was very well stretched out, and carried upon a Lance, being
the device or Standard of the Cacique in time of War. This Cacique was much
feared by his Neighbou^ and Subjects, and commanded a very large and well
peopled Country: he was of a very high stature, well shaped, strong limbs, and
a well-proportioned body. When the Camp-Master had delivered his Harangue, all
the Troopers of his Retinue made a great many Passades in (...) Marketplace,
spurring their horses sometimes to the very place where the Cacique was, which
he beh^ld with a great deal of gravity, casting his eyes only upon them now
and then in a most haughty and disdainful manner. In the mean time the
Governor arrived, the Cacique not budging out of his place to go and meet him;
Soto took him by the hand, and both went and sat down upon a bench under the
Balcony, where the Cacique spoke to him in these terms.

Mighty Lord, may your Lordships arrival be attended with all happiness; I am
as well pleased to see you, as if you were a Brother whom I extremely loved: I
need say no more as to that, seeing it is to no purpose to express in many
words, what may be said in a few, insomuch as it is the Will which gives force
to Actions, and Actions are the Evidences of Truth. As to the Will, you shall
know by the fairness of my proceeding how sincere mine is. I esteem the favor
you have showed me in sending me a Present, as much as it deserves, and
especially because it is a Present from you. Look, now, what it is you would
have me serve you in.

The Governor thanked him very civilly, but set spies over him so long as he
staid in that Town; and when he was ready to be gone, he resolved, for many
reasons, to take him along with him. After two days march, we found the Town of
Piache upon a great River, where Soto demanded Canoes of the Indians to carry
over the Army. They told him that they had none, but that they would make rafts
of Canes and dry wood, which they did in a very short time; and seeing the
River ran very gently, we passed over with a great deal of ease. It is reckoned
an hundred Leagues from the Port of the Holy Ghost to Palache, and that way
runs from East to West; from Palache to Cutifachiqui there is four hundred and
thirty Leagues, from South-West to North-East; and from Cutifachiqui to Xualla,
the way is from South to North for the space of two hundred and fifty Leagues.
In ^ine, from Xualla to Tascaluca which are also two hundred Leagues distant,
one hundred and fourscore go from East ^o West as far as Cosa, and the rest
from Cosa to Tascaluca from North to South. When we were g^t to the other side
of the River of Piache, a Spaniard pursuing an Indian woman his slave, who had
run away from him, was lost in the Woods, being either killed or taken by the
Indians; whereupon the Governor told the Cacique, that he must be accountable
for him, threatening to keep him in fetters as long as he lived, if the
Christian were not found. The Cacique sent one of his Indians to Maville, a
large Town on our way, belonging to another Cacique Vassal to Tascaluca; his
pretext was good, for he said he sent to give him n^tice to prepare Provisions
and Indians of service for the Army: But it was apparent enough afterward that
that was not his design, and that the business of that Messenger, was to cause
the Indian Soldiers muster into a Body, that they might fall upon us. We
continued our march three days, the last whereof was through a very populous
Country, and the Eighteenth of October we arrived at Maville. Soto had the
Vanguard with thirty Foot-souldiers, and fifteen Horse. Near the Town he met a
Soldier whom he had sent to the Cacique, to pray him to stay, and likewise to
observe the motion of the Indians; the Soldier told the Governor, that they
seemed to have some bad design, because whilst he tarried at Maville, he had
seen a great many Indians in Arms enter the Town, and that they labored with
extreme diligence in fortifying the Palissado about the place. Upon this,
Moscoso told the Governor, that the best way would be to encamp, seeing the
Indians appeared not to be submissive enough: but Soto replied, That he was
weary of encamping, and that he would go and refresh himself in the Town. The
Cacique at his entry received him with the sound of Instruments; and having
offered him his Services, presented him with three Mantles of Martin-skins. The
Governor made his entry in the middle betwixt two Caciques, followed by eight
of his guards, and three or four Troopers, who alighted to wait upon him; so he
went and sat down under a Balcony, where the Cacique of Tascaluca prayed him to
leave him in that Town, and not give him the trouble of going any farther; but
perceiving by Soto's discourse, that it would be hard for him to obtain his
leave, he changed his design; and pretending to go speak with some Indians, he
left the Governor sitting in his place, and went into a house, where many
Indians were assembled with their Bows and Arrows. The Governor perceiving
that he returned not, called him several times; and at length the Cacique made
answer haughtily, That he would neither come out of that place, nor go any
farther; that if the Governor would depart in peace, he might in a good time;
but that he must not pretend to carry him out of his Country and Dominion.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Indians rise against the Governor; and what happened upon it.

THe haughtiness of the Cacique made the Governor sensible that there was a
Plot laid: He endeavored to sweeten him by Civilities, to which the Indian
made no answer; on the contrary, with a haughty and slighting look he withdrew
into a place where the Governor could neither see hi^ nor speak with him: Soto
seeing another Indian of Q^ality passing that way, called him to ^m, and bid
him assure the Cacique, that (...) would give him leave to be gone when and w^r
he pleased, provided he furnished hi^ ^th a Guide, and Indians for service; but
the Indian replied, That he would hear no proposition; which obliged Gallegos
to take hold of him by the skirt of his Mantle, and the Indian to spring away
from him, leaving his Mantle in his hands. Now seeing the Indians took to their
Arms, Gallegos drew his Sword, and gave one whom he had taken hold of so
surious a thirst, that he ran him through the breast; that blow was the signal
to the revolt: They came running out of their houses all in fury, shooting
Arrows at the Governor and those that were with him. So^o saw very well, that
if he made head against them, there was no probability of escaping out of their
hands; and if he caused his Forces to advance toward the Town, the Indians
from their houses where they sheltred, would kill all their horses, and make a
gr^t (...) of men; he therefore thought it best to run out of the Town with all
the speed he could; but before he could save himself, he was ^ain to be taken
up two or three times. All that accompanied him were dangerously wounded, and
five killed upon the place. The Governor, wounded as he was, cried to his men
to keep off from the Palissado, from whence the Indians shot furiously; and as
the Spaniards retreated, most of them running, the Indians sallied out upon
them, killing with their Arrows all whom they overtook. The slaves who carried
the Baggage had unloaded it in a place near the Palissado; so that during the
rout of the Spaniards, the Indians of Malville loaded them again with the
Baggage; and leading them into the Town, knocked off the Chains they carried,
and gave them Bows and Arrows to fight with against us. Thus they seized all
our equipage, and even our Pearls; and seeing we had marched through a Country
that in all appearance had submitted, many Soldiers had left their Arms with
the Baggage; so that they fell into the Enemies hands, who had, besides, Swords
and Halbards which they had snatched from those who entered with the Governor.
So soon as Soto was out of danger, he mounted on horseback, and with some other
Gentlemen on horseback also, turning upon the Indians, he killed three with his
Lance, which made them retreat behind the Palissado, where they defended
themselves, and from whence the bravest sallied out when the horse were making
their Caracol, and immediately entered in again so soon as they turned upon
them. A Monck and Secular Priest, with one of the Generals Servants, and an
Indian woman-slave, were still in the Town. The revolt of the Indians was so
sudden, that they had not time to get out, so that they were obliged to
barricado themselves within the house where they were, making fast the door;
and seeing they had a Sword, the Generals man standing behind the door, made
thrusts at the Indians who offered to come in; and the Monk and Priest laying
hold each of them of a staff, stood on each side to knock down the first that
set his foot within the house. The Indians who saw the door so well defended,
were got upon the roof to make holes in it, and to shoot them with their
Arrows. When all the Army came in sight of Maville, they held a Council to
deliberate whether they should assault the Indians in the Town, or only
besiege them, because the assault was very dangerous; but at length the assault
was resolved upon in this manner.

CHAP. XIX.
The Governor draws up his men, and enters Maville.

SOto made those who were best armed to alight, whom he drew up into four
Batalions, and marched straight to the Gates of the Town; this being done in
spite of the Indians, their first care was to make the Cacique withdraw,
telling him, as we were informed by some Indian slaves, that in such occasions
a Cacique signified no more than another man, and fought only for one; that in
the Town there was a great many Indians to command, brave and expert Soldiers;
and that one of them was enough to give the necessary orders; that seeing the
success of a Fight depended on Fortune, it would not be known for what side
Victory would declare, that therefore they prayed him to secure his Person, to
the end that if they all died in the Battle, as they resolved to die rather
than turn their backs, some might remain alive to govern the Country. The
Cacique refused to be gone; but they pressed him so hard, that at length he
left the Town accompanied with fifteen Indians, carrying with him a Scarlet
Cloak, and the best things he found in the Spaniards Baggage. The Governor
being informed that Indians were seen flying out of the Town, sent off a party
of Horse to make the rounds about the circuit of the place, and in every
Batalion placed a Soldier with a lighted firebrand, to set all on fire, and so
to oblige the Indians to fight abroad in the streets. Having so ordered all
things, they gave the signal by a Musket Shot, and the four Batalions marched
with extraordinary fury to their several posts. There was a fearful slaughter
on both sides at the entry of the Gates; for the Indians defended them so
valiantly, that they beat our men back several times; at length the Gates were
forced, and we mingled pell-mell with them: The Monk and Priest were very
opportunely relieved, but with the loss of two brave Soldiers who were the
first who ran to their assistance. The Fight continued so long, that the
Christians choked with droughth, went to refresh themselves in a Pool near the
Palissado, where they drank as much blood as water; and so returned to the
Fight. This obliged the Governor, and those that were with him on horseback,
to enter the Town, where they charged the Enemy so briskly, that they put the
Indians into disorder, and gave opportunity to the Soldiers to set the houses
on fire. They that thought to save themselves out of the Town, were forced in
again by the Horse that made the round; so that despair giving them fresh
strength, they came to blows again with the Spaniards: but that way of fighting
was very disadvantageous to them; for the Christians hewed them down with so
much fury, that many of them threw themselves one upon another into the houses
that were on fire, where they were smuthered and reduced to ashes; so that
above two thousand and five hundred Indians perished by the fire and sword. We
lost eighteen Christians, amongst whom were Don Carlos the Governors Cousin,
and one of his Nephews, John de Gomez and Mem Rodriguez, both Portuguese, and
John Vasquez de Villeneuve of Barcaro^a, all Gentlemen of Quality and much
esteemed; the rest were but private Soldiers. An hundred and fifty Spaniards
were wounded in this Action, with seven hundred Arrow-shot; and God permitted
that all of them in a very short time were cured of their wounds, though they
were very dangerous. All our Equipage, Linen, Clothes, Pearls, and Ornaments
for saying of Mass, were consumed by the fire, our men having no respect to
that loss, since it was far less than the damage that the Indians might have
done us by fighting under shelter. The Governor had advice in that place, that
Maldonado waited for him in the Port of Ochuse, which was seven days journey
distant; but he discharged Ortiz to divulge the news, lest it might be
prejudicial to his designs: For since by the fire he had lost the Pearls which
he intended to send to Cuba, by that ostentation to invite men to come over to
Florida; he resolved to give no news of himself until he had discovered some
rich Country, that he might not disgust the Soldiers whom he needed for
completing his Conquest, if they saw neither Silver, Gold, nor other Riches
brought from those places.

CHAP. XX.
The Governor leaves Maville to go to Chicasa; what happened to him in that
Journey.

FRom the time we landed in Florida, till we departed from Maville, we had lost
an hundred and two Christians, some by sickness, and others fighting against
the Indians. In consideration of the wounded, we were obliged to lie encamped
three weeks near that Town, in a fruitful and populous Country; for besides the
fenced Towns, there were many scattered houses all about in the Country,
distant from one another one or two Cross-bow-shot at most. The Governor
finding that the wounded were almost cured, decamped on Sunday the Eighteenth
of November, all the Soldiers having provided themselves of Maes for two days:
nevertheless, we spent five in a desert Country, before we entered into the
Province of Pafallaya. We found two Villages Taliepatave, and Cabusto, this
last lying upon a great River, the opposite side whereof was possessed by the
Indians; they called to us that they would knock out the brains of us all, if
we were so bold as to cross the River; which obliged Soto to cause a great Boat
to be built privately in the Woods, that the Indians might not come to know his
design. It was finished in four days time, and the Governor ordered it to be
carried down half a League lower on the River; there he put on board thirty
Soldiers well armed; but when the Indians perceived his design, those that
were nearest came running to defend the passage: They made some resistance till
the Spaniards landed; but so soon as they marched toward them, the Indians
retreated and threw themselves into swamps covered with Reeds. The thirty
Spaniards mounted on horseback, and went down along the River, till they found
a place where the Army crossed over without any difficulty. We found Towns full
of Maes and dry Pease: from thence we marched five days through a desert
Country, until we came to a River where the Indians offered again to dispute us
the passage. But Soto avoiding as much as he could to expose his men to more
engagements, in two days time caused another Canoe to be made, and sent one of
his Indians to the Cacique to demand peace and his friendship: This did not
succeed, for the Indians being up* massacred his Messenger before his face; and
having done so, retired with loud shouts. So that the passage being free, we
went to Chicasa the Eighteenth of December: It was a little Village, containing
about twenty houses, where the Governor was obliged to pass the Winter,
because it snowed, and the cold was already so sharp, that the Army suffered
extremely in the Camp, before they could find out means to make houses. This
Country was well peopled, and full of scattered houses in the fields, like to
those of Maville: We found abundance of Maes there, most part whereof was still
upon the ground, so that we had enough for the whole Winter-Quarter. We took
some Indians, and amongst others one who was much considered by the Cacique,
and who persuaded the Governor to send word to the Cacique, that he desired to
see him, and to treat with him. The Cacique complied, and came to the
Governor, offering him his Country and Subjects, and promising to bring two
Caciques more; who came, indeed, some days after very well accompanied. The one
was called Alimamu, and the other Nicalusa: They presented Soto with an hundred
and fifty Rabbets, some Mantles and Skins. The Cacique of Chicasa came often to
visit the Governor, who sometimes sent for him, and lent him a horse to go and
come to the Camp. This Indian complained to him of one of his Vassals who had
revolted, demanding assistance against that Rebel, whom he intended to punish;
which was a mere sham to make us divide our Forces, that so he might attack us
separately. However, the Governor granted him that assistance; and when the
Cacique came with two hundred Indians in Arms, he accompanied him with thirty
Horse, and fourscore Foot. They marched together to Saquechuma, which was the
place of Residence of the Indian whom the Cacique pretended to be revolted:
that Village was abandoned, and the Indians of Chicasa set fire to it, the
better to disguise their Treachery; but the good order which the Governor
observed on the march, being always upon his guard as well against the Indians
who accompanied him, as against the Enemy; and the care that was taken to
fortify the Camp, hindered them from attempting any thing against us. Soto upon
his return from that Expedition, entertained the Cacique and the chief of his
Subjects at a Feast, where he gave them Pork to eat, which they had never
tasted before, and which to them seemed so delicious meat, that from that day
forward the Indians came every night to certain houses a Cross-bow-shot from
the Camp, to steal and kill the Pigs that were there. Seeing they had, in this
manner, carried some away, guards were placed to watch them, who surprised
three Indians, two of which the Governor ordered to be shot to death with
Arrows; the third had his hands cut off, and was in that condition sent back to
the Cacique, who pretended to be much troubled that they had been so insolent,
as to meddle with any thing that belonged to the Governor; he said that it
rejoiced him to see that they were pu^shed as they had deserved. He lived
retired into a Country House half a League from the Camp, whither four
Horsemen went one day without leave: These were Francis Osorio, Reynoso a
Servant to the Marquess of Astorga, a Page and a Valet de Chamber of the
Governors, called Ribeyra, and Fuentez. They brought away some Skins and
Mantles by force, which so offended the Indians, that they left their Houses.
Soto being informed of that violence, caused them to be apprehended, and
condemned Osorio and Fuentez to death, as being the Ringleaders of the
enterprise, and confiscated the Goods of all the four: All the Churchmen and
chief of the Army begged Osorio's life, and some mitigation of the Sentence, but
he was inflexible; so that the Criminals were going to be led to the
Marketplace to have their heads struck off, when some Indians came from the
Cacique, to make their Complaints to the Governor. The coming of the Indians
which should have hastened their death, was that which saved their lives; for
Ortiz put on by Gallegos, and some other persons of Quality, cunningly turned
the sense of their discourse, saying to the Governor, that the Cacique had
been informed that these men were apprehended upon his account, that
nevertheless they were not guilty, since they had not offended him; and that if
he would do him a favor, he would set them at li^rty. On the other hand he
assured the Indians, That they who had wronged them were Prisoners; and that
the Governor would punish them in such a manner as should serve for an example
to all others. So the Governor pardoned the men; and being resolved to leave
Chicasa in March, he demanded Indians for service from the Cacique. The Cacique
made answer, That he would propose the matter to the most considerable of his
Subjects; and seeing the answer was long a coming, Soto went to pay him a visit
on Wednesday the Eighth of March. He pressed him again to furnish him with
Indians, whom the other promised to send next day: Nevertheless, the Governor
observed that he was a hatching some mischief, and ordered Moscoso to keep a
good guard all night, which he neglected. The Governors observation was but
too well grounded; for about midnight the Indians in four Batalions came to
attack us in four several places at once; and so soon as they perceived that
they were discovered, they beat a Drum, which served them for a signal; and
with fearful shouts broke into the Camp at the same time that our Out-guards
retreated thither; nay, scarely had those who were in the Village heard the
noise of the Enemy, when one half of the houses were already all on fire. Three
Troopers were that night upon the Vedelte, two of which were of low birth, and
the least esteemed of any in the Army; the third was a Cousin of the
Governors, who till that day had preserved the reputation of being stout;
nevertheless, on this occasion he behaved himself as cowardly as his
Companions, running away with them without so much as once running a Lance; so
that the Indians entered without any opposition, and set all on fire, waiting
for the Christians abroad, who came out of doors in disorder without having
leisure to arm themselves; for being for most part as yet overwhelmed with
sleep, and blinded with the smoke, they knew not where to find their Arms, nor
how to saddle their horses; nor could they see the Indians that pierced them
with their Arrows. Several horses were burnt in the Stables, none escaping but
such as broke their halters, and saved themselves in the streets: So terrible
was the disorder, that every one thought of flying without making head against
the Enemy; but God who only chastizes his Servants to correct, and not to
destroy them, and who holds them in his hand in their greatest necessities, and
amidst the most frightful dangers, so blinded the Indians that they perceived
not our disorder, but imagined that the horses which ran about the streets,
were Squadrons drawing up to charge them. In the mean time there was none but
the Governor that could get on horseback, who followed by a Soldier called
Tapia, spurred up against the Enemy; Soto with the thrust of a Lance killed the
first Indian he met, but seeing in the general surprise and consternation care
enough had not been taken to girt his horse, the violence of the tilt threw him
off, with the saddle betwixt his legs. The rumor of the danger the Governor
was in, spread immediately, which obliged a great many that were leaving the
Village to go hide themselves in the Woods, to rally again and come to his
assistance. And seeing it was still night, and that the Indians still imagined
that the horses which they heard running, were coming to fall upon them, they
gave ground, and abandoned the Town, leaving only one of their number dead
upon the place, who was killed by the Governors own hand. The Village was
wholly burnt down, and a woman that followed her Husband perished in the
flames, who having got out of the house with him, went back again to save some
Pearls which she had preserved; but when she thought of getting out a second
time, the fire was at the door before her, so that neither her Husband nor any
body else could save her life. Three Christians more were so spoilt by the
fire, that one of them died three days after, and the other two were for a long
while unable to go, but forced to be carried a-bed in a kind of Litter born by
Indians. Twelve Christians died on this occasion, with fifty horses and four
hundred hogs which were burnt. All that we saved from the fire of Maville, was
consumed in this: several who had not the time to take their Cassocks were
reduced to their single Doublets, so that they suffered much by the cold which
was very sharp; and though we made great ^ires, yet we spent whole nights
without sleep, because we were broiled on one side, when we froze on the other.
For avoiding that inconvenience, a Soldier invented cove^ts made of two Matts
of withered grass fastened together; they laid these coverlets one over and the
other under them. This invention was laughed at at first, but at length the
laughers themselves thought themselves happy when they could make use of them.
We were in so great disorder, and so destitute of arms and saddles which were
consumed by the fire, that had the Indians assaulted us once more, they might
easily have defeated us. Soto thought fit to remove the Camp from the place
where it was, to the house where the Cacique held his Residence, and where we
found Ash-trees which we made into as good Lances as those of Biscaye. We found
means also to make saddles; so that in eight days time the Troopers were in a
condition of doing service again.

CHAP. XXI.
The Indians return to attack the Spaniards, and are beat off. The Governor
goes to Alimamu, and the Indians in arms expect him on the way.

WE had already encamped eight days within half a League of our former Quarter,
and had made a Forge to dress and new temper our Swords that had been spoiled
by the fire; our Bucklers, Saddles, and Lances, being likewise fit for service,
when on Wednesday the Fifteenth day of March, 1541. the Indians came to attack
us a little before day. They were divided into three Batalions; but seeing our
past danger had taught us wit, the Sentinels did their duty, and gave the
allarm in good time: The Governor and Troopers were on horseback in an
instant. He divided them into three Squadrons: and having provided for the
guard of the Camp, charged the Indians so furiously that they could not stand
it. Seeing the ground favored the Horse, and that it was already day, we might
have had a sufficient revenge on the Indians for their former assault, had it
not been for a Monk that fell a crying with all his force very unseasonably, To
the Camp, to the Camp: At that cry the Governor and his men hastened thither,
and gave the Indians time to save themselves, leaving only forty of their
number dead upon the place: Some were taken, whom the Governor asked about the
Country that was further before us, and on the Twenty fifth of April we went to
Alimamu; it was a small Village, where we found but little Maes. In the mean
time, the Army being to march seven days through a desert Country, Soto sent
out three Captains three several ways to seek provisions. Danhusco, who went
with fifteen Horse and forty Foot the way that the Army was to march, met with
a strong Palissado, where the Indians waited for us. He saw them walking with
their Arms behind the Palissado, having their bodies almost all over painted
with various colors, as black, white, blew, and red, laid on in streaks, so
that they seemed to be in Doublet and Breeches; some had feathers on their
heads, others horns, and their faces made black, with the circuit of their eyes
died red, that they might appear more terrible. So soon as they saw the
Spaniards approaching, they fell a shouting, and with their Drums beating came
out to receive them. Danhusco thought best to retreat to an open field within a
Cross-bow-shot of their Palissado: he drew up his Foot with their Cross-bows
and Bucklers before the Horse, to save his horses from being wounded, and so
made head against the Indians, who sallied out by sevens or eights in company,
to skirmish. They kindled a great fire to the Spaniards view, and took an
Indian by the head and feet, making as if they cast him into the fire, after
they had knocked him on the head with a great club, to show the Christians that
they must expect to be treated in the same manner. Danhusco sent off three
Troopers to carry the news to the Governor, who immediately advanced, and
resolved to beat them from that post; saying, that if that were not done, they
would take the boldness to attack us, when they might do us greater prejudice.
The Horse alighted by his orders, and attacked the Palissado in four bodies.
The Indians made a very good defense, till we came up to the Palissado; but
charging them then briskly, they ran for it over a little River which they had
at their back, and defended the passage with whole flights of Arrows; where
seeing we could find no foard for the Horse, we were obliged to retreat. There
were but three Indians killed, and many Spaniards wounded, of whom fifteen died
some days after. This loss made the Governors Conduct be blamed in that he had
not got the nature of the ground which was on the other side of the River
viewed, and a passage found before he attacked the Indians. Because the hopes
they had of making good their retreat that way, if they chanced to be beaten,
made them obstinately maintain the fight, defend themselves, and anoy the
Christians, without running great risk.

CHAP. XXII.
The Governor goes to Quizquiz, and from thence to Riogrande.

THough during three days space some little quantity of Maes had been brought
to the Army, and that the wounded wanted rest, yet the Soldiers who suffered
very much had still more need of victuals; so that the Governor was obliged to
decamp to go to Quizquiz, and marched seven days through a desert Country full
of swamps and woods; but where there was still horse-way, unless in some few
places where they were put to swim. The Indians of Quizquiz had no intelligence
of our march, so that we took them all in their houses, and amongst the rest
the Cacique's Mother. Soto sent him word by an Indian, that if he would come to
him, which he might do with all safety, he would restore to him his Mother and
all his Subjects. To which the Cacique made answer, That he should first
deliver his Mother and the other Prisoners, and then he would come and wait on
him. Seeing the Soldiers were tired out and heartless for want of victuals,
and the horses also in bad case, Soto resolved to give the Prisoners their
liberty, to see if by that means he could oblige the Cacique to let him alone
in peace; he therefore sent home the Cacique's Mother, and all the rest that
were taken, having in very obliging words expressed the great desire he had of
living in peace with them. Next day when the Governor expected the Cacique, we
saw a great many armed Indians, coming with a design to attack us: all
immediately armed; which the Indians observing, retreated to the side of a
River out of the reach of shot. They consulted together about half an hour, and
then six of the chief of them advanced toward the Camp. They told the
Governor that they were come to see what kind of men they were whom he
commanded; that they had learnt from their Ancestors that a white people should
come and conquer their Country, and that therefore they would go and tell their
Cacique, that he should come and offer his services to the Governor; so having
presented him with six or seven Skins, and as many Mantles, they returned with
all the other Indians that waited on them. In the mean time the Cacique came
not, nor did he send us any more news of him; but there being no great store of
Maes in the Town, the Governor made us march to another about half a League
from Riogrande, or the great River; there we found as much Maes as we needed,
and Soto went to view the River; he found on the sides of it a great deal of
Timber fit for building of Boats, and an advantageous place for the Army to
encamp in, which he ordered to advance. We patcht up some houses in haste in a
smooth level ground, about a Cross-bow-shot from the River, and thither we
brought all the Maes that was in the Villages through which we past.
Immediately we fell to prepare the wood that was necessary for the Boats; and
whilst we were employed about that work, some Indians descending the River,
came ashore, and told the Governor that they were the Subjects of a great
Cacique called Aquixo, who commanded a great many people in a very large
Country on the other side of the River; That they were come in his Name to
acquaint his Lordship that their Master would come tomorrow and wait upon him.
The Cacique did, indeed, come, followed by two hundred Canoes full of armed
Indians, painted after their way, and adorned with feathers of all colors,
having shields in their hands wherewith they covered the Rowers; the rest with
their Bows and Arrows stood fore and after in the Canoe. The Cacique's Canoe
had a Pavillion in the poop, under which he sat; there were others also trimmed
up in the same manner for the chief Indians, who sitting under their
Pavillions, gave their orders to those who guided the Canoe. They put
themselves in order, and advanced within a stones throw of the Riverside; from
thence the Cacique spoke to the Governor who stood on the shore well attended,
and told him, That he was come to offer him his services, and assure him of his
obedience, because he had been informed that he was the most Potent Lord of the
whole Earth. Soto thanked him, and prayed him to come ashore, where they might
discourse more commodiously together; to which the Indian made no answer, but
ordered three Canoes to put in, which were loaded with fish, and bread made of
paste of Prunes, or of the kernels of that fruit, and of the shape and bigness
of a tile. The Governor accepted the Present, and importuned the Cacique to
come ashore. But seeing the design of the Indians was only to watch for an
occasion to surprise us, when they perceived that the Governor had put his men
into very good order, they stood off from the shore, and at the same time the
Cross-bow-men, who were all in a readiness, shot at them with loud shouting,
and made five or six to fall. They retired in very good order, covered with
their shields, and no man leaving his Oar, though he saw his Companion fall by
his side. They landed several times afterward to attack us, but so soon as we
charged them, they hastened back to their Canoes. It was a very pleasant sight
to see them in their Canoes, which were most neatly made, and very large, with
their Pavillions, Feathers, Shields, and Standards, that looked like a Fleet of
Galleys. In the mean time our four Boats being finished in thirty days time,
the Governor chose three of them, which three hours before day he manned with
twelve Troopers of tried Courage, who he was certain would die rather than turn
their backs to their Enemies. Each Canoe contained four, defended by
Cross-bow-men, with good Rowers to carry them over to the other side of the
River. John Guzman who commanded Maldonado's Company, was in the other Boat
with his men; and because the current of the water was very swift, he made them
go a quarter of a League higher than the place where we encamped; so they
passed over and landed just over against the Camp. When they were within two
stones throw of the shore, the Troopers took the water on horseback, and landed
in a place where the sand was firm: Finding no Enemies there, they easily
landed, and made themselves masters of the passage. The Boats immediately
returned back to the other side where the Governor was, who past over with the
whole Army two hours before Sunset. The River in that place was half a League
over, so that a man could not be distinguished from one side to the other; it
was very deep and very rapid, and being always full of trees and timber that
was carried down by the force of the stream, the water was thick and very
muddy. It abounded with fish, most of which differed much from those that are
taken in the Rivers of Spain, as we shall etll you hereafter.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Governor goes from thence to Casqui, and from thence to Pacaha, where he
finds a Country different from the other parts of Florida.

WHen we had passed that River the greatest of all Florida, the Army marched a
League and a half to a Town in the Province of Aquixo; the Indians had
abandoned it, nevertheless the Cacique sent thirty to learn intelligence of our
march and design. As soon as they appeared in sight of the Camp, the Horse made
toward them, and the Indians dispersed and fled; but the Country being open
and level, they were so hotly pursued, that two of them were killed, and
fifteen taken, who were brought to the Governor. He had sent a Captain with
Soldiers to bring our Boats up to this Town which stood upon the River; but
seeing the course of it was not, straight, and that it behoved us to turn a
great many reaches before we could get to the Camp, the Indians who were
acquainted with all the turnings and windings, and expert in that Navigation,
many times attacked the Boats, and reduced us to great extremities; for we
durst not venture out into the stream which was too rapid, and standing in to
the shore, they skulked by the Riverside and shot at us. No sooner was the
Governor got to the Town, but he sent off all the Cross-bow-men, who came very
seasonably to our assistance. When the Boats were come to the Town, he caused
them to be broken up, and all the Iron-work to be kept for other occasions. The
Army rested a night in this Town, and parted next day to go into the Province
of Pacaha, which according to the relation of the Indians, bordered upon the
Country of Chisca, where that Metal was found which the Governor took to be
Gold. On our march we found several great Villages abandoned by the Indians;
nevertherless, we took some, who told the Governor, That three days journey
from the place where we were, he would find a powerful Cacique, called Casqui:
This made him hasten our march to a little River, which we crossed upon a
bridge; but seeing the waters were out, the men marched till Sunset up to the
middle in water. At length we saw dry land to our great satisfaction, because
we feared we should have been forced to pass the whole night in the water; and
our joy hereupon adding to our strength, next day about noon we found the first
habitation of the Province of Casqui. The Indians expected us not, which cost
many of them their dear liberty. That Village we plundered, with another half a
League distant, whither the Horse had advanced. The Land of this Country was
the highest, driest, and evenest of any that we had found before we came to the
great River; the fields were covered with Nut-trees, whose fruit was of the
shape of an Acorn, and we found store of them everywhere in the houses, which
the Indians had laid up for their Provisions: These Walnut-trees differed
nothing from those of Spain, nor from those which we had seen elsewhere in that
Country, but that their leaves were somewhat smaller. We found also a great
many Mulberry-trees, and Plum-trees, whereof some bore red Plums like those of
Spain, and others Plums of a violet-colour, different from ours, but of a far
better taste. All these Trees were fair, and of as good a growth as those which
are raised with care in Gardens and Orchards; for the Land yields but few
rushes and bushes. The Army marched two days in this Province of Casqui, before
we came to the place where the Cacique usually resided; and the Country upon
the Rode was so populous, that one of their Villages was as big as two or three
in the other Provinces. The Governor sent an Indian to acquaint the Cacique
that he was coming to see him, to desire his friendship, and to treat him as
his own Brother. To which the Cacique answered, That he should be welcome, and
that he would joyfully comply with whatsoever he should please to enjoin him.
He added to his words a Present of Skins, Mantles, and Fish; so that after
these testimonies of mutual friendship, the Indians forsook no more the
Villages through which we past, but in all places received the Army with
gladness, and offered the Governor Fish, Mantles, and other presents. The
Cacique came out of his Town half a League to meet the General, and spoke to
him in these terms.

Most High, most Mighty, and most illustrious Lord, may your Lorships coming be
happy. As soon as I was informed of your Lordships Power and great Qualities,
though upon your entry into my Country you killed my Subjects, and made them
slaves, nevertheless I resolved to conform my will to yours, and to approve
whatever you do, seeing I am wholly at your service; for I thought you must
have had just reason to do so, upon good considerations, which are hid from me,
but are known to your Lordship; since an evil may sometimes be permitted, for
avoiding a greater evil, and for obtaining a good. I am apt to think it will
prove so, because it would be to declare against reason, to be persuaded that
the Generosity of so excellent a Prince does allow him to consent to any
injustice. I have so little power to do your Lordship service, that unless you
have some respect to my Will, which is disposed to obey you in all things, I
can deserve but very little at your hands: But if it be reasonable that some
value should be put upon a sincere Will, accept of it with my Person, Country,
and Subjects, to be disposed of at your pleasure, since were I master of the
whole World, I could not have a greater inclination to receive and serve your
Lordship. Soto made answer to this discourse very civilly in few words, and
then they entered into a Conference, wherein the Cacique very obligingly offered
the Governor his house to lodge in; but he excused himself that he might keep
the peace, saying, That since the weather was fair and pleasant, he had rather
lie in a Camp. So the Camp was pitched under trees a quarter of a League from
the Town. The Cacique returned to the Town, and some time after came back with
several Indians singing; so soon as they came into the Governors presence,
they all fell to the ground, and the Cacique made a discourse to him, whereof I
shall only relate the substance and subject. They brought with them two blind
Indians, whom the Cacique presented before him; saying, That since he was the
Son of the Sun, and so powerful a Lord, he begged it of him as a singular
favor that he would cure those two blind men, who at that instant rose up, and
earnestly besought Soto to restore to them their sight. He told them that the
Master whom he served, and who was above in the Heaven which they saw, had
alone the power to cure them, and to grant them besides all that they demanded;
that he was the Lord who made the Heavens, the Earth, and Men, whom he had
formed according to his own Image and likeness: That he had been willing to
suffer death upon the Cross for the Salvation of Mankind, and that the third
day he rose again from the dead, having suffered death as man; but that as God
his Nature was immortal: That he had ascended up into Heaven, where his arms
were open to receive all those that applied themselves to him. He then
commanded a very high Cross to be made, which was set up in a rising place of
the Town, telling the Indians that the Christians rendered it honor in
remembrance of what JESUS CHRIST had suffered upon it for them. After the
Governor and all the Spaniards had rendered their respects before the Cross on
their knees, the Indians did the like; and Soto told them, that they should
continue to honor and adore it, and demand of that Lord who was in Heaven, all
that they might stand in need of. After that, Soto informed himself of the
Cacique how far it was from that Town to Pacaha; he told him that it was a days
journey, and that at the utmost bounds of his Country, there was a Lake which
made a kind of a Gulf in the great River into which it fell; adding, that he
would send Indians to build a Bridge for the passage of the Army. The day we
parted from Casqui we came to a Village of that Province, where we staid all
night, and next day we came to the Lake, which was rapid, deep, and half a
Cross-bow shot over. The Indians had made an end of the Bridge when the
Governor came: It was made of pieces of Timber in form of posts laid upon
trees driven into the Lake; and on the one hand they left a rank of stakes
which stood up higher than the Bridge for those that past to hold by. The
Cacique of Casqui came to us in this place with his Indians in Arms; and the
Governor sent an Indian to tell the Cacique of Pacaha, that though he was
Enemy to the Cacique of Casqui who was with him, yet if he would stay for our
coming in peace, he should have no injury done him; and that if he granted him
his friendship, he would treat him as his Brother. The Governors Messenger
brought back word, that the Cacique had with contempt rejected the Offers that
were made him, and that he fled with all his Subjects beyond the Town. Soto
took all his Horse to go and pursue them, and many of them were taken in a
Village a quarter of a League off. They were delivered into the hands of the
Indians of Casqui, who led them to the Town with much gladness, because they
were Enemies; but it vexed them exceedingly that they were not suffered to
massacre them. In this last habitation we found several Mantles, with the skins
of Stags, Lions, and Bears, besides a great many Cats skins: And seeing the
Soldiers were very ill clothed, they soon found the means of Apparrelling
themselves therewith. Of the Mantles they made closebodied Coats, Cassocks, and
also Waste-coats, which they lined with Cats skins as well as their upper
Coats; and the Stags skins they cut into Breeches, Doublets, and Shoes: the
Bears skins served to make good Cloaks, because no water pierced them. We found
also in that Town Bucklers of the raw hides of Cows, which the Troopers made
use of for their defense.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Cacique of Pacaha comes and offers his service: Casqui withdraws, but
comes again to excuse himself. The Governor makes them friends.

WEdnesday the Nineteenth of June the Governor entered the Town of Pacaha, and
lodged in the Cacique's house, which was very large, and fortified with a
Palissado and Turrets, wherein holes were made to shoot through. The Town was
provided with old Maes, the fields covered with green, and in the compass of a
League about the Town, there were a great many other very large ones, and all
fortified. The Town where we quartered had a great Lake near its enclosure, the
water whereof fell into a ditch drawn round the same close or sense, which
encompassed it almost all round: And the Indians had also made a Canal from the
great River to the Lake; by that means the River-fish came into it in great
plenty, and the Cacique usually diverted himself at fishing. What quantity
soever were taken, they were never missed, as we tried it with Nets that were
in the Town. Several Lakes thereabouts were every whit as well furnished, but
they were a softer kind of fish, than the fish that came from the River, and
nothing near so good: they all differed from the fish of Spain. The fish which
they call Bagres, is of an extraordinary shape; the head of it is one third of
its bulk, and about its sins and belly it has great bones as sharp as a
needle. Those which we took in the Lake were about the bigness of a large Pike;
but in the great River there were some that weighed from an hundred to an
hundred and fifty pound weight, of which many were catched with the Hook. There
are other fish that resemble a Barbel, and others again a Carp, with scales
like a Roach, but of a color somewhat browner; these they esteemed most. We
caught another sort of fish also, called Pexe-palla, the Palat-fish; the head
of it is covered with a kind of an elbow-hood, the upper point whereof is
shaped like a Palet or Lingel; others again resemble the Alose, and all had
scales except the Bagres and Palat-fish. The Indians sometimes caught fish as
big as a hog, which they called Pexe perco, and had several ranks of teeth
above and below. The Cacique of Casqui sent the Governor Presents often, and
told him one day that he would deliver up to him the Cacique of Patacha. He
went to Casqui, from whence he sent up a great many Canoes by water, and came
himself by land attended by several of his Subjects. Soto led them himself,
accompanied with forty Horse, and sixty Foot, to a place where the Indians in
the Canoes discovered Pacaha and his men, who were retreated into a little
Isle. Five Spaniards went in a Canoe under the Command of Don Antonio Osorio,
to view the Indians of Pacaha, and judge what number of men they mightbe: They
were about five or six thousand, who taking all those that came in the Canoes
for Spaniards, were so frighted that the Cacique and Indians, who were in three
Canoes, fled to the other side of the River, and the rest cast themselves into
the water with so much fear and precipitation, that though they could swim, yet
many of them were drowned, especially Women and Children. The Governor who was
on shore not knowing what happened on Don Antonio's side, put on board the Canoes
of Casqui Soldiers to go into the Island, where they arrived at the same time
Don Antonio did, and took several Indians, men and women, with a great deal of
booty. These Indians had loaded much of their Goods in Paniers of Canes upon
floats, to carry them to the other side; but fear making them forsake them, the
floats carried down by the current of the water, fell into the hands of
Casqui's men, who filled their Canoes with them; and fearing that the Spaniards
might take their booty from them, went away (with their Cacique) without taking
leave of the Governor. Soto was extremely incensed at that, and returned
immediately to Pacaha, from whence he made an incursion into the Territories of
Casqui, and took twenty or thirty Indians; having done so, he returned to the
Town, because the horses were quite weary, but with a resolution to go and
attack Casqui within four days. He set at liberty a Subject of Pacaha, and sent
him to tell his Cacique, that he desired to be his friend, that he should come
to him, and that they should go together and make War against Casqui. Pacaha
immediately sent back several Indians, who brought one with them whom they
called the Cacique; but the cheat was discovered by one of Pacaha's Brothers
who was Prisoner. The Governor told these Indians that they should bring their
Master, since he knew very well that he who usurped his Name was not, and that
no resolution could be taken, unless they took their measures together. So that
the Cacique came accompanied with many of his Subjects, and made the usual
Present to the Governor: This he seconded by a very fine discourse, which he
concluded, That though his Lordship had done him so many injuries in wasting
his Country, and killing his Subjects, without any provocation ever given by
him, yet he could not forbear to be his most humble Servant. Soto set his
Brother and the most considerable of his Subjects at liberty; and the same day
the Cacique of Casqui sent an Indian to assure the Governor, that his Master
would come next day and beg his pardon for the fault he had committed in
retiring without his leave. To which he made answer, That if the Cacique did
not come in person, he himself would fetch him, and punish him as he deserved.
Casqui failed not to come, and began with a present of Mantles, Skins, and
Fish, besides one of his Daughters whom he offered to Soto, saying that it was
his greatest ambition to Allie his Blood with so great a Lord, and that for
that end he had brought his Daughter, whom he prayed him to take for Wife;
thereupon he made a very long and judicious speech, full of the praises of the
Governor, and concluded by begging his pardon for the sake of that Cross which
he had left, in that he had gone away without his orders, being ashamed at what
his Subjects had done without his consent. Soto answered that he had chosen a
very good Patron; and that if he had not come to excuse himself, he resolved to
have gone and put him, his Subjects, and Country, to fire and sword. To which
the Indian replied: My Lord, I and my Subjects are yours, and my Country
belongs to you, in doing so then you would have destroyed your own Country, and
killed your Subjects; as for my self, I am ready to accept of any thing from
your hands, whether it be punishment or favor: What I have already received
from you in leaving me the Cross, is the greatest benefit that can be bestowed,
and much above my deserts: for all our Maes had been burnt up by an
extraordinary drought, had not I and my Subjects on our knees before the Cross
prayed for Rain, whereupon our misery presently ceased. The Governor after
that, resolved to put an end to the differences that were betwixt him and
Pacaha, and made them both dine with him. The two Cacique's had a new contest,
which of them should take the Governors right hand; but he agreed them,
saying. That amongst Christians there was no distinction made betwixt the right
and left hand, as to the place of honor, that they should do the like, seeing
they were with him, and that every one should take his place as it fell. In the
mean time he sent thirty Horse and fifty Foot-Souldiers toward the Province of
Caluca, to find out a way from thence into the Province of Chisca, where the
Indians had told him there were Copper-Mines, and Mines of that Metal which
resembled Gold. These Soldiers marched seven days through a desert Country,
and returned quite spent, having eaten nothing but green Plums and Maes in the
blade, which they had found in a wretched Habitation of seven or eight houses.
And indeed the Indians told the Governor, that farther Northwards the Country
was for the most part unpeopled because of the cold; and that the Cows were in
so great numbers, that the people could not preserve their Corn for them, but
that they lived on the flesh of those beasts. Soto finding that that Northern
Country was so barren and poor, asked the Indians whereabouts he might find a
well-peopled Country; and they told him, that they had knowledge of a great
Province toward the South, called Quigate, which was abundantly furnished with
all sorts of Provisions.

CHAP. XXV.
Soto goes in search of the Province of Quigate, from whence he goes to
Caligoa, and thence to Cayas.

THe Army lay in Quarters of refreshment for the space of forty days at Pacaha,
where the two Caciques strove who should make most Presents to the Governor.
When he was about to depart, Pacaha gave him his two Sisters, saying. That they
were the pledges of his Affection, and that he prayed him to marry them, to the
end he might always think of him: The one was called Macanoche, and the other
Mochifa, both handsome and well shaped, especially Macanoche, who had very good
features, a pleasan^ countenance, and a majestic air; the other was somewhat
more unpolished. The Cacique of Casqui caused the Bridge to be repaired, and
the Army returned through its Country to its former Camp, near the Cacique's
Town, who brought from thence plenty of fish, and two Indian women, whom he
trucked for a couple of shirts: From thence we parted and passed by two other
Towns of the Province of Casqui; and seeing the last lay upon a River, he sent
for Canoes to carry us over, and having taken leave of Soto there, returned
home. From thence we marched toward Quigate, where we arrived the Fourth of
August; the Cacique sent a Present of Mantles and Skins, but durst not tarry in
his Town. This was the greatest Town that we had seen in all Florida, insomuch
that the Governor and all his people took up but one half of it: But Soto
knowing that the Indians dealt not sincerely, he caused the other half to be
burnt, for fear it might serve the Enemies for an entrenchment, from whence
they might anoy us under cover; and gave the horse orders to be in a readiness
to beat them off in case of an attack. At length an Indian came to the Town
very well accompanied, and gave it out that he was the Cacique; which obliged
the Governor to set guards over him to observe him. In the mean time, many
Indians brought Mantles and Skins; but when they found no opportunity of
putting their bad designs in execution, the Mock- Cacique coming one day with
the Governor out of his house, ran away so swiftly, that no Christian was able
to overtake him, and threw himself into a River which he swam over, whilst a
great many Indians on the other side shot at our men, and made terrible shouts.
The Governor immediately crossed the River to charge them, but they staid not
for his coming; and as he was in pursuit of them, he found a Town abandoned,
and a little farther a Lake which the Horse could not pass. Several Indian
women appeared on the other side of the Lake, which made the Governor send
over the Foot, who took these women and a great deal of Baggage. Soto returned
to the Camp, where the same night the Scouts took a Spy; the Governor asked
him if he could guide him to the place where the Cacique was gone, and the
Indian promised to do it: Whereupon Soto took thirty Horse, and fifty Foot, and
marched to find the Cacique; after a day and a halfs march a Soldier met him
in a very thick Wood, and not knowing him, cut him in the head with a sword,
which made the poor Indian cry out that he was the Cacique, and begged that
they would not kill him; so he was taken, with an hundred and forty of his
Subjects, whom Soto brought to Quigate, where he told the Cacique that he must
send for Indians to serve the Christians: But having expected some days, and
none coming, he sent out two Captains with Horse and Foot along the two sides
of the River, who took several Indians men and women. They found thenthat they
could get nothing by their Rebellion but loss; so they submitted to the
Governor, and came to receive his orders, bringing with them Mantles and Fish.
The Cacique and his two Wives were kept under a guard of Halbardiers in the
Governor's house, whilst Soto informed himself daily of the nature of the
Country whither he intended to march the Army; and he learnt of the Cacique
that going down the River toward the South, the Country was very populous, and
governed by very powerful Caciques; and that toward the North-West was the
Province of Caligoa at the foot of the mountains. The Governor and all the
principal Officers, imagining that we should find a Country beyond these
mountains of another quality than that where they were, and which might produce
Gold or Silver, resolved to go to Coligoa. Quigate as well as Casqui and Pacaha
lie in a flat Country, of a sat and fruitful soil, and amongst little Rivers
that form fields, where the Inhabitants sow a great deal of Maes; from
Tascaluca to the great River, we reckoned three hundred Leagues, and all that
Country is low, full of Lakes and Swamps; and from Pacaha to Quigate it is six
score Leagues. Soto left the Cacique of this last Province in his Town, and
marched under the conduct of an Indian, that led us for seven days through a
desert Country continually across the Woods, where no way was to be found; but
that which incommoded us most, was, that that Country was in a manner nothing
but a Marish, where we were obliged to sleep amidst water. It was indeed very
low, and so full of fish, that we killed them with our sticks; and when our
Indian slaves stirred only the water and made it muddy, they came up to the
brim as if they had been giddy and stunned, so that they took as many as they
pleased with their hands. The people of Coligoa had no intelligence of our
march, and were so surprised to see us in the first Town, that they threw
themselves in a crowd into a little River that past by that Habitation; but
seeing the Christians came on both the sides, many of them were taken with
their Wives, and the Cacique himself. Three days after, the chief of his
Subjects came to wait on the Governor, with Mantles, Stags skins, and Cows
hides, which they presented him with: They told us, that five or six Leagues
from thence Northwards, there were great herds of these Cows, but that the
Country was not much inhabited because of the cold; and that they knew no
Province more plentiful and better peopled than that of Cayas toward the
South. From Quigate to Coligoa it is almost forty Leagues, and this last Town
lies at the foot of a mountain, and upon a River as big as the River of Coya in
Estramadura; the Soil is fat, and bears so great plenty of Maes, that they are
fain to throw away the old that they may have-store room for the new; it
likewise produces Pease or small Beans, and Cucumbers bigger and better than
those of Spain, and which being roasted on the hearth, taste like Chestnuts.
The Cacique of Coligoa gave us a Guide to conduct us to Cayas, and abode still
in his Town. We marched five days to Palisema, where the Cacique's house was
hung with Bucks skins, so well died and wrought, that one would have taken them
for good Tapistry, the floor also being covered with the same: The Cacique left
all the furniture to accommodate the Governor, and to show that he was
inclined to peace; nevertheless he durst not stay for us himself, which obliged
Soto to send a Captain in search of him. He met with a great many Indians, but
it being a rough Country, could not apprehend any but women and children.
Seeing there were but a few separated Habitations there, the Army made no long
stay, but advanced to Tafalicoya: Soto took the Cacique of this Town to serve
him for a Guide toward the Province of Cayas, which was four days journey
distant. When he came there, and found the Habitations at a distance one from
another in the Country, the Cacique having assured him that it was a very
populous Country, he imagined that he had put a trick upon him; he threatened
him sharply, asking what place they were in; but the Cacique and all the
Indians affirmed constantly that we were in the Province of Cayas, that that
was the best and most populous Town of all the Province; and that though the
Habitations were scattered in that manner, yet there were many Inhabitants, and
large fields sowed with Maes. That Town was called Tanico, and we encamped in
the pleasantest place on the Riverside; the Governor advanced a League
farther with his Horse, and met with no Indians, but a great many Skins which
the Cacique had left as a sign that he was not our Enemy, for that is the custom
in that Country.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Governor goes to see the Province of Tulla; what happens to him upon the
way.

THe Army rested a Month in the Province of Cayas; during which time our horses
grew so fat, that they never were in so good case since the beginning of our
Expedition: The Maes there being excellent good, and the straw better, they eat
a great deal of it without any danger; but the water of a Lake contributed also
much to the fatning of them, which was so good and wholesome, that they could
not get their bellies full on it, and fatned them to the eye. We had had no Salt
till we came to that place, where a great deal was made, and where the
Soldiers did not forget to make Provision: Indians trade in it with their
Neighbors, and barter it for Mantles and Skins. They make it in cakes along
the Riverside, which leaves a great deal upon the sand when it overflows; and
seeing they cannot make these cakes so long as it is mixed with the sand, they
put altogether into baskets that are made for the purpose wide above and narrow
below, which they hang in the air upon a pole, and throw water upon the sand
that drops down into a vessel set under the basket, which afterward they boil;
and the water being evaporated, the Salt remains at the bottom of the pot.
There was a great deal of Maes sowed in the fields upon the sides of the River:
But the Indians were afraid to appear; at length some ventured to come near the
Camp, and were called to by the Soldiers, which gave them the boldness to
cross the River, and come to see the Governor attended by his Soldiers. Soto
asked them news of their Cacique; they told him that he desired to live in
peace with him, but that he was afraid to present himself. The Governor sent
him word that he might come securely, and that if he would show himself to be
his friend, he should give him Guides and an Interpreter; otherwise that he
would come and find him out, which would be to his ruin. Soto waited three
days for his Answer, and seeing he came not, he went himself and took him with
an hundred and fifty of his Subjects: Soto put the ordinary questions to him,
If he knew of any good Country, and any great Lord? The Indian made answer,
That the best Country thereabouts was the Province of Tulla, a day and a halfs
journey distant toward the South; that he would give him a Guide to conduct
him, but that he could not furnish him with an Interpreter, because the
Language of the Indians of Tulla differed much from the Language of his
Subjects; and that seeing his Predecessors and he had always been in War with
the Caciques of that Province, they had no communication together, and
understood not one another. Upon that information, the Governor set out with
some Horse and fifty Foot-souldiers, to see if he could pass through Tulla with
the Army; but so soon as they had intelligence of his march, the whole Country
rose; and when fifteen or twenty Indians were got together, they set upon the
Governor; but being paid off by the Horse, they got up to the roof of the
houses, shooting Arrows from thence; and though they were driven from one post,
yet they got upon another, and attacked the Spaniards on all hands That way of
fighting lasted so long, that the horses could not make one step forwards: they
killed one, and wounded some Christians, leaving fifteen of their own upon the
place. We could not take any but about forty women and children; for the
Indians that fought had no quarter given them, if they were taken: But the
Governor fearing they might gather together in greater bodies, resolved to
come back to the Camp at Cayas, and parted at night, keeping off of the
highway that he might disappoint the Indians. Next day he came to the Camp,
where he staid three days, and then with all the Army set out upon his march to
Tulla. He took the Cacique along with him; but amongst all his Subjects there
was not one to be found who understood the Language of the Indians of Tulla.
After three days march we came to a Town abandoned; in the mean time, as soon
as the Indians knew that we were entered into their Country, they came to attack
us a little before day, in two bodies, and armed with Arrows and Poles after
the manner of Pikes. So soon as they were discovered, we betook our selves to
our Arms, and broke out upon them, to the loss of a great many men on their
side, and only a few Soldiers and Horses wounded on ours. Soto chose out six
of the chief Indians from amongst the Prisoners whom he had taken, and having
caused their right hand and n^se to be cut off, he sent them back to the
Cacique to tell him. That if he obeyed not his Orders, he would find him out,
and use him and all his after the same manner; which he made them comprehend by
signs the best way he could for (...) of a^ Interpreter. Before three days
(...) over, an Indian laden with Cow-hides, came and cast himself at the
Governors feet, weeping, and showing all the signs of an extreme sorrow. Soto
took him up, and the Indian made a long discourse which no body understood:
They made him conceive by signs, that the Governor would have the Cacique to
come, and that he should bring with him an Interpreter who understood the
Language of the Indians of Cayas. Next day three Indians more loaded as the
first was came to the Camp, and three days after twenty others, amongst whom
there was one who understood the Language of Cayas. He made a long discourse
full of reasons to excuse the Cacique, and expressions in praise of the
Governor, and concluded with a protestation, that he and all the other Indians
were come on behalf of the Cacique to receive the Governors Commands, and
promise him Obedience. Nothing rejoiced Soto and all the Spaniards more than
that Interpreter, seeing without knowing the Language, it was very difficult to
proceed any farther in Florida. Soto ordered him to be kept with a great deal
of care, and told the other Indians that they might return to their Cacique,
and assure him that he pardoned all that was past, and that he took his
Presents and Interpreter very kindly; that he would be very glad to see him,
and that he might come next day. At length the Cacique came, attended by
fourscore Indians, who all entered the Camp weeping bitterly, as a sign of their
repentance and submission, according to the custom of that Country. They
brought with them a considerable Present of several Cows hides, which were very
convenient against the cold in that Country, because they made a good furr, the
hair of them being as soft as sheeps-wool. These Cows are to be found in very
great numbers to the Northwards of this Province, but we saw none of them
alive, beause that Country is barren, and almost a desert. The Cacique of Tulla
made a speech to the Governor in his own excuse, and offered him his Person
and all that he possessed. And here it is to be observed, that this Cacique and
all the rest, as also all their Envoys, expressed themselves in their own
Language, as elegantly as the most polite Orator could do in his.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Governor goes from Tulla to Autiamque, where he spends the Winter-Quarter.

SOto having enquired into the nature of the Countries about Tulla, was
informed that the Country to the West had nothing but separate Habitations; but
that betwixt East and South, he would meet with large Towns, especially in the
Province of Autiamque, ten days journey distant from Tulla, which might make
about fourscore Leagues, and that that Country was extraordinary fruitful in
Maes. Seeing Winter drew on, and that the rain and snow would hinder our march
for two or three Months, the Governor was apprehensive that we could hardly
find provisions in these Habitations so remote from one another; and besides,
the Indians said that near to Autiamque they saw a great Lake, and according as
they talked of it, we had ground to believe it might be an arm of the Sea. The
Governor was very desirous to send advice to Cuba, and to get from thence a
supply of men and horses, because it was already three years that neither his
Wife nor any body else had heard what was become of him; nay besides, he had
already lost two hundred and fifty of his Soldiers, and an hundred and forty
Horses: All these reasons concurring, made him determine to pitch upon the
Province of Autiamque for his Winter Quarters, and to search for some Seaport
in the Sp^ng: His design was to have two Brigantines built there, which he
would send one to Cuba and the other to New-Spain, to the end that if one of
them should miscarry, the other might carry news of him to one or the other of
these two Provinces. He hoped to make new Lev^es with the money that he had at
the Havana, and carry on his discoveries. Westwards, having not as yet
proceeded so far as those places where Cabesa de Vacca had been. He sent back
the two Caciques of Tulla and Cayas, and began his march toward the Province
of Autiamque: after five days traveling over very rough mountains, we found an
habitation called Quipana, where we could not take any Indians, the Country
being too close for the horse; however, that Village being seated amongst
mountains, we laid an Ambuscade, and caught two Indians: They told us that
Autiamque was six days journey off, and that to the South we would find another
Province called Guahate, very plentiful in Maes, and extremely well peopled.
But the Province of Autiamque being the nearest, Soto continued his march, and
came to the Town of Anoixi. A Captain marching in the front of the Army with
fifty Foot and thirty Horse, surprised the Indians, who expected no such thing
as the seeing of us there, and took a great many Prisoners of both Sexes: Two
days after, we found the Habitation of Catamaya, where we encamped without the
Town. Two Indians pretending to be sent from the Cacique, came to observe our
Countenance; and the Governor told them, that they should go and bid the
Cacique come to him, without any fear of violence; but they came back no more,
and we had no more news of them. The day following the Christians entered the
Town, which was forsaken by the Indians; there they took what Maes they stood
in need of, and without longer stay in that place, we went and past the night
in a Wood, that the next day we might reach Autiamque: In this Town we found a
great deal of Maes in Granaries, small Beans, Nuts, and Prunes, and all in
great plenty; and we took some Indians that had staid to pack up their Baggage,
for the women were already conveyed away to places of security: That Is a
Champion Country, and very well peopled. The Governor pitched the Camp in the
place most inhabited, but at a distance from the houses, to avoid the fire that
the Indians might put to them, and ordered it to be fortified with a Palissado
of Wood: The ground was measured out by paces, that every one might work in
that fortification according to the number of slaves he had; the Indians
brought the Timber, and the enclosure was finished in three days with high and
great piles of Wood driven deep into the ground, and fastened with good cross
pieces. The River of Cayas past by this Town, which was very large. Some
Indians came from the Cacique bringing Mantles and Hides; and another lame
Cacique of the Town of Tieriquaque, and Vassal to Autiamque, frequently visited
the Governor, giving him many presents; however, the Cacique of Autiamque
appeared not, but only sent to know of Soto how long he intended to sojourn in
that place: When he came to understand that he was to be his guest, for above
three days he sent him no more Indians nor Presents, and was the cause also
that the lame Cacique withdrew for good and all. Several parties were sent out,
who took a great many Indians of both Sexes, and amongst the rest the lame
Cacique; but the Governor having respect to the services which he had rendered
him, only checked him a little, and then gave him his liberty, ordering him two
Indians to carry him home upon their shoulders. Autiamque, whose sole design
was to drive us out of his Country, sent out several Spies, one of which coming
in the nightime to the gate of the Camp, was discovered by the Sentinel, who
gave him a thrust with his Sword that made him fall; he was brought to the
Governor, but expired before any thing could be got out of him. The night
following, Soto being willing to keep his men in a readiness, caused a false
allarm to be given by a Soldier, who cried that he saw the Indians. He had
made use of this stratagem in other places, when he observed any negligence in
the guards, or in those that were out upon duty: and he very severely chid
those who delayed to come to their Colors; so that all strove who should be
first at their duty. We staid three months at Autiamque, having plenty of
provisions, as Maes, small Beans, Nuts, dried Prunes, and Rabbets, which we had
not as yet learned the way of catching, till we came to this place, where the
Indians showed us how they took them in snares; and this was by a small string
with a running noose fastened to a stick in the ground, into which the Rabbet
running its head, hanged it self by the neck; and that it might not gnaw the
string, it was put through a little cane. A great many were taken so among the
green Maes, especially when it froze and snowed. The snow kept us a whole month
within the Town, so that we could not go abroad: But seeing we began to be in
want of wood, the Governor with all the horsemen mounted on horseback, and
riding often to and again, pathed a way to a Wood distant from the Camp two
Cross-bow-shot, whither the Foot went and cut fuel. In the mean time, our
Indians who had their chains taken off, catched Rabbets in their Snares, or
shot them with their Arrows. There were two sorts of these Rabbets, some like
those of Spain, and others which were indeed of the same shape, and had the
same kind of wool, but they were as strong and bigger than Hares, nay thicker
and fatter too.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Soto leaves Autiamque, and goes to Nilco, and from thence to Guachoya.

WE left our Camp at Autiamque on Wednesday the Sixth of March, 1542. The
Governor had a mind to go to Nilco, which according to the relation of the
Indians, stood on the side of a great River; and his design was to fall down to
the Sea, and expect the recruits that he had sent for; for he had no more than
three hundred Soldiers remaining, and forty Horse, whereof some were lame, and
good for nothing but to make a show in a Squadron; for above a year they had
gone without shoes for want of Iron, but being accustomed to it, and marching
upon soft ground, that did not much incommode them. John Ortiz died at
Autiamque, which extremely grieved the Governor; because having lost so good
an Interpreter, he was afraid that he might engage himself in some Country
where he and all his men might be lost, and the rather that now he had no other
Interpreter but a young Indian of Cutifachiqui, who understood a little
Spanish: The loss of Ortiz was a great cross to his designs, for it required
sometimes a whole day before that young Indian could explain what the other
would have done in four words, and very often also this last took what was said
to him in a quite contrary sense, so that it happened after a whole days march,
that we were forced to spend two days in coming back the same way again, or in
wandering in the Woods, not knowing whither we went. After our departure from
Autiamque, Soto made us tarry ten days in the Province of Ayays, where we found
a Town upon that River which passes by Cayas and Autiamque; Soto ordered a Boat
to be made to carry us over the River, and we were forced after we were got
over, to stay four days longer, because of snow and bad weather. The Army
marched afterward three days through swamps and such broken ways, by reason
the Country is very low, that the Troopers themselves were many times up to the
knees in water, and always to the stirrup, besides several places that they
were forced to swim over. At length we came to the Town of Tultelpina, which
was forsaken by the Indians, and no provisions left. A Lake that discharged it
self into the River that passed by that Town; and it being very high, and
running impetuously, a Captain and five Soldiers who ventured to cross over by
the Gonours order, were overset in their Canoe; some stuck to the Canoe, and
others to the trees that were in the Lake; but Francis Bastien was drowned, no
body being able to help him. He was a Gentlemen of Quality born in Villeneuve
of Barcareta. In the mean time Soto sought out a way along the sides of the
Lake, but to no purpose; so that he came back to the Town, whither two Indians
came, and taught him the means how to get over the Lake. We made rafts of
Canes, and of the wood the houses were built of, for crossing the Lake; and
being over, after three days march we came to Tianto, which is the first Town
of the Province of Nilco; there we took thirty Indians, and among the rest, two
of the greatest note. The Governor sent before two Captains with Horse and
Foot, to hinder those of Nilco from carrying away the Provisions out of their
Habitations; and they past by four great Towns, before they came to that where
the Cacique had his Residence, though it was but two Leagues from the Camp
where we were. Upon their coming they found the Indians in Arms as if they
prepared to fight; nevertheless, when they perceived that the Christians came
marching up very fiercely toward them, they set fire to the Cacique's house,
and fled away over a Lake near to the Town: the day following, being Wednesday
the Fifteenth of March, Soto came to Nilco with the rest of the Army, which he
quartered in the Town. That Country, which is very even, is so populous, that
in the compass of a League about this Town, there are a great many very large
Villages full of Maes, small Beans, Nuts, and Prunes; so that except Cosa and
Palache, it was the most fruitful and populous Country that we had hitherto
found in Florida. An Indian attended by some others came to wait on the
Governor in name of the Cacique, and presented him with a Mantle of
Martin-skins, and a string of large Pearls; and Soto requited him with a Collar
of Mother of Pearl, which is much esteemed by the Indians of Peru, and some
other trifles, wherewith the Indian seemed much satisfied. He came back two
days after, but from that time forward we saw no more of him; on the contrary
the Indians came in the nightime, and carried away the Maes in their Canoes,
which they conveyed into Hovels built in a very thick wood on the other side of
the River. The Governor seeing that the Indian came no more, as he promised,
laid an Ambuscade near to some Granaries of Maes close by the Lake, where the
Indians came to steal the Corn; two were taken, who told us that the Indian who
came to the Camp was not the Cacique, but a Spy whom he had sent to discover
our force, and to learn whether Soto had a design to make any stay in his
Country, or if he intended to advance farther in. Immediately the Governor
commanded out a Captain to cross the River; but as the Indians perceived us in
our passage, they forsook their Hovels, so that we could take but twelve, who
were brought to the Camp. The same River that passes by Nilco, runs by Cayas
and Autiamque, and it discharges it self into the great River that runs by
Pacaha and Aquixo; they join near to Guachoya, the Cacique whereof came up the
River to Nilco to make War with the Indians of that Country: This Cacique sent
an Indian to the Governor to offer him his service, and to acquaint him that
within two days he would come and kiss his hand. He came at the appointed time,
accompanied with many Indians, and presented the Governor with Mantles and
Stag-skins, in very civil and submissive terms. Soto entertained him and showed
him much honor; but having asked him what Countries lay lower upon the River;
he made answer, That he knew no other Town but his own, but that on the other
side there was a Province governed by a Cacique called Quigaltan. After this
Conference, he took leave of Soto, and returned home to his own Country. Some
days after, the Governor resolved to go to Guachoya to know if the Sea was far
off, or if he might not find some habitations, where we might stay commodiously
till he had got the two Brigantines built, which he intended to send for
recruits. The Indians of Guachoya who were coming up the River in their Canoes,
perceived us passing it; and imagining that we had a design to attack them,
they returned and acquainted the Cacique, that the Spaniards were coming to his
Town. This put him into so great a fright, that in the nightime he carried
away all that he could, and fled with all his Subjects to the other side of the
great River. In the mean time Soto sent before a Captain with fifty Soldiers
in six Canoes, and kept on marching with the rest of his men: He arrived at
Guachoya the Seventeenth of April, and he lodged in the Town, which was fenced,
being a Cross-bow-shot from the River. In that place the great River is called
Tamaliseu; at Nilco, Tapatu; at Cosa, Mico, and at the Haven, that is to say,
it is mouth at the Sea, Ri.

CHAP. XXIX.
Which treats of a Message the Governor sent to Quigaltan; of the Answer he
received, and of what happened thereupon.

AS soon as the Governor was come to Guachoya, he commanded Danhusco to mount
up the River in Canoes, because he had observed on the other side Hovels lately
built. Danhusco returned from the Expedition with his Canoes loaded with Maes,
small Beans, Prunes, and Bread made of Prune-paste. The same day an Indian came
from the Cacique of Guachoya, to tell the Governor that his Master would come
next day. The truth is, we saw a great many Canoes coming down the little
River, which went ashore on the side of the great River opposite to where we
were; there the Indians held Council the space of an hour, to deliberate
whether they should come or not; at length all the Canoes came over to our
side. Guachoya was there with many of his Subjects, carrying Fish, Hides,
Mantles, and Dogs, which they brought along with them. They came to the Town,
where they offered all these Presents to the Governor, and the Cacique spoke
to him in these terms.

Potent and excellent Lord, I beg your Lordships pardon for the fault I
committed in withdrawing, and not waiting for you in this Town, that I might
receive and serve you; seeing the occasion of doing so, was, and it is still
more acceptable to me, than if I had obtained a great Victory. I was afraid
where there was no cause of fear, and therefore it was that I did which I ought
not to have done; but seeing precipitation always produces bad effects, and I
retired without knowing what I did: I am resolved not to follow the opinion of
Fools, which is to persevere in their error, but to imitate the wise who take
the best Council; I come to receive your Lordships Commands that I may serve
you to the utmost of my power. Soto having thanked him for his Presents and
Offers, asked him if he knew any thing of the Sea; the Cacique said, that he
knew nothing of it, nor of any other Habitation lower down the River, except
the Village of an Indian Vassal of his, and three days journey further down the
other side the Province of Quigaltan, the Cacique whereof was the greatest Lord
in all these Quarters. The Governor thought that Guachoya disguised the truth
to make him leave his Country, which obliged him to send out Danhusco with
eight Troopers to make discoveries down along the side of the River, and to
inform himself if the Sea was near. Danhusco was out eight days, and upon his
return told the Governor, That during all that time he could not make above
fifteen Leagues, because the River fetched great compasses into the Land in
several places, and that the rest of the Country was full of swamps and very
thick woods. Soto finding by that relation, that many obstacles withstood his
finding out the Sea; and considering that his men decreased in number daily,
without the hopes of any relief, gave so much way to these sad and melancholic
reflections, that he fell sick upon it; however, he sent an Indian to the
Cacique of Quigaltan, to tell him that he was the Son of the Sun, and that the
Caciques of all the Provinces through which he passed, had offered him their
services and obedience; that he asked his friendship, desired to have the
satisfaction of seeing him, and that he would send him some Present of what was
most esteemed in his Country, as a mark of his good will and submission.
Quigaltan sent him answer by the same Indian, That since he boasted himself to
be the Son of the Sun, he would take the pains to dry up that great River, and
then he should be ready to own him for such; that in the mean time it was not
his custom to visit any body, but that all his Neighbors visited him, and paid
him Tribute willingly or by force; so that if he had a mind to see him, he
should come over into his Country; that if he came as a friend, he should be
gladly received, or if he intended to make War, he would expect him in his
Town; and that neither he nor any man else should ever make him give an inch of
ground. When the Indian brought back that Answer, Soto was already a-bed sick
of a high Fever, which was increased by his vexing that he was not in a
condition to cross the River, and try to humble the Pride of that haughty
Indian, though is was a very great River, being half a League over, and
seventeen fathom deep, of a very rapid Current, many Indians on both sides; and
that, in fine, Cunning at that time was more useful to him than Force. The
Indians of Guachoya brought daily such quantities of fish, that the Town was
full of them. The Cacique gave notice to the Governor, that Quigaltan was to
come and attack him one night, which the Governor looked upon as a false
allarm, to oblige him to leave the Town; however, that he might not seem
negligent, he doubled his Guards, and ordered a good watch to be kept.
Quigaltan did not come, and the Governor talked of it to the Cacique, who made
answer, That he did come, but that his Lordship having put all things in so
good order, he was obliged to retreat. In the mean time, he daily importuned
Soto to pass the great River, telling him that he would give him Forces enough
to beat Quigaltan. The Governor assured him, that so soon as he were well, he
would go in person to that Expedition: But seeing many Indians came to our
Quarters, and that the Country was very populous; that besides, there were many
breaches in the Palissado, which, it was not fit, should be stopped, lest the
Indians might think we were in fear of them; Soto made all his Horse mount the
Guard every night, who were upon duty at the Gates with bridle in hand, and
from every Court of Guard two Troopers were sent out upon the Patroulle, and to
visit the out-Sentinels, whilst the Cross-bow-men kept guard upon the River in
Canoes, to hinder the Indians from assaulting us treacherously. The Governor
also, that he might make himself more terrible to the Indians, thought fit to
send a Captain to Nilco, whither those of Guachoya said the Inhabitants were
come back; that by the rigor of the punishment he should inflict upon them, he
might quell the boldness of both, if they resolved to attack him: For that
effect he chose Nuno de Touar with fifteen Horse, and John de Guzman who with
his Company was to go up the River in Canoes. The Cacique of Guachoya sent also
many Indians in Canoes to this Expedition. Touar marched by Land, and staid for
Guzman, who in the nightime came and landed two Leagues below Nilco. The
Horse advanced first, and about break of day found an Indian Sentinel, who
fled, giving the allarm with loud cries. Touar and his Horse fell on with so
great fury, that they mingled with the Indians before they could get out of the
Town. It lay in a Champion Country, and was at least a quarter of a League in
compass: It might contain betwixt five and six thousand Souls. And seeing the
poor wretches came running out of their houses in crowds, and pressed one
another on all hands, hardly a Trooper but found himself alone amidst a great
many Indians. The Captain gave orders that no quarters should be given to the
men; and their consternation was so great, that not one of them had the courage
to shoot an Arrow; so fearful were the cries of the Women and Children, that
they stunned even those who pursued them. Above a hundred were killed, and many
wounded with Lances, who were afterward let go to terrify the rest who were
not present at the rout. Some Christians were so cruel as to kill even old men
and children, who did not offer to make any resistance: But they who only
sought for opportunities to signalize themselves honorably, and who were known
to be brave men, made it their chief business to break the Indians who rallied,
by running them down with their Horses, and pricking them with Lances; and when
any women or children came in their way, they delivered them over to the Foot.
Those who to show their Courage showed themselves inhumane, were punished for
it by Almighty God, who suffered their crime to fall upon their own heads, if I
may say so, by the base actions which they committed in view of the whole Army,
on such occasions where Valor was seasonable, and at length by suffering them
to die miserably. There were about fourscore women and children taken, and a
great deal of booty: The Indians of Guachoya made a halt without the Town, and
peaceably beheld the success of the Attack, that they might see what became of
the Christians; but when they perceived that the Enemies were broken on all
hands, and what execution the Troopers did with their Lances, they ran to
pillage the houses; and having loaded their Canoes with plunder, fled back to
Guachoya before the Spaniards left Nilco; and related to their Cacique what
they had seen with no less dread than admiration.

CHAP. XXX.
The Death of the General Don Fernando de Soto; Louis Moscoso d'Alvarado is
chosen in his place.

THe Governor perceiving that his last hour drew nigh, sent for the Kings
Officers, with the most considerable of the Captains and Gentlemen; he told
them, that since he was going to render an account to God of what he had done
in this life, and that his Divine Goodness in taking him out of this world, did
him the grace to allow him his Senses to the last; though he was unworthy of
that mercy, yet he most humbly thanked the Almighty for it; that he
acknowledged he was exceedingly obliged to them all, as well present as absent,
for the affection and fidelity they had showed toward him, which he had proved
by all the misfortunes and pains they had so generously endured; that he had
always wished he might have been able to have showed them his gratitude, by
Rewards suitable to their Merit, had it pleased God to have settled him in a
more happy condition; that he begged them to pray to God for him, that through
his infinite mercy his sins might be forgiven, and his Soul received into
Glory; that they would take back the charge that they had given him, and which
he resigned up into their hands; and that they whom he might have offended
would be so good as to grant him the pardon which he begged of them; that to all
his other Prayers he added this one more, That they would in his presence choose
some Person of Quality that might be fit to Command them in his place to the
satisfaction of all; to the end they might prevent the divisions that after his
death might arise on that occasion; and that having chosen one, they would take
an Oath to obey him: That as that was the last favor he desired of them, so it
would be the most grateful unto him, seeing it would mitigate his grief and
trouble for leaving them in a barbarous and unknown Country. Balthazar de
Gallegos being desired by all the company to answer this Discourse, began by
motives of Consolation, representing to him the uncertainty and shortness of
the life of man; to what miseries it was exposed; and that the sooner we left
it, the greater was the mercy of God. He added many other edifying things, and
at length said, that since it pleased God to remove their General, though it
was a loss which they resented with extreme grief, yet it was but just, nay and
necessary, that he and all his should resign themselves up to his Divine Will:
That as to the Person whom he appointed them to choose for supplying his place,
they prayed his Lordship to name him himself* which immediately he did, naming
Louis Moscoso d'Alvarado his Captain General. That nomination was approved by
all, and they took an Oath to Moscoso. Next day, being the One and twentieth
day of May, the Magnanimous, Virtuous, and Valiant Captain, Don Fernando de
Soto, Governor of Cuba, and General of Florida, yielded his Soul to God. He
had the same fate as many other great men have had, whom Fortune only raises
high to make their fall the greater. He died at a time and in a Country where
his sorrow could receive but very little consolation; every one stood in need
of it for himself in the danger we were in of perishing in a Country which we
knew not; and seeing these were reflections that sufficiently took up the
thoughts of all, Soto had not all the assistance which was due to him, and
which we could have wished to have given him. Moscoso would have his Death
concealed from the Indians, because Don Fernando had always made them believe
that the Christians were immortal; and seeing they had a great opinion of his
Prudence and Valor, he wisely judged that his death might inspire into them
thoughts of revolting, though they appeared to be submissive; for it was good
to mistrust their natural levity and inconstancy. Besides, as the ignorance of
that Nation makes them receive for a truth whatever is beyond the reach of
their knowledge, the late General had persuaded them, that their most secret
designs were not hid from him, though they could not conceive how that should
be, and that his Image which he showed them in his Looking-glass, told him all
their thoughts: being persuaded of that, they durst not so much as think of
Rebellion. So soon as he was dead, Moscoso caused his Body to be put into a
house, where it lay three days; after which, it was buried in the nightime
near to one of the Gates within the Town. The Indians who had seen him in his
sickness, and now saw him no more, began to have strong suspicions of his
death; and when they passed by the place where he was interred, they curiously
looked upon the ground, which seemed to have been lately dug, and talked to one
another. This being told to Moscoso, he caused him to be deterred very
privately in the nightime, and a great deal of sand put into the Mantles
wherein he was wrapped; in this condition he was carried out in a Canoe to the
middle of the River, and there sunk to the bottom. In the mean time, the
Cacique of Guachoya daily asked news of Soto, whom he called his Lord and
Brother, desiring to know what was become of him. Moscoso told him that he was
gone about a little business up to Heaven, whither he was accustomed to go; and
being he was to make some short stay there, he had left him to Command in his
place. The Cacique making no doubt then but that he was dead, sent for two very
handsome young Indians, and told the Governor, that it was the custom of his
Country when any great Lord died, to put to death some persons to attend and
serve him on his Journey; that these young men presented themselves to render
that duty to his Lord and Brother, and that he might freely cause their heads
to be struck off. Moscoso made answer, That the Governor was not dead, but
that he was gone to Heaven; that among the Christians whom he Commanded he had
chosen those who were to attend him, that he prayed Guachoya to send home the
two Indians, and to renounce so damnable a custom. He set the Indians at
liberty upon the spot, and ordered them to return to their houses; but one of
them refused to do so, saying, that he would not serve a Master who had
condemned him to death without a cause, and that he would ever stick to him who
had saved his life. The Governor's Goods were sold at an Auction, consisting
in all in two Slaves and two Wives, three Horses, and seven hundred Hogs. The
Slaves and Horses were sold at three thousand Crowns a piece, to be paid at the
first discovery of Gold or Silver Mines, or at the first Plantation that the
Buyer should have if we settled in Florida; that if neither of these two cases
happened, the Buyer obliged himself to pay the Money within a year, and gave
Security, at least those who had no Estate in Spain did. The Hogs were sold in
the same manner for two hundred Crowns a piece: The truth is, they who had
Estates in Spain bought but little, or had it at a cheaper rate. From that time
forward most part of the Soldiers got Pigs, which they fed and eat of them on
all days but Fridays, Saturdays, and the Eves of Festivals, which they observed
according to the custom of Christians, a thing they could not practice before;
for sometimes the Soldiers wanting flesh for two or three Months together,
they eat meat when they could find it, without any distinction of days.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Governor Louis de Moscoso leaves Guachoya, and goes to Chaguate, and from
thence to Aguacay.

THe Death of Don Fernando was not received by the whole Army with the same
sense of sorrow; on the contrary some rejoiced at it, in hopes that the new
Governor, who was inclined to devotion, would choose rather to seek repose in
some Country inhabited by Christians, than to carry on the designs of Soto, in
making new Conquests with so much fatigue, whereof they were already disgusted
because of the small profit they had made. Council was held to deliberate what
was best to be done in that Juncture, and the Governor having taken exact
informa^on of the nature of the Country that was on all hands round us, he
learnt that the most populous was toward the West; and that going down the
River beyond Quigaltan, the Country was desert, and destitute of all sorts of
Provisions. He prayed all the Officers to give their Opinions (...) Writing,
and to sign them, that it might be decided whether we should follow the course
of the River, or cross into the Country: The general opinion was to march into
the Country toward the West, because New-Spain was on that side; and that a
Voyage by Sea was more uncertain and dangerous, insomuch that we could not
build a Vessel strong enough to weather a storm; that we had no Master, no
Pilot, no Compass nor Sea-Cart; that we were not very sure on what hand the Sea
was, and whether the River did not make great turnings, or had Falls from
Rocks, where the Vessel would be in danger of being lost. Some also who had
seen Sea-Maps, added, That according as they could judge by the Latitude they
were in, the Seacoast must be five hundred Leagues more or less distant from
the Coast of New Spain. That so though perhaps the necessity of getting
Provisions might make us ramble a little out of the way, as we went by land,
neverthless after we had marched all the Summer long, we might light upon some
Country inhabited, where we might spend the Winter commodiously; provided the
Army met with no great Desert that might hinder our passage* and that the
Summer following we should undoubtedly come to some Country inhabited by the
Spaniards; besides, that traveling by Land, we might perhaps find some Country
that would enrich us all. Though it was the Governors design to get out of
Florida as soon as possibly he could, yet he was obliged to conform to the
general opinion, because of the inconveniences that were represented to him to
be in a Sea-Voyage. So he left Guachoya on Monday the Fifth of June; the
Cacique gave him a Guide to go to Chaguate, and staid at home in his Town. We
passed through the Province of Catalte; and having crossed a desert Country, we
arrived at Chaguate the Twentieth of June. The Cacique of that Province had
been at Autiamque with the Governor Don Fernando, and made him a present of
Mantles, Skins, and Salt. In the mean time, one day before Moscoso arrived in
this Town, we missed a Spaniard who was sick, and believed that the Indians had
killed him: The Governor sent word to the Cacique that he should cause him to
be looked after and sent back to him, and that by his care and diligence
therein, he would judge of his Affection; otherwise, let him not imagine that
he could avoid the resentment of the Spaniards, who would pursue him and his
Subjects into all places, and set all his Country on fire. The Cacique came
immediately, bringing with him the sick Spaniard; and having made the Governor
a great Present of Mantles and Skins, he told him, that all the Treasures of
the World could not have obliged him to have had the thoughts that he was
suspected of; that no constraint was laid upon him to come and wait upon the
Governor his Father at Autiamque, and to offer him his services with so much
affection and fidelity, that he should so soon fail in the duty which he owed
to the goodness of Soto, without receiving any new injury; that no motive of
interest could ever blind him so far. But since it is our fate that Crosses
should succeed our Pleasures, Fortune thought fit to moderate the joy he had in
seeing him, by the trouble he felt to find him angry with him, whereas he hoped
to have done him service in bringing that sick Christian into his house to be
taken care of, and in restoring him to him safe and sound; that if that action
deserved a punishment, he would accept of it as a favor, being wholly devoted
to the obedience of his Commands. Moscoso made him answer, that since he was
not to be found in his Town, he could not forbear being vexed at him, thinking
that he had fled, as many other Caciques had done; but that the testimony he
gave of his affection and fidelity, obliged him now to love him as his Brother.
The Cacique wa^ on him to his Town, which was a days journey off: they passed
by a small habitation where the Indians were making of Salt, wherewith the
Christians provided themselves. They got it out of a Source like a
Fountainhead, which was near to that Village. We staid six days at Chaguate,
where the Governor informed himself of the nature of the Country that lay
Westward: They told him, that three days journey from thence, he would find the
Province of Aguacay: And the day we parted from Chaguate, Francis de Guzman,
natural Son to a Gentleman of Seville, fled to the Indians for fear of losing a
young Indian girl which he had and carried about with him, being apprehensive
that she would be taken from him to satisfy some debts that he had contracted
at play. The Governor heard nothing of this till after two days march, and
sent to the Cacique to have him searched after, and sent to him to Aguacay,
which the Indians neglected to do. The Cacique of Aguacay sent fifteen Indians
to meet Moscoso loaded with Mantles, Skins, Fish, and roasted Venison.
Wednesday the Fourth of July the Army arrived at his Town, and quartered there,
it being abandoned: The Governor sent out some parties, who took several
Indians of both Sexes; and in this place we came to hear of the South Sea. The
Indians made a great deal of Salt in this Town, which they formed into Cakes in
little square Earthen moulds, and prepared it in the same manner as those of
Cayas did.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Governor goes from Aguacay to Naguatex; what happened to him.

THe same day Moscoso parted from Aguacay, he lay at a little Village which
held of the Cacique of that Province; we encamped upon the banks of a salt
Lake, from which we had Salt the same Evening. Next morning we marched, and
spent the following night in a Wood that was not very thick, and from thence we
went to Pato: At length on the fourth day after our departure, we found the
first Habitation of the Province of May, where we took an Indian, who told us,
that from thence to Naguatex it was but a day and a halfs journey more, which
we made through a very populous Country. Saturday the Twentieth of July, the
Army encamped on the side of a very pleasant Wood, betwixt May and Naguatex.
Some Indians being observed to come and view us, Moscoso sent out a party of
Horse, who killed six of them, and made two prisoners that were brought in to
him: He asked them what they came to do, and they confessed that their design
was to discover what number of men he had, and the seat of his Camp; that it
was by order of their Master the Cacique of Naguatex, who was the same day to
come and attack him, being assisted by two other Caciques that accompanied him.
Whilst Moscoso was enquiring into the particulars of that Conspiracy, the
Indians divided into two Batalions appeared; who finding that they were
discovered, attacked us furiously in two places; but so soon as they saw we
made head against them vigorously, they turned their backs, leaving many of
their men upon the place. They were hotly pursued by all our Horse, who being
at a distance from the Camp, were attacked by two other Batalions which made a
kind of body of reserve, but they were as warmly received as the others were,
and had no greater cause to brag of their temerity. The Indians were put to the
flight, and the Christians rallied again, when of a sudden great cries were
heard about a Cross-bow shot from the Camp. Moscoso sent off twelve Horse to
know what the matter was; and they found six Spaniards, two on horseback and
four a foot, surrounded by a great many Indians, where the two Troopers did all
that could be expected of brave men in defending the four Foot-souldiers: They
had lost their way in pursuing the Indians who made the first attack, and
having rallied to return to the Camp, they fell into that company of Indians
who set upon them. Assistance coming in very good time, most of the Indians
were killed, and only one taken who was brought to the Camp. The Governor
asked him who they were that attacked us; he said it was the Cacique, of
Naguatex, the Cacique of May, and a third very powerful in Lands and Vassals,
who governed a Province called Hacanac; however, that Naguatex was the General.
Moscoso ordered his nose and right arm to be cut off, and sent him in that
condition to Naguatex to acquaint him that next day he would enter his Country
and put all to fire and sword, and that if he would defend it, he should meet
him at the entry into the Province. The Army rested that night in the same
place, and the day following went to a Village of Naguatex where the houses
were at great distance one from another. He asked where the Caciques Town was,
which was showed him on the other side of a River that run near that place: We
marched up to the River, and found the side opposite to us covered with Indians
in arms, who seemed to be resolved to dispute us the passage. Seeing the
Governor knew not the foard, and that he had men and horses wounded, he drew
back the Army to the Town which we left, resolving to rest there for some days,
that they might have time to be cured. So the Army encamped within a quarter of
a League of the River* (...) Town in a pretty clear wood of very lovely and
pleasant trees; and that place was pitched upon because the weather was very
fair and calm. Some Indians were taken, who told us that the River was
foardable at certain times, which obliged the Governor two days after to send
off two Captains with fifteen horse and some Indians a piece to search for a
foard, one up and the other down the River. The Indians appeared to defend the
passage in both places, nevertherless the two Captains passed over in spite of
the Enemies, and found on that side of the water a very populous Country, and
plentiful in Provisions; whereupon they came back and gave the Governor an
account of what they had done.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Cacique of Naguatex comes to wait on the Governor: He parts from
Naguatex, and arrives at Mandacao.

THe Governor sent an Indian to the Cacique of Naguatex to tell him, that if
he came and offered him his service, and showed his repentance for what was
past, he would pardon him; but if he failed, that the Governor would come and
punish him according as his Treachery deserved. Two days after, the Indian came
back, and told that the Cacique would come next day: Accordingly a great many
of the principal Subjects of Naguatex appeared, being sent by their Master to
observe the Governors looks, and the carriage of his men, that he might
thereupon take his resolution: They only told that the Cacique was coming, and
presently returned. The Cacique came two hours after very well accompanied, his
Indians marching in two Files, and making a lane for the Cacique to walk in the
middle. They all came weeping according to the custom of the Province of Tulla,
which is not far from thence to the Eastward. The Cacique made a low bow to the
Governor, and begged pardon for what he had done, the thought of which alone,
said he, deserved to be punished; he enlarged much in the Governors praise,
and in commendation of the Spaniards, whom he called immortal people, rejecting
the blame of all the enterprise upon the bad Counsels of one of his Brothers
who died in the Fight; he concluded with the offer of his service and
obedience. Moscoso answered, That he would pardon him what was past; and that
if he would for the future contain himself within the bounds of his duty, he
should consider him as his friend. Four days after, the Army decamped; but the
River was so swelled that we could not pass it, which extremely surprised us,
seeing it had not rained for above a month before, and that it was Summer too;
however, the Indians told us that it happened so sometimes without rain; this
made us judge that that extraordinary motion might come from the Sea flowing
into the River, because we were told that that swelling always happened in the
waxing of the Moon: in the mean time none of these Indians had the least
knowledge of the Sea. The Army marched back the same way to the Camp we left
and we were forced to stay eight days longer till the water was low enough to
let us pass: the Indians were careful to give us notice of that and having
crossed over to the other side, we went to a Town abandoned: The Governor
pitched the Camp in an open field, and sent for the Cacique to come to him and
give him a Guide; but he not obeying, Moscoso sent out two Captains with orders
to burn the Towns, and take all the Indians they should meet with. These orders
were strictly put in execution; the fire consumed a great deal of Provisions,
and several Prisoners were taken: Then was the Cacique sensible of the miseries
he drew upon himself through his obstinacy; he therefore sent six very
considerable Indians, with three Guides who understood the Language of the
Countries we were to pass through. So we left Naguatex, and at the end of three
days march, came to a little Village of five or six houses; it belonged to the
Cacique of Missobone, a barren and ill-peopled Country. When we had marched two
days longer, we perceived that our Guides led us out of the way, out of a
premediated and malicious design, changing our march from West to East, and
that they had left the highway and brought us into very thick woods: Moscoso
caused them to be hanged upon a tree, and took for Guide an Indian woman of
Missobone; she made us turn back again into the high way, and led us into as
poor and miserable a Country as that which we had left. That beggarly Province
was called Lacane; it hardly afforded us any thing but an Indian, who told us
that the Province of Mondacao was peopled and plentiful in Maes, and that the
Habitations separated from one another showed like mountains. We directed our
course that way, and the Cacique came out to meet us weeping, as a mark of his
submission; he presented the Governor with a considerable parcel of Fish, and
offered him his services. Moscoso treated him very civilly; and having
refreshed and made provision of Victuals, he took a Guide, and marched toward
the Province of Socatino.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The Governor leaves Mondacao, and goes to Socatino, and Guasco. The Army
marches through a desert Country, and returns to Nilco for fault of an
Interpreter and Guide.

AFter five days march the Governor found the Province of Aays, the
Inhabitants whereof had no knowledge of the Christians; but the people being
wild and savage, our entry into their Country caused a general rising. When
fifty or sixty of them were got together, they came and assaulted us in our
march, their numbers continually increasing; and we had no sooner fought one
company of them, but another began a new skirmish. This way of fighting lasted
a whole day, till we came up to one of their Towns. We had some Soldiers and
Horses wounded; but the wounds not being very dangerous, they followed the Army
still; however, we made a great slaughter of Indians. When the Governor parted
from this Town, the Indian who conducted us told him, that he was informed at
Mondacao, that the Indians of Socatino had seen other Christians. These news
extremely rejoiced the whole Army; for as men easily believe what they
passionately desire, we persuaded our selves that they might have been Forces
come out of New-Spain; that if that conjecture were true, we might leave
Florida when we had a mind to it, ^f we found nothing that might make us live
^appily there; and that fully dissipated all the ^ear we had of losing our
selves in some desert Country. In the mean while, that was the thing that the
Indian aimed at; for two days after, h^ ^ed us out of our way: Moscoso ordered
him to ^ave some stretches with a Rope, which is a kind ^f Rack; whereupon he
confessed that the Ca^ique of Mondacao his Master, had commanded ^im to ruin
us, as being his Enemies, and that ^e was obliged to obey the orders of his
Lord. The Governor caused him to be thrown to the ^ogs, which tore him to
pieces; and another ^uided us to Socatino: It was a very barren Country, where
we hardly found any Maes. Moscoso enquired if they had never had any news ^f
Christians, and the Indians assured us, that ^hey had heard say that they
marched to the ^outhward. That relation engaged us into a ^wenty days march
through a desolate and un^eopled Country, where we suffered incredible ^ardship
and misery; for the Indians buried in ^he woods that little Maes they had; and
the ^paniards were daily obliged after the fatigues of their march to rake in
the woods that they might find out somewhat to feed on. We came at length into
the Province of Guasco, where w^ found Maes, which we loaded on horses and
Indian slaves, to maintain us on our way to Nagisscoca. It was the first thing
the Governor did in all places to enquire about Christians; but the Indians
told him that they had never seen any but us. He caused them to be put to the
Rack, the torments whereof made them devise a story which was, that the
Christians had advanced as far as Nacanahez; but that they had gone back the
way they came; that was a place but two days journey distant. The Governor
hastened thither with all the Army, and at our coming we took some Indian women,
amongst whom there was one who said that she had seen Christians, and that she
had been their slave, but that she had made her escape. Immediately the
Governor sent out a Captain with fifteen horse the way that the Indian woman
directed, to see if he could find the tracts of horses, or any other mark. They
were not gone four Leagues when the woman that served them for a Guide, told
them that all she had said were mere lies; and we discovered that the other
relations which the Indians gave us concerning Christians, were of the same
nature. So we came to Guasco extremely perplexed, because the Country where we
then were was barren, and there were no other Habitations to the Westward. We
again questioned the Indians, who told us that ten days journey that way from
the place where we were, there was a River called Daycao, whither they went to
hunt Stags that fed along the banks of it; and that they had ^een on the other
side of that River, people whom ^hey knew not. We provided all the Maes that we
could rap and rake, and marched through a ^esart Country as far as that River:
Moscoso made ^en horse cross over it, who marched for some ^ime along the side
of it, till they came to a Ham^et of Indians, consisting of some pitiful
Cot^ages. At sight of the Troopers they fled, lea^ing behind them their
Baggage, which showed their misery and poverty; so great it was that in ^ll the
Hamlet they could not find half a bushel ^f Maes. The Troopers took two
Indians, and ^ame back to Moscoso, who waited for them on ^he other side. He
ordered these two Indians to ^e questioned, but there was not an Indian in the
Camp that could understand their Language. Then did the Governor assemble all
the Ca^tains to consult with them what they had to do; ^ost part advised him to
return back to Gua^hoya and the great River, because the Province ^f Nilco
abounded with Maes; saying, that we ^ight spend the Winter in that place, and
make ^rigantines to carry us down the River to the ^ea, where sailing along the
Coast we might get ^o New-Spain; that though the enterprise wanted not its
difficulties, as it has been already observed, yet it was our last refug^,
because it was impossible to travel by Land without an Interpreter; that they
believed the Country lying along the River of Daycao, was the same which Cabesa
de Vaca in his Relation says he passed through, and where the Indians were
erran^ as the Arabians are, without settling in one place (...) and that they
fed on Figs, the roots of Grass, and Venison: That supposing this conjecture to
be true if we engaged into that Country, we must infallibly perish for want of
food; that it was already the beginning of October, and that if we staid any
longer the Rains and Snow would hinder our return, an^ so we must perish and be
starved in that miserabl^ Country. Moscoso at that time had rather bee^ in a
place where his sleep might not be broken by continual allarms, than to be
Governor an^ Conqueror of a Country where misery an^ trouble beset him on all
hands; so that he ad^ hered to that advice, and gave orders to retur^ back the
way to Guachoya.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Army returns to Nilco, and at Minoya Vessels are made to carry them out of
Florida.

WHen the result of the Council of War was published in the Camp, many were
afflicted at that resolution; the way by Sea appeared to them to be no less
difficult and dangerous, than by Land, because all things necessary were
wanting, not only for building, but also for rigging out of Vessels; and they
had not yet lost all hopes of finding some Country rich enough to recompense
them for all their labors, because of what Cabesa de Vaca had told the
Emperor: and that was, that when he came into a Country where Cotton grew, he
had seen Gold, Silver, and precious Stones of extraordinary value. And it was
certain that we had not as yet gone so far in as those places where Cabesa had
been; for he had kept along the Coast, and we had advanced up into the Country
Westward: That we must needs find those places he spoke of, because he said in
his Relation, that he had marched for many days, and entered the Countries on
the North-side. Besides that, we had found some Cotton-Mantles, nay, and
T^rqueisses at Guasco; and the Indians made us signs, that they had those
things out of a Country Westward of them, and that that way led us also into
the Country of the Christians: But, in fine, in spite of all them murmurings
and frettings caused by this return; and though many had taken a resolution to
perish in Florida, rather than to leave it in a beggarly and miserable
condition, yet they wanted force to withstand what was determined, because the
Governor's opinion concurred with that of all the chief Officers; but some
time after one of the discontented said, That he would be glad to have one eye
put out, provided he could put out one of Moscoso's, since it would trouble him
extremely to see him happy. Moscoso and his Friends had a mind to have been
revenged for this discourse; but they durst not do it, because within two days
he was to quit his place. From Daycao where we were, to the great River, it is
a hundred and fifty Leagues, which we had marched all the way Westward. Our
return was extremely irksome, because the Country was ruined; and we had much
ado to find Victuals, seeing the Indians hid them. The Towns of Naguatez, which
to our sorrow we had burnt, were rebuilt, and the houses full of Maes; for it
is a very fruitful and populous Country. They make Earthen-ware there, which
differs little from that of Estremos or Montemor. When Moscoso came to
Chaguete, he found some Indians deputed by the Cacique, to tell him that the
Christian who had fled to his protection, would not come back. The Governor
wrote to him, and sent him paper, pen, and ink, that he might give him an
Answer. The Governor's Letter informed him of our resolution of leaving
Florida; that therefore as he was a Christian, he ought not to trust himself in
the power of the Indians, men without Faith and Religion; that he heartily
pardoned the fault which he had committed, provided he returned to the Army, or
signified in Writing whether or not he was detained by force. An Indian carried
the Letter to him, and came back again without other answer but the name Guzman
written on the margin of it, to let us know he was alive. Moscoso sent twelve
Horse in search of him; but seeing that he had Indian spies that informed him
of every thing, he hid himself so well that he could not be found. In the mean
time we were so pinched for want of Maes, that the Governor was obliged to be
gone without any farther search after him. We parted then from Chaguete, and
crossed the River to go to Aays, and from thence following the course of that
River, we found the Town of Cilano, which we had not seen before. At length we
came to Nilco; but we found so little Maes there, that there was not enough to
maintain the Soldiers during the time that was to be employed in building the
Vessels: The reason of that scarcity was, because we had been at Guachoya all
the seed-time; so that the Indians of Nilco, scared by the evils they had
endured, durst not come to sow their Lands: Besides, we knew of no other
Country but this where there was Maes, and it being very fruitful, we wholly
relied on it for our subsistence. We fell into a confusion that bordered upon
despair; most part of the Soldiers blamed the resolution that had been taken
in leaving Guasco, and not pursuing our discoveries by Land: They said that
there was no hopes of safety by Sea, unless God would be pleased to work
Miracles for them; for we had no Pilot, no Sea-Cart, and no body could tell at
what place the great River fell into the Ocean. We wanted Sails also, and every
thing that we could make them of; and though we had a little Enequen, which is
an Herb they make a kind of Flax of, yet it was hardly sufficient to cawlk the
Vessels; but we were wholly destitute of Pitch and Tar, and they could not be
made strong enough to resist the least storm without that, so that we must
perish without remedy. This brought into our minds the misfortune of Narvaez,
who was lost upon that Coast: But the most grievous inconvenience of all, was
the want of Maes, without which it was impossible to subsist, and without food
the Soldiers would not work. In this desolation we took the best course we
could, which was to recommend our selves to God, praying him to open some way
for us, to let us out of those miseries: He graciously heard our Prayers, and
permitted that the Indians of Nilco came very submissively, and told us that
two days journey from the place where we were, we should find upon the side of
the great River, two Towns which we had not as yet discovered; that was the
Country of Minoya; which was extraordinarily fruitful. The Indians added, that
they knew not then whether there was Maes there or not, because they were at
War with that people, and that they would be very glad to join with the
Spaniards and fight against them. Moscoso commanded out a Captain with some
Horse and Foot, and accompanied by the Forces of Nilco, they went to Minoya,
and found two great Towns distant from each other half a League, in an open
Champion Country; there they took several Indians, and found Maes in abundance.
The Captain fortified himself in one of the Towns, and sent advice to the
Governor of what he had done. Great was the joy all over the Camp, and
instantly we parted. It was the beginning of December, and that proved as hard
a march as any we had made since we left Cilano, because of the swamps we met
with, and of the rains that fell with a North wind, so that we were wet above
and below, and had great cause to give thanks to God, when we found a little
dry place to rest in at our journeys end. These fatigues killed all our Indian
Servants, and several Spaniards also after we arrived at Minoya, few of those
who survived escaping dangerous diseases, which degenerated into Lethargies:
That Country sickness was fatal to Andrew de Vasconcelos who died of it, and to
two other Portuguese of the City of Elvas who attended him; they were Brothers,
and went by the name of the Sotis. The Army quartered in the better of the two
Towns, which was senced with a Palissado, a quarter of a League from the great
River. Thither we brought all the Maes from the other Town, which amounted in
all to six thousand bushels. In this place we found the fittest Timber for
building of Vessels, that we had hitherto seen in all Florida, for which we all
thanked God as for a singular mercy, and some glimpse of hopes of getting once
more into a Christian Country began to appear among us.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Seven Brigantines are built; the Army departs from Minoya.

SO soon as our Quarters were settled at Minoya, the Governor ordered all the
Chains of the Indians who were in the Camp to be knocked off, and all the Iron
that was kept for a reserve, to be brought out: We set up a Forge for making
the Iron-work of the Vessels, and felled wood to build them of. A Portuguese of
Ceuta who being a slave at Fez had learned to saw, taught some Soldiers the
use of the Saw, and a Geneose whom God had purposely preserved to save us,
(for he alone knew the Art of building Ships, and had it not been for that man,
we had been still in Florida) that Geneose, I say, being assisted by four or
five Carpenters of Biscaye who prepared and fitted the Timber, undertook to
build Brigantines. Another Genoese, and a Catalonian of the County of Cerdagne
took care to cawlk them with that Herb I told you of, which resembles Hemp, and
is called Enequen; and when that failed them, they supplied the want with the
thread of Mantles, which they purposely undid, and mingled it with fat Earth.
We had with us a Cooper, but he was sick to extremity, and he being the only
man of his Trade that we had, we were obliged to wait till it pleased God to
restore him to his health; and though he was still very weak, yet fifteen days
before our departure he made two large Casks for each Brigantine, such as the
Seamen call Hogsheads. The Indians of Taguanate, which is a Province two days
journey from Nilco up the River, and those of Nilco also and Guachoya, seeing
that the Brigantines went forward, were persuaded that we made them for
carrying away their crop which they put into the water; nevertheless, they
still brought us Fish and Mantles; which the Governor exacted from them for
making of Sails. God was so gracious at that time, as to continue to us the
marks of his protection, by moving the Indians, to bring us in Mantles; for we
had no means left to go and fetch them, because in the beginning of Winter the
water had surrounded the Town, leaving but one League of dry Land around us; so
that we could not go out on horseback, and without that it was impossible to
reduce the Indians; for they were very numerous, and feared our foot so little,
that they made no scruple to fight them hand to hand either by land or by
water, because they are more dexterous in shooting, and nimbler than the
Christians, the ground also being more proper for their way of fighting. They
also brought some Ropes, of which we made Cables; and when those failed, we
made others of the rinds of Mulberry-trees. The Troopers made wooden stirrups,
and gave their Iron ones to make Anchors of. In March, though it had not rained
for above a month before, ^he River swelled so prodigiously, that it reached ^o
Nilco, which is nine Leagues off on it; and the ^ndians said that it spread as
far on the other ^ide. The Town where we were, stood on a ^eight; nevertheless,
in the highest places the ^ater reached the stirrups of a Trooper. We ^uilt
high sheads of great pieces of Timber cove^ed with boughs for stabling our
horses; and the ^ke was done in the houses. But these not hol^ing out the
water, we were obliged to get up ^o the Garrets, and never went out of doors
but ^n Canoes, or on horseback where the ground was high. We spent two Months
before the River returned into its Channel; in the mean time we kept a good
guard about our Brigantines, and no Indians were any more suffered to come ^ear
them in their Canoes: for the Governor ^egan to have some suspicions, not
without ground, that the Indians had a mind to rise; so that he ordered that
without any noise, one of those who came to the Town should be seized, and
^rought to him when all the rest were gone. The ^rders were put in execution;
and finding that ^he Indian would not confess any thing, he commanded him to be
rackt. Then the Indian confessed, that the Caciques of Nilco, Guachoya, an^
Taguante, accompanied with other Caciques t^ the number of twenty, had resolved
to attac^ the Camp with a very great Army; that t^ mask their Treachery, they
were to send him (...) great Present of Fish, three days before the Attack, and
another Present the same day they ha^ pitched upon for the Enterprise: That the
Indians who brought the Fish, combining wit^ those who served in the Camp, were
to set fire t^ the houses of the Town, having first made themselves Masters of
the Lances and other Arms tha^ stood before the Soldiers doors: That at the
sight of the fire, the Caciques, who were to be i^ ambush, would fall upon us
with all their men and surprise us in that disorder. The Governou^ ordered the
Indian to be kept in Chains, and o^ the day he pitched upon, thirty Indians
loade^ with Fish came to the Town. They were presently apprehended, and Moscoso
ordered the noses and right arms of all of them to be cut off, and in that
condition sent them back to Guachoya, whose Subjects they were, with orders to
tell him, that he and all his confederated Caciques might come; that he
impatiently expected them, and that he should know the Governor was informed
of all, even to his most secret thoughts. This example put them all into a
strange fright, so that Nilco and Taguante came with great submission to
justify themselves, and some days after Guachoya brought another Cacique a
Vassal of ^is, who had learnt of a certain, that Nilco and ^aguante had really
combined against the Chri^ians; whereupon Moscoso caused some of the ^ndians of
Nilco to be apprehended, who confessed ^he truth. They were delivered over to
this Cacique, who put them to death without the Town; and next day Moscoso
punished likewise ^ome Subjects of Taguante who also confessed the Treachery of
their Cacique, to whom he sent them home without nose or hands. This piece of
justice comforted and fully satisfied the Indians of Guachoya, and from that
time they came daily ^ringing with them Mantles, Fish, and Hogs, of which they
had got a breed by the Swine which ^tray'd when we passed through that Country
before. Nay, they egged on the Governor to make War with Taguante as soon as
the waters were fallen, and offered to accompany him and serve him as Guides.
He sent thither some Foot, whom the Indians carried down the River in their
Canoes, and a Captain with Horse by Land, who attacked the Town. They made a
great many Prisoners of both Sexes, and good booty of Mantles, which came very
seasonably considering the want we had of Sails. At length, in the Month of
June, the Brigantines were finished; and though the Indians had told us that
the great River overflowed: but once a year when the Snow melted, which had
already happened, and that it was then Summer, when no rain l^a fallen for a
very long time, yet it was the will (...) God. that it swelled again all of a
sudden at ne^ Moon, and, as I may say, came to find our Br^ gantines, which so
were very easily launched whereas had we been necessitated to carry the^
over-land, they would have been in danger (...) breaking, or bulging by the
Keel, or somewher^ else, the nails for want of Iron were so short, an^ the
planks so thin. The Indians of Minoya cam^ daily to serve us, not so much out
of inclination as necessity, that they might gain somewhat t^ live on; for the
Soldiers had seized all their Maes: And seeing their Country was very fruitful
in that, and that they made most of their food of it, they being so numerous
knew no^ what to get to eat. Those who came to the Town were so famished, that
they were reduce^ to skin and bones, and many died for mere wan^ The Governor
had severally discharged any Maes to be given to them; but the Christians
seeing that even the Hogs had their bellies full and that these poor Indians
who came and took so much pains to serve them, and whose extreme misery they
could not but pity, charitably gave them of the Maes they had; nevertheless,
through their charitableness we had not Maes enough to put on board for the use
of the Army. All that remained was put into the Brigantines, and twelve great
Canoes that were fastened two and two together. First we put on board two and
^wenty of the best Horses, and then killed all the ^est, whose flesh with that
of the Hogs were dried. ^o the Spaniards parted from Minoya, the second ^f
July, 1543.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The Indians of Quigaltan attack the Spaniards upon the River, and the success
of that Engagement.

ONE day before we went on board, it was resolved, that all the Indian Men and
Women, who followed the Army, should be dismissed, except an hundred, whom the
Governor allowed to be kept and Embarked. But there being a great many persons
of Quality, whom he durst not refuse what he granted to others, he was obliged
to come off with this Fetch; that every one might keep Indians so long as we
were upon the River, but that they must all be sent back when we come to the
Sea, because we had not Casks enough to hold fresh Water for so many people; In
the mean time he gave notice privately to his Friends, that they should retain
those whom they had, and carry them with them into New Spain: So they who were
in bad terms with him, and who were n^ a few, sent back about five hundred
Indians (...) all Age and Sex; amongst whom there we^ some young ones that
spoke and understoo^ Spanish already. For being ignorant of the Mystery which
time discovered to them afterward they thought it would be cruelty to take the^
along with them, and leave them so far from their own Country, in danger of
being mad^ Slaves by other Indians; and for the advantag^ of a few days
service to reward them so ill ^o all the services they had rendered them. Mo^
of these poor Indians went away weeping, which wrought a great deal of
compassion in us, seeing so many Souls lost without remedy, tha^ might have
been saved, by instructing them i^ the Christian Faith, which with all their
heart they would have received. The Spaniards wh^ parted from Minoya were in
all three hundre^ and twenty two, in seven Brigantines, pretty well built, save
that the Planks were a little to^ thin, because of the weakness of the Iron
work that they were not well caulked, and that they were open without any Deck.
Some board^ were laid across to serve for a Deck, that the Seamen might have
convenience to Sail and work the Vessel; and that the Soldiers also might walk
and take the air. Moscoso appointed a Captain for every Brigantine, and made
them take an Oath to obey him, till we were come into a Christian Country. He
chose the best of all for himself, and so we fell down to Guachoya. The Indians
expected us there in their Canoes, and had made a kind of a Hall covered with
branches of Trees, where they entreated the Governor to come a shore and
refresh himself; but he excused himself, and continued his course. The Indians
waited upon us in their Canoes as far as a branch of the River, which broke off
to the right hand. They told Moscoso that the Province of Quigaltan was not far
from thence, and they pressed much to land and make War against that Cacique,
promising to assist us with all their force; but seeing they had told us before
that that Province was three days Journey distant, the Governor thought they
had a mind to betray him, and therefore dismissed them. So we continued our
course by the largest branch of the River, which run very swift, making way
a-pace with our Oars. The first day we put a-shoar into a Wood by the River
side, on the left hand, and when night came, we Embarked again. Next day we
landed near a Town which the Indians abandoned. There we took a Woman, who told
us that the Town belonged to a Cacique called Nuhasene, a Vassal of Quigaltans,
and that Quigaltan expected us with great Forces. Moscoso sent some Horse down
along the River side, who found great quantity of Maes in some Houses, whither
the whole Army went, and tarried a day, to put on board the Maes which we
wanted very much. Whilst we were still in that Post, we saw several Canoe^ with
Indians in them, who rowed down the Water, and being come to the side opposite
to us, with some kind of confusion they drew up in order of Battle. The General
sent off all the Cross-bow men in two Canoes, who dispersed the Indians; but
when they saw that the Spaniards did nothing but disperse them without
pursuing, they took heart, and drew ^igh, threatening us. And so long as the
Fleet continued in that place, they still kept within sight of us, some in
their Canoes, and others on the River side. When we weighed Anchor they got on
head of us, and joined all together near a Town that stood very high, upon one
side of the River, as if they intended to stay and fight us there. Each
Brigantine had a Canoe at he^ Stern, to serve when occasion offered. These
Canoes were Manned with well-armed Soldiers, who dispersed that Body of
Indians and burnt the Town. After that we went a-shoar in an^ open Plain, where
the Indians durst not molest us; but next day they appeared upon the River, to
the number of an hundred Canoes, amongst which there were some so great that
they carried threescore and ten men. The Cacique's Canoes had their Pavillions,
under which the Indians appeared, adorned with Feathers of several Colors, and
they advanced in good order within two Cross-bow shot of the Brigantines. From
that station they sent three Indians in a little Canoe, under the false pretext
of a Treaty: But in reality to observe our order and strength. They were
carried aboard Moscoso's Brigantine, to whom one of the Indians said, that the
Cacique of Quigaltan his Master, had sent him to offer him his Friendship, and
to assure him, that all that the Indians of Guachoya had spoken to his
prejudice was false; that they being his declared Enemies, the Governor ought
not to give credit to their Impostures; but believe, that Quigaltan was ready
to serve him. Moscoso answered, that he was very well persuaded of the good
intentions of Quigaltan, and that he should tell his Master, that he had a
great esteem for him, and desired to be his Friend. The Indians returned with
that Answer to their Master, and immediately they fell upon us with terrible
shouts. The Governor Commanded out John de Guzman, with fifteen armed men in
Canoes, to make head against the Enemy. The Indians made a stop at the sight of
that Detachment, and divided into two, till the Spaniards were got betwixt them
two Divisions. Then they joined, and shut in Guzman with the Canoes that had
advanced with him, which they furiously engaged; and seeing their Canoes were
much bigger than ours, and that they jumpt into the Water on all sides to hold
them up, and to over, set those of Guzman, they over-turned these in a trice;
so that those brave Men fell into the Water, where they perished miserably,
because of the weight of their Arms that sunk them to the bottom; and such as
could keep themselves up by swimming, or that stuck to the Canoes were knocked
down with poles. The Soldiers who were in the Brigantines seeing that terrible
disorder, did all they could to assist them; but the rapidity of the stream
rendered their Attempts useless, because there was no rowing against it to come
up to the Enemy; so that there was but four Spaniards saved, who swam to the
next Brigantine. They lost eleven, amongst whom John de Guzman, and a Son of
Don Carlos called John de Vargas were much lamented; the rest also were persons
of Quality and worth. They who escaped said, that they had seen some Indians
carry John de Guzman into one of their Canoes, but whether dead or live they
could not tell.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the Headstrongness of the Indians in pursuing us during our course in the
River.

THis advantage made the Indians so insolent and fierce, that they came and
attacked the Brigantines, which they had not the boldness to do till then. The
first they set upon was that which Caldeiran commanded, and which was in the
Reere. At the first discharge they wounded five and twenty men on board; for
there were but four in that Brigantine that had Armor. These came to the sides
to hinder the Indians from boarding; but they who had no Arms finding
themselves exposed to the Arrow-shot, left the Oars and hid themselves under
the Deck. So that the Brigantine fell across the stream, and would have been
carried down by the Current, had not one of the Soldiers in Armor, without
staying for the Captains Orders, made a Foot Soldier ply his Oar again, who
set the Brigantine to rights, and kept her so, whilst the Trooper covered him
with his Buckler, nay and with his Body too. The Indians came no nearer than
their Bows shoot, from whence they did us a great deal of mischief, when we
could do them no hurt, because there was but one Cross-Bow in each Brigantine,
the rest being out of condition of serving; so that all the Spaniards could do
was to receive their shot, and keep them from boarding. At length they left
that Brigantine and attacked another, which they engaged for half an hours
space, and so one after another they had a touch at all of them. We made double
Mats well put together, and so strong, that an Arrow could not pierce them. And
they who had so much spare time from the Indians shot, made a Target-sence
along the sides of the Brigantines. These people being mad that they could not
hurt us by shooting upon a level, shot their Arrows at random in the air, that
falling down into the Brigantine, they might by their weight do greater
Execution; and so they wounded some Soldiers. Their greatest efforts were
against those that looked after the Horses in the Canoes, which a hundred times
they essayed to board; but the Brigantines defended them, turning round the
Canoes, and at length put them into the middle of the Fleet. In the mean time
that way of fighting wearying them so, that they could hardly stand under their
Armor any longer. The Governor resolved to keep going all the night long,
that he might pass the Province o^ Quigaltan, where he thought the Enemies
would give us no more trouble. But they followed us on still; and when we
imagined them far enough from us, and began to take heart again, they came upon
us all of a sudden with such hideous shouting, that we were quite stunned with
it: These allarms lasted all night long, and half next day, at which time the
Fleet was past the Province of Quigaltan; nevertheless, we found no more ease
for all that; because the former before they left us, recommended us to the
Indians of that other Province, who presently came in pursuit of us with fifty
Canoes. We were engaged with them a whole day and a night; nay, they had the
boldness to board one of the Brigantines which was retreating with its Canoe at
the stern, out of which they took an Indian woman, and wounded some Soldiers.
They who carried the horses in the Canoes, being weary of rowing so long a
time, rested themselves sometimes; and then the Indians fell upon them
immediately. This obliged the Brigantines to stay for them, which was a great
hindrance to us, so that the Governor resolved to put ashore, and kill all the
horses; accordingly having found a place fit for putting that design in
execution, we landed, and killed these poor beasts, that were dried as the rest
were: There were but only five or six left alive, which, so soon as the
Spaniards were on board again, the Indians went ashore to seize; but the horses
defended themselves by kicking and running from side to side, which put them
into such a fright, that most part leapt into the water, and all got into their
Canoes again to follow the Brigantines, which they mauled with continual
shooting of Arrows. In that manner we spent that whole night, and until ten a
clock next morning, about which time the Enemy left us. Then seven Canoes with
Indians of a little Town upon the side of the River, came to continue the
pursuit; but perceiving they did us but little hurt, they returned to their
Town; and from that time forward we met with no more Enemies upon the River.
Our course continued seventeen days; wherein we made two hundred and fifty
Leagues: the River at its mouth divides it self into two branches, eachof which
are at least a League and a halfover.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The Fleet comes to the Sea; what befell the Spaniards before they put out into
it, and in the beginning of their Voyage.

THe Soldiers being almost spent by so much fighting, and much more by the
trouble of rowing, we resolved to go ashore half a League from the mouth of the
River, that they might have some days rest. They had other troubles upon them
besides, occasioned by the scarcity of provisions; insomuch that for many days
they had nothing but a little Maes roasted or boiled in a pot, which was
distributed amongst them by allowances, every mess of three having a Headpiece
full, and but scanty measure too. As soon as we were encamped, the Indians came
in seven Canoes to attack ours; and at the same time other Enemies made up to
us cross a swamp, armed with poles with sharp-pointed hooks made of a fish
bone, wherewith they fought so vigorously, that after they had wounded some
Spaniards with their Arrows, they closed with us; but, at length, with much ado
we beat them off. In the mean time the Governor ordered some Soldiers to go
into the Canoes and make head against the Enemies: They waited for us till we
were within bow-shot; and then having shot, and wounded some Soldiers, they
retreated as nimbly as a well mounted Trooper clears himself when he is beset
by Foot; and rallying again they renewed the charge always within the reach of
their own shot, and without the reach of ours: for though some of our Soldiers
had Bows, yet they knew not how to use them; and besides, their Arms were
almost broken with rowing. The Enemy on the contrary expected them at their own
ease; and having made their discharges, they wheeled about again, like Horsemen
a pickeering. Our men observing this, and that there was but little appearance
to come up with them, nay and that those who had got nearest were very ill
handled, thought it was enough to beat them off, and so returned to the
Brigantines. We tarried two days in that place, and then the Fleet, following
the Current of that branch of the River where we were, fell down to the Sea:
The Governor ordered to sound to see what water we had in the Rivers mouth;
and having found forty fathom water, he came to an Anchor, and called a
Council, that all might give their Opinions as to the Voyage we were to
undertake. The question was put, Whether we should direct our course straight
for New-Spain, standing out to Sea, or Coast it along near the shore. Opinions
were divided; but the advice of Danhusco weighed most with the Governor,
because he found others that concurred* with him in the same Judgment. Danhusco
was a man that presumed much on his parts and skill in Sea-Affairs, though his
knowledge therein was backed by no experience: He alleged to the Governor,
that it was much more convenient to stand out to Sea, and cross the Gulf, than
to keep near a shore that made many Bays, seeing it would shorten our Voyage by
three parts in four: Maintaining, That according to the Maps which he had seen,
the Coast from the place where we were, to the River of Palms, bore East and
West, and that from that River to New-Spain it run North and South; so that if
we followed it, we should make a compass that would extremely retard our
Voy^ge, and put us in danger of being overtaken by the Winter, before we could
come into a Country ^nhabited by Christians: Whereas if we had but any
favorable wind, we might cross the Gulf in ten or twelve days time. But that
advice was not at all approved by the better part of the Council: They said,
that it was the far surer way to keep along the Coast, though the Voyage would
be longer; because our Vessels were very slightly built, and without Decks,
which made them in danger of being lost, should we meet with the least storm;
that the risk was no less if we were becalmed or met with contrary winds,
because we had but very little fresh water for want of Casks to put it in. And,
in sine, though the Brigantines were strong enough to hold out a storm, since
we had neither Pilot nor Compass to direct our course, it would be a rashness
to cross over an unknown Gulf. That Advice which carried by pluralities of
voices, was followed, and it was concluded that we should not stand off from
the Coast. The Fleet being ready to set sail, the Cable of the Brigantine on
board of which the Governor was, slipped its Anchor, and left it in the bottom
of the water. And though we were near Land, nevertheless it could not be got up
again by the Diverse, because of the depth of the River. Moscoso and all tha^
were aboard with him were extremely trouble^ at this accident, and they were
forced to take (...) Mill ^one instead of an Anchor, with some bit^ that the
Troopers had still reserved, which were tied to it to increase its weight. Thus
we pu^ to Sea with a favorable wind, and in very fai^ weather, being the
Eighteenth day of July. The Governor and Danhusco being on head with their
Brigantines, kept out two or three Leagues at Sea; the other Captains bore up
to the Governor to ask him if he designed to quit the shore, which he ought
not to do without acquainting them, seeing it was contrary to the resolution of
Council; that if he would not follow it, neither would they follow him, and
every one would make the best of his way, Moscoso answered, That he would not
undertake any thing without the advice of his Council; that he stood only off
from the shore that he might sail with more security in the nightime, and
that next day he would come in sight of it again when he saw his time. We
failed all that day and the next until the Evening with a fair wind, and all
the while in fresh water, which was a surprise to us, seeing we were a great
way from the mouth of the great River: but its Current being very strong, and
the Coast low, it carries its fresh water a great way out into the Sea. About
night we discovered a little Island like a Rock, where the Fleet came to an
Anchor to take a little rest. There Danhusco so prevailed by his reasons, that
all the Officers consented to stand out to Sea. We followed that course two
days; but when we had a mind to put in again to the shore, we met with a
contrary wind, so that the fourth day we began to be in want of fresh water.
Every one cursed Danhusco, and the Governor too for complying with his advice;
and all the Captains swore that they would no more leave the shore, let the
Governor take what course he pleased. It was the will of God that the wind
veered about a little, and four days after that the Fleet had stood out to Sea,
all our fresh water being spent, we rowed in to shore again with a great deal
of difficulty, and went to land on the sand where there was no shelter. In the
Evening the wind turned about to the South, and blew full upon the shore, on
which it forced our Brigantines. The wind was high, and our Anchors being but
light and weak came home, so that our Vessels drove. In this extremity all
leapt into the water by the Governors order, and stood betwixt the Land and
the Brigantines, to keep them out in the water, until the wind abated.

CHAP. XL.
A^storm disperses the Brigantines; the join again at a Rock or little Island.

SO soon as the storm was over, our men wen^ ashore and dug pits, which
furnished us wit^ fresh water enough to fill the Casks of all the Brigantines.
Next day we set sail again, and after two days came to an Anchor in a little
Creel^ safe from the South Wind that blew at that time^ and was against us; it
detained us four days i^ that place, till at length the weather being cal^
again, we rowed out; but toward the Evening the wind began to blow fresh, so
that it force^ the Brigantines upon the shore. We were sensible then of our
fault in leaving our Road; for the Sea began to swell very high, and the win^
blew so hard, that the Brigantines could not keep company. Two of them that
were on head o^ the rest, were forced into an Arm of the Sea tha^ run into the
Land; and the other five separate^ from one another a League or a League and a
half, were cast upon a slat open shore, not knowing where they were, nor what
was become o^ the rest; the Sea being rough broke furiously upon that shore,
and the Anchors could not hold: The Oars signified nothing at all almost
against ^e violence of the storm, though there were at ^east seven or eight men
at each Oar to keep the ^essel in the water, which made all the rest jump
^ver-board. When the wave that forced the ^rigantine to land was past, they
thrust her out ^gain with incredible pain and labor, whilst the ^est with
bowls laved out the water that broke in^o the Vessel. In the mean time the
tempest was still increasing, as our fears also of seeing our Brigantines, in
which all our hopes lay, broken to pieces, when we were attacked by a far more
insupportable calamity; for about night such a terrible quantity of Musketto's
came about us, that we were all over covered with them; and their stingings
caused so sharp pains, that they seemed to be venomous. About break of day the
wind ceased, and we had a calm, but the Musketto's continued as bad as ever,
for they fell upon us in such numberless swarms, that our white Sails appeared
all black; and the Rowers could not set their hands to an Oar, without somebody
by them to beat off these Insects. However, we were so glad to see the storm
over, that we laughed at the other inconvenience, when by daylight we could
see one another with monstrous faces; and it was no unpleasant sight to behold
how every one beat themselves to kill the Musketto's. All fell a rowing, and
our Fleet got together again in that little Gulf where the two first
Brigantines had put in to. There we found of that scum of the Sea called Copeck
much like to pitch, which some indeed make use of instead of it for their
Vessels, as we our selves did, having stayed two days in that place to re fit
our Brigantines. We sailed two days more, and came to an Anchor in a Bay where
we stayed as long; we sent out seven men in a Canoe to find out the bottom of
the Bay; but they could not. The Fleet set sail with a South wind which was
against us; nevertheless, seeing it was not violent, all were so desirous to
make an end of our Voyage as soon as we could, that we employed our utmost
endeavors to get out to Sea again. We advanced then for two days with little
Wind and much labor, till we came to a little Island at the entry of an arm of
the Sea. The weather that happened after gave us good cause to thank God, for
sending us into that safe Road: There were a great many fish thereabouts, which
we took with Nets or the Hook; and it happened that a Soldier having thrown in a
Line, the end whereof was tied to his wrist, a fish swallowed the Hook and Bait
with so much force, that it drew the man headlong into the water: by good luck
he bethought himself of an Axe which he carried about him, wherewith he cut the
Line, and swom back to the Brigantine. Bad weather kept us here a fortnight,
and then it pleased God to send us a favorable gale, for which we rendered him
our most humble thanks, in a very devout Procession which we made along the
shore of that Island; beseeching his Divine Majesty to guide us into a place
where we might consecrate our Services to him with more zeal and tranquillity.

CHAP. XLI.
The Spaniards arrive at the Town of Panico.

FResh water is to be found by digging in the sand everywhere on that Coast,
which was a great convenience to us for filling our Casks. So after we had
ended our Procession, we went on board, and run along in sight of land six
days. Danhusco persisted still in his first Opinion, saying, that he had seen
Maps, and remembered that that Coast bore North and South, so soon as one was
past the River of Palms; that hitherto we had steered from East to West; and
that so according to his judgment that River could not be far off. The Fleet
stood a little out to Sea, and next day early in the morning we perceived at a
distance some Palm Trees, which seemed to rise above the surface of the water,
and we observed that that Coast lay North and South. At noon we began to
discover very high mountains, which we had not seen before, because from the
Port of the Holy Ghost to that place, the Land is low and level, so that it
cannot be seen but very near. These remarks made us believe that we had passed
the River of Palms in the nightime, and we knew very well that it was but
threescore Leagues from the River of Panico: But others alleged that we ought
not to lose so good weather, and that Panico could not be so near that we
should fear to pass it in one nights sailing. However, we resolved at length to
spare sail and keep on our course; all the Fleet did so except two Brigantines,
which making what sail they could, were by break of day got beyond Panico
without seeing it; but the Captains of the five other Brigantines that were in
the rear, were wiser and more fortunate. The first Brigantine that discovered
the River was Captain Caldeiran's; they were within a quarter of a League
without discovering it, when perceiving the water thick, they tasted it, and
found it to be fresh; then they advanced toward the mouth of the River, where
the water broke upon a bank of sand at the entry into it. No body knowing what
River it was, they consulted together what was best to be done if they should
put in, or keep on their course forwards; at length they resolved to enter in,
rowing close by the shore to avoid the Current, and so they found a Harbor. As
they put into it they observed some Indians clothed after the Spanish fashion,
which gave them the boldness to ask them what Country they were in. The Indians
answered in Spanish, that they were in the River of Panico, and that the Town
was fifteen Leagues off. It is not to be expressed with what joy they received
those glad tidings; their Birth day seemed not to them so happy a day as that
was: They leaped ashore, and kissed it a thousand times, lifting up their eyes
and hands to Heaven to thank God for the favor he had bestowed upon them. The
Soldiers of the Brigantines that followed Caldeiran's, perceiving that he
entered the River, steered the same course, and arrived at the Harbor; but
those who were on board the other two Brigantines, had not the same fortune.
When they found that the rest did not follow, they tackt about to look after
them, but the wind was contrary, and the Sea so rough, that they were forced to
come to an Anchor near the shore. In that place they were tossed with so
furious a storm, that finding they could not weather it neither at Sea nor in
that station, they took the course to run ashore: And seeing the Brigantines
were light and drew little water, and that that shore was low and of a soft
sand, the wind drove them on dry ground without any hurt to the Vessels, or to
those that were in them. So that whilst the Spaniards who were in the Harbor,
tasted pleasures which cannot be expressed, these were overwhelmed with grief
and trouble, seeing they knew not what was become of their Companions, nor
whether Fortune had cast them into a Country, where they should meet with
savage people and Enemies to the Spaniards. They were shipwrackt two Leagues
below the Harbor; and so soon as they found themselves out of danger, every
one packed up what he was able to carry, and so advanced up into the Country;
at length they met with Indians, who told them where they were, which turned
their sadness into extraordinary joy, and they thanked God, as it was their
duty, for delivering them out of so many miseries and dangers.

CHAP. XLII.
The Spaniards go to Panico, and in what manner the Inhabitants received them.

OUr Voyage lasted fifty days from the mouth of the great River in Florida, to
the mouth of the River of Panico, into which we entered the Tenth of September,
1543. We spent four days ingoing up the River with our Brigantines; but the
wind being low, and not very useful to us because of the compasses which that
River fetches, so that we were many times obliged to tow them up, the passage
was so tedious and toilsome, that we left the Brigantines to the care of the
Seamen, and went by Land to Panico, being impatient to get, as soon as we
could, into a Christian Country, and to be present at Divine Service, which for
a very long time we had not been. We were all clothed in Buck-skins died
black; and so soon as we entered the Town, we went straight to the Church to
offer up our Prayers to God, and most humbly to thank him for the Miracles he
had wrought in saving us. The Burghers who were informed by the Indians of our
arrival, came to the Church, from whence they took home with them such of us as
they could know, or who belonged to their Relations or Friends. The Governor
of the place offered his House to Moscoso, and ordered the other Spaniards to
be quartered by sixes, or even more, according to the convenience of the
Inhabitants, who kindly entertained their Guests with Pullets and Bread of
Maes, and the fruits of the Country, which are the same that are in the Isle of
Cuba. The Town of Panico contains about threescore and ten Families: their
Houses for most part are built of Stone and Lime, except some few that are only
wooden, and they are all thatched. The Country is not Rich, because it produces
neither Gold nor Silver; but, on the other hand, the Inhabitants have plenty of
all that is necessary for life. The wealthiest have not above five hundred
Crowns of yearly Rent; and their Revenue consists in Cotton, Poultry, and Maes,
which the Indians who are their Vassals, pay them as quit-Rent. We were in all
three hundred and eleven Gentlemen and Soldiers, remaining of above six
hundred who followed Soto into Florida, when we entered this Town. The
Governor of the place forthwith dispatched a Burgher to give advice to Don
Antonio de Mendosa Viceroy of Mexico, that three hundred men of the Forces that
had been with Don Fernando de Soto for the Discovery and Conquest of Florida,
were arrived at Panico, to the end he might give orders for their subsistence,
as being in the Emperors Service. The Viceroy and all the Inhabitants of
Mexico. were extremely surprised at the news; for all gave us over for lost so
soon as we advanced up into the Country of Florida; and they looked upon it as a
Miracle, that having no place of retreat, nor no assistance sent us, we could
have maintained our selves so long amongst these Infidels. So soon as the
Viceroy received the advice, he sent Orders in writing, to furnish us in all
places we past through, with Provisions, and Indian Servants; and if they
refused to supply us accordingly, he gave us leave by the same Order to take by
force, without any danger of punishment: But we needed it not; for all the way
we went, the people came out and met us, striving who should first present us
with Pullets and other Provisions.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the civil and generous manner how we were treated by the Viceroy, and the
Inhabitants of Mexico.

IT is reckoned threescore Leagues from Panico to the great City of Mestitam,
or Mexico; and it is as far from that City to the Port of Veracruce, which is
also threescore Leagues from Panico. Veracruce is the Port where they take
shipping to go from Mexico to Spain, and where they land when they come from
Spain to Mexico; and these three Towns make a Triangle, Veracruce being the
South-Angle, Panico the East, and Mexico the West. This Country is so populous,
that the most remote Villages of the Indians, are not a League and a half
distant one from the other. Some of our Soldiers who were most spent, abode a
month in Panico, others a fortnight; and, in a word, as long as they had a
mind, their Landlords not grudging it in the least: On the contrary, they
shared with them what they had; and all, without exception, seemed troubled at
their departure. The truth is, what they gave cost them but little, since their
Indians furnish them with more Provisions than they can well spend; and they
took extraordinary pleasure to hear the relation of our Adventures. The
Governor gave of the Goods in his hands belonging to the Emperor for his
dues, to those who would accept of them. They were very happy men who had
reserved a Coat of Mail, for they trucked it for a Horse; so some were mounted,
but the greatest part performed the journey to Mexico on foot. The Indians in
all places received us very kindly, and did us all sorts of good Offices,
offering the Soldiers whatever they had in their houses, though they had no
want of Provisions; for when one asked a Pullet of an Indian, he was sure to
bring four; and if one seemed to have a mind to a fruit which was not to be
found but at a Leagues distance, immediately he ran to fetch it. When the
Soldiers came to any Indian Town, the Cacique presently commanded an Indian
who carried in his hand a Verge or Mace, to see that Provisions were furnished.
They call that Officer, Tapile; that is to say, Sergeant. He took care also to
provide us Indians for carrying the sick, and our small Baggage. The Viceroy
sent a Portuguese to meet us twenty Leagues from Mexico, with Sugar, Rasins of
the Sun, Pomgranates, and other refreshments for the sick who might stand in
need of them: And he acquainted us that he would cloth all the Soldiers at
the Emperors charges. The Citizens of Mexico came to receive us without the
City-Gates, and desired it as a great favor of the Soldiers that they would
lodge with them, and they who prevailed carried them home to their houses,
where they treated and clothed them so well, that the Apparel of him that was
worst clothed, was worth thirty Crowns at least. The Viceroy had the same care
of those whom he entertained in his Palace, where they of the better quality
eat at his Table. He had another Table for the private Soldiers, where all
were welcome, but though he had informed himself of their several qualities,
that he might show them honor accordingly, yet seeing he denied not his Table
to any of the Conquerours whether Gentleman or Peasant, it sometimes happened,
that the Servant sat cheek by joule with his Master. However, that little
disorder proceeded only from his Officers fault, of whom some though, that knew
their duty better, informed themselves of the qualities of persons, and treated
them with distinction. In a word, all strove who should entertain us best, and
that in so gentile and obliging a manner, that they prayed the Soldiers to
make no ceremony to take what they offered them, saying that they themselves
had been in the like straights, that others had assisted them, and in fine,
that it was the custom of the Country. God Almighty reward them for it, and
may it please him to give grace to those who have been preserved by his
goodness in that discovery, to spend the rest of their days in his holy
service, and that of his infinite mercy he would vouchsafe, to receive into
glory those who have ended their days in that enterprise, and those who believe
in him, and confess his holy Faith.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of some Singularities of Florida, of Fruits, Foul, and Beasts, which that
Country produces.

FRom the Port of the Holy Ghost, where the Spaniards landed when they entered
into Florida, to the Province of Ocute it is reckoned about four hundred
Leagues all in a flat Country full of Lakes and thick Woods, excepting in some
places where the ground is light, and produces wild Pine-trees; and in all that
way, there is neither Mountain nor Hill to be seen. The Land of Ocute is fatter
and more fertile, the Woods are not so thick there, and it has Meadows watered
with little Rivers. It is a hundred and thirty Leagues from Ocute to
Cutifachiqui, of which fourscore are through a desert Country, that yields
nothing but wild Pines, and yet has great Rivers running through it. But from
Cutifachiqui to Xuala there is nothing but Mountains, for the space of two
hundred and fifty Leagues. These two Towns are seated in a high Country, but
level, and cut by Rivulets which have Meadows on the banks. Beyond Xuala are
the Provinces of Chiaha, Cosa, and Talise, which are lovely Plains of a dry
ground, that produce Maes in plenty. From Xuala to Tascaluca it may be two
hundred and fifty Leagues, and three hundred from Tascaluca to the great River.
That Country is low, full of Lakes and Swamps, but the soil is of another
nature beyond the great River. It is pretty high, yet there is champion ground
in it, and is the most populous Country in all Florida. On the sides of the
great River from Aquixo to Pacaha and Coligoa, for the space of an hundred and
fifty Leagues, the Country is plain, and in some places very fertile and
pleasant. From Coligoa to Autiamque it is reckoned two hundred and fifty
Leagues, in a Mountainous Country, and from Autiamque to Guacay two hundred
and thirty of a level Country; but the Mountains begin again from Guacay to
Daycao, that are an hundred and twenty Leagues distant. The way from the Holy
Ghost to Palache is from East to West, and North West; from Cutifachiqui to
Xuala from South to North, from Xuala to Cosa from East to West, and from Cosa
to Tascaluca, and from thence to the great River and the Provinces of Quizquiz,
and Aquixo from East to West. In short, Pacaha is Northward from Aquixo, Tula
West of Pacaha, and Antiamque to the South of Tula, so as are the Provinces of
Guachoya and Aycao. The bread they eat all over Florida is made of Maes, which
resembles great Millet, and the same Maes serves for food in the Antilles, and
in all the Indies belonging to the Crown of Castille. In Florida there are also
Nuts, Plums, Mulberries, and Grapes; every one labors his field of Maes apart,
but all the other Fruits are common, because they grow in the fields in great
plenty, without any necessity of cultivating or watering the Trees. The
Mountains yield Chestnuts, which are smaller than those of Spain. From the
great River Westwards the Nuts differ from those of the other Provinces, for
they are soft and shaped like an Akorn, and from the same River to the Port of
the Holy Ghost, they are harder and the Trees as well as Fruit resemble those
of Spain. All over Florida there is a Fruit which grows upon a kind of Plant
like to a Lilly which the Indians sow. That Fruit resembles a bon Chreteen Pear
of an excellent relish. There is also another Herb which bears its Fruit near
the ground as the Apple of Love, and is very good. The Plums are of two
colors, the one red, and the other a dark gray of the bigness and shape of
Walnuts. They have three or four stones, and of these last excellent Prunes are
made, which in goodness surpass those of Spain. The Vines want only care and
dressing; which may be easily known, because the Grapes have very great and
hard stones, nevertheless they are very good. In a word, all the Fruits are
better and less hurtful than those of Spain. That Country breeds a great many
Bears and Lions, Wolves, Stags, Wild cats, Tame cats, and Rabbets. The Poultry
are wild there, as big as Peacocks, and very plentiful* The Partridges are
small like those of Africa* and you have also Cranes, Geese, Turtles,
Fieldfares, Sparrows, and other black birds that are bigger than Sparrows, and
less than Starlings: as also Goss-hawks, Falcons, Sparrow-hawks, and all other
Birds of Prey that are to be found in Spain The Indians in general are well
enough shaped* but those of the Plains are better limbed and much nimbler than
the Mountaneers, as also the people that inhabit the heart of the Country,
live more at their ease than those of the Coast. For the Land on the Seacoast
is barren and poor, but seeing misery renders them fierce and warlike, they rob
and play the Pirates. From the Port of the Holy Ghost to Palache, and from
Palache to the River of Palms, the way is from East to West, and from the River
of Palms to New Spain from North to South. That Coast is low and soft, but full
of shelves and banks of sand.

FINIS.
TWO JOURNEYS Of the present Emperor of CHINA INTO TARTARY, In the Years 1682,
and 1683.

With some Discoveries Made by the SPANIARDS In the Island of California, In
the Year 1683.

London: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, over against
the Compter. 1687.

A JOURNEY OF THE Emperor of China INTO EAST-TARTARY.

In the Year 1682.



LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, for John Lawrence, over against the
Poultry-Compter. 1686.

Advertisement.
THe Reader is to take notice, That the two Expeditions of the Emperor of
China, were fully translated into French from the Letters of the famous Father
Verbiest, who attended that Emperor in both these Iourneys; and that the
Narrative of the Spaniards late Descent on the Island of Califurnia, was
likewise translated into French from a Spanish Relation, taken from the Letters
of the Admiral himself, who was the chief Gommander in that Enterprise: All
which three are Dedicated to the French King.

A Journey into East-Tartary. In the Year 1682.
IN the beginning of the year 1682, the Emperor of China made a progress into
East-Tartary, when by the death of three Rebel-Kings he had quieted a Revolt
that had broken out in some Provinces of the Empire: One of these revolted
Princes was strangled in the Province he had made himself Master of; the second
being brought to Pekin with the Ringleaders of the Faction, was cut in pieces
in view of the whole Court, the most considerable Mandarius themselves lending
a hand to this sad Execution, that upon that Rebel they might revenge the death
of their Relations whom he had cruelly put to death.

The third who was the most considerable, and, in a manner, head of the
Conspiracy, by a voluntary death prevented the punishment which he had
deserved; and by that means put an end to a War of seven years continuance.
Peace being thus restored to the Empire, and all the Provinces quietly enjoying
their ancient liberty, on the Twenty third of March the Emperor set out upon
his Journey to the Province of Leaotum, the Country of his Ancestors, with
design to visit their Sepulchers, and having honored them with the accustomed
Ceremonies, to continue his progress into East-Tartary. From Pekin to the end
of the journey, that progress was about eleven hundred miles in length.

The Emperor took with him his eldest Son, a young Prince of ten years of Age,
who is already declared Heir of the Empire: The three chief Queens accompanied
him also, every one of them in a gilt Chariot, as likewise the principal Kings
who compose that Empire, with all the great men of Court, and the most
considerable Mandarius of all the Orders; who having a numerous Retinue and
splendid Equipage, made in all an Attendance for the Emperor of above
threescore and ten thousand Souls.

It was his pleasure that I should wait upon him in this progress, and be
always by him, that I might in his presence make the necessary Observations for
knowing the Disposition of the Heavens, the Elevation of the Pole, the
Declination of each Country, and for measuring with Mathematical Instruments
the height of Mountains, and the distance of places. He was willing also to be
instructed about the nature of Meteors, and many other Natural and Mathematical
matters; wherefore he gave orders to an Officer, that all the Instruments I
might have occasion for, should be carried with us upon horses, and recommended
me to the Prince his Uncle, who is also his Father-in-Law, and the second
Person of the State; he is called by a Chinese Name, which signifies an
Associate in the Empire. He charged him to supply me with all things necessary
for the Journey; which that Prince did with singular goodness, making me always
lodge in his Tent, and eat at his Table.

The Emperor ordered me ten horses out of his own Stables, that I might change
more easily when occasion required; and amongst those there were some that he
himself had rid, which is a very great distinction and honor. On our Journey
we marched always North-East.

The way from Pekin to the Province of Leaotum, which is about three hundred
miles in length, is pretty even and level; within the Province of Leaotum it
continues four hundred miles, but much more unequal because of Mountains: From
the Frontiers of that Province to the Town of Ula, or the River which the
Tartars call Songoro, and the Chinese Sum-hoa, the way for four hundred miles
more, is very rugged, being intercepted in some places by very craggy
Mountains, and in others by Valleys of an extraordinary depth, and desert
places where one may march two or three days and nothing to be found. The
Mountains of that Country on the East Side are covered with great Oaks, and
ancient Forests which have not been cut for many Ages.

All the Country beyond the Province of Leaotum is very desert, nothing being
to be seen on all hands, but Mountains, Valleys, Dens of Tigers, Bears, and
other wild Beasts: Hardly any houses are to be found there, but only some
sorry thatched Cottages upon the sides of Rivers and Torrents. All the Towns
and Villages which I saw in Leaotum, and which are pretty numerous, are
entirely ruined. There is nothing to be seen everywhere but old demolished
houses, with heaps of Brick and Stone: some houses have been lately built
within the old Precinct of these Towns, but without any order: some are of
Earth, and others of the rubbish of the ancient Buildings, most covered with
straw, and but very few with tile. Of a great many Towns and Villages that were
in being before the War, there is not now the least sign remaining; for the
little King of the Tartars who began it, having but a very small Army at first,
armed the Inhabitants of those places, and then destroyed them, that his
Soldiers might have no hopes left of ever returning again into their Country.

The chief City of Leaotum, which is called Xin-yam, is a Town handsome enough,
and pretty entire: there is still in it the remains of an ancient Palace. What
I could find after several observations, it lies in forty one degrees fifty six
minutes; that is, two degrees higher than Pekin, though hitherto neither
Europeans nor Chinese have assigned it but forty one degrees. There is no
declination of the Lodestone in that Town, as I remarked by many reiterated
observations. The Town of Ula, which was almost the period of our Journey, lies
in forty four degrees twenty minutes. The Compass declines there from South to
West a degree and forty minutes.

But let us return again to our progress. From Pekin to that extremity of the
East, a new way was made for the convenience of the Emperors traveling on
horseback, and the Queens in their Chariots. The way is about ten foot broad,
and as straight and level as possibly it could be made, reaching in length
above a thousand miles: On each side there was raised a Bank a foot high,
always even, and exactly parallel to each other; and that way was as clean,
especially in fair weather, as a Barn-floor, there being men placed all along
the Rode, who had no other business but to keep it clean. Christians are not so
careful to sweep the streets and public places, through which the Holy
Sacrament is to pass in Procession, as these Insidels are to clean the way by
which their Kings and Queens are to go, as often as they came abroad out of
their Palaces.

For our return a way was made like the former; Mountains were levelled as much
as was possible, Bridges cast over Torrents, and for ornament they were hung on
each side with a kind of Mats, painted with diverse figures of Animals, which
wrought the same effect as the Tapistry with which the streets are adorned in
time of Processions.

The Emperor hardly ever kept that Highway, spending his time for most part a
Hunting: And even when he came up with the Queens, he kept along the side of it
only, lest the great number of horses that followed him might spoil it. He
marched most commonly at the head of that kind of Army; the Queens followed
immediately after in their Chariots, with their Train and Equipage, but at some
little distance from him. Next marched the Kings, the great Men of Court, and
the Mandarius, all according to their several Ranks and Qualities. An infinite
number of Servants and others on horseback brought up the Rear.

Seeing there was no Town upon all the Rode capable of lodging so great a
multitude of people, or supplying them with Provisions; and that, besides, a
great part of the Journey was to be made through uninhabited places, there was
a necessity of having all things for the Journey, nay, and three months
Provisions carried along with us.

And therefore an infinite number of Wagons, Camels, Horses, and Mules, for
carrying the Baggage, were sent before by ways made on the sides of the
Emperors Rode; besides, the Emperor, the Kings, and generally all the great
Men of the Court, had a vast number of led-Horses following them, that they
might change as occasion served; not to reckon the herds of Oxen, flocks of
Sheep, and other Cattle that must needs go along with us. And though that vast
number of men, horses, and flocks, kept a way pretty distant from the Emperors
Rode, yet they raised such a terrible dust, that we seemed to march in a Cloud,
and had much ado to discern those that were fifteen or twenty steps before us.

Our march was so well ordered, that this Army encamped every Evening upon the
side of some River or Brook: and therefore the Tents and necessary Baggage were
sent before early in the morning; and the Quarter Masters being first at the
place, marked out the fittest ground for the Tents of the Emperor, Queens,
Kings, great Men of the Court, and Mandarius, according to their several
Qualities and the Rank they hold in the Chinese Militia, which is divided into
eight Orders, or Standards.

In three months time we made about a thousand miles North-Eastward, and as
much more on our return. At length we arrived at Kam-hay, which is a Fort
situated betwixt the South Sea and the Mountains of the North. There it is
that that famous Wall begins which divides the Province of Leaotum from that of
Pekeli, from whence it reaches a vast way Northwards over the highest
Mountains. When we entered that Province, the Emperor, the Kings, and great Men
of the Court, left the highway we mentioned, and passed along the Mountains of
the North, which without interruption run North-East: we spent somedays there a
Hunting, which was in this manner:

The Emperor chose out three thousand of his Lifeguard, armed with Arrows and
Javelins; Those he dispersed several ways, so that they took up a great compass
of ground about the Hills, which they environed on all hands: This made a kind
of circle three thousand paces diameter; then drawing nearer and nearer
together in a regular march, without leaving their Rank what impediment soever
they found in their way, (for the Emperor had put Captains and some Grandees
also among them to make them keep their order) they brought that great
circumference into a circle of far less compass, which had about three hundred
paces in diameter; so that all the Beasts who were enclosed within the former,
were caught in this as in a Toil; because all alighting, they joined so close
together, that they left no space for them to get out at. Then were they so
hotly pursued within that narrow compass, that the poor Creatures, quite spent
with running, fell down at the Huntsmens feet, and were taken up without any
trouble. In this manner I saw two or three hundred Hairs taken in less than a
days time, besides a great many Wolves and Foxes. I have seen the same thing
several times in that part of Tartary which is beyond the Province of Leaotum,
where at one time I remember I saw above a thousand head of Deer, enclosed
within such Toils, which came and cast themselves into the Huntimens hands,
finding no way to make their escape. We killed also Bears, wild Boars, and
above sixty Tigers; but for killing of them they take another course, and make
use of other Weapons.

It was the Emperors pleasure that I should be present at all these different
ways of Hunting; and he recommended it to his Father-in-Law in a very obliging
manner, that he should have a special care of me, and see that I were not
exposed to any danger in the hunting of Tigers and other fierce Beasts. Of all
the Mandarius I was the only person near the Emperor without Arms. Though I
had been enured to fatigue from the time we set out upon our progress, yet I
was so weary every Evening when I returned to my Tent, that I had much ado to
stand upon my legs; and many times I would have spared my self the labor of
following the Emperor, if my friends had not advised me the contrary, and if I
had not been afraid he would have taken it ill, if he had perceived it.

After about four hundred miles of continua Hunting in this manner, we arrived
at length at Xyn-yam, the Capital City of the Province, where we staid four
days. The Inhabitants of Coree came and presented the Emperor with a Seal or
Sea-calf which they had taken; the Emperor showed it me, and asked me if that
Fish was mentioned in our Books of Europe; I told him that we had a Book in our
Library at Pekin which explained the Nature, and had a Cut of it. He said he
would be glad to see it; and immediately dispatched a Courier to our Fathers at
Pekin, who within a few days brought it to me. The Emperor was pleased to see
that what was observed concerning that Fish in the Book, agreed with what he
saw. He ordered it afterward to be carried to Pekin, to be carefully preserved
there.

During our stay in that City, the Emperor with the Queens went to visit the
Tombs of his Ancestors, which are not far distant, from whence he sent them
back to Xyn-yam, that he might continue his Journey toward East-Tartary.

After several days marching and hunting, he came to Kirin, four hundred miles
distant from Xyn-yam: That Town lies along the great River Songoro, which has
its source in Mount-Champe, distant from thence four hundred miles toward the
South. That Mountain, so famous in the East for having been the ancient
Habitation of our Tartars, is always covered with Snow, from whence it has
taken its Name; for Champe signifies the White Mountain.

So soon as the Emperor perceived it, he alighted from his horse, kneeled down
on the Riverside, and bowed three times to the ground to salute it; then he
gave orders that he should be carried on a Throne glittering with Gold, and in
that manner made his entry into the Town. All the people flocked out to meet
him, showing by their tears the joy they had to see him: And that Prince was
extremely pleased with the testimonies of their Affection; and as a mark of his
good will, he showed himself publicly to all, and discharged his Guards from
hindering the people to come near him, as they do at Pekin.

In this Town they build Barks of a singular shape, and the Inhabitants have a
great many always in a readiness, to beat off the Muscovites, who come often
upon that River to contend with them about the Pearl-fishing. The Emperor
rested two days there, and then went down the River with some Lords,
accompanied with above an hundred Boats, as far as the Town of Ula, which is
the fairest of all the Country, and was heretofore the Seat of the Empire of
the Tartars.

A little below that Town, which is above thirty miles from Kirin, the River is
full of a certain kind of Fish which looks much like the Plaice of Europe; and
it was chiefly to divert himself at Fishing that the Emperor went to Ula; but
the Rains falling all of a sudden, so swelled the River, that all the Nets were
broken and carried away by the flood: Nevertheless, the Emperor tarried five
or six days at Ula; but finding that the Rains continued, he was obliged to
come back to Kirin, without the pleasure of Fishing. As we were returning up
the River, the Bark wherein I was with the Emperors Father-in-Law, was so
beaten with the waves, that we were forced to go ashore, and to get into a Cart
drawn by an Ox, which brought us very late to Kirin, the Rain continuing all
the way.

At night when they were discoursing with the Emperor about that Adventure, he
said laughing, The Fish have made fools of us. At length, after two days stay
at Kirin, the Rains began to abate, and we returned to Leaotum. I cannot here
express the trouble and fatigues we endured throughout this whole Journey, in
ways broken and made almost impassable by the Rains: we went continually over
hills and dales, and with extreme danger crossed the Brooks and Rivers, which
were much out by the Torrents that run into them from all parts. The Bridges
were either broken down by the violence of the Currents, or covered all over
with the overflowing of the waters. There were in many places great plashes of
water gathered together, and such deep dirt, that it was hardly possible to get
out of it: The Camels, Horses, and other Beasts that carried the Baggage could
not get forward; they stuck in the mires, or died of weakness upon the Rode:
The men fared no better; and all pined away for want of victuals and necessary
refreshments for so long a Journey. A great many horsemen were forced either
to alight and drag their horses on by the bridles, or to stop and rest them a
little in the open fields. Though the Quarter Masters and their Officers spared
neither workmen nor wood, which they cut down everywhere, to fill up the
broken places of the way with faggots; nevertheless, when the Horses and
Wagons that set out very early in the morning had once passed them, it was
impossible to pass after them; the Emperor himself, his Son, and all the Lords
of the Court, were oftener than once forced to cross over mires and fens on
foot, fearing they might be exposed to greater danger, if they attempted to
pass them on horseback.

When we met with Bridges, or any narrow passes, all the Army made a halt; and
so soon as the Emperor with some of the most considerable was over, the rest
came crowding on; and every one striving to be first, several tumbled into the
water; others going about by more dangerous ways, fell into bogs and quagmires,
where they stuck. In fine, they suffered so much in all the ways of
East-Tartary, that old Officers who for above thirty years had followed the
Court, said that they had never endured so much hardship in any Expedition.

On these occasions the Emperor oftener than once gave me proofs of a very
singular goodwill.

The first day we set out upon our return, we were toward evening stopped by so
large and rapid a Torrent, that it was impossible to foard it over.

The Emperor finding there by chance a little Boat, which could not hold above
four, went over first with his Son, and some of the chief Kings followed next;
all the other Princes, Lords, and Mandarius, with the rest of the Army, waited
impatiently in the mean time on the bank for the return of the Boat, that they
might get over as soon as they could to the other side of the water, because
night was drawing on, and the Tents were already over long before. But the
Emperor coming back to us in just such another little Boat as the other, asked
aloud where I was, and his Father-in-Law, having presented me to him: Let him
come in, said the Emperor, and go over with us. So that we only passed over
with the Emperor; and all the rest continued on the other side, where it
behoved them to spend the night in the open Air. The same thing happened next
day, and almost in the same manner: The Emperor about noon came to a River as
high and rapid as the former; he ordered the Tents and Baggage to be carried
over in Boats, which took up the time till night, and made me alone to pass
over with him and a few of his Retinue, leaving all the great Lords on the
other side, who were obliged to spend the night there. The Emperors own
Father-in-Law having asked him if he should not pass over with me, seeing I
lodged in his Tent, and eat at his Table; he made him answer, that he should
stay, and that he himself would take care that I should have what was sitting.

When we were over, the Emperor sat down by the waterside, and made me sit
down by him, with the two Sons of two little Western Kings, and the chief
Colaos of Tartary, whom he honored on all occasions.

The night being clear, and the sky very serene, he would have me name to him
both in the Chinese and European Language, all the Constellations that at that
time appeared above the Horizon; and he himself named first all those which he
knew already; then unfoulding a little Map of the Heavens, which some years
before I had presented him with, he fell a searching for the hour of the night
by the Star of the Meridian; delighting to show to all the skill he had in
those Sciences. All these and the like favors which he showed me often enough,
insomuch as to send me dishes of meat from his own Table, were so public and
extraordinary, that the Emperor's two Uncles, who bore the Title of Associates
in the Empire, said upon their return to Pekin, that when the Emperor was out
of humor, or appeared melancholic, he resumed his usual cheerfulness so soon
as he saw me.

I arrived in good health at Pekin the Ninth of June very late, though many
were left sick upon the Rode, or came back from the Journey wounded and maimed.

I say nothing of what we have done for Religion in this Journey; I reserve the
particulars of that for a Relation apart, wherein it will be seen that by the
Grace of our Lord, our favor at the Court of China produces considerable fruit
to the Church, and deprives not the Emissaries of their Crosses.

I will subjoyn here the Tartarean Names, and the distance of the several
places, through which we passed in East Tartary, from the Capital City of the
Province of Leaotum to Kirin, in order, according to the days we spent in that
march: This may be reduced into a Typographical Map, and inserted in the Map of
the Province of Leaotum, which is to be found in the Atlas of Father Martin
Marini, changing therein only the Latitudes, according to the Elevations of
the Pole, which we have taken notice of before. I Will add one thing more which I
learned from the very Inhabitants of Ula; to wit, that Nincrita, which is a
place of considerable note in those Quarters, is distant from Ula 700 Chinese
furlongs, each containing 360 Geometrical paces; and that embarking at Nincrita
upon the great River Helum, into which the Songoro and some other more
considerable Rivers than it, discharges themselves, following the Current of
the water, and going North-East, or a little more toward the North, in forty
days time one will arrive at the East-Sea, which is, as I conceive, the
Streights of Anian. This I had from the Generals own mouth, who is at Kirin,
and who has made the Voyage himself.

The distances of the places through which we passed in East-Tartary.
THe first day we parted from Xyn-yam, the chief Town of the Province of
Leaotum, and arrived at Seao-lysto, for so that place is called in the Chinese
Language, 95 Chinese furlongs.

The second day we arrived at Chacay Angha, 85 furlongs.

The third day at another River of the same name, 70 furlongs.

The fourth at Kiaghuchen, 50 furlongs.

The fifth at Feyteri, 80 furlongs.

The sixth at the Brook of Seipery, 60 furlongs.

The seventh at the Brook of Ciam, 60 furlongs.

The eighth at Courou, 50 furlongs.

The ninth at the Village of Sape, 40 furlongs.

The tenth at Quaranni Pyra, 40 furlongs.

The eleventh at Elten Eme ambayaga, 70 furlongs.

The twelfth at Ypatan, 58 furlongs.

The thirteenth at Suayen ny Pyra, 60 furlongs.

The fourteenth at Ylmen, 70 furlongs.

The fifteenth at Seuten, 70 furlongs.

The sixteenth at the City of Kirin, 70 furlongs.

That way makes in all 1028 Chinese furlongs, which are 369 miles, allowing
1000 Geometrical paces to the mile. I have already told you that a Chinese
furlong consists of 360 Geometrical paces.

A Journey of the Emperor of CHINA INTO WEST-TARTARY. In the Year 1683.
THis year the Emperor of China, being in the Thirteenth year of his Reign
made a Journey into West-Tartary, with the Queen his Grandmother, who goes by
the name of the Queen Mother. He set out the Sixth of July, accompanied with
above threescore thousand men, and a hundred thousand horse. He would needs
have me go along with him, and one of the two Fathers who are at the Court of
Pekin, of whom he left the choice to me: I pitched upon Father Philip Grimaldi,
because he is best known, and perfectly well skilled in the Mathematics.

The Emperor undertook that progress for several reasons: the first was to
keep his Forces in continual Exercise, as well in time of Peace as War; and
therefore having settled a firm Peace in all the parts of that vast Empire, he
recalled out of the several Provinces his best Troops hither; and has resolved
in Council, every three years to make Expeditions of this nature in several
seasons; to teach them by pursuing Stags, wild Boars, Bears, and Tigers, to
overcome the Enemies of the Empire, or at least to hinder that the Luxury of
China, and too much repose, may not soften their Courage, and make them
degenerate from their Primitive Valor.

The truth is, these ways of Hunting look liker a Military Expedition than a
Pastime; for as I have already observed, the Emperor had in his Retinue an
hundred thousand horse, and above threescore thousand men, all armed with
Arrows and Cymiters, divided into Companies, and marching after their Colors
in order of Battle, with beat of Drums and sound of Trumpets. Whilst they
hunted they invested whole Mountains and Forests, as if they had been Towns
they were about to besiege, in that imitating the huntings of the Eastern
Tartarians, which I mentioned in my last Letter. That Army had its Van, its
Rear, and Main Body, its Right and Left Wings Commanded by so many General
Officers and little Kings. There was a necessity during the space of above
threescore and ten days they were upon the march, that Provisions and
Ammunition should be carried about for them in Wagons, upon Camels, Horses,
and Mules, in very rough and difficult ways; for in all West-Tartary (I call it
Western, not with reference to China, which lies Westward of it) but with
relation to East-Tartary) there is nothing to be found but Rocks and Mountains,
Hills and Dales. There are neither Towns nor Villages, nor indeed any houses
there; the Inhabitants lodge in Tents pitched here and there in the fields.
They are for most part Herdsmen, and remove their Tents from one Valley to
another, according as the Pastures are better or worse; there they feed Cattle,
Horse, and Camels: They have no breed of Hogs, nor of any of those other
Creatures which in other places are bred in Towns and Villages, as Pullets and
Geese; but only of such as an uncultivated Land can feed with the Herbs that
grow naturally of themselves. They spend their time either in Hunting, or else
in doing nothing at all; and as they neither sow nor labor the Land, so they
have no crop, but live on Milk, Cheese, and Flesh, and have a kind of Liquor
not unlike to our Brandy, wherein they carrouze, and make themselves often
drunk. In a word, from morning till night all their care is to eat and drink,
like the Beasts and Herds they keep.

They have nevertheless their Priests, whom they call Lamas, for whom they have
a singular veneration; wherein they differ from the East-Tartars, who for most
part have no Religion, nor believe at all in any God. In short, both the one
and the others are slaves, and in all things depend on the wills of their
Masters, whose Religion and Manners they blindly embrace and follow; like to
their Beasts in that too, which go whither men lead or drive them, and not
where they ought to go.

This part of Tartary lies beyond that prodigious Wall of China, about a
thousand Chinese furlongs; that is to say, above three hundred European miles,
and bears from North-East to North. The Emperor marched on horseback at the
head of his Army over these desert places, over craggy Mountains distant from
the highway, all day long exposed to the heat of the Sun, the Rains, and all
the inconveniences of the weather. Many who have been in the late Wars assured
me, that they had not suffered so much during that time, as during this match
of Hunting; so that the Emperor, whose chief end was to keep his Troops in
Exercise, has completely performed what he intended.

The second reason he had for making that Progress, was, that he might keep the
Western Tartars in awe, and prevent the pernicious designs which they might
hatch against the State.

And that made him enter their Country with so great an Army, and so great
Preparatives of War, taking a Train of Artillery along with him, which he
ordered now and then to be discharged in the Valleys, that by the noise and
fire that broke out of the mouths of the Dragons with which they are adorned,
he might spread terror far and near upon the Rode.

Besides all this Retinue, he would also be attended by all the marks of
Grandeur which environ him at the Court of Pekin; by that multitude of Drums,
Trumpets, Timbrels, and other Instruments of Music, which play in Consort
whilst he is at Table, and with the noise whereof he enters and comes out of
his Palace: All this he did to terrify those barbarous people by that external
pomp, and to imprint in them that fear and reverence which is due to the
Imperial Majesty.

For the Empire of China never had at any time more dreadful Enemies, than the
Western Tartars, who beginning on the East of China, surround it with vast
numbers of people, and block it up to the North and West. And it was against
their Incursions that a Chinese Emperor built that great Wall, which divides
China from their Country. I have crossed it four times, and narrowly considered
it; and without exaggeration I may say, that the seven wonders of the World put
together, are not comparable to this work; and all that Fame has published
concerning it among the Europeans, comes far short of what I my self have seen.

I admired it particularly for two things; first, That in that long extent from
East to West, it runs along not only vast Fields, but also over most high
Mountains, upon which it rises gradually, and is fortified by intervals with
great Towers, that are not distant from one another above two Cross-bow-shot.
Upon our return I had the curiosity to measure the height of it in one place by
means of an Instrument, and found it in that part to be a thousand and thirty
seven Geometrical foot above the Horizon; so that it is not to be conceived how
such a prodigious Bulwark could be raised to that height in a dry Country and
full of Mountains, where they were obliged with incredible labor to bring from
a far the water, bricks, mortar, and all the necessary materials for the
raising of so great a work.

The other thing that surprised me was, that this Wall is not carried on upon
the same line, but turns and winds in several places according to the
disposition of the Mountains; in such a manner, that instead of one Wall, it
may be said there are three, which encompass all that great part of China.

But after all, the Monarch who in our days has united the Chinese and Tartars
under one Dominion, has done somewhat more for the security of China, than
that Chinese Emperor who built that long wall; for having reduced the Weastern
Tartars, partly by cunning, and partly by force, he has obliged them to go and
live three hundred miles beyond the Wall of China: And at that distance he has
distributed amongst them Lands and Pasturage, giving at the same time their
Country to other Tartars his Subjects, who at present inhabit it. Nevertheless,
the Western Tartars are so powerful, that if they agreed among themselves, they
might still render themselves Masters of all China, and East-Tartary, as it is
confessed by the Eastern Tartars themselves.

I said that the Tartarian Monarch who conquered China, used Artifice for
subduing the Western Tartars; for it was one of his chief cares by Royal Bounty
and demonstrations of a singular Affection, to engage the Lamas into his
interests. These having great Credit and Authority over the whole Nation,
easily persuaded them to submit to the Government of so great a Prince; and it
is in consideration of that service rendered to the State, that the present
Emperor still looks upon the Lamas with a favorable eye, that he is liberal
unto them, and makes use of them to keep the Tartars in due obedience; though
inwardly he despises them, looking upon them as a dull and blockish sort of
men, who have not the least tincture of Arts and Sciences, wherein that Prince,
doubtless, shows a great deal of Wisdom and Policy in disguising so his real
thoughts, by those external marks of esteem and kindness.

He has divided that vast extent of Land into forty eight Provinces which are
subject and tributary unto him. Hence it is that the Emperor who at present
Reigns in China, and in both the Tartaries, may justly be called the greatest
and most powerful Monarch of Asia, having so many vast Countries under him
united and not intercepted by the Lands of any foreign Prince; and he alone
being as the Soul, which gives life and motion to all the Members of so great a
Body.

For since he has taken the Government upon him, he has never entrusted the
care of it to any of the Colaos, or the great men of his Court: nor has he
ever suffered any of the Eunuchs of the Palace, any of his Pages, or any of
those young Lords that have been bred with him, to dispose of any thing within
his house, or regulate any matter by themselves. This will appear very strange,
especially if one consider how his Predecessors were wont to act on such
occasions.

With wonderful equity he punishes the great as well as the small, he turns
them out of their Places, and degrades them from their Dignity, always
proportionating the punishment to the heinousness of their Crime. He himself
takes cognizance of the Affairs that are handled in the Royal Council, and in
the other Tribunals, requiring an exact account of the Judgments and Sentences
that have been past therein. In a word, he disposes of all, and orders every
thing by himself: And that absolute Authority which he has thus taken to
himself, is the cause that the greatest Lords of the Court, and those of the
highest Quality in the Empire, even the Princes of the Blood themselves, never
ap^r in his presence, but with profound respect and reverence.

After all, the Lamas or Tartarian Priests, of whom we have been speaking, are
not only esteemed by the people, but also by the Lords and Princes of their
Nation, who for politic reasons show them a great deal of friendship; and that
makes us fear that the Christian Religion will not find so easy an entry into
West-Tartary. They have a great power also upon the Mind of the Queen Mother,
who is of their Country, and at present seventy years of age. They have often
told her, that the Sect whereof she makes profession, has none more declared
Enemies than us: And it is a kind of Miracle, or at least a special protection
of God, that notwithstanding this, the Emperor who has a great deal of
respect and esteem for her, has still heaped honor and favors upon us,
always considering us in anotherguess manner than he does the Lamas.

During our progress, the Princes and chief Officers of the Army, going often
to make their Court to the Queen, and we being advised to do the like also, we
thought fit first to consult a Courtier that has a great kindness for us, and
who speaks in our favors to the Emperor when we have any business: This Lord
going into the Princes Tent, told him what passed; and immediately coming out
again, said to us, The Emperor has given me to understand, that it is not
necessary you should attend the Queen as others do. Which convinced us that
that Princess had no kindness for us.

The third reason that engaged the Emperor into this progress, was his Health;
for he has found by a pretty long experience, that when he stays too long at
Pekin, he never fails to fall into some sickness, which he prevents by means of
such progresses. For all the while they continue, he keeps no company with
women, and, which may seem very strange, there was not a woman in all that
great Army, except those who attended the Queen Mother; and that is a new thing
too that she accompanied the King this year, the like being never practiced
before but once, when he took the three Queens with him to the Capital City of
the Province of Leaotum, to visit the Sepulchers of their Ancestors.

The Emperor and Queen Mother intended also by that Journey to avoid the
excessive heat that is at Pekin during the Dog Days; for in that part of
Tartary, there blows so cold a wind in the Months of July and August,
especially in the nightime, that people are obliged to wear thick clothes and
furs. The reason that may be given for so extraordinary a cold, is, that that
Region lies very high, and is full of Mountains: Amongst others there is one,
on which for five or six days march we were always going upwards. The Emperor
being desirous to know how much it surpassed in height the plains of Pekin,
which are about three hundred miles distant from it; having upon our return
measured above an hundred Mountains that are upon the Rode, we found that it
was elevated three thousand Geometrical paces above the Sea that is nearest to
Pekin.

The Saltpeter wherewith these Countries abound, may likewise contribute to
that great cold, which is so violent, that digging three or four foot deep in
the Earth, we found frozen clods and heaps of ice.

A great many little Kings of West Tartary came with their Children from all
hands, some three hundred, and some five hundred miles to salute the Emperor.
These Princes who for most part know no other Language but their Mother Tongue,
which differs much from what is spoken in East-Tartary, with their eyes and
gestures showed us a great deal of civility. Some amongst them had traveled to
Pekin to see the Court, and had seen our Church there.

A day or two before we arrived at the Mountain, which was the period of our
Journey, we met a little King of great age, who was coming back from the
Emperor: perceiving us, he stopped with all his Retinue, and made his
Interpreter ask which of us it was that was called Nauhoaii; one of our
Servants having made a sign that it was I, the Prince accosted me with much
civility, and told me that of a long time he had known my Name, and that he
desired to be acquainted with me. With the same signs of affection he spoke
also to Father Grimaldi. The favorable reception we had from him at that time,
gives us some grounds to hope that our Religion may find easy access to these
Princes, especially if their esteem be gained by means of the Mathematics. And
if there be any design to propagate the Faith as far as their Country, the
surest way to succeed for many reasons that I have not time to allege here,
would be to begin first with other more remote Tartars, who are not Subjects of
this Empire; from thence one might proceed to these, advancing by little and
little toward China.

During the whole progress, the Emperor continued to express his good will
toward us by the singular favors he did us in sight of his Army, which he did
not to any body else.

Meeting us one day in a great Valley, where we were taking the height and
distance of some Mountains, he stopped with all the Court, and calling to us at a
great distance, he asked us in the Chinese Language, Hao mo? that is to say, Are
you in health? Afterward he put a great many questions to us in Tartarish,
concerning the height of these Mountains, which I answered in the same Language
also. Then turning to the Lords that were about him, he spoke to them of us in
most obliging terms, as I was told that very evening by the Prince his Uncle,
who was then by him.

He has besides expressed his kindness to us, by causing dishes to be sent
from his Table to our Tent, and sometimes honoring us so far as to make us eat
in his own; with that regard to our days of fasting and abstinence, that
whenever he did us that honor, he sent us only such dishes as we could make
use of.

The Emperors eldest Son, after his Fathers example, showed us likewise much
kindness; for being forced to make a stop for above ten days, because of a fall
he had from a horse, whereby he received a hurt in the right shoulder, and a
part of the Army (in which we were) staying for him, whilst the Emperor with
the rest continued his Hunting; he failed not all that while to send us once,
nay sometimes twice a day Victuals from his Table. But to conclude, we look
upon all these favors of the Royal Family, as the effects of a particular
Providence, which watches over us and the Christian Interest, and for which we
have so much the more reason to thank God, that the Emperors affection appears
not always so constant toward the great men of the Empire, nor even toward
the Princes of the Blood.

As to the other particulars of our Journey, they are much like to those that
happened last year in our progress to East-Tartary, which I described at large in
my last Letter; that is to say, we were accommodated with the Emperors Horses
and Litters, lodged in the Tents, and eat at the Table of the Prince his Uncle,
to whom he particularly recommended us.

For above six hundred miles that we made in going and coming (for we returned
not the same way we went) he caused a great way to be made over the Mountains
and Valleys for the convenience of the Queen Mother, who was carried in a
Chair; he caused a great many Bridges also to be cast over Rivers and Torrents,
Rocks and points of Mountains to be cut through with incredible labor and
charge. Father Grimaldi will describe the other circumstances in his Letter.

I have spoken elsewhere of the fruit that Religion may reap from our Journey.
Let it suffice in this place to say, that the Emperor, whose will and pleasure
we cannot in the least resist, without exposing this mission to manifest
danger, commanded us to follow him; I have nevertheless spoken twice to that
Court-Lord who is our particular friend, that he might get us excused from such
long Journeys, and especially my self, who am not now of an Age fit for them. I
have endeavored to obtain at least that the Emperor would be satisfied with
one of us. Upon the Rode the Letters of our Fathers came always safe to my
hands, and I had the convenience of writing to them by the Couriers that went
continually to the Royal City, or came from thence. I wrote this in haste, that
I may persist in giving you an account of our Occupations.

An necessary Explication for justifying the Geography which is supposed in
these LETTERS.
IT may be thought strange, that the Author of these Letters makes mention in
the first of a kind of War betwixt the Eastern Tartars, and the Muscovites,
considering the vast distance that seems to be betwixt these people in the
Geographical Maps; but they who know how far the Muscovites have enlarged the
bounds of their Empire along the Sea of Tartary, will judge the thing to be
less difficult: Besides, those who have seen these Countries, have made
discoveries far different from what our Geographers have hitherto informed us
of. Very lately Monsieur d'Arcy, who Commands a Kings Ship in the Mareshal
d'Estrees Fleet, told us, That serving in Poland, and having been made
Governor of a place toward Muscovie, some Muscovite Ambassadors passed that
way upon their return, and that he having entertained them so as to put them
into a good humor, one of them showed him a new Map of the Countries that lie
betwixt Muscovie and China, and told him, that from three Towns which he showed
him, whose Names were Lopsla, Abasinko, Nerginsco, all three under the Dominion
of the great Dukes, though lying in great Tartary, there was a way to Pekin,
not above five and twenty or thirty days Journey. That Map must needs be kept
very private in Muscovie, for next day the Muscovite was mad with himself for
having given it him, saying, that he would pay dear for it if it came to be
known. The Officer being since come back into France, has given a Copy of it
to the King, and another to the Marquess of Seignelay. To confirm this, we may
add what a Frenchman wrote two months ago from Muscovie, that they were
actually raising Forces there for making War against the Chinese.

A NEW DESCENT OF THE SPANIARDS On the Island of Califurnia. In the Year 1683.
THE great Island of Califurnia has appeared a Conquest worthy the Spanish
Arms, ever since Mexico was annexed to that Crown. Zeal for Religion, and the
Salvation of the Islanders, with the hopes that those who have failed upon
these Coasts, have always given us of fishing Pearls there in abundance, have
made us still desirous to extend the Empire of our Nation unto those vast and
rich Countries. The famous Don Fernando Cortez Marquess del Valle, was the
first that conceived that design, and made the Voyage; but the fear of troubles
wherewith he he was threatened in a new-conquered Country, having recalled him
to Mexico, stifled the hopes that all had of the success of his valor and good
fortune. Many great Captains since his time have renewed that Enterprise, but
it has always been crossed by some unexpected accident; and all that has been
got by several descents made on that Island, was only some knowledge of the
people who inhabit it, of Pearls that may be fished, and of a kind of Amber
that may be found there.

The glory of succeeding in that Conquest, no less important for Religion, than
advantageous for our Commerce, was reserved for our Monarch, at whose charge
this last Expedition was made, from the first success whereof we have ground to
expect future prosperity. The Marquess of Laguna, Viceroy and Captain General
of Mexico, which we call New-Spain, having received orders from his Majesty to
spare no cost in those Enterprises which might give hopes of propagating the
Faith amongst barbarous Nations, fitted out two men of War, with a Billander,
to serve them for a Pinnace; and having manned them well, and provided them
with all sorts of Ammunition, sent them upon the Conquest under the conduct of
Don Isidore d'Atondo, Admiral of New-Spain, from whose Letters this Relation
has been taken.

This little Fleet put out from the Port of Chalaca in New Galicia the 18th day
of January, 1683.

For the first days the wind was contrary, so that they were forced to sail
upon a wind, and by a storm were driven into the Port of Mazatlan, where the
two ships entered the Ninth of February. March the Eighteenth they arrived at
the mouth of the River of Cinaloa, where there is a pretty commodious Harbor,
there they refreshed for some time, and then continued there course along the
Coast of Cinaloa, to the Isles of St. Ignatius, where they stood away before
the wind, that they might sail faster, or rather not so slowly as they had done
till then. Their course was almost from East to West, and the weather so good,
that in one nights sailing they came in sight of Ceralbo, and made the Land of
Califurnia, notwithstanding the great Currents that run in those Streights, and
impetuously fall into the Pacifick Sea: but the wind changing all of a sudden,
they could not come up with it till three days after. From thence they sailed
North-West along the shore; and having made eight Leagues more, they arrived at
length at the entry of the famous Haven of our Lady of Peace. Opinions differ
much about the situation of that Port: the ordinary Maps place it in 24
degrees; some put it in 27, and others betwixt the 25 and 26 degree. The Sea
Cart of Capt. Francis de Lureville, which puts it in the 24 degree, in that
agrees with those of Ionsonius: but Father Eusebius Francis Kino, a Jesuit and
famous Mathematician, who went the Voyage, says that the mouth of that Haven
lies in 24 degrees 45 minutes. This gave some cause to doubt whether or not
that was the real Haven of Peace; and the doubt was the more confirmed, that
the Indians whom they found in the Port, understood not one word of what the
Jesuits who were on board said to them, who spoke according to a Dictionary of
words made by the Fathers of their Society when the Spaniards made the former
Expeditions to the Haven of Peace. To which it may be added, that the ancient
Relations of these Expeditions, observed that the Indians of that Port, were
wont to come out upon floats and in Canoes to meet the Ships with great
demonstrations of friendship, and at this time no float nor Canoe appeared, nor
indeed for some days was there any person to be seen. The Admiral Don Isidore
d' Atondo, who had the same doubt, thinks to satisfy it by alleging that the
Indians, called Guaricures, who according to the ancient Relations made War
with those of the Haven of Peace, might have driven out the ancient
Inhabitants, and made themselves Masters of the Country, because the Landmarks
which are given that the Cape of St. Luke is on the point of the Isle of
Ceralbo, prove that that Port is the ancient Haven of Peace: However it be, we
shall call it by that Name. They entered it the Thirtieth of March, having
first kept the Festival of St. Joseph for nine days. The Bay is very large, and
much like to that of Cadiz. Next day they advanced five or six Leagues farther
up, and came to an Anchor: the Admiral and Captains went ashore in two
Shalloops, and landed in a very pleasant place, full of Palm Trees, where they
found a Fountain of excellent fresh water. They saw no body, but by the tracts
they observed, they concluded that there were men there: They went no farther
that day, but came back and lay upon the shore.

The day following all came ashore, and made a great Cross, which they planted
upon an Eminence, to take possession of the Country in the Name of God, and of
the Catholic King. They had a mind to know whether there might be some Indians
hid in the thick woods that cover the Mountain: for that end they left some
things fit for eating, as Indian Corn, Biscuit, and other things, amongst which
they mingled some Beads of a Chaplet, contenting themselves with that
discovery, and so re-imbarked.

They landed upon the Third of April, and found the things they had left
untouched in the same place. The Admiral, accompanied with a Captain and some
Soldiers, went up to a little hill, from which he could discover nothing but a
great Lake, and so returned to the Ship. On Sunday after Mass, they sent out
upon discovery a Shalloop into a narrow passage that reaches above three
Leagues: Father Kino writes, that the farther end of that straight lies in 24
degrees 10 minutes. In the evening they fell a fishing, and took a great many
Sea-wolves, Soles, Thornbacks, and several other fish of a prodigious bigness,
whereof they made provision for three days; but amongst these fish some they
knew to be poisonous. On Monday they came ashore again in the same place where
they landed at first: they began to build a little Fort with a Church which
they Dedicated to Our Lady of Guadalupa, because under her Auspices they had
undertaken the Conquest of that Country. That precaution was not useless; for
the Admiral and some Captains advancing up to a height, discovered great smoke,
which is the signal given by the Califurnians to assemble when they go out to
War. The Admiral thought fit to fortify himself, which was done with trunks of
Palm Trees, amongst which instead of faggots, we mingled the bundles and
knapsacks of the Soldiers, that if it was needful they might fire their
Artillery, and cover themselves from the Arrows and Darts of the Indians. They
planted three pieces of Cannon upon the Fort, which was made in form of a
half moon; and having taken these necessary cautions, they spent the night in
great security. The Soldiers going out next day to clear a little hill, and to
cut Timber for the Fortifications, heard all of a sudden the terrible cries of
the Indians, who were coming straight to the place where the Spaniards were.
The Allarm was sounded, and every one retreated in to the Foot. Hardly were
they got into a posture of defense, when there appeared thirty five Indians
well shaped, and armed with Bows, Arrows, and Darts; they drew up into a
half moon, and began to make signs that the Spaniards should be gone and* leave
their Country. The Admiral and Captains made signs to them again, that they
desired nothing but peace, and that they were come to make Alliance with them.
They made a sign to them to lay down their Arms, and that they would do the
like also; but the Indians would not.

In the mean time, Father Mathias Gogni, and Father Eusebius Francis Kino,
Missionaries of the Society of Jesus, who embarked in that Fleet to endeavor
the Conversion of those people, advanced toward them in a fearless manner, and
offered them Biscuit, Indian Corn, Beads of Jet, and many trifles which these
Barbarians look upon as very precious things. At first they would not receive
them from their hands, but made them a sign to lay them down upon the ground,
and that they would take them. The Jesuits did so; they took what was presented
them, and having eaten with great demonstrations of joy, they laid down their
Arms, came to the Fathers, and took from their hands, and the hands of the
other Spaniards, all they pleased to give them. They seemed to be very hungry,
and rubbed their belly and stomach very fast with their hand, to show the need
they had of food. Not that they wanted victuals, for they had Venision with
which they entertained the Spaniards, and some pieces of a kind of Roast-meat
which they also eat in New-Spain: But by what could be conjectured, having that
day made a long march, it was probable they were willing to reserve their
Provisions for their return, or to eat them by the Fountain which was seized by
the Spaniards. It was observed, that the Barbarians having eaten a little of
what was given them, carried the rest up to the Mountain, and then came back
again, showing by their gestures that it would be a great kindness to give them
some more. May be their wives and children were in the Neighboring woods, and
that they went to share what they got with them. That day they retired not till
toward night; and though the Spaniards were extremely well satisfied with what
had past, yet they thought they could not use too great circumspection in sight
of a people whose humor and fidelity were not as yet sufficiently known. The
days following were employed in cutting of Palm Trees and other great Timber
for fortifying the half moon. Thursday the Eighth of April the Spaniards made a
great fishing; and because the Indians appeared not that day, they suspected
they might have some bad design, and that they gathered together Forces to come
and attack them: But next day appeared fourscore and ten Indians far different
from the former, who gave the Spaniards all the testimonies of friendship that
could be desired: these showed them a Crucifix and the Image of our Lady of
Guadalupa; but it was plain enough by the surprise they seemed to be in at the
sight of these things, that they had never seen the like before. At night they
went to lie upon the Mountain, and returned next day, showing a great deal of
familiarity and freedom; for they mingled with the Spaniards without any fear,
and indeed with a little too much liberty, stealing some small trifles with
wonderful dexterity and slight. The Admiral perceiving that disorder, thought
fit to remedy it by inspiring into them fear and respect. And this is the
course he took: He caused a very thick earthen Buckler to be fastened to the
bones of a Whale that were found there by chance; and then made a sign to the
Barbarians to shoot their Arrows against that Buckler. Some of the strongest
did so with great dexterity, but the Arrows broke, and scarcely grazed the hair
of it, which surprised them; for their Arrows are so sharp and piercing, that
they shoot all sorts of Beasts through and through. The Armiral asked them by
sign, if they had a mind to see the force of the Spanish Arms, because they
imagined, as they confessed afterward, that the Harquebuse was a kind of Bow,
and the scowring-stick the Arrow; and that they might know what the force of
Firearms was, he ordered Lieutenant Don Martin Verastigui to shoot at the
Buckler: the Lieutenant standing six paces farther off of the Buckler than they
did, discharged his Harquebuse, and pierced through not only the leather of
the Buckler, but also the bone of the Whale to which it was fastened. The
Barbarians in amazement drew nigh to see the shot, and asked a Bullet, in hopes
they might do as much: They had a Bullet given them, which they put to the end
of a Dart, and then blew with all their force, thinking that the blowing was
the cause of the report which they had heard; but so soon as they let the
Bullet go, it fell at their feet. This experiment frightened them, and made that
they durst not steal any thing more; nay, if they chanced to take any thing,
they gave it back so soon as they were bid. The Spaniards asked by sign if
there was any River in the Country; and this one of them did to make his Answer
be understood: He took a Dart, and pointing it Westward, began to go at a trot,
and having made a turn and a half round the Camp, he turned the point of his
Dart toward the Sun, thereby signifying that there was a River distant as much
way as by going at that rate one might accomplish in the space that the Sun
takes to make a turn and a halfround the World; which was as much as if he had
said that there was a River Westward a day and a halfs Journey from the Camp.
They gave then a handful of Salt, asking if they had any of it; they put some
of it into their mouths, and made a sign by turning the head, that they had
not. When they had done so, they put their hands upon their cheeks, and
shutting their eyes, took leave of the company, intimating by that gesture,
that they were going to sleep.

The Jesuits who made the Voyage for no other end but to endeavor the
Conversion of those people, applied themselves presently to the learning of
their Language: They most exactly remarked all the words which they understood,
and immediately wrote them down that they might learn them; and Father Kino,
who begins to understand that Tongue, affirms that it is very clear, and
conta^s all the Letters of the Alphabet. The people a^ docile, affable, and of
a very cheerful humor; they pronounce Spanish very distinctly, and from the
very first their Children came and played with the Children of the Spaniards,
as familiarly as if they had been bred together.

There scarcely past a day but some new Indians came to the Camp. The Spaniards
having kept Holy-Thursday with a great deal of Devotion, in the Church which
they had made of the trunks of Trees, forty Indians different from those whom
they had seen before, came to them: They made friendship with them, and gave
them some trifles in recompense for some loads of Timber that they were desired
to carry. They were so well satisfied with these Presents, that they all came
back next day with their loads of wood upon their back, thinking thereby to
please the Spaniards.

They are a very teachable people, take instruction quickly, pray with the
Fathers, make the sign of the Cross, and clearly and distinctly repeat the
Prayers which they are taught to say; for though they understand them not, yet
the Name of GOD, which is contained in these Prayers, is capable of softning
their hearts, and producing great effects in their Souls.

The ingenious way of expressing any thing by gestures, shows very well that
they want not wit. An old man who had had five Children, took this course to
make the Spaniards understand that he had buried one of them: he dug a hole,
took a piece of wood and covered it therein with earth; endeavoring by that
representation to comfort himself for the loss he had suffered. In this manner
these good people converse with the Spaniards, and inform them of many things,
which would be too long to be related here. It is not as yet known if they have
any Cottages: The Admiral having commanded a Corporal and some Soldiers to
march up as far as they could in the Country, to discover if there were any;
and they having marched about three Leagues, went up to a very high place, from
whence they perceived a great Lake, lovely Plains, and thick smoke at a vast
distance; but saw neither men nor houses.

The Air of this Island is very good and pleasant; it has great Mountains
covered with wood, full of Wild-fowl, Rabbets, and Deer. The Soil seems to be
very fit for all sorts of Grain; there is already some Indian Corn sowed,
Melons, and other Seeds which the Spaniards carried with them. The Meadows and
lovely Pasture-ground which they have found there, make them believe it will
breed all sorts of Beasts: and therefore the Admiral sent off the best Ship to
import some for breeding; they have advice that she was arrived at Hiaqui,
where they had taken on board all that the Admiral demanded.

Some Soldiers walking abroad at a pretty good distance from the Camp, found a
Cave, wherein was a great quantity of dead men's bones, which made them
conjecture they bury their dead there. They found also the marks of some
Vessels, which is probable were the remains of the shipwreck that Captain
Ortega made in that Port, in the year 1633, or 1634. They found Mineral stones
there also, and Mother of Pearl, which that great Gulf is full of, if the
ancient Relations may be believed; but what wonders soever they report as to
that, there have been none found as yet, and the Indians themselves know of no
such thing. May be there are none to be found but in the Isles, which are very
numerous in the middle of this Gulf, especially to the North-West. They found
likewise in the same Cave, the bones of a Whale of so prodigious a bigness,
that one single Jaw Bone was five else broad. The Admiral Don Isidore d'Atondo
impatiently expects the horses that are to be brought to him from Hiaqui, that
he may advance farther up into the Country, and go to the other side of the
Haven, and to St. Mary Magdalene's Bay, which is twenty Leagues from the Haven
of Peace.

The length of this Island North-East and South-West from the Cape St. Luke to
Cape Mendozino, is 1700 Leagues; its breadth East and North-West from Sir
Francis Drake's Port, to Cape Mendozino, is 500 Leagues, according to the
ancient Relations. However, when the Country is wholly discovered, a more
certain Account may be given of it.

FINIS.

