A REMARKABLE PASSAGE, OR, A VVITTY DISCOVRSE between two Citizens and the
Bishop of LINCOLN, Concerning the Book of Common Prayer, before the Lords of
the PARLIAMENT House. With the pleasant Passages in their Discourse worthy to
be observed by the READER.

LONDON: Printed in the year 1641.

A REMARKABLE PASSAGE, OR WITTY Discourse, between two Citizens and the Bishop
of LINCOLN.
Our Sovereign Lord King Charles after his Royal entertainment by his most
loving and faithful Subjects of this famous City of London, by those grave
Senators of the City, showing their joyfulnesse by their obedience and duty;
and the meaner sort of people rejoicing in their hearts, in hopes of a happy
reformation, that would by his means be put forward, after they had conducted
his Majesty home to White Hall, where after many kind congratulations, the
Lord Mayor left him with the rest of the Citizens, and returned home to their
several habitations triumphing. And so leaving the perambulation, falling upon
the circumstance and matter.

His Majesty after his safe and happy return went to the Parliament House,
And viewing the Trained Band which tended there for the safeguard of that
Honorable House, he fearing some casualties that might happen by it, discharged
them, thinking they would be as safe as his Sacred Person. But upon their
discharge, some godly Christians of honest Report, house keepers of reputation
and good credit; the streams of their thoughts running upon some other object,
went thither with some discontented fears, to show their loving affections,
with their lives and estates, as it did appear by their designs, but there
being legions of spirits foming after the honor of the world, rather then the
glory of God.

There presently coming by the Bishop of Lincoln (^A) by name, and spying
these Christians there, he certified the Parliament, that there was a tumult
gathered together, of inhumane fellows. There being at that time between both
Houses some discord about Bishops, he certifying at that time that there was
none but such there as could not abide the Divine Service. Upon his Relation
there was two of them called in before the House and examined, upon this
Cogitation which came into the Bishops brain. Whereupon after a while one was
asked where he was at Church by the Honorable House, which being present with
them there the Bishop of Lincoln; The parties answer was, That he was at
Aldermanbury at Master Calamies. Whereupon the Bishop asked him, If he were
present all the while at the Divine Service; He made Answer, that he was there
from the beginning to the ending. (which being as short an answer, as the
matter used in that Congregation.) Then was the other Questioned, where he was
at Church; His Answer was, That he was at Wool-Church. Then the Bishop demanded
of him, whether he was at Divine Service or no; but his reply was agreeable to
the others answer, being very wittily replied, which was, from one end to the
other, there being no Service read at all, being well known every where. This
question of the Bishop being so fully answered, one of their Honors said, they
were worthy to be recompensed for their pains; for their answer gave great
content.

Besides, their accuser the Bishop of Lincoln said, it was well done of them:
whereupon they were freed of their opposer (his aims and ends) which being
contrary to his expectation, and the rest of their Honors said, they were
worthy of recompense for their pains; for they had answered all Objections
that was put to them, and had cleared themselves.

This being a pretty remarkable passage, and let it exhort Christians to be
mild in their speeches; calling to mind an old Proverb, Ill words corrupts
good manners; therefore, let all Christians pray for peace and happiness, that
the King our anointed may flourish over us in a Joyful and settled peace, both
in this and his other two Kingdoms, that He and his people may triumph; And
the enemies of God, his Church, and People, may be confounded in their plots
and intentions.

And thus courteous Reader, I bid thee farewell.
FINIS.

