A RELATION OF THE DEFEAT Given to SIR ARTHVR FORBES And his Party, which came
from the Hills; BY CAPTAIN HEART, Of Col. TWISLETONS Regiment; At Phillip, near
Borthwick water; On Wednesday, December. 21. 1653.

In which you have the numbers that engaged on both sides: As also what slain
of the Tories, Prisoners, and Horse taken: With the names of the said
Prisoners.

Together with the number wounded on our side.

Printed in the Year 1653.

A RELATION of the Defeat given to Sir Arthur Forbes and his Party, which came
from the Hills, by Capt. Heart of Colonel Twisletons Regiment, etc.
THere being a Party of loose and broken People gathered together in the
Highlands, who having no other way to protect themselves from the due course of
Law, or to gain a livelihood, but by engaging others, as idle and desperate as
themselves, under the pretense of espousing the Quarrel of the late King, to
join with them; and amongst others, Sir Arthur Forbes being imbarqued in that
Design (against which many Testimonies have been given from on High for diverse
years past) came from the Hills with a party of about Forty eight Horse (most
of them Officers) into the Southern parts of Scotland, where having (b^ the
plundering of Horses, and addition of diverse Moss-Troopers, and other loose
persons) increased his number to about an Hundred in a body: With these on
Wednesday last, about twelve hours, he had a Randezvouz on Borthwick Brayes,
of which Capt. Heart (who was with a party of about sixty Horse of Co^
Twisletons Regiment in those parts) having knowledge, he marched toward the
Randezvouz, which was broken up before his coming whereupon, pursuing them by
the Track in the Snow, at last he got sight of them at Phi^, near
Borthwick-water. They drew up into two Bodies and faced our Men: Ours made what
have they could to charge them; After a short Conflict, it pleased the LORD to
give us the Victory over them. Our men pursued them several miles, as long as
their Horses would go they having the advantage of ours, their Horses being
fresh, and ours extreme wearied-out. There were not above Twenty five Horses of
them which escaped in a body. We took Sixty five Horses, many of them good
ones, and Sixteen Prisoners, In the Pursuit many were cut down and put off
their horses and so left, concluding those that came after would glean them;
but most of them which escaped away on foot will be known where ever they are
met, having the States Mark; and amongst the rest, Sir Arthur Forbes and Maj.
Irwin (who should have been his Major) (we took both their Horses:) Sir Arthur
Forbes being beat off his horse, shot in the thiegh, and dangerously cut in the
head, lay upon the ground as if he had been dead whilst our Men were gone on
the Pursuit, and then crept away. There were Seven of the Tories found dead,
amongst whom these are known, Capt. David Moore, and John Moore his brother,
Capt. Robert Stewart, son to the late Earl of Bothwell (who about fourteen days
since surprised the Post-Letters that were going from Leith for London) and
Lieut. Boyde. The rest not known. It is believed several other were mortally
wounded, who crept into holes and barnes, and are not yet found. Quartermaster
Ward, with fifteen or sixteen of ours wounded, and one slain. Senlis, the
High Sheriff of Roxburgh-shire, (whom they had taken out of his house)
redeemed, but one of our Troopers ran him through the thigh (not knowing him)
but not dangerous. There were about Eighteen Captains of Sir Arthur's party
before the Engagement; they bragged much what they would do to our men; but
wherein they spoke proudly God was above them, and I hope has given this as an
Earnest of what he will do for us in future Engagements: The consideration of
which will undoubtedly teach the remnant of these barbarous and perfideous
wretches (by Gods continued blessing upon us) that the visible Finger of His in
this late Transaction, will be meanly valuable to that stretched out Hand and
Arm, which is and will be daily more prosecuting of them through all their
inaccessible and idolized lurking strengths and corners; this being already
half made a certainty by the fire of dissension, already begun in their own
bowels, which now daily bringing them to the detection, conviction, and
imprisonment one of another (even to a numerous filling of our Prisons) they
cannot but foresee it (without any resentment of our power and vigilance) as a
succeeding Consequence of their inevitable ruin and destruction.

A List of the Prisoners.
David Lin, Corporal, living near Port-Patrick in Galloway. Francis Erwin,
living near Dumfrieze. John Brown, near Glasgow. William Key, in Nithedale.
John Johnson, Aunandale. William Vauce, Galloway. James Vouce, Galloway, James
Addington, Galloway. Alexander Squire, Sterling. Alexander Belfore, Perth.
William Reynolds Sterling. David Andrews, of Air. William Read, of Air. Will.
Daglashe, of Air. Thomas Rudde, of Northumberland. Andrew Ker, living near
Kelso. Two more left at Philipp, the place of the Engagement.
FINIS.

