A RELATION of the VICTORY Gained by the Imperialists and Polanders near
Burkan, right over against Strigonia, called Gran, the 9th of October New Style
1683.
THE Emperor's and the Polonian Armies, under the Command of His Majesty of
Poland, and His Highness the Duke of Lorrain, being marched into Hungary, after
having past the Danube upon a Bridge of Boats, made at Wisar near Comorra, the
King of Poland would march to Attack a Fort called Burkan, which covers the
head of the Bridge of Strigonia, called Gran: He marched on the 7th. instant,
with so much diligence, that his Army was near a League and a half before the
Emperors, and even the Duke of Lorrain knew not that he was so far advanced.
His Highness Marched only with the Cavalry, for the Infantry were six Leagues
behind; The Imperialists had not marched a League, when the King of Poland sent
in all have, to desire His Highness to come up without losing time, and to
Advertise him that he was at Blows with the Enemies: Whereupon His Highness
marched with what have he could, but the distance that was between the King and
the Imperialists, caused the loss of some time. As soon as the Duke of Lorrain
arrived with the foremost Squadrons of his Troops, the Polanders retreated to
join him, that so they might avoid a greater disorder than that which they
began to be in. The meddley was hot; the King was in some danger; Prince
Alexander his Son, advancing as far as any, had is Horse killed under him; a
Palatine and some others also were killed. As soon as the Turks saw the
Christian Army in Batalia, they Retreated.

The Polanders this day gave the right hand to the Imperialists. The King of
Poland, who had caused his Dragoons to alight, thought to attack the Fortress
of Burkan, and to carry it by assault. The Enemies immediately Sallied from
behind their Re-intrenchements in small Troops, to draw on the Christians, who
immediately repulsed the Turks, and made them retreat, which they did only to
amuse the Christians; for in the mean time they caused 5 or 6000 Janisaries to
creep along a Hill without being perceive; These fell upon the Flank of the
Poles, and entertained them so ill, that they were put to confusion, and lost
more than 1000 men in this Encounter; and the Regiment of the Great Marshal
Jablouniski was the worst treated. But the Enemies being again assaulted by the
Polonian and German Dragoons, retreated with loss. This day being the 8th. the
Infantry are expected, and to morrow they intend to assault the Fort of Burkan,
which will not pass without Fighting.

God preserve the King, and His Highness. From the Camp before Strigonia,
called Gran, the 9th. of October, 1683.
From Sints the 13th. of October New Sile, 1683.
The Postscript of a Letter from the Marquess de Borgomayne, Ambassador
Extraordinary from Spain at the Imperial Court, to His Excellency the Marquess
de Grana, etc. arrived at Brussels the 20th of this month New Style, by a
Courier Extraordinary.
IN this moment, being 12 of the Clock at night, the Count of Sambarg arrived
here, sent by his Highness the Duke of Lorrain, with News that the Christian
Army had been in Action with 10000 Turks, of whom the greatest part were cut in
pieces, excepting a small rumber, who at first found means of passing the
Danube over the Bridge of Burkan; which being afterward broke down, deprived
the Enemies of the convenience of seeking their safety by Flying that way. They
were all killed; some cast themselves into the River and were drowned; and 800
Prisoners were taken: Among the last, was the Bassa of Silistria; and among the
dead, the New Bassa of Buda, and that of Aleppo. Burkan was presently yielded
up, on Discretion; and with this advantage the King of Poland resolved to
assault Strigonia, called Gran; and according to all appearance it will not be
long before they become Masters of it, and then proceed to further Conquests.

LONDON: Printed for C.W. MCDLXXXIII.


