A RELATION Of the Barbarous and Bloody MASSACRE Of about an hundred thousand
PROTESTANTS, BEGUN At PARIS, and carried on over all FRANCE by the PAPISTS, in
the Year 1572.

Collected out of Mezeray, Thuanus, and other approved Authors.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

A Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants, begun in Paris, and carried on
over all France, in the Year 1572.
THere are no Principles of Morality more universally received, and that make
deeper impressions on the minds of all Men, that are more necessary for the
good of humane Society, and do more resemble the Divine Perfections, than Truth
and Goodness: So that if our Savior denounced a Woe against those who teach
Men to break the least of his Commandments, what may they look for, who design
to subvert these that may be justly called the greatest of them?

That the Church of Rome teaches Barbarity and Cruelty, against all who receive
not their Opinions; and that Heretics are to be delivered to secular Princes,
who must Can. 3.
burn them without mercy; or if they have either Bowels or Conscience, so that
they will not be the Instruments of their Cruelty, that they shall lose their
Kingdoms or Dominions, is known to all that have read the Decrees of the 4th
Council in the Lateran. The violation of Public Faith, was also decreed by
another of their General Councils at Constance; in which, notwithstanding the
Sess. 19.
safe conduct that Sigismund had granted to John Husse and Jerome of Prague,
care was not only taken that they should be burnt; but they made it a standing
Rule for the time to come, That tho Heretics came to the place of Judgment,
trusting to their safe conduct, and would not have come without it; yet the
Prince who granted it, was under no Obligation by it, but the Church might
proceed to Censures and Punishment. By these Decrees, Cruelty and Treachery are
become a part of their Doctrine, and they may join them to their Creed, upon as
good Reasons as they can show for many of their other Additions.

The Nature of Man is not yet sunk so low, as easily to hear these things
without horror: therefore it is fit they should be kept among the Secrets of
their Religion, till a fit opportunity appear, in which they may serve a turn:
and then we need not doubt but they will be made use of. If any will be so
charitable to their Church, as not easily to believe this, the History of the
Parisian Massacre may satisfy them to the full: which Thuanus says, was a
Pitch of Barbarity beyond any thing that former Ages had ever seen: And if the
Irish Massacre, flowing from the same Spirit, and the same Principles, had not
gone beyond it, we might have reasonably concluded, that it could never be
matched again. But we may be taught from such Precedents, what we ought to
expect, when ever we are at the mercy of Persons of that Religion, who, if they
be true Sons of the Church of Rome, must renounce both Faith and Mercy to all
Heretics.

I shall give the Relation of this Massacre from that celebrated late Writer of
the French History, Mr. de Mezeray, only adding some Passages out of Thuanus,
Davila, and others, where he is defective.

But I shall premise a short representation of the Civil Wars of France, which
are made use of as the Arguments for justifying that Cruelty, and by which they
do still blemish the Protestant Religion, as teaching Rebellion against Princes.

During the Reign of Francis the 1st, and Henry the 2d, the Protestant Religion
got great footing in France; the usual severities of the Church of Rome were
then employed to extirpate it; yet tho their Numbers were very great, and the
Persecution most severe, they made no resistance. But upon the death of Henry
the 2d, Catherine de Medici, the Queen Mother, with the Cardinal of Lorrain,
and the Duke of Guise, took the Government in their Hands; pretending that the
King ( Francis Thuanus.
the 2d) was of Age, being then sixteen. The Princes of the Blood on the other
hand alleged, That the Kingdom The abstract of the Books written upon the
Head, is in the Voluminous but Anonymous Historian of these Wars, printed at
Paris, An. 1581.
ought to be under a Regency till the King was at least 22 Years of Age: Since
Charles the 6th had been admitted at that Age to the Government, as a
particular mark of their esteem of him: So that tho the Age of Majority was at
25 Years, and that was a singular exception from a general Rule, yet at
furthest, it showed that the King could not assume the Government before he was
two and twenty.

It was also an undoubted Right of the Princes of the Blood to hold the
Regency, during the Minority of their Kings: and to administer it, by the
Direction of the Parliaments, and the Assembly of the States. Upon these
Points, many things were written on both sides. Thuanus, lib. 16.
The Princes of the Blood pretended, they were excluded from the Government,
against Law, and upon that were projecting how to possess themselves of the
Power; which, with the Person of the King, were violently kept from them. But
the Prince of Conde being advised to it, by Coligny then Admiral of France, did
also declare for mitigating the Severities against the Protestants. This being
the Case, that the Point was truly disputable, no Man can blame the Protestants
for joining with their Friends against their Enemies. And yet this Plot was
driven no further, than an endeavor to take the King out of the Hands of his
Mother, and the Brothers Thuanus. Mezeray.
of Lorrain, who were all Foreigners. The chief Promoter of it was a Papist,
Renaudy, and it was discovered by Avennelles; who tho he was most firm to his
Religion, being a Protestant, yet having an aversion to all Plots, revealed it
out of scruple of Conscience.

Soon after this Discovery, Francis the 2d died; and his Brother that succeeded
him, Charles the 9th was without dispute under Age, he not being then full
eleven years old. And according to the resolution of many great Lawyers, in the
case of his Brother, the Kingdom ought to have been under a Regency, during all
the Wars that preceded the Massacre, for he was then but two and twenty. At
first it was agreed to, that the King of Navarre, as the first Prince of the
Blood, ought to be Regent; but he being wrought on, by the Queen Mother and her
Party, and drawn over to them, the Lawyers were again set to examine, How far
the Power of the Regent did extend: Many published their Opinions, That the
other Princes of the Blood ought to have their share in the Regency, and that
the Regents might be checked by the Courts of Parliaments, and were subject to
an Assembly of the States.

The chief Point of State, then under Consideration, was, What way to proceed
with the Protestants, whose Numbers grew daily, and were now more considerable,
having such powerful Heads. A severe Edict came out against them in July 1561,
condemning all Meetings for Religious Worship, except those that were
celebrated with the Rites of the Church of Rome, banishing all the Protestant
Ministers, and appointing the Bishops to proceed against Heretics; with this
only mitigation of former Cruelties, That Banishment should be the highest
Punishment. But the Nation could not bear the Execution of this: So next
January there was a great Assembly called of the Princes of the Blood, the
Privy Counselors, and eight Courts of Parliament, in which the Edict that
carried the name of the Month, was passed. By it, the free exercise of that
Religion was tolerated, and the Magistrates were required to punish all who
should hinder or interrupt it.

Not long after that, the Duke of Guise did disturb a Davila. lib. 3
Meeting of Protestants at Vassy, as he was on his Journey to Paris; his
Servants began with reproachful words, and from these they went to blows. It
ended in a throwing of Stones, one of which hurt the Duke; but that was
severely revenged, about 60 were killed, and 200 wounded, no Age or Sex being
spared. Upon this he encouraged the violation of the Edict every where; so that
it was universally broken. The King of Navarre joined with him in these
Courses; but the Prince of Conde, that was next to him in the Royal Blood,
declared for the Edicts: Many great Lawyers were of opinion, That the Regents
Power was not so vast as to suspend, or break the Edict, and that therefore the
People might follow any Person, much more the next Prince of the Blood, in
defense of it. This Plea was yet stronger, before the Year ended, for the King
of Navarre being killed, the Prince of Conde was then by the Law of France the
Rightful Regent: So that all the Wars that followed afterward, till the Year
1570, had this to be said for them, That in the Opinion of very Learned Men,
the King was all that while under Age, that the Edicts were broken, the Kingdom
governed by a Woman, and Foreigners, against Law, and that the lawful Regent
was excluded from the Government; which made King James, whose Judgment is not
to be suspected in this Case, always justify the Protestants in France, and
excuse them from Rebellion.

This is a piece of History little understood, and generally made use of to
blemish the Reformation; therefore I thought it necessary to introduce the
following Relation, with this just account of these Wars, that were the
pretended grounds with which the House of Guise covered their own Ambition, and
hatred of the Family of Burbon.

After France had suffered all the Miseries which a course of Civil Wars, for
ten years together, carries after it, the King was advised to set on foot a
Treaty of Peace; not so much out of a design to quiet Matters by a happy
settlement, as to ensnare the Protestants into some fatal Trap, in which they
being catched, might be safely and easily destroyed. The chief Authors of this
advice, were the Queen Mother, the Cardinal of Lorrain, the Duke of Nevers, the
Count of Rets, and Birague; the last three were Italians, and so better fitted
both for designing and carrying on so wicked a Council, to which the Duke of
Anjou, afterward Henry the third, was also admitted.

They said the extirpation of Heresy might be done much cheaper than by a Civil
War. It was fit first to grant the Protestants what conditions they desired,
then to treat them with all possible kindness; by which their Jealousies were
to be once extinguished; and a confidence being begotten in them; then to draw
the chief Heads of the Party to Court, upon some specious Attractive, and there
they were sure of them. The first Bait to be offered, was the marriage of the
King's Sister to the King of Navarre, and if that succeeded not, they were to
invent still a new one, till they found that which would do the Business. All
the danger of this Council was, that the Pope and the King of Spain would be
much provoked by it; and there might be some hazard of Tumults, among the
zealous People of France, if the King seemed to favor the Heretics too much.
But they reckoned, that when the Design took effect, all who might be
discontented with the appearance of favor showed to them, would be well
satisfied, and the more the Pope and Spaniard complained of it, it would
advance their chief end, of creating a confidence in the Protestants more
effectually. Thus were their Councils laid. The Room in which this was first
projected, Thuanus lib. 49.
was the Council Chamger of Blois, where 16 years after the Duke of Guise was
killed, by Henry the third's orders. And it was more fully concluded in that
Chamber at St. Glou, where the same Henry the third was murdered by a Dominican.

The Design being agreed on, the Queen Mother made some of her Spies, among the
Protestants, assure them, that she hated the King of Spain mortally, both on
her Daughters account, that was his Queen, and as was universally believed, had
been poisoned by his Orders; as also upon the consideration of her own Family
of Florence, to which the Spaniard was then an uneasy Neighbor: and designed
to take the Territory of Siena out of their Hands. It was reasonable enough to
believe, that upon such Motives, a Woman of her temper would set on a War with
Spain. The King did also express a great inclination to the same War, and to
undertake the Protection of the Netherlands, which were then under the Tyranny
of the Duke of Alva's Government. This wanted not a fair pretense, Flanders
having been formerly subject to the Crown of France. He also seemed weary of
the greatness of the Duke of Guise and his party, which a Civil War did still
increase.

The King and the Queen Mother employed also in these Messages, Biron,
Momorancy, Cosse and others, who were Men of great Integrity, and had much
friendship for the Queen of Navarre and the Admiral, that were the Heads of the
Protestant Party. The Queen of Navarre was sensible of the great advantages her
Son would receive from such an Alliance. An Army was also promised her, for the
recovery of her Kingdom from the Spaniard; which had been easily regained, if
the Crown of France had assisted her; since the Southern parts of France were
almost all Protestants, who would have willingly served her against Spain. Only
she being a most Religious Woman, had great apprehensions of the unlawfulness,
at least the extreme danger of matching her Son to one of a different Religion;
therefore she took some time to consider of that part of the Proposition. The
Admiral was very weary of the Civil War, it both ruined his Country, and
slackened the discipline of War, which he had formerly observed with a Roman
Severity.

He thought the Conquest of the Netherlands would be an easy and a great
accession to the Crown; he knew there was none so likely to be employed in it
as himself, and he was resolved to carry all the Soldiers of the Religion with
him. And being Admiral, he also designed to raise the greatness of the Crown
both at Sea, and in the Newfound World, which was then sending over an
incredible deal of Wealth to Spain; in which the Spaniards who had landed in
Florida, and killed a Colony of the French, that was settled there, had given
just cause to make War upon them. Therefore as he had often expressed his being
so averse to a Civil War, that he could no longer look on and see the Miseries
it brought on his Country; so he was made believe, the King did in good earnest
intend to assist the Flemings, which being, both against the Spaniard, and in
defense of those of the same Religion, he would by no means hinder.

Upon these Considerations, there was a Peace concluded between the King and
the Protestants, by which the free exercise of their Religion was granted: some
Cautionary Towns were also put in their Hands, to be kept by them two years,
till there were a full settlement made of the Edicts, and the other things
agreed to, for their Security. The King acted his part with all the Artifice
possible, he became much kinder to the Family of Momorancy and the rest of the
Admirals Friends, and seemed to neglect those of Lorrain. He threatened the
Parliament of Paris, because they made some difficulty in passing the Edict in
favors of the Protestants. He went secretly to meet with Lewis Count of
Nassaw, and treated with him about the Wars of the Netherlands. He married the
Emperors Daughter, who was thought a Protestant in his Heart. He entered in a
Confederacy with Q. Elizabeth: and the Cardinal of Chastilion (the Admirals
Brother, who had renounced his red Hat, and turned a Protestant) being then in
England, was employed to set on Foot a Treaty of Marriage between the Duke of
Anjou and the Queen: A Peace was also made with the Princes of the Empire. And
tho both the Spanish Ambassador and the Legate did all they could to hinder the
Peace, and the Marriage of the King of Navarre, yet they seemed to make no
account of that at Court: Only the King gave the Legate great assurances of his
Fidelity to the Apostolic See, and that all that he was doing, was for the
interest of the Catholic Religion. And taking him one day by the Hand: He
desired him to assure the Caten. vita de Pio Quinto.
Pope, that his design in this Marriage, was that he might be revenged on those
that were Enemies to God, and Rebels against himself, and that he would either
punish them severely, and out them all in pieces, or lose his Crown. All which
he would do in compliance with the Advices he had received from the Pope, who
had continually set him on to destroy them; and he saw no way of doing it so
securely, as by getting them once to trust him, having tried all other methods
in vain. And for a pledge of his Faith, he offered him a Ring of great value;
which the Legate refused to take, pretending that he never took Presents from
any Prince, and that the Word of so great a King, was a better security than
any Pledge whatsoever.

Upon all these demonstrations of Friendship made to the Protestants, it was no
wonder if Persons of such candor, as the Queen of Navarre, and the Admiral,
were deceived. The Admiral went first to Court, where he was received by the
King with the greatest show of kindness and respect that was possible. He
embraced him thrice, laid his Cheek to his, squeezed his Hands, called him
Father, and left nothing undone that might possess him with a firm Opinion of
his Friendship. Nor was the Queen Mother less officious to express her kindness
to him. He was allowed to keep fifty Armed Gentlemen about him. An hundred
thousand Franks were sent him, for furnishing his Houses that had been spoiled
during the Wars. And which was more than all the rest, when Complaints were
carried by him to the King, of some who violated the Edicts, great Insolences
being committed in many places; the King ordered them to be exemplarily
punished. So that there was a general repining over all France, at the King's
kindness to him. The King had also told him, that now he had got him near him,
he would never suffer him to leave him any more.

The Design succeeding so well on the Admiral, the Proposition of the Marriage
was also carried on; and the Queen of Navarre was next brought to Court, but
soon after died (as was generally believed) of Poison, that was given her in
some perfumed Gloves; to conceal which, the Surgeons that opened her, would
not touch her Head, but pretended she died of an Imposthume in her side. The
Cardinal of Chastilion was also at that time poisoned, which tho afterward
confessed by him that had done it, yet was not then so much as suspected.

The King seemed more and more set on the War in Flanders. He sent both to
England, and Germany, to consult about the Preparatious for it, and had agreed
with the Prince of Orange, about the Division of the Netherlands: That all on
their side of Antwerp should come to the Crown of France: And what lay on the
other side of it, should belong to the States. He sent a Protestant his
Ambassador to Constantinople, to engage the Grand Signior unto a War with
Spain. He also furnished the Count of Nassaw with Money, and sent some of his
best Captains with him to try, if they could surprise any Towns near the
Frontier, who did their part so dexterously, that Mons was surprised by the
Count of Nassaw, and Valenciennes by La Noiie, according to Mezeray; tho he
seems to be mistaken as to Valenciennes, for Thuanus and Davila say nothing of
it, but mention Mons only. And Veremundus Frisius, who wrote the History
Printed at Edinburgh, 1573.
of that Massacre the year after, says, That they missed their Design in
surprising Valenciennes, upon which they went to Mons and carried it. Upon this
all reckoned that the King was now engaged, and the War begun. So the King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, were brought to Court, and received with all
the Marks of a firm Friendship, that could be invented. A Dispensation was
obtained from the new Pope for the Marriage. Veremundus says, Pope Pius the 5th
had always opposed it, but upon the Cardinal of Alexandria's return to Rome,
who went to assist in the Conclave, where Gregory the 13th was chosen, the new
Pope, easily granted the Bull, which was believed to have flowed from the
Information he received from that Cardinal, of the King's Design in this
Marriage, which to be sure his Holiness would neither obstruct nor delay. So
the Bull being sent to the Cardinal of Burbon, the day was set, and the chief
heads of the Protestants were all drawn into Paris, partly to assist at the
solemnities of a Marriage, which they hoped would put an end to all their
troubles; partly to get Charges in the Army, which all People believed would be
commanded by the Admiral. Only many of the hottest of them had followed Ienlis
and La Noiie into Flanders, where it was intended to abandon them to the
cruelty of the Duke of Alva, who had intercepted and cut off a great Body of
them commanded by Ienlis. The Admiral pressed the King, to declare the War
immediately; foreseeing that unless it followed suddenly, his Friends that had
surprised these Towns, would be destroyed, and the whole Design spoiled. But
the King put him off with delays, in which he expressed much confidence in him,
by telling him the secret grounds he had to distrust almost every Person about
him: and that therefore he must of necessiity settle his Court and Councils
first, before he could enter upon such a War.

But now the Design being ripe, the Duke of Guise, to whom it had also been
communicated, was employed to gather many desperate Men about him, who might be
fit to execute all Orders; and the thing getting into more hands, took wind, so
that they at Rochel being informed of some suspicious Passages, wrote to the
Admiral, to disabuse him, and desired he would leave the Court, and trust no
more to the fair appearances he saw there; since these were only the Masks of
some great Mischief that was a framing. To them he wrote a long answer, and
assured them, That the King's Heart was wholly changed, that there was never a
better Prince in the World, and that for his own part, he would die a thousand
deaths, rather than suspect him capable of so base a Design. Then he laid
before them all the reasons which induced him to believe the War with Spain was
really intended, and theresore he desired, that they would lay down their
groundless Jealousies. And when some that were about him, pressed the same
things upon him; he told them plainly, He would rather be destroyed, than make
a new Rupture; and would be dragged at Horse-heels through Paris, rather than
begin another Civil War. His Authority was so great, and his Experience so
approved, that the whole Party submitted to his Judgment: And he got some
Cautionary Towns, that were by the Treaty of Peace to be restored at the end of
two Years, to be delivered up three Weeks before the time was elapsed: Only the
Rochellers were a little more apprehensive, and would not receive a Garrison.

On the 17th of August was the King of Navarre Married, and four days were
spent in all the gallant Diversions, that are usual on such Occasions, but were
now performed with more than ordinary Magnificence and Joy.

Hitherto the Mine was working underground, and now it was time for it to
play. There was nothing could be blamed in the Conduct of the Protestants, but
too much Candor and too great Confidence. They knew they designed nothing, but
the quiet of their Country, and the greatness of the Crown. They were cajoled
with the most engaging tokens of Friendship, that ever were showed on any such
Occasion; they thought the King was sincere, and being then but coming to be of
Age, was taking new Measures. And he had so covered the Cruelty of his Temper,
with a show of good Nature, that they expected they should be most happy under
him. And for the Queen Mother, tho they knew her too well to put any confidence
in her; yet her Passion for her Family, and her Revenge for the poisoning of
her Daughter, made them think they were also well assured of her. And indeed so
deep and so refined a Dissimulation was perhaps never before acted. There was
but one part of the Kings Deportment that could give any ground for Jealousy,
the horrid and blasphemous Oaths and Imprecations, which he made use of on all
occasions to persuade them of the reality of his Professions; which always
raise suspicion in sober and wary Persons. These the King used so frequently,
that the Writers of that Time, say, That he seldom spoke three words without
some terrible Oath, or blasphemous Expression, which from his ill Example, was
so spread over all France, that none but the Protestants, spoke in any other
strain.

But now when it fell under Consideration, how their Designs should be
Executed, the Queen with her two Italian Confidents, the Count de Rets, and
Birague, who, next to the Protestants, hated the House of Guise beyond all the
World, yet dissembling it most artificially; intended that the business should
be so managed, as to ruin both the Protestants, and that Family at once:
Therefore they thought, that if some of their Followers would Assassinate the
Admiral, the Protestants would turn their Revenge on them, and they knew the
Parisians would be easily moved to rise against the Protestants; and so they
reckoned, that if an attempt was made upon the Admiral, by any of the Duke of
Guise's Creatures, his Party would presently take a severe Revenge on the Head
of the House of Guise, and the Parisians would be soon brought out to destroy
them.

They concealed this part of their Design, and in the Cabinet-Council only
proposed, that the Duke of Guise would find some person to kill the Admiral,
which should pass like an act of private Revenge; and they said, they did not
doubt, but the whole party would upon that take arms, and thereupon, there
would be a good color given, to bring out the City of Paris upon them. The
Duke of Guise being young and hot, and boiling with Revenge for his Father's
Blood, undertook it, not considering that himself might perish in the first
heat of action, as the Queen hoped he should. He pitched on Maurenel, who had
formerly assassinated another Person, and placed him in the House of one that
had been his Tutor, near St. German of Auxerre, where the Admiral used to pass,
as he went or came from the Louvre.

It was now necessary to execute their Design quickly, for the Protestants were
beginning to apprehend some danger. They saw the King was resolved, to let
those who had surprised the Towns in Flanders perish, without sending them any
Relief. The Admiral was resolved to take leave within a few days: His Friend,
the Duke of Montmorency, tho no Protestant, yet saw the Storm coming, and
retired to his House: and many little Circumstances occurred, which gave them
all just cause of fear: So the other Party had no time to lose. Therefore on
the 22d of August, about Noon as the Admiral was going Home from the Court,
reading a Paper that he had in his hand, the Assassinate that was laid for him,
shot him from the House, where the Duke of Guise had placed him; his Fuzee was
charged with three Bullets, that were believed to be poisoned. One of these
carried away part of the Forefinger of his right Hand; the other stuck in his
left Arm, and the third missed him. He received it with great presence of mind,
and pointed to the House from whence it came; he also sent one to the King to
give him notice of it, and then ordered his Arm to be bound up, and so went
Home leaning on his Servants. Some run to the House and broke into it, but
found none there, save a Lacquey, and a Maid, and the Fuzee, which the Murderer
left behind him, when he made his escape. The King was in the Tenis-Court when
the news were brought him: He personated a deep resentment, and said in a Tone
that seemed full of affliction, and with a terrible Oath, Shall I never have
quiet! and so threw away his Racquet, and went out in a rage. The Duke of Guise
did also counterfeit some Surprise.

But they missed their designs, both ways, for neither was the Admiral killed,
nor did the Protestants fly out into any disorder. The King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, came upon this to the King to complain, and desired leave to
go out of Town, since Men were not safe so near the Court. The King seemed to
resent it, more than they did, and with the horriblest Oaths he could think of,
swore he would execute such a Revenge on all that were found guilty of it,
whoever they were, that it should never be forgotten; and desired them to stay
and be Witnesses of it. The Queen Mother made also show of inflaming his Rage
with most vehement Expressions, so that they were persuaded to stay. The King
ordered the Murderer to be pursued, the two Servants to be Examined, and all
the Gates of Paris (except two) to be kept shut. The Admirals carriage on this
occasion, was suitable to the rest of his behavior, and equal to what the
greatest Hero's had ever showed. Ambrose Pare, the famous Surgeon, dressed his
Wound, he made the Incision into his Arm, that he might take out the Bullet,
and did cut off his Finger for fear of a Gangreen: But his Scissars not being
sharp enough, he put him to extreme pain, and did not cut it off but at the
third reprise: during all which, the Admiral expressed no impatience nor anger.
But as Pare told Thuanus, he said to Mr. Maur a Minister that stood by, Now I
perceive that I am beloved of God, since I suffer these Wounds for his most
holy Name. And during the Operation, he often repeated these words, O my God,
sorsake me not, and withdraw not thy wonted Favor from me! And whispered one
that was holding his Arm, in the Ear, that he should distribute an hundred
Crowns among the poor of Paris.

Next day Danivil, Cosse, and Villars, came to visit and comfort him, but
confessed it was needless, for he expressed great resolution of mind and
readiness to die, only he desired to see the King, and speak with him before he
died. Damvil and Teligny (the Admirals Son in Law) carried this Message to the
King, who very readily yielded to it. The Queen Mother apprehending the great
Genius of the Admiral, and fearing lest he should turn her Son to better
Councils, would needs go with the King. His two Brothers, with twelve of the
chief Persons in the Court, waited also on him, to make a show of putting the
more Honor on the Admiral, but really to watch the King, that he might have no
opportunity of speaking with him alone. When the King came to his Bedside, he
expressed the greatest tenderness possible, and in his Looks, and the tone of
his Voice counterfeited a most profound sorrow, and said to him, You, my
Father, have received the Wound, but I feel the smart of it, and will punish it
in so severe a manner, that the like was never seen. The Admiral thanked him,
and told him, By his Wound, he might well perceive, who were the Authors of the
Troubles of France. He pressed him earnestly to go on with the War in Flanders,
and not leave all those Gallant Persons to the Duke of Alva's Insolence and
Cruelty, who had trusted to his Protection. He complained of the Violation of
the Edict in several parts of France; and desired the King, to consider how
much it concerned him both in Honor and Interest, to keep his Faith
inviolated. The King gave him full assurances of this, but avoided the
discourse of Flanders, and with repeated Oaths told him, he would punish this
Fact against him, as if it had been done against himself. Then the Admiral
desired to speak privately with the King, which lasted not long; for the
Queen Mother, apprehending what the subject of his Discourse might be, came to
the Bedside and told the King, that so long a Conversation would much endanger
the Admirals health, and so broke it off. Yet it seems, as short as it was, it
made some Impression, for when she asked the King, what it was that he had said
to him? He answered, He had advised him to Reign himself, and he was resolved
to follow it. When this was over, the King asked the Admirals Friends, and the
Physicians many questions about his Health, and proposed for his greater
security, the carrying him to the Louvre. But the Physicians said, he could not
be safely removed. So after he had stayed an hour he left him, during which
time he acted the part, he intended to play, so well, that all the Witnesses
were satisfied with the Sincerity and Passion he expressed.

The Court of Parliament examined the Maid, and Lackquey, that were taken in
the House from whence he was shot, about the Murderer: and many presumptions
appeared against the Duke of Guise, whose Servants, they found, had brought him
to that House, and had provided an Horse for his escape. The King wrote that
same day both to his Ambassadors in foreign parts, and to the Governors of
the Provinces, showing them what had befallen the Admiral, and how much he
resented it. The next day being the 23d, the Duke of Guise and his Uncle the
Duke of Aumale, came and desired leave to go out of Town. The King by his Looks
and Carriage seemed to abhor them; and said, they might do what they pleased;
but as they went away, he said, they might go whither they would, but he should
find them out, if they appeared to be guilty of that Fact. And so they mounted
on Horseback and rode to the Port St. Anthony, as if they had intended to go
out of Town, but came back to Guise-house: and began to raise a great stir in
Paris. They called many about them, and sent their Agents all over the Town,
and sent Arms to diverse places. When News of this was brought to the Admiral,
he sent to the King to desire a Guard, so 50 were sent under the Command of
Cosseins, one of his bitterest Enemies. But to cover the matter better, some of
the King of Navarres Swisses, were sent to Guard within his House. The King did
also order all the Papists that lay near his House, to remove their Lodgings,
that the Protestants might have convenience to be about him, and gather
together if there should be any Tumult. He also desired the King of Navarre,
and the Prince of Conde would gather about them their best Friends, that they
might be prepared to defend themselves, in case the Duke of Guise should raise
any disorders.

All this seemed not only sincere, but kind; and by these Arts were the
Protestants, not only secured from their fears, but had great hopes raised in
them: And thus the greatest part of them were brought within the Net, that was
laid for their ruin. Only the Vice-Lord (or Vidam) of Chartres saw through the
disguise: And a Council of their Party being held in the Admirals Chamber, he
spoke freely, and told them, the Admirals Wound was the first Act of the
Tragedy, and more would soon follow. Therefore he proposed, that he might be
carried to Chastilion, ill as he was, in which there was less danger, than to
stay in a place where they and all their Friends would be suddenly destroyed.
Teligny and others, that were fully persuaded of the Kings good Intentions,
opposed this much, and said, it would show such a distrust of the King, as
might for ever lose him, that was then beginning to favor their Party. But the
Vidam answered, that stay who would, he would not stay longer than to Morrow,
for he was assured their stay would be fatal to themselves, and all their
Friends.

There was a perfidious Person in that Assembly, one Bouchavannes, who was an
Intelligencer to the Queen Mother, and carried presently an account of their
Consultation to her. She and her Party were now pressed with time, therefore
the execution of their Design could be no longer delayed than the next Night.
So the Council met and resolved, that not only the Persons of Quality of the
Religion should be killed, but that every one of what condition soever, that
were of that Profession should be Massacred. It was debated long, whether the
King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, should perish with the rest? for the
Duke of Guise his Party had a great mind to destroy the whole Family of
Bourbon: but as for the King of Navarre, it was thought contrary to the Laws of
Nations, of Hospitality and of Nature, to murder a King, that had come under
trust to the Court, and was now so nearly allied to the King: and was guilty of
no Crime, but what he had from his Education. So it was resolved, he should be
spared, and made change his Religion. But for the Prince of Conde, he was
naturally fierce, and that temper, joined with the memory of his Father, made
them less inclined to save him; Only the Duke of Nevers, who had married his
Wifes Sister, interposed vigorously for him, and undertook that he should
become a good Catholic, and a faithful Subject: And he prevailed, tho with
great difficulty, that he should be spared. But for the rest, it was agreed on,
to raise the Town of Paris, and set them upon them, who were inflamed into such
a rage against that Party, that they knew it would be an easy work to engage
them in any sort of Cruely against them.

The conduct of it was committed to the Duke of Guise, who undertook it very
cheerfully. He did first communicate it to the Guards, and ordered them to keep
a strict Watch, both about the Louvre, and the places where the Admiral and his
Friends were lodged, that none might escape; then he desired the Provost (or
Major) of Paris, and the chief Magistrates and Officers of the City, would meet
at Midnight in the Townhouse, where they should receive their Orders. They met
accordingly, and it was intimated to them, that the King was now resolved to
destroy the Heretics, who had so long distracted his Kingdom: that therefore
every one should go to his Quarter, and have all People in readiness, with the
greatest secrecy that might be, and that they should have many Torches and
Flambeaus ready, to light out at their Windows. The Sign should be a white
Linen Sleeve on their left Arm, and a white Cross in their Caps: and at the
tolling of the great Bell of the Palace, which should be done near the break of
Day, they should light their Torches and march.

The King in the mean while, was under great irresolution. The horror of the
Fact, the infamy that would follow it, and the danger he might be in, if it
either miscarried, or were not fully executed, could not but fill him with
Confusion. But the Queen, who had overcome all the impressions of Tenderness
and Pity, that are natural to her Sex, hearing of it, came to him, and studied
to confirm him in his former resolutions, representing to him all the trouble
they had given him in the former Wars, and that he might expect yet worse, if
he would let go this opportunity, of securing the quiet of his whole Reign. She
knew how to work upon him so well, that in end she prevailed, and the King
swore deeply he would go through with it. Upon that, she being impatient, and
fearing a new turn in the Kings Thoughts, made the Bell of St. Germans be
tolled, which was the warning for tolling that in the Palace.

This fatal Signal was given the Morning of the 24th of August, St.
Bartholomews day, being Sunday; and was followed with a general Rising of the
whole City of Paris. The March of Soldiers, the noise of their Arms; and the
lightning of so many Torches, awakened the poor Protestants, who now saw
visibly that their ruin was both near and inevitable. Some of them went out to
the Streets, and asked what the matter might be, of so great a Concourse, and
so many Torches and armed Men, at such an hour? Some answered, as they had been
instructed to say, till all things should be ready, that there was to be a
Mock-Siege of a Fort in the Louvre, for the Kings Diversion. So they went
forward to satisfy their Curiosity, but quickly found it was a real Massacre,
and not a Mock-Siege that was intended, and they were the first Sacrifices of
that bloody Festivity. There were now about threescore thousand Men brought
together. The Duke of Guise, which his Uncle Aumale, resolved first to satisfy
their revenge on the Admiral, and therefore went to his Gate, where Cosseins
kept guard, on design to betray him the more effectually. He called to open the
Gate; which being done, they killed the Porter and broke into the Court. But
the King of Navarr's Swisses barricado'd the next Gate, and made some
resistance. This dismal noise awakened the Admiral, who at first apprehended,
it might be some Tumult of the Populace, which he hoped the King's Guards would
easily disperse. But when he perceived it increased, then he saw he was to be
destroyed. So he took his Nightgown and got up: Those that were about him were
amazed at the constancy of his mind, his Minister Merlin prayed; and when that
was ended, He said to those that were about him, I see now what this will end
in, but I am prepared to meet Death, which I have often looked for, but was
never afraid of: I account my self happy since it is so near me, having in this
my Death, through the Grace of God the hope of Eternal Life. I need no more the
help of Men, therefore farewell, my Friends, and try how you can save your
selves, that you be not involved in my ruin, lest by my death I make more
Widows than one: I have help enough in the presence of God, into whose hands I
commit my Soul, which is soon to be discharged out of this Body. All this he
spoke without the least commotion or appearance of fear. Then those about him
left him, and got up to the Roof of the House. By that time the Murderers had
brook in, and seven of them being all in Armor, came into his Chamber. Besme,
that had been one of the Duke of Guises Grooms, advanced toward him; to whom
he said, Young Man, you ought to reverence my gray Hairs, but you cannot
shorten my Life much. They all stood a while amazed at such undaunted courage,
and so composed a behavior, which as one of them told Thuanus, was the most
extraordinary thing that ever he saw his whole Life. Besme did first thrust him
into the Belly, and then cut him over the Face: at which he fell, and the
others struck at him, till he was quite dead. The Duke of Guise being below in
the Court, heard the noise, and called to them to throw him out at the Window,
which Besme and another did. And either the Duke, or the Count of Angoulesme
(for it is differently reported) wiped his Face, which was disfigured with
Blood, to know if it was he indeed, and perceiving it was so, trampled on his
Belly, and went away. An Italian cut off his Head, and carried it first to the
Queen Mother, and then embalmed it, and sent it to Rome, (not only as the
Protestants say, which is disingeniously added, by Mezeray, for Thuanus affirms
it): Then all the ignominy and barbarity possible, was exercised about the dead
Carcass, his Fingers and Hands were cut off, his Body dragged about the
Streets, thrown in the Sein, and hanged up in Chains his Feet uppermost: and a
fire was set under to burn it, but it only dried it and did not consume it.
Some days after Monmorancy caused it to be taken down secretly, and buried it
in his Chapel at Chantilly.

Thus fell the Admiral, that for all noble Qualities necessary, either to a
great Captain, or a complete Statesman, may be equalled to any of the Ancient
Greeks or Romans; and for Piety and other Christian Virtues, was the Wonder of
the Age he lived in.

But the Cruelty of the Duke of Guise and his Party, was rather kindled than
satiated with his Blood. So he and his Company went out to the streets, and
cried aloud, It was the King's command they should go on, and finish what they
had begun. And so the Multitude was let loose, to murder all that were of the
Religion, and the plunder of their Houses was to be their reward. This was
followed with the most enraged and cruel Massacre that ever was heard of. It
exceeded all that either the Heathens had done, or their Poets had feigned.
Every Man seemed a Fury, and as if they had been transformed into Tigres and
Wolves, out-did the very cruelty of Beasts of Prey. The bare relation of
Matters of Fact, is beyond all that Eloquence can invent, by which it may be
aggravated: and indeed a strict Narrative of what was really done, will appear
some Ages hence, as a Tragical description of an imaginary Cruelty, rather than
a true History. Five hundred Persons of Quality were murdered, and in all 4000
according to Thuanus and Mezeray. Perefixe the late B. of Paris says, there
were twenty Lords of note killed, and twelve hundred Gentlemen, and between
three and four thousand others. But Veremundus says, they were ten thousand. No
Age nor Sex was spared; Husbands and Wives were killed in one another Arms,
after they saw their Children murdered at their feet. One butchered an
innocent Babe, as it was playing with his Beard. Men of fourscore were not left
to the course of Nature, but hewn down. Nor did a single death satisfy their
brutal rage, but they made them die many deaths, before death relieved them.
One would cut off the Nose, another the Ear, a third the Hands, and a fourth
the Arms of the same Person, before they would be so merciful as to kill him
outright. Those that fled up to the tops of their Houses, were made leap over
to the Streets, where they were knocked down with Halberts. Such as ran out to
escape through dark Passages, were either instantly killed, or driven to the
Sein, where they took pleasure to kill and drown them with much art. Dead
Bodies floated all along the Seine, and were lying in heaps thorough the
Streets. In many places the Kennels ran Blood. There was nothing to be heard
but the howlings of mangled and dying Persons; or the horrid blasphemies of
their accursed Butchers. They searched all the Corners of their Houses, as
Hounds pursuing for prey. No Man delivered his Friend; no Host had pity on his
Guest: Only one brave Man saved his Enemy.

The Louvre it self was full of Blood, and the dead Corpse of those whom the
King of Navarre and Prince of Conde had brought about them for their security:
but where they expected a Sanctuary, they found a Massacre. It is needless to
reckon up the Names of those noble Persons who were then destroyed, for the
memory of Rochfoucant, Teligny, Renel, Piles, Pluvial, Baudine, Guerchy,
Lavardin, Nompar or La Force, and five hundred more will be ever sacred; yet in
this Nation where these Families are not known, the recital would be tedious
and useless. Of all those Guerchy alone died with a Sword in his Hand, but
could hurt none of those that assaulted him, they having Armor on them.

This horrible Confusion, gave the Allarm to those who lay in the Suburbs on
the other side of the Seine to make haste and be gone; and they, having no
suspicion of the King himself, were thinking to have gone over and sheltred
themselves within the Louvre. The Parisians had now lost all order, and were
fallen to plunder, so that they could not be brought together: Therefore the
Duke of Guise sent over some of the Swisse Guards in Boats to kill them, and
himself followed with some Horse; and had it not been for the mistake of him
who brought the wrong Keys of the Gate, thorough which he was to pass, they had
been all surprised before they had resolved what course to take. But day
appearing, they saw enough to convince them, it was not time to delay any more:
So in the greatest confusion possible, they got on Horseback, and fled away.
The Duke of Guise pursued them, but they were out of his reach, and not being
strong enough to defend themselves, and keep in a Body, they dispersed and
escaped.

But the fury that they fled from, continued in Paris all that day, and the two
following days: In which nothing was left undone that ingenious and desperate
cruelty could suggest. Six hundred Houses were pillaged. And after such a glut
of Blood, Men's minds becoming savage, they fell to revenge private Enmities,
even upon their Fellow Papists; many of whom were in the end also murdered, but
those were chiefly Monorancy his Friends, who were thought cold in the matter
of Religion.

The most enraged of their Bloodhounds were Tanchou, Pesou, and Crosier a
Goldsmith; the two former drove many to the Mills, and forced them to leap from
thence into the River. Pesou boasted to the King himself, that he had made an
hundred and fifty leap that night. And Thuanus says, he often heard Crosier
say, That with that Hand he had killed 400: by which it seems he was thought so
sanctified, that he would live no longer a common life, but as a sacred Person
went to an Hermitage; where yet his cruelty left him not; for during the Wars
of the League, he drew a Flemish Merchant into his Cell and murdered him there.
Thus were the Protestants destroyed in Paris, with a Treachery and Cruelty that
the uncivilized Nations had never showed to one another, nor had the Heathens
been ever guilty of any thing like it toward the Christians. The Precedent
which the Church of Rome had formerly given in the Massare of the Albigenses,
was the likest thing in History to it for Barbarity; but never had Treachery
and Cruelty met together in such a manner before this execrable day.

At Court all those generous Impressions which follow noble Blood, seemed
extinguished. Men threw off Humanity, and Women had neither compassion nor
modesty. The Queen Mother and her Ladies took pleasure to look upon the most
detestable Objects, and greedily beheld some obscene and indecent sights; but
it is not fit to write all that was then done. About nine of the Clock, the
King sent for the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, and told them he was
forced to use that severe Remedy to put an end to War and Rebellion, and had
therefore destroyed those, whom he could not induce to obey: And for them, tho
he had good reason to hate them mortally, since they had led on a Rebellion
against him, yet in consideration of their Blood and Alliance, he was resolved
to spare them if they would change their Religion, otherwise they must look for
no better usage than their Servants had met with. The King spoke this with
great rage, so that the King of Navarre being terrified, said, That if the King
would save their lives, and leave them their Consciences free, they should in
all other things be commanded by him. But the Prince of Conde answered more
boldly, That he might dispose of his Life and Estate as he pleased, but for his
Religion, he owed an account of it to God alone, from whom he had received the
knowledge of it. This resolute Answer put the King in such a rage, that after he
had treated him with most abusive language, he swore, That if he did not change
within three days, he should hang for it. And so ordered them to be strictly
guarded. At the same time there were Expresses dispatched over all France, to
set on the People both in the Towns and Country, to imitate the example of the
Parisians, and destroy the Heretics. Yet the King either out of some remorse
or shame, wrote to his Ambassadors and the Governors of the Provinces, that
same day: That the Duke of Guise, and others that adhered him, having a great
interest in the City of Paris, and apprehending that the Admirals Friends were
resolved to revenge his Wound, had therefore, both to secure themselves, and to
prosecute their former Quarrels, raised the City of Paris: and had broke
through the Guards set to defend the Admiral, and killed him, and many other
Persons of Quality; the rage of the People being such; that the King's Guards
could do nothing to repress it: Therefore he was forced to keep himself within
the Louvre, but had, as soon as was possible, quieted the Town; so that all
things were put in order again; and he was resolved still to maintain his
Edict, made for the free Exercise of their Religion. Veremundus has printed the
Copies of the Letters, directed to the Governors of Burgundy and Tourain, and
to the Town of Bourges, with the Memorial sent to the Swiss Cantons, all to the
same purpose, bearing date the 24th of August. And in another Letter the King
wrote, That he had made up a new agreement with the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, and was resolved to run the same hazard with them, for
revenging the death of his Cousin the late Admiral. But the House of Guise
would not bear this, and made the King own, that all was done by his express
Orders. So on the 26th of August, the King went to the Court of Parliament, and
after an invidious repetition of all the Troubles of his Reign, which yet he
said, he intended to have quieted by the late Treaty of Peace, he discovered
that the Admiral had conspired to kill him, his Brothers, and the King of
Navarre, and to set up the young Prince of Conde, whom he also designed
afterward to kill, that so the whole Royal Family being destroyed, he might
make himself King: and since extreme Diseases required extreme Remedies, he was
forced to do what he had done; and concluded, that all was done by his express
Order and Command. Thuanus the Father, tho he abhorred the thing, yet out of
fear and compliance, made a base flattering Speech, of the necessity of
dissimulation in Princes, and did much commend that saying of Lewis the 11th.
He who knows not how to Dissemble, knows, not how to Reign. And Pibrac the
Attorney General' moved the King, that the Declaration he had made' might be
entered in their Registers, and that strict Orders might be given, to put an end
to the Blood and Confusion with which the City was filled: Both which the King
ordered to be done. The Declaration which was thereupon published on the 28th,
is printed by Veremundus. By it the King charged all Persons, under pain of
Death, through the whole Kingdom, to do no injury to the Protestants. And at
the same time declared it Capital, for the Protestants to have any Assemblies.
This was believed to be done rather on design to destroy, than save the
Hugonets: That they being out of apprehension of danger, might stay all at
Home, and so be more easily Massacred. On the 28th of August, a Jubilee was
granted to all, who had been in this Butchery; and they were commanded to go
every where to Church, and bless God, for the success of that Action. So little
relenting had they, after all these black Crimes, that they imagined they had
done God good service: And to that height did their Impudence rise, that they
presumed to address to that Merciful Being, who abhors cruel and blood-thirsty
Men, and that with hands not only defiled with Blood, but boasting of it as a
Sacrifice offered to God, which had been a fitter Oblation to him that was a
Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, than the God of Truth, and Father of
Mercies.

One remarkable Passage fell out, which occasioned much Discourse, and was
variously constructed by the several Parties. On the day of the Massacre, about
Noon, a white Thorn in the Churchyard of the Innocents, that was almost dead,
and had no Leaves on it, flourished all of a sudden. This was published through
the Streets of Paris, as a Sign, that Heaven approved their actions, and was
made use of to animate them to new heats in their Cruelty: For every one was
set on to kill one or other, that he might be honored with the sight of so
unusual a thing. Some thought it might come from the nature of the Tree, and it
was said, such things were not extraordinary in Trees of that kind, a little
before they became quite dead. Others believed it might be the Trick of some
Monk, who pouring either hot Water, or some prepared Water at the Root of it,
might have done the feat. But the Rabble did universally ascribe it to some
miraculous Cause, only they differed about that to which it referred. The
Protestants said, it signified their Innocence, and that a new Troop of
Innocents were sent to Heaven, and therefore the Tree in the Churchyard of the
Innocents flourished afresh. The Papists said, is signified the joy in Heaven
at that days work, and that the Church was to flourish again by the death of
the Heretics.

But leaving these discantings on this seeming Miracle, Morvillier that was
Lord Keeper, advised, That for justifying, or at least mitigating the Censures
that might be made on these proceedings, there should be a Process carried on,
against the dead Admiral to prove him guilty of a Conspiracy against the King
and the Royal Blood; and there were some few Protestants kept Prisoners, who
had been taken out of the English Ambassadors Lodgings, who to save themselves,
they hoped might be brought to accuse the Admiral. But while this Mock-Process
was making, there was a real prosecution of the like Cruelties in many other
parts of France.

At Meaux, a little Town not far from Paris, they began on the 25th of August,
being Monday, and spent the whole Week in shedding more Blood. They killed two
hundred; many of those were Women, whom they Forced before they Murdered them.
At Troy in Champaigne, about the same number was killed. At Orleans, a
thousand were also killed. Six or seven hundred at Roan, tho the Governor did
what he could to hinder it. At Bourges, Nevers, and Charity, all they found
were killed. At Toulouse two hundred were killed. At Bordeaux, they were for
some time in suspense, being afraid of the Rochellers; but the Priests did so
inflame the Multitude, that the Governor could not restrain their rage longer,
than the beginning of October; so then they Massacred all that they could find.
This beginning, was followed by all the Towns on the Garvinne. But next to
Paris, Lions was the place where the most barbarous Cruelties were acted. The
Governor had a mind to save the Protestants, and gathered together about six
or seven hundred of them, whom he lodged in several Prisons, that so he might
preserve them: And to give the People some content, he granted them the pillage
of their Houses. But they were so heated by the Clergy, and by some that were
sent from the Court, to promote the Massacre every where, that they broke open
the Prisons and murdered them all, dragged their Bodies through the Streets,
and opened the Bellies of the fattest of them, to sell their Greese to
Apothecaries. And when they could do no more, they threw them into the River of
Rhosne, which was colored with the Blood, and filled with the Carcases of the
slain. These Examples were followed in many more places, but detested by
others, who were not Papists enough, to overcome Nature and all Morality. The
Governors in some places restrained the People; and in many places the
Soldiers, tho more inured to Blood, defended the Protestants from the Rabble,
that were set on by the Priests. The Answer the Governor of Bayonne made,
deserves to be remembered, who wrote to the King in these Words.

SIR,
I Have communicated your Majesty's Command to the Inhabitants of the Town, and
the Soldiers of the Garrison. I find many good Citizens, and brave Soldiers,
but never a Hangman here: And therefore in their Name and my own, I humbly beg
your Majesty would employ our Arms, and Lives in things, which are possible for
us to do, how dangerous soever they may be, and we will spend the last drop of
our Blood in your Service.

This gave great Offense at Court, and soon after, both Mezeray.
he and the Count of Tendes, Governor of Provence, who had also given Orders,
that there should be no Massacre made within his Jurisdiction, died very
suddenly: And it was believed they were both poisoned. In all there were, as
Thuanas says, Thirty thousand massacred over France, tho he believes they were
not quite so many. Mezeray estimates them at five and twenty Hist. Hen. the 4th.
Thousand. But Perefixe says, that over all France, near an hundred thousand
were butchered. And Veremundus says, that besides, those who were killed, an
hundred Thousand Persons were set a begging, most of those being Widows and
Orphans. Many of them fled to the places of strength in France, and great
numbers went out of the Kingdom. For when they had escaped the first rage of
the Massacre, they clearly perceived the design of their Enemies, was to
extirpate them Root and Branch. And tho the King at first declared he would
observe the Edict inviolably, they had learned from sad experience, how little
his Faith was to be depended on, and they were further convinced of it by fresh
Proofs. For the King pressed the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde very
hard, to change their Religion: the former was tractable and hearkened to
instruction; but the latter continued resolute and would hear nothing. This put
the King once into such a Rage, that he called for his Arms, and was going in
Person, either to kill him, or see him killed; had not his virtuous Queen, who
had been instructed by her Father, to abhor all cruel Proceedings about
Religion, cast her self at his Feet, and with many Tears diverted him from so
ignominious an Action. But he sent for him and said only these three words to
him, Mass, Death, or the Bastil. Yet he generously resolved to suffer Death, or
perpetual Imprisonment, rather than go to Mass, had they not found out a Tool
fit to work on him. One Sureau-des Rosiers, that had been Minister of the
Protestants at Orleans, had now to save his Life, changed his Religion; But to
have some reputation in it, pretended that he had resolved to have done it
sooner, tho when that fear was over, he returned to them again, but was never
much considered after that. He was therefore employed to persuade the Prince of
Conde: and what by his endeavors, and what by fear of Death, both the King of
Navarre and he went to Mass, and wrote Letters full of Submission and Obedience
to the Pope; tho they were no sooner out of that Snare, than they declared,
that what had been obtained of them, was extorted by force.

This being done, the King sent his Orders over all France, bearing date the
22d of September, to turn all Persons out of any considerable Employments, that
would not renounce their Religion, and a long form of Abjuration was sent with
it, which was to be the Test: both which are printed by Veremundus.

The Process against the Admiral was carried on before the Parliament of Paris,
and (without any proofs that ever were published) they on the 27th of October,
judged him guilty of a Conspiracy against the King and his Crown: And therefore
ordained his Body to be hanged, if it could be found; or if not, that he should
be hanged in Effigy: his House of Chastilion to be razed, and a Pillar set up
with an Inscription to defame his Memory, his Blood was also attainted, and his
Children declared ignoble and incapable of any Privileges in France. And the
Sentence concluded with an Order, for celebrating St. Bartholomews day in all
time coming, with Processions and public Thanksgivings for the Discovery and
Punishment of that Conspiracy. There were also two other Persons of Quality,
Cavagnes and Briquemaut who had been dealt with to accuse the Admiral, but they
would not save themselves by so base a ransom; so they were both condemned as
Accomplices with him. But when the Sentence was pronounced against them, Thuanus,
that was an Eyewitness, says, Briquemaut cried out, when that part of the
Judgment was read that concerned his Children; Ah Innocents! what have they
done? And then he, who for 50 years together had served in the Wars, with a
high and approved Valor, being then 70, what for fear of Death, what out of
pity to his Children, would have done any thing, to have saved himself. He sent
the King word, first that he would put Rochel in his Hands, if he would spare
his Life: But that being rejected, he offered to accuse the Admiral, to
preserve himself. But neither was that considered. All that while, his
Fellow-Sufferer Cavagnes continued most serious in his Devotions, and for three
hours together, was either Praying or reciting some Psalms: and expressed no
concern for his Life* his thoughts being wholly employed about Eternity. He
encouraged Briquemaut to die as he had lived, and to turn himself to God, and
not to stain so honorable a Life, as he had led, with an ignominious end. And
he seeing, he must die, recollected his Thoughts, and seemed ashamed of his
former abject behavior, and composed and prepared himself for Death. They both
were carried to the place of Execution in Hurdles, where they not only suffered
the reptoches of the Multitude, as they went along (who threw Filth and Clay at
them with their most scurrilous Language) but Death it self with much Christian
Patience and Magnanimity. They were hanged at the Greve, and their Bodies,
after they were dead, were barbarously mangled by the cruel Multitude. With
them the brave Admiral was hanged in Effigy, whose Innocence, as well as their
own, they did to their last Breath assert. The King who delighted in such
bloody Spectacles, did not only look on himself, with the Queen Mother, and the
Court; but forced the King of Navarre likewise to be a Witness of it.

It is needless to say much, for evincing the Admiral's Innocence, for all the
Writers of the time acknowledge, the Process was only to cover the infamy of the
Massacre. And Thuanus has so fully demonstrated it, that none can so much as
doubt of it. If the Admiral had any such design, why came he to Court? Why to
Paris, where he knew he had few Friends, and a vast number of mortal Enemies?
and why did he desire a Guard from the King? But since they could not find a
better color for so foul a Business, they must make use of the best they had.
They took another course to stop the Queen of Englands resentments, who,
besides the common Cause of Religion, had a particular esteem for the Admiral,
for they showed a Memorial, which he had given the King to persuade the War of
Flanders, to Walsingham (the ever renowned Secretary of State) then her
Ambassador in France; In which one of the reasons was; That if the King would
not receive these oppressed Provinces into his Protection, they would throw
themselves into the Queen of Englands Hands; and if the English made themselves
Masters of them, or of any considerable Ports in them, they would be again
uneasy and formidable Neighbors to France, which would thereby lose the great
security they had in taking Calice out of their Hands. When Walsingham read
this, and was asked, what he thought of the Admirals Friendship to his
Mistress? he answered, as became so great a Man. That he could not say much of
his Friendship to the Q of England, but he was sure, it appeared from that,
what a faithful Subject he was to the King of France.

A Week after this was done, the King completed the Treachery of this
Precedure: for by his Letters directed to the Governors of the Provinces,
bearing date the, 3d of November, He declared he would Tolerate no Religion,
but the Roman Catholic in all his Dominions. Upon which the following Civil
Wars began, and in excuse of them, I shall only say, that besides the barbarous
and persidious Treatment the Protestants had now received, they had this legal
Warrant for standing on their own defense, That by the former Treaty the King
granted them Cautionary Towns, for Pledges of the observation of the Edict. And
it is certain, that if a Prince grants his Subjects Cautionary Towns for their
Security, he does thereby relax their Alleagiance to him, and gives them a
right to defend themselves, if the Agreement upon which these Pledges were
given, should come to be broken.

This is the true and just account of that foul and treacherous Massacre, even
as it is represented by the Historians of that Age and Church, who can neither
deny nor excuse the Infamy of it; tho some rejoiced at it, and others wrote in
defense of it. The King gloried so much in it, that three Meddals were struck,
to perpetuate the memory of it. In one, Hercules is both with his Club, and a
Flambeau, fighting against the sevenheaded Serpent, with this Motto. Ne ferrum
temnat, simul ignis obsto. On the reverse, the King with his Hand, supports two
Crowned Pillars, ready to fall, with this Motto. Mira fides, lapsas relevat
manus una Columnas. Hereby intimating, that Heresy was the Serpent, which was
to be destroyed by main Force, and by Fire: And that by this Act, the King had
supported Religion and Justice. In the second, the King sits in his Chair of
State, with a Sword in his right Hand, and an Hand on the Head of a Scepter in
his left. And many Heads lying about his Feet, with this Motto. Virtus in
Rebels. On the Reverse, were the Arms of France, between two Pillars and two
Laurel Branches, with this Motto, Virtus excitavit Iustitiam. The third had, on
the one side, a Woman environed with Rays, and a Book open in one Hand, and a
Palm in the other, and at her Feet many Heads in Flames, with this Motto,
Subducendis rationibus. The Reverse was the same with the first. The
Signification of this, was, Religion triumphing over Heresy.

But this was only a false show of Joy, for he was ininvardly tormented with
the horrors of a guilty Conscience, which the effusion of so much Blood did
justly raise in him; so that being often troubled with Visions, he was
frequently heard say, Ah! my poor Subjects, what had you done? But I was forced
to it. The strange manner of his Death, looked like a signal Judgment from
Heaven for that bloody day; for after a long Sickness, which was believed the
effect of a lent Poison given him by the Queen Mother, Blood not only came out
through all the Conduits of his Body, but through the very Pores, so that he
was sometimes found, all bathed in his own Blood. And he that had made his
Kingdom swim with Blood, died thus wallowing in his own.

All the servile Pens of the Lawyers, and the bitter ones of enraged Priests,
were also set on work, to appear in Defense of it; Of whose Writings Thuanus
gives a full account. One mercenary Protestant was also hired, to excuse, if
not to defend it. I have never been able to meet with any of these Books, only
Rosseus that wrote in defense of the Holy League, calls it the Justice of St.
Bartholomews day. And Andreas Eudemon Johannes does also commend it.

The Arguments they used, have been formerly glanced at. The late Civil Wars;
the pretended Conspiracy of the Admiral; the necessity of using desperate
Remedies in extreme Cases; and the Sovereign Power of Kings, were what the
Lawyers could pretend. But the Divines had a better Plea, that by one General
Council, all Heretics were to be extirpated. And by another, Faith was not to
be kept to them. And it cannot be denied, but this is unanswerable, according
to the Principles of the Roman Church. The Protestants were not wanting to
their own Cause, but answered these Books, and sufficiently discovered the
impudent Allegations of those shameless Persons, who hired themselves out to
defend so horrid an Action.

Maximilian the 2d, the Emperor, is the Person whose Judgment we have least
reason to suspect. He was the King of France his Father-in-Law, and both by
Blood and Alliance was joined to the Crown of Spain, yet he in a private
Letter, writing to Scuendi his chief Minister in Hungary, has delivered his
sense of this Matter so sincerely and fully; And that whole Letter is so
excellently well written, and shows so much true piety, and so rare a temper of
mind, that I shall not fear the Reader's censure for inserting it at its full
length. It is but in one Book that Comingii Collectio p. 278.
I know, and that is very scarce.

Dear Scuendi,
I Received your Letter, and took in good part your Christian and Friendly
Condoleance for my late Sickness. The Eternal God, in whose hands are all
things, do with me according to his Will. I bless him for every thing that
befalls me. He only knows best what is healthful and profitable, and what is
hurtful to me: I do patiently and cheerfully acquiesce in his Divine Pleasure.
And indeed Matters go so in this World, that a Man can have little pleasure or
quiet in them: for every where there is nothing to be found but trouble,
treachery, and foul dealing. God pity us, and deliver his Church from these
mischiefs. It were no wonder, if from such a prospect of Affairs, a Man should
become stupid or mad; of which I could say much to you. I begin to recover, and
am now so strong, that I walk about with a Stick. God be blessed in all his
Works.

For that strange thing which the French have lately acted, most tyrannically
against the Admiral and his Friends, I am far from approving it: and it was a
great grief to me, to hear that my Son-in-Law had been persuaded to that vile
Massacre; tho I know that others reign rather than he; yet that is not
sufficient to excuse him, nor to palliate such a wickedness. I would to God he
had asked my advice, I should have given him faithful and fatherly Counsel, and
he should never have had my consent to this Crime, which has cast such a
blemish on him, that he will never wash it off.

God forgive them that lie under such guilt. I apprehend within a little while,
they shall perceive what they have gained by this method. For indeed, as you
observe well, the Matters of Religion are not to be handled or decided by the
Sword: and no Man can think otherwise, that is either pious or honest, or
desirous of Public Peace and Happiness. Far otherwise did Christ teach, and
his Apostles instruct us; their Sword was their Tongue, their Doctrine, the
Word of God, and a Life worthy of Christ. Their Example should draw us to
follow them, in so far as they were followers of Christ.

Besides, that mad sort of People might have seen after so many years Trials,
and so many Experiments, that by their Cruelties, Punishments, Slaughters and
Burnings, this Business cannot be effected. In a word, Their ways do not at all
please me, nor can I ever be induced to approve them, unless I should become
mad or distracted which I pray God earnestly to preserve me from.

And yet I shall not conceal from you, that some impudent and lying Knaves,
have given out, That whatever the French have done, was by my knowledge and
approbation. In this I appeal to God, who knows how deeply I am injured by it;
but such Lies and Calumnies are no new things to me. I have been often forced
to bear them formerly: and in all such cases, I commit my self to God, who
knows in his own good time, how to clear me, and vindicate my innocence.

As for the Netherlands, I can as little approve of the Excesses committed
there. And I do well remember how often I wrote to the King of Spain, Advices
far different from those they have followed. But what shall I say? The Councils
of the Spaniards relished better than mine. They now begin to see their Error,
and that they themselves have occasioned all the mischief that has since
followed. I had a good end bebefore me, that these noble and renowned Provinces
might not be so miserably destroyed. And tho they would not follow my Counsel,
so that I may well be excused from meddling any more, yet I do not give over,
but am sincerely pressing them all I can to follow another method.

God grant I may see the wished-for effect of these endeavors, and that Men
may be at last satisfied with what they have done, and may use no more such
violent Remedies. In a word, Let the Spaniards or the French do what they will,
they shall be made to give an account of their Actions to God, the Righteous
and Just Judge. And for my part, by the help of God, I shall carry my self
honestly, christianly, and faithfully, with all candor and uprightness; and I
hope God will so assist me with his Grace and Blessing, that I may approve all
my Designs and Actions, both to him and to all Men. And if I do this, I little
regard a wicked and malicious World.


How the rest of the World looked on this Action, may be easily gathered from
the Inclinations and Interests of the several Parties. That all Protestants did
every where abhor it, and hold the remembrance of it, still in detestation,
needs not be doubted. All that were noble or generous in the Roman Church were
ashamed of it, but many extolled it to the Heavens as a work of Angels; and
others did cast the blame of it on the Protestants. The Court of Spain rejoiced
openly at it. They delighted in the shedding of Protestant Blood, and were also
glad to see France again embroiled, and to be freed of the fears they had of a
War in Flanders. In which if the French King had engaged, he had in all
appearance conquered in one year, that for which his Successors have been since
fighting a whole Age.

But let us next examine how the tidings of this Massacre were received at Rome
by which we may judge how fitly that part of Antichrist's Character, of being
drunk with the Blood of the Saints, agrees to it. The News was brought thither
the 6th of September, upon which a Consistory of the Cardinals was presently
called, and the Legate's Letter, that contained a Relation of the Massacre,
being read, they went straight in a Procession to St. Mark's Church, where they
offered up their solemn thanks to God for this great Blessing to the Sea of
Rome, and the Catholic Church. And on Monday following, there was another
Procession made by the Pope and Cardinals to the Minerva, where they had high
Mass, and then the Pope granted a Jubilee to all Christendom: And one of the
Reasons was, That they should thank God for the slaughter of the Enemies of the
Church, lately executed in France. Two days after that, the Cardinal of
Lorrain, had another great Procession of all the Clergy, the Ambassadors,
Cardinals, and the Pope himself, who came to St. Lewis Chapel, where the
Cardinal celebrated Mass himself. And in the King of France his Name he thanked
the Pope and the Cardinals, for their good Councils, the help they had given
him, and the assistance he received from their Prayers, of which he had found
most wonderful effects. He also delivered the King's Letters to the Pope, in
which he History de France, An. 1581.
wrote, That more Heretics had been destroyed in that one day, than in all
the twelve years of the War.

Nor did the Pope think there was yet Blood enough shed, but that which all the
World condemned as excessive Cruelty, he apprehended was too gentle. Therefore
he sent Cardinal Ursin his Legate in all haste to France, to thank the King for
so great a Service done the Church, and to desire him to go on, and extirpate
Heresy Root and Branch, that it might never grow again. In order to which, he
was to procure the Council of Trent to be received in France; and as the Legate
passed through, in his Journey to Paris, he gave a Plenary Absolution to all
that had been Actors in the Massacre.

The best Picture-drawers, and workers of Tapistry, were also put to work to
set off this Action with all possible glory, and a Suit of these Hangings are
to this day in the Pope's Chapel. So well do they like the thing, that they
preserve the remembrance of it still, even in the place of their Worship. Such
a representation does indeed very well agree with their Devotion, whose
Religion and Doctrine led on their Votaries to the thing so expressed. By this
we may easily gather what is to be expected from that Court, and what we ought
to look for, whenever we are at the mercy of Men, whose Religion will not only
bear them through, but set them on to commit the most Treacherous and Bloody
Massacres.

FINIS.

