

A RELATION IN FORM of JOURNAL, OF THE VOYAGE And RESIDENCE Which The most
EXCELLENT and most MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES THE II KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, etc.

Has made in Holland, from the 25 of May, to the 2 of June, 1660.

Rendered into English out of the Original French, By Sir WILLIAM LOWER, Knight.



HAGUE, Printed by ADRIAN VLACK, Anno M. DC. LX. with Privilege of the Estates
of Holland and West-Freesland.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
IF ever was a Relation, whose truth might be indubitable, it is questionless
this which I give you at present. It was composed on the Public Acts, drawn
from the Registers of the Estate, and exposed to the eyes of those who were
ey-witnesses of the things whereof it treats, and made the speeches which are
inserted there, and which are so faithfully related, that except one only,
there is none which was not pronounced in the same manner as you see them here
written. After this; one cannot doubt, that it may not one day serve
advantagiously the History of the time, whose mervellous revolution of the
affairs of England, shall make one of the principal parts. It is requisite the
world should know the particularities, which you shall not find but in this
discourse, and I think to oblige my Country, in publishing the marks of
affection and good will, which one of the first Kings of Christendom has left
it. The Relation is French, because the King would use that tongue, during the
residence, whereof you have here the recital, though he that composed it,
hinders it not to be extant in other languages, but would that all people of
the Universe should know it. I confess, it would have been more proper to have
put it forth as soon as it was made, immediately after the Kings departure, and
I would have given you this satisfaction if the diligence of those men that
graved the Plates, had answered my desire; But I cease not to hope, that it
will not be ill received, and that this production, though tardive, will have
its agreements, as well as the fruits, which though given by nature but in a
late season, please notwithstanding, and are carefully preserved. I confess
also, that some faults are escaped in the Impression, which all the diligent
care of the Corrector could not avoid. There is not any though, that I know,
which alters the sense, and which your discretion may not either correct, or
excuse.

Extract out of the Privilege of the Estates of Holland and West-Freesland.
THe Estates of Holland and West-Freesland make known, that Adrian Vlack
dwelling at the Hague, having remonstrated to us, that he had caused to be
printed, at his great expense, a Book entitled, A Relation of the Voyage and
Residence which the most Excellent and most Mighty Prince, CHARLES THE SECOND,
King of Great Britain, etc. Has made into Holland from the 25 of May to the 2
of June 1660. Enriched with diverse fair Plates, not only in the French tongue,
but also in the Dutch, and English, etc. And fearing that some one might
counterfeit it to his great Damage: We have consented and granted by these
Presents, that the said Adrian Vlack may cause the said Book to be imprinted,
with prohibition to all other persons to imprint, or distribute in our Province
the said Book, or part of it, in any language, or form whatsoever, nor
counterfeit the said Plates in any kind, during the space of ten Years; on pain
of Confiscation of all the Copies, and of three hundred pounds besides.

A RELATION Of the VOYAGE AND RESIDENCE Which His Most Excellent MAJESTY CHARLES
THE II KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, etc. Has made in Holland, from the 25 of May, to
the 2 of June 1660.
WHen the Parliament began at London, the fourth day of May, in this present
Year 1660. The beginning of free Parliament.
it was no new thing in the noble breast of his Excellence the Lord General
Monck, Commander in Chief of the English Army in Scotland, as sensibly touched
with the calamities, wherewith he saw his poor country so long afflicted, to
think of the means to establish there the Monarchal government, grounded upon
the old and primitive Laws of the Estate. This could not be a free Parliament,
and such a one as the whole Kingdom demanded, if it were not composed of two
Houses, viz. the Higher House of Lords or Peers, and the Lower House of
Commons, or Deputies of the Provinces. For the same violence which had
destroyed the essential form of the estate, had so disfigured that illustrious
Body, in cutting off one of its principal members; that being incapable to act
for the important affairs, which made the convocation of that great assembly to
be judged absolutely necessary if it opened not the Higher house which tyranny
had shut up, it must of necessity find it fit to repeal the Lords, who had
voice and place there for so many Ages; I say many Ages, because it may be
truly affirmed, that this custom is no less ancient then Monarchy it self,
since that from the time that it came out of the hands of the Britans and
Saxons, to pass into the family of those that possess it at present, the
Estates of England never assembled but the Peers were called, as well as the
Deputies from the towns of the Kingdom. The resolution which was taken on this
occasion was not so soon executed; and scarce had the two Houses began their
assemblies to labor in regulating the government, which the passed disorders
had perverted into a miserable Anarchy; but there appeared, on the twelfth of
the same month of May, at the door, one of the Gentlemen of the King's
Bedchamber, named Sir John Greenvil, who demanded The King's Letter to the
Parliament.
permission to present Letters to the House from his Majesty. That Sacred name,
which not long since was the aversion of varlets and fanatics, was heard with
veneration, and inspired into that illustrious assembly such extraordinary and
advantageous motions for the King, that it was impossible for it to express
them, as we also will not undertake to represent them here upon paper. It
suffices to say, that not above three or four months before, it had been a
crime of high treason to speak in Parliament in behalf of the King; but now no
sooner is that great name pronounced, then one sees a general joy in the
countenance of all the commons, and observes a most high respect for that
divine character. They caused the Gentleman to enter: The Speakers of the two
Houses receive the King's Letters from his hand, and make the Secretary to read
them, every one, in the mean time, with the greatest expressive submission of
the world, standing bare headed.

The two Houses compose but one sole Parliament, and they are two members of
one and the same body; so that the King in writing to each of them, upon one
and the same subject, might well make use of one Letter, and address it not
only under diverse inscriptions, to the two Houses; but also to General Monck
for the Army; to Admiral Montague for the Fleet; and to the Major of London for
the Capital town of his Kingdom, which were all united with one and the same
affection, and labored unanimously to make one and the same design to succeed.
His Majesty added thereunto an excellent Declaration, The King sends a general
Act of Oblivion.
for the safety and repose of those, who tortured in their consciences, for
having partaken in the rebellion, might fear the punishment of it, and in that
fear might oppose the tranquillity of the Estate, and the calling in of their
lawful Prince. It is printed and published, as well as the Letter: but that
shall not hinder me to say, that there was never seen a more perfect assemblage
of all the most excellent natural qualities, and of all the virtues, as well
Royal, as Christian, wherewith a great Prince may be endowed, then was found in
those two wonderful productions. They breath but piety and zeal for the glory
of God and for Religion, but tenderness for the afflictions of his people, but
esteem for the Parliament, but firmness for the conversation of the King's
rights, an admirable prudence for the regulating of affairs, an inexemplar
conduct for the re-establishment of the government in its former estate; love
for the good, indulgence for the seduced, and a more then Christian clemency
for criminals, or rather for crime it self: for a crime, I say, so black, and
so abominable, that as there has not been an example in history, since the
creation of the world, so it is to be hoped that the goodness of his Majesty,
will not make it serve for example to the following ages. Both one and the other
wrought the effect, which the King promised to himself from them, since they
fully gained the hearts, which the miseries of the time passed, had already
very much disposed to acknowledge their Prince. For the Letter and Declaration
were no sooner read, but the Parliament declared that the sentiments of the
King were good, lawful, generous, and conformable to the fundamental laws of
the Estate, the government whereof ought to be composed of a King, of Lords or
Peers, and of Commons; and judging that the people would be well satisfied in
the Declaration which the King had granted them; the Parliament ordained, at
the same time, that most humble thanks should be returned to his Majesty for
the favorable Letter which he graciously had written to them: That to
disingage his Majesty from the place where he was, and to facilitate his
passage, they ordered him presently a sum of fifty thousand pounds sterling,
which was increased with another of ten thousand, by the inhabitants of the
City of London* That the Admiral Montague should go, with his Fleet, to attend
the King's orders on the coast of Holland: That the two Houses, and City of
London, should send to beseech him, by their Deputies, to come forthwith to
take possession of the Kingdoms, which God and his Right had given him; and
that, in the mean time, Sir John Greenvil should be dispatched with the
Parliaments answer, and should carry to Breda the resolutions and prayers of
the two Houses, or rather the just impatience which all England had to see
again their Sovereign, after a sad absence of so many years.

But that which is most remarkable in these resolutions, is, that they were not
taken after a long contestation, nor upon a simple acquiesment of the assembly,
but by the express suffrages and upon the universal and unanimous consent of
all the Deputies of the two Houses, who labored in emulation of each other,
which should give the most proofs of affection. The Parliament also permitted
General Monck to send Mr. Clarges, his brother-in-law, accompanied with some
Officers of the Army, to assure his Majesty The Army declares it self.
of the fidelity and obedience of the Army; which had made public and solemn
protestations thereof, after the Letter and Declaration was communicated unto
them by the General.

But to the end one may see plainly, what the sentiments The Speaker of the
Lower House his discourse to Sr. John Greenvil.
were of all the English on this occasion, I will not fear to report here the
very words which the Speaker of the house of Commons said to the Gentleman,
which had delivered him Letters from his Majesty. It is impossible for me, said
he, to express the acknowledgment and submission with which the Commons
assembled here in Parliament, have received the Letter, wherewith his Majesty
was pleased to honor them: The thing speaks it self, you have seen it with
your eyes, and heard it with your ears. Our Bells, our Bonfires, and the report
of our Artillery, have already begun to proclaim the King, and to publish our
joy. We have made known to the People, that our King, the glory of England, is
returning unto his Kingdom, and have heard resound in our ears these agreeable
protestations, that they are ready to receive him, and their hearts open to
lodge him; and as well the Parliament, as People have already cried aloud
together with one voice in their prayers to the King of Kings, Long live King
Charles the second. I have also to tell you, continued he, that the Parliament,
not willing that you should return without some mark of acknowledgment to the
King, your Sovereign and ours, has ordained you the sum of five hundred pounds
sterling, to buy you a Jewel, to make you to remember the honor which his
Majesty has done you, in charging you with a Commission of this nature,
whereof you have so well acquitted your self, that the Parliament has
commanded me to give you thanks.

We must confess, that there is something very extraordinary in this
mavelous revolution; but it is also certain, that there is nothing miraculous
in it. The King was not surprised thereat. God used him in the conduct of this
great work. He had labored therein; he had observed the dispositions and knew
the progresses thereof; and in this foresight he departed from Bruxels the last
of Mareh, to go to Breda. And though since in the same month, he went sometimes
to Bruxels and to Antwerp, he was resolved notwithstanding not to remain there,
but to betake him to the Princess Royal his sister.

Many considerations obliged him to depart the Territorres under the obedience
of the King of Spain in this conjuncture of affairs; but the sole convenience
which he had at Breda, to receive at all times Posts from England, which passed
and repassed every day and hour, and to go from thence unto Holland, to
expedite the return into his Kingdom, might invite him to transfer his Court
there for a while. He arrived there the 14. of April, and was the same day
complemented by Mr. Snel, old The King arrives at Breda.
Burgemaster, in the name of the Magistrate, who would likewise oblige the Town
to make a solemn entrance to his Majesty, but the Princess Royal hindered it
for most considerable reasons. The 17 the Lord Mordant arrived there, with full
assurances of the good will of the Parliament, and that it would labor
indubitably for the re-establishment of the King as soon as it should be
complete, and that the entrance into it should be made the day that had been
named for it.

From that time forward, there passed not a day almost that the King received
not some remarkable news, upon which he might ground infallible hopes of his
re-establishment. The 25. of April Sir John Greenvil, since Earl of Bath, and
Lambert's defeat.
Sir John Boys, brought him intelligence of the defeat of General Lambert; he
had been prisoner in the Tower of London, by virtue of an Ordinance of the
Council of Estate, and made an escape thence with design to put himself in the
head of those that would oppose Monarchal government; but he was beaten, and
taken by Colonel Ingoldsby, and brought back unto his former Prison, before he
could assemble troops enough, to form the body of an Army. He received the same
day Letters from Admiral Montague, which continued to assure him of the good
estate of the affairs of the Kingdom, and of the sincerity of his intentions,
of which he had already given proofs many months before when Sir George Booth
took up Arms for the King, under the name of good Englishmen, which demanded
the convocation of a Free-Parliament. The The Prince of Orange comes to Breda.
Prince of Orange, his Nephew, was at Breda the 16. of the same month, and
every day some Prince, or person of quality, came to rejoice with his Majesty
for the happy change of his fortune, whereof they began to have almost
infallible assurances. Prince As also Prince Frederic of Nassau.
Frederic of Nassau, brother to Prince Maurice, of whom we shall have occasion
to speak hereafter, arrived there the 2. of May, with the Prncess his wife,
from his government of Bergen op Zoom; and the Duke of Brunswic Lunenburg, who
And the Duke of Brunswic Lunenburg.
resides at Hannover, came there four days after. The visit of this Prince,
which is no less considerable through the excellent qualities which he
possesses, then through the Extent of his Dominions, was so agreeable to his
Majesty, that he could not forbear to testify it to him on all occasions, and
in a most obliging manner: insomuch that he would voluntarily sup with his
Highness, accompanied with the Dukes his brothers, and live with him in a
confidence, which might make him to hope for a very particular good will for
the future.

The 14 of May, a day fatal to the most potent Kingdom of They know at Breda
the Declation of the Parliament.
Christendom, for the death of the two last Kings, was that which fully assured
the King of the revolution of the affairs of his Kingdom, through the
advertisement which came to Breda of what was done in Parliament the eleventh
of the same month, as we have spoken of it before; and the next day, after the
news was brought, being the 15, they being of great importance, were sent The
news whereof is carried to the Hague.
to the Hague, by Letters from the Princess Royal, which were seen in the
Assembly of the Estates General. The Estates of the Province of Holland, who
were at that time assembled in a body, and had by their wisdom foreseen, in
the disposition of the affairs of England, the change which would apparently
arrive there, had also foreseen by their prudence, the advertisement which was
given of the Declaration of the Parliament. For on The Estates of Holland send
Deputies to the King.
thursday the 13 of May, before it could be known what passed at London, that
illustrious Senate, making reflection upon the present constitution of affairs,
and on the apparences of the near and indubitable re-establishment of the King,
resolved that Mr. Beverweert, Strevelshouck, Vlooswijck, and Teylingen,
Deputies at the Assembly from the Nobility, and from the Towns of Dort,
Amsterdam, and Alckmaer, should depart immediately after they knew the
intention of the Parliament, to make known to the King of great Britain the
affection of this Province for the person of his Majesty, and for all the
Royal Family, to testify unto him the joy and satisfaction they had to see
infallible dispositions, almost ready to place him in the Throne of his
Ancestors; and to assure him of the strong inclination which they had to make
with him, and with the Kingdoms under his authority, a firm, and indissolvable
alliance, for the mutual conservation of the common interests of his Estate,
and of this Republic; But chiefly to make him offers of service, and to
beseech him to do this Province the honor to reside there, as in a place most
commodious for communication with his Subjects for his passage into England;
and to receive there the effects of the most sincere protestations of respect
and amity, which they caused to be made unto him by their Deputies. They had
also order to insist particularly upon this last point, as on the most
important of their commission, and to use to this purpose the most civil and
most engaging terms, that interest of Estate, and affection for the good of
their country could dictate to them. They enjoined also the same Deputies to
officiate with the Dukes of York and Gloucester, the King's brothers, and with
the Princess Royal, his Sister, and that instance should be made in the
Assembly of the States General, that the same offices might be made of their
part with his Majesty, and with all the Royal persons.

The last point of this Resolution was executed the next day, The Estates
General send Deputies to the King.
when Mr. de Wit, Pentionary Councellor, Keeper of the great seal, and
Lieutenant of the Fiefs of Holland, was in the Assembly of the States General,
where it was resolved, that Mr. de Ripperda Lord of Buirse, Deputy to the
States General of the Province of Gelderland; Mr. de Merode, Lord of Rumme,
Deputy from the Nobility of Holland to the Assembly of the same States General,
named to the extraordinary Embassage of Spain; and Guldewagen of Holland,
Vrybergen of Zealand, Renswoude of Utrecht, Velsen of Frieseland, and Isbrants
of Groaning should go to Breda to congratulate the King for his glorious
re-establishment, and do with his Majesty, with the Dukes of York and
Gloucester, and with the Princess Royal, the same office which the Deputies of
the Province of Holland had order to do with him, in the name of their
Superiors.

The States of Holland pretended, that their Deputation would have no effect,
until they should have advertisement of the Declaration of the Parliament; not,
that they doubted of its intention, but because they judged, that it imported
the service of the King, so to use it whereby not to prevent the Parliament,
and to do nothing rashly in an affair of this consequence, where civility done
out of season, was both incommodious and unprofitable. Notwithstanding
forasmuch as it was necessary that his Majesty should know the sentiments of
the Estates, they ordained that he should have assurance thereof under hand, by
offices efficacious and capable to express them well; and to this purpose, they
judged it fit that the person of Mr. Jews of Nassau, Mr. Beverweert goes to
Breda.
Lord of Lecque and Beverweert, etc. Sergeant Major General of the Armies of
the United Provinces, and Governor of the Bosch, should be so much the more
proper for that, as the devoirs which he was obliged to render to the King, in
his particular, might serve for pretext to his voyage. And, indeed, the person
of this Lord should be extremely agreeable, not only because of the affection
which he had witnessed for the affairs of his Majesty during his persecution,
and because of the alliance which the Lord of Ossery, eldest son of the
Marquess of Ormond, Lord Deputy of Ireland, of the illustrious House of Butler,
and now Lord Steward of England, has taken in his House; but also, and
principally, because of the great imploiments which he has in his country, and
of the excellent qualities which are found in his person. All considerations,
which obliged him to see the King before he did the functions of public
Minister. He arrived at Breda on Saturday morning, the 15 of May, and executed
his Commission so happily, that the King, reserving but the open declaration of
his good will for the Deputies when they should be arrived, disposed himself to
receive the offers and civilities which they had order to make him, with so
much the more advantage and glory for this Estate, and for Mr. Beverweert in
particular, as Don John de Monroy who arrived the The Marquess of Caracene
desires the King to pass into Flanders.
same day at Breda, had prayed his Majesty, from the Marquess of Caracene,
General of the King of Spains Armies in Flanders, to take his way through the
Provinces under the obedience of his Catholic Majesty, and to embark in one of
the ports of those quarters, to return to his Kingdoms. Some report at that
time, and even those, who took pains to observe what passed at Breda, during
the abode which the King made there, as sure, that Don John de Monroy had also
made known to the King, that the arrears due to the troops, which the King of
Spain entertained for the service of his Majesty, were at Bruxels, and that he
might cause them to be paid as he passed. But this appeared not, no more then
what passed in the conference, which the Duke of York had some days before,
with the Marquess of Caracene himself, in the town of Antwerp, by order of the
King, who would not go there in person, though he was pressed thereunto through
the consideration of the important affairs, which he said he had order to
communicate to his Majesty. The King defended himself with the same firmness
from the civilities which he sent to be made unto him, in excusing himself upon
the facility which he found for his passage in the place where he was at
present. I know that two reasons, principally, obliged the King to render
himself, at first, to the request which Mr. Beverweert made him in the name of
the Lords the Estates of Holland: The first, that having had advertisement,
that the Parliament, and City of London sent a great number of Commissioners,
he would not they should lose time in going from the Sea to Breda; and the
other, that the Court was already so great, and the town so incommodated of
provisions, that it would be impossible to lodge there; and diet the Deputies
and their train, which were said to be three or four hundred Gentlemen, besides
other Domestics.

We have said that the news of the Parliaments Declaration, of the Army, and of
the City of London, was carried to Breda, the precedentday, by Posts express,
and that from thence it arrived the next day at the Hage, where the estate of
affairs being changed since the resolutions of the former days, as well the
Estates General of the United Provinces, as those of the Province of Holland,
pressed their Deputies to depart: And those last in particular, writ to Mr.
Beverweert, and gave him order to signify to the King, that they had nominated
already some of their body, which should be gone forthwith to congratulate his
Majesty; and in the mean time to dispose him to honor that Province with his
presence and abode, during the time that his affairs should oblige him to stay
in the Country. They writ also, at the same time, to the Magistrates of the
towns where the King might pass in his way, that they should make necessary
preparations to receive his Majesty with all the honor and magnificence that
was due to so great a Monarch.

The devotion of the day of Pentecost, which happened the Order of the precedence
between the States General, and the Estates of the Province of Holland.
16 of May, was cause that the Deputies departed not that day; but it hindered
them not from laboring in the regulation of a most important affair, and which
was judged, by the Province of Holland, to be of the greatest consequence. This
Estate is composed in such manner, that notwithstanding the Soveraignity of all the United Provinces in one body, every Province cease not to be Sovereign in
particular; and they are all so jealous of their Soveraignity, that they suffer
not the Generality to have other advantage in the Provinces, then that which is
due unto them by virtue of their union, and of the perpetual alliance, which
is, in some kind, more straight even then that of the Cantons Suizzers. So that
the Deputies of the Estates General, being to meet with those of the Estates of
Holland, in the place where these pretended to represent the Soveraignity of
their Province, which acknowledges no superior at home; the difficulty was to
order the rank between them, and to conserve to each that which belongs to
it. The Estates of Holland, who had caused the King to be prayed, in
particular, to honor their Province with his presence, would have him to be
received and saluted, in their name, upon the Fronteer, would defray the
charges on his way from the time he entered into the Province, and till the
first day he should arrive at the Hage, as making part of his Voyage. The
Estates General, who represent not, indeed, in general, but what every Province
possesses in particular, acquiesced therein, left to the Province of Holland,
all the marks of Soveraignity, and consented to this, that their Deputies,
after they had congratuled the King, and conducted his Majesty to the entrance
into Holland, should remain without functions; conditionally notwithstanding,
that the Deputies of Holland should do the honor of the House, and treating
them of the Generallity with civility, should give them precedence in the
places, where they might meet together. The Estates General resolved, the same
day, that the King's charges should be defrayed during the whole time he stayed
in the United Provinces; and ordained likewise that provision should be made
for it; but at first they met with so many difficulties, that it was absolutely
impossible to execute this resolution. For the Town of Breda being already
starved almost, because of the great number of persons of quality which came
there every day, and the hot season permitting not provisions to be brought
there from other places, there was no body would undertake to treat the King;
and those that would have undertaken it, could not have accomplished it; so
that the Estate would have had the displeasure to see their substance
dissipated, at the expense of its reputation.

We think to relate here, as a thing most remarkable, that the same day Mr.
Moorland, chief Commissioner under Mr. Thurlo, Thurlo's Secretary comes to
Breda.
who was Secretary of Estate unto Oliver Cromwell, his chief and most confident
Minister of his Tyranny, arrived at Breda, where he brought diverse Letters and
Notes of most great importance; forasmuch as the King discovered there a part
of the intricate plots of the interreign, and likewise the perfidiousness of
some of those, who owed him, without doubt, the greatest fidelity of the world.
The King received him perfectly well, made him Knight, and rendered him this
public testimony, that he had received most considerable services from him for
some years past.

The 17. the Deputies of the Estates General, whom we have The Deputies of the
Estates General, and of Holland, depart.
named, departed from the Hage, about two a clock after dinner and embarked
themselves, the same day, at Rotterdam, where the Jachts or Pinnaces, which the
Estate had caused to be in readiness, attended them. Those of Holland departed
in the morning, but they made not the same haste, as well because they, would
not be the first in the place where the Estates were to precede, as because
they had diverse orders to give in the places of their passage.

The Deputies of the States General arrived at Breda the 18. The Deputies of
the Estates General arrive at Breda.
of May after dinner; and were met with near the village of Terheida by four
Cornets of Horse of the Garrison, and arriving at the Town, they found there 12
Companies of Foot drawn up in battalia; which saluted them with their shot,
whilst the Artillery thundered from the walls and bulwarks. As soon as they
were come to the house which was prepared for them, they gave notice thereof to
his Majesty, and next to the Dukes of York, and Gloucester, and to the Princess
Royal; and toward the evening the King, and their Royal Hignesses, sent them
most civil salutes by Gentlemen of their House. They understood that Mr.
Clarges, brother-in-law to General Monck, was arrived there the same day, and
that he had brought the protestations of fidelity and obedience from the Army;
and the confirmation of what they had already heard of the Declaration of the
Parliament: Until then the Major of the Garrison had taken orders from the
Princess Royal; but the Deputies of the States General, being arrived at Breda,
would transfer that honor to the King, who gave the word, Amsterdam; not so
much for that he considered this Town as the most powerful of all these
Provinces, but for as much as he could not silence the resentiments which he
had for the Magistrate; which had given him most illustrious, and most
agreeable marks of its affection.

The next day there came a Post to Breda, bringing intelligence ^
that the Garrison of Dunkerck, declared for the King, and had witnessed its
joy by the fire of its Cannon and Muskets. The King had the goodness to invite
the Lord Lockart, Governor of the place, to express some inclination for his
service, and to give him an occasion for it by the advance he had made, and the
assurances he had given him, but it could gain nothing upon that spirit
prepossessed, and tied so by particular interests to the house of Cromwell,
until he was constrained to leave himself to be carried away by the general
motion of the whole Army, and of the Garrison it self.

The next day being the 19. the Estates General having had advertisement by
public Letters, from their Ambassador at London, of what passed in Parliament
in behalf of the King, redoubled the orders which they had given to their
Deputies, touching the complement and offices which they were to do; to the end
to acquit themselves thereof with zeal and affection; and certified them, by an
express, that they had sent commissions to Arnham, Heusden, Bergen op Zoom, and
Gercum, for the Troops of Horse of Prince William of Nassau, of the Count
Christian of Dona, and of Mrs. de Buat, de Wassenaer, and de la Lecque, son to
Mr. Beverweert, with order to march with all speed, night and day, toward high
Swaluwe, to attend there the King of great Britain, and to execute the commands
which should be given them by the Deputies of the Estates of Holland. The last
arrived this day at Breda, and the Deputies of the Estates The Deputies of the
Estates General have* audience of the King.
General had their audience. The King sent unto them about eleven a clock in
the forenoon, the Lord Gerard, one of the Gentlemen of his bedchamber, whose
quality and functions are answerable to those of the chief Gentlemen of the
Chamber of the King of France, who was to take them at their lodgings with four
Coaches, each drawn by six white horses, and conducted them to the Castle where
the King was lodged. The Marquess of Ormond came to receive them, at the top of
the stairs, and caused them to enter into the King's chamber, where they found
his Majesty standing in the midst of the chamber, and covered; but as soon as
he saw them, he uncovered himself, and came two or there paces to meet them.
After they had made most low reverences, and were come unto the King, Monsieur
de Ripperda, Lord of Buirse, one of the Deputies, would begin to speak; but his
Majesty would oblige them to put on their hats, in making semblance that he
would be covered. They had not the character of Ambassador, and could not have
it at home with them; therefore would they not be in that condition, but
remained in their duty, and obliged thereby his Majesty, who could not overcome
their modesty, though innocently, and against their intention, to remain also
uncovered, whilst the first Deputy spoke. The substance of his discourse was,
that the States General of the United Provinces had understood, with an extreme
joy, the chang of the affairs of England; That they knew the good God had so
well touched the heart of the inhabitants, that there was not any Person,
almost, that cried not on the name of the King, and wished passionately to see
him returned into his Kingdom; that upon certain advertiements, which the
Estates General had had thereof, they thought it fit to send their Deputies to
this Majesty, to witness unto him the part they take, to congratulate him in so
important an occasion, and to wish him, and all his Royal Family all the
blessings of Heaven, and all the prosperity that he might hope from God, after
so long and such bitter afflictions; that the Estates General made those
prayers with so much the more ardour, as they knew that the repose of this
Commonwealth, depended in some kind on that of its neighbors; and that they
would not willingly enjoy the amity of the English, but under the Monarchal
Government of his Royal House; that they pretended to enjoy it still for the
future under the happy government of his Majesty, and for this purpose, they
hoped he would have the goodness to renew with the United Provinces the
alliance which they always considered here as one of the chief points of
Estate, and as the foundation of the conservation of the common interests of
the two Nations; That they had order also from their Superiors, to remonstrate
to his Majesty that the residence of Breda, was inconvenient and distant, and
to beseech him most humbly to choose one in their Provinces, that he should
judge more proper for his affairs, for his residence, and for his embarkment.
That the Estates General had commanded them to follow his Majesty in his
voyage, and to serve him with whatsoever the United Provinces possessed. The
King thanked the Lords the Estates for their civility, and for the testimonies
of affection which they caused to be made him by the mouth of their Deputies;
and assured them of his amity, in such strong and obliging terms, that knowing
one shall be very glad to remember often the goodness of the King, we fear not
to relate here the same words which he used, to conclude his discourse. I love
this Commonwealth, said he, not only because the Princess Royal, my Sister,
and the Prince of Oreng, two persons who are extremely dear unto me, remain
here; but also through interest of Estate, for the good of my Kingdoms, and
through a very strong inclination toward their good. I love truly, SIRS, these
Provinces, and so strongly, that I should be jealous if they gave greater part
in their amity to another Prince then to me, who think that I ought to have
much more therein then any other Prince, since I love them more then all the
other Sovereigns together.

After dinner the Deputies did reverence to the Dukes of York and Gloucester,
the King's brothers, and to the Princess Royal, Have audience of their Royal
Highnesses.
his sister, where Mr. de Ripperda made again the complement. Mr. German,
Gentleman of the Horse to the Duke of York, came to take them at their lodging,
and conducted them to the audience of his Royal Highness. At coming from
whence, he conducted them to the audience of the Duke of Gloucester, and coming
forth of his appartment, they met with Sir Alexander Humes, Steward to the
Princess, who conducted them to his Mistress chamber, which was not above
fifteen or twenty paces from thence. The two Princes made them a full civility,
in conducting them even to the door almost of their apartments. Thursday, the
20. of May about eleven a clock in the fore-noon, The Deputies of Holland have
audience of the King.
the Deputies of the Estates of Holland had their audience of the King, unto
which they were brought in by the same persons, and with the same ceremonies,
wherewith that of the Estates General was accompanied. The Marquess of Ormond,
who had the conduct of it, giving them the hand, Mr. de Beverweert, Chief of
the Deputation, carried the Word, and spoke in these terms.

SIR, It is now the third time, that, My Lords, the Estates of Holland have
congratulated with your Majesty upon your coming to the Crown. The first was,
when you attained thereunto by virtue of the fundamental law of your Estate,
immediately after the decease of the late King your father, of most glorious
and eternal memory; and the other, when the Scots came; to this place, to
invite your Majesty to go to take possession of one of the Crowns of your
Ancestors. It is but with great grief, SIR, that we remember those two
disastrous encounters; but on the contrary, it is with a transport of joy, that
we come now from the Estates of Holland, our Superiors, to congratulate your
Majesty upon the present happy estate of your affairs. We may say, that they
see already your Majesty seated in the Throne, and so that they take the part
which they ow to the satisfaction which you are to have thence, and this with
so much the more reason, as they know that the reciprocal amity between England
and this Republic, has never suffered the least alteration under the
government of her Kings. So promise they themselves, that it shall be better
conserved then ever it was, under that of your Majesty, with whose alliance
they shall feel themselves always extremely honored, as well as with the
Royal goodwill which your Majesty expresses unto them. They also most humbly
beseech your Majesty to give them a proof thereof, at present, in transferring
your Court into their Province, for the little time which your Majesty will have
to stay in these quarters and to suffer, that they cause to be rendered, and
render themselves in person unto you, during that time, all the services which
they ow to so great and potent a Monarch, whose amity is so precious and
necessary to them.

The King made them very near the same answer, which he did the day before to
the Deputies of the Estates General; in saying, that he was very much obliged
to the Lords the Estates of Holland for the affection they expressed to him;
that he refused not the offer they made him of the commodity of another
residence, in a Province for which he had always had a most particular
inclination; as well because of the dear pledge of the Princess Royal, his
sister, and of the Prince of Oreng, his nephew, which they kept; as trhough a
secret motion, and an interest of Estate indispensable. This the King said,
with so much goodness and tenderness, that the Deputies, finding themselves
insensily engaged in a discourse more particular, and his Majesty, making known
that he heard speech of the affairs of the North with pleasure, opened himself
fully therein; and feared not to say, that he was obliged to assist the King of
Denmark, not only because of the near affinity, and affection which the present
King, as well as the deceased King his father, had expressed for his interests;
but also, because he judged that it extremely imported England, and all Europe,
to stop the progress of the Swed's Arms in those quarters. The Deputies were,
after dinner, with their Royal Highnesses, where they were brought in by the
same persons, and received in the same manner that the Deputies of the Estates
General had been treated and received the day before. About five a clock in the
evening, the Estates General had a particular audience of the King, in
execution Particular audience of the Deputies of the States General.
of the express order which they had to make known to his Majesty the
inclination of the Estate for a most straight and perpetual alliance with his
Majesty; to which the King answered with much freeness and affection, saying in
most strong, and most obliging terms, That not one of the Kings, his
predecessors, had ever had for this Commonwealth, the affection which it
should find always in him; not only because of the interests of the two
persons so near as the Princess Royal and the Prince of Oreng; who live in the
Estate, and make, as one may say, a part thereof, as he said unto them the day
before; but also through inclination, and many reasons of Estate, which obliged
him to make with these Provinces a most straight alliance.

The same day the Estates General having understood, by Letters from their
Deputies, that the King's design was to come into Holland by water, gave order
that all the Pinnaces, and other Barks, capable to transport the King, the
Princes and Princess of the Royal House, with all their Court, Train, and
Baggage, should immediately repair to the higher Swaluwe in Brabant, to attend
there the orders which the Deputies of the Estates of Holland should give them
for that purpose. They caused also to be written to all the Colonels, and other
Major Officers, as well of Foot, as of Horse, who were quartered in the
neighborhood of that Town, that they should be the first day at the Hague, to
serve the Estate there, and to appear splendidly at the Ceremonies of the
reception, and treatment which they had resolved to make to his Majesty. As for
the Deputies of Holland, not only Mr. Beverweert, who knew the intention of the
King, by the Marquess of Ormond, had one the 18 sent an express to the Hage, to
advertise the Deputy Councillors therewith, in the absence of the Estates of
Holland, who brake up from the evening of Pentecost, but they dispatched also
themselves a Post, immediately after they arrived at Breda, praying urgently,
that without delay necessary orders might be given, for the reception and
entertainment of his Majesty at the entrance into this Province, and during his
voyage to the Hage; and to that purpose the Deputy Councillors, who do in the
Province of Holland, what the Council of Estate does in regard of the United
Provinces, employed the three days following, after having required Mr. de
Wimmenum, President in their College, to take upon him the whole conduct of
this affair, as also the order of all the expense which they had resolved to
make for the King's table, and for the Lords which belonged to him as his
attendance, whereof they left unto him the full disposing, during the voyage
and first day that his Majesty arrived at this Town. The Deputies had also
written to the Magistrate of the Town of the Briel, to advertise him of the
resolution which the King had taken to pass into Holland; to the end that if
there arrived there Posts from the Commissioners of Parliament, he should send
them to the Hage, where the King made account to arrive in a very short time.

And indeed the same day, the Deputies, as well of the Estates General, as
those of the Estates of Holland, knew that the King had resolved to depart from
Breda on Monday, the 24 of May; and to this purpose, to embark himself the same
day at Moordike; to the end to be at the Hage the next day, by water, about
four a clock in the evening. Upon the advertisement which they gave thereof,
the same day, to their Superiors, the Estates General resolved, Friday the 21,
that Mr. the Count de Flodorp, de Wimmenum, d'Amerongen, and de Ripperda de
Hengelo, should give order, conjunctively with two Councillors of Estate of
the United Provinces, that his Majesty, and the Princes his brothers, should be
sumptuously treated and defrayed, with all their Train, during the whole time
that his Majesty should remain in the Country of their obedience, from
Wednesday the 26 of May, to the day of his embark'ment.

The same advertisement, which had been carried, at one time, into diverse Towns
of the Province, made to return, to the Hage, the most part of the Deputies,
which compose the Estates of Holland; and which (as we have said) brake up the
eve of Pentecost; so that the most part being returned on Friday in the
evening, they began their Assembly the next morning, being the 22 of May; and
fixed on this, that Tuesday following, the 25 of the said month, they should
send toward Delf, at a place convenient to make the complement, all Coaches of
four and six horses that could be gotten, for the Convoy with which they
intended to receive his Majesty; and should cause also as many pinnaces and
other Barks to beready as was necessary to transport the train and baggage.
They ordained also, that besides the Deputies which they had sent to Breda, Mr.
Buckhurst, Lord of Wimmenum, Deputy Ordinary from the Noblity to the College
of the Deputy Councillors or Council of Estate of Holland, should join himself
to the other Deputies at Delf; and forasmuch as he was charged with the conduct
of the whole treatment which the Province intended to make to his Majesty,
as well on the way, as in this town, as Deputy from the Estates, that in this
quality he should stay by the King, whilst he dined, to receive the honor of
his commandments, after the other Deputies should be retired.

The Estates General, of their side, required Mr. d'Amerongen, Mr. d'Amerongen
goes to Breda.
of the House of Rhede, one of the chief Nobles of the Province of Utrecht,
Deputy, in their assembly, from the Nobility of the same Province, lately
extraordinary Ambassador in Denmark, and now nominated for Spain, to go to
Breda; and to report from thence an exact estate of the Kings whole Court, and
train of the Princes; as also of the number of the Lords, of the Council, and
of his Majesty's House; to the end, that necessary proportions might be taken
for the lodgings pointed out for the Lords; for the Tables which were to be
furnished; and for the mouths to be fed, during the residence which the King
should make at the Hage. And to the end, not to come short, they made, the same
day, a foundation of three hundred thousand gilders for the expense that should
be made for it.

They had the same day Letters from Breda, which signified, that the day before
Sr. Peter Killegrew, brother to him who comands an English Regiment of Foot, in
the service of the Lords the Estates, and who so gloriously fought in the
Battle of Funen, that it is his merit, rather then the alliance which he has
with General Monck, that makes him to be considered, was arrived there from
London; from whence he had been dispatched express, to carry to the King the
news of his proclamation; which was done the 19 of the same month, with great
ceremonies, and extraordinary testimonies of joy and affection, not only in the
City of London, but also in diverse other neighbor Towns. But forasmuch as
these particularities are of the History of England, which will not fail to
publish all the wonders of this great revolution, we will not make our relation
of it, which in speaking of all that passed in the Country, is obliged to make
known here the affection of the Magistrates of Dort, of Delf, and of Rotterdam,
who sent to beseech the King, by Deputies express, to do them the honor to
pass through their Towns, and to refresh himself there by the way. But his
Majesty excused himself, as well upon the present estate of his affairs, which
permitted him not to stay any where; as because that his passage could not but
incommodate the inhabitants, unto whom he should not cease to find himself
sensibly obliged, for the tenderness they expressed to him.

Sunday the 23, there was nothing remarkable, if not, that at Breda solemn
thanks were rendered to God, in all the Churches, on the revolution of the
affairs of England, in behalf of the King: all the Ministers of the Churches,
English, Dutch and French, expounding Texts proper for the matter. After the
Sermons, the Magistrate and Consistory were incorporated to make their
complement to his Majesty, and to their Royal Highnesses; and at evening,
bonfires of joy were made through the whole Town; all the Bells rung, and many
volleys were discharged from all the Artillery; the Deputies of the Estates
General, those of the Estates of Holland, the Magistrate, and the particular
persons, emulating one another which should express most joy and satisfaction
in this great day. They began, in the mean time, to load, and to send away the
baggage, whilst they finished, at the Hague, to furnish Prince Maurice his
House, designed for the King's lodging; to appoint lodging for the whole Court,
and to make necessary provisions, for its subsistence when it should be come,
and whilst it should remain there.

Monday the 24, there happened, at the Hague, a thing very remarkable, and which
might be of great importance, in its consequences, if they had taken council of
ambition, rather then of prudence. By the fixed resolution of the Estates
General, of the 16 of this month, it was said, that the Estates of Holland
might cause the King to be received, and complemented, at the entrance of the
Province; and that they might make the honor of the House, as being the
Masters of it. But the former had made Order between the Estates General and
those of Holland for precedence in the Province.
known since, that their intention was to cause the King to be received, either
by a greater number of Deputies, then there had been from them at Breda, or if
the Estates of Holland went, in a body, to receive his Majesty by Delf toward
Rotterdam; in this case, the States General would go, also in a body, to
complement his Majesty between Delf and the Hage, at the place where they are
accustomed to receive Ambassadors; and that in conducting him their Coaches
should follow immediately the King's. The Estates of Holland being advertised
hereof, likewise that the Estates General would send Deputies to their
Assembly; and pretending that formerly there passed too many things to the
prejudice of the right of their Soveraignity, they named the Deputies of the
Towns of Dort, Harlem, Amsterdam, Alckmar, and Horn, to enter into conference
with the Deputies of the Estates General; to the end, to dispose fitly this
affair. And, indeed, they negotiated so happily, that they were agreed, at
last, among themselves, that if the Estates of Holland caused the King to be
received at Delf, by Deputies, they should remain both in the terms of the
resolution of the 16 of this month; by virtue of which, the Lords, the Estates
of Holland, might alone do the honors in their Province, and cause the King to
be complemented wheresoever he pleased; and that the Deputies of the Estates
General, which were by his Majesty's person; should continue to be treated with
respect, as representing strange Sovereigns; and that in this quality, their
Coach, or Coaches, if they judged fit to increase the number of their Deputies,
(which notwithstanding they promised, by mouth, that they would not do) should
follow immediately the King's, and precede those of the Deputies of the
Province. After this the Estates of Holland ordained, that Mr. de Wassenaer,
Lieutenant Admiral of Holland, should be joined to the Deputies named in the
resolution of the 13 of May, and to Mr. de Wimmenum, who had been named the 22;
and that every Town should depute one, of its body, to go to make the
complement, together with the Pentionary Counselor, at the disbarkment of his
Majesty by Delf.

And forasmuch as there was reason to fear, that there might The Estates send
to pray the Ambassadors not to send their Coaches to meet the King.
happen some disorder about the rank of the Coaches that should be sent to meet
the King; not so much because the Ambassadors were not well agreed among
themselves about precedence; but chiefly, because there were some of them, that
would make their Coach, to go before that of the Prince of Oreng; who ought to
be considered here, not only because of his quality of Sovereign Prince, but
also as Nephew to the King; and consequently, as chief Prince of the blood of
England, after the two Dukes; as well the Estates General, as those of Holland,
judged fit to cause the Ambassadors, of the Crowned-heads, to be prayed, by
their Agent, not to send their Coaches, but to leave the conduct and whole
honor of this ceremony to the Estate; to the end, to prevent the confusion,
which otherwise would be unavoidable. They all acquiesced therein, without
repugnance, and would fain have that respect for the King, and condescendence
enough for the desire of the Lords the Estates, not to trouble the public joy,
which the whole world endeavored to make resplendent on this occasion.

The whole Court, in the mean time, departed from Breda the same day, being the
24 of May. The Deputies of the Estates of Holland departed thence, at four a
clock in the morning, to the end to have the leisure to choose a fit place to
put the five troops of Horse, which were commanded into Battle, and to give
necessary orders for his Majesty's embarkment. The Deputies of the Estates
General departed about two hours after, and the King took coach with the Dukes
of York and Gloucester, and the Princess Royal, about 8 or 9 a clock in the
morning. But before they went out of the Hall of the Castle, the Burgemasters,
and Council of Ten, presented themselves again to the King, and caused to be
made unto him, by the same Mr. Snel, who made him a speech when he arrived at
Breda, this following discourse; for which the public is obliged to a
Gentleman of the King's House, who had a care to write word by word, and to
communicate to the author of the relation, all the orations, where he was
present, when they were spoken.

SIR, The Magistrate and Council of Ten of this town of The speech of the
Burgemaster of Breda.
Breda, present themselves, again, with a most low reverence before your
Majesty, to render you most humble thanks for the honor it has pleased you to
do the town, by the residence you have made here; and to bring you a last proof
of the perfect joy, which the wonderful success of your Majesty, as it is the
powerful hand, and infinite providence of God, which has drawn your Majesty
out of a Gulf of dangers, and conducted you through a desert of afflictions,
even unto the entrance of the greatness, which the right of your Predecessors
has gained to all their posterity. This is the subject of our joy, Sir, but
that after the success of many battles, Victories gained at the price of the
blood of Subjects, may content the ambition of a Prince transported; but a good
Prince, whose thoughts are generous and magnanimous, prefers an innocent
triumph, before all other advantages of the world. We praise with all our
hearts, that great God, who has began this work in the person of your Majesty;
and pray him ardently, that it will please him to hear the devotions which we
shall continue to make incessantly, for the prosperity of the voyage and reign
of your Majesty. The King answered, that he thanked the Magistrate and Council
for the affection they expressed to him, and should endeavor to acknowledge
it, on all occasions that should be presented unto him. Whereupon the
Burgemaster having taken the liberty to reply, that since his Majesty had the
goodness to accept the affection and zeal which they had for his service, he
besought him most humbly to remember the grace which he had made them to hope
for, when he concluded in that place his treaty with the Deputies of Scotland,
some years since; that he would honor the town of Breda, and its inhabitants,
with all the favor, which the Laws of his Kingdom would permit him to grant
them. The King answered, that he remembered it very well; and that he was
obliged to do it for a town, where he had received such agreeable news, and
which had rendered him so many testimonies of respect and affection.

The King took coach, after this audience, and came between eleven and twelve a
clock at Moervaert. He found there some squadrons of Horse in batalia, and the
Deputies of the Estates of Holland, who presented themselves at the boot of his
Coach, and made him their complement, in the name of their Superiors, at the
entrance of their Province. His Majesty stayed but to hear the quaint and
obliging words of Mr. de Beverweert, who spoke for all the other Deputies, and
to answer to that civility: After this, he persued his way to the end of the
Causey, The King embarks himself.
or Dike, where they had made a bridge, from the Dike to the Pinnace, to
facilitate his embarkment.

The Estates General, to give no jealousy to some persons of quality, who have
coaches with six horses, make use ordinarily, for the entrance of Ambassadors,
and for other public Ceremonies, but of the Coach of the Princess Dowager of
Orange, which represents that of the Estates in those occasions. Hence was it
they desired that the pinnace or barge of the same Princess, which she had lent
for the same purpose, should have the same honor on this occasion, and had
enjoined their Deputies to endeavor to make it acceptable to his Majesty: But
the King, after he had considered them all, chose another, as well because he
knew it was very commodious, as having used it formerly; as because, indeed,
that of the Princess Dowager was not great enough, to lodge the King, and the
Princess Royal, who would pass the night, by the King her brother, with persons
necessary for their service. That whereinto the King entered, was made formerly
for the Prince of Orange, but it is now in the College of the Admirality of
Rotterdam; and was, without doubt, the greatest of all that little Fleet, which
was composed, besides other Barks, almost innumerable, of thirty great Barges,
commonly called Yachts, and are a kind of little Frigates, whereof persons of
condition make use upon the Rivers, in passing from one Province unto another,
for necessity, or for divertisement. And indeed, the King found his Yacht so
fit, and so well fashioned, that he said, in discourse with the Deputies, that
he would cause one to be made of the same manner, as soon as he should be
arrived in England, to serve him upon the Thames above the bridge. Mr. de
Vlooswick, Burgemaster of Amsterdam, and one of the Deputies of the Province of
Holland, taking occasion from thence to render a very considerable service to
this country, said to the King, that lately they had made one in their town of
the same bigness, at least as commodious every way, which he took the liberty
to offer The town of Amsterda^ makes a present of a fair Yacht to the King of
England.
to his Majesty, beseeching him to grace the Magistrate of the town of
Amsterdam to accept it. The King accepted it not absolutely, but declined not
so strongly, that upon the advertisement which Mr. de Vlooswick gave to the
Magistrate of what passed on this occasion, he caused not that Yacht to be
bought, which the College of the Admiralty had gotten of the East India
Company, and put it in condition to serve for the divertisement of this great
Prince: And to give it the more luster, the Magistrate caused the outside to be
richly gilt, whilst some of the best Painters of the country, wrought upon the
fair Pictures, wherewith they have since adorned the inside.

No person would undertake the commission to distribute the Yachts among the
Lords of the Court, because it would be impossible to oblige them all equally,
and to disoblige none: Therefore Mr. de Beverweert besought the King to be so
gracious, as to cause the distribution to be made, since the Deputies had no
other order but fully to obey the commandments of his Majesty, which were
absolutely necessary for them on this occasion. The King would fain take the
pains thereof himself, and ordained that the Duke of York, should ont his
occasion perform the functions of Admiral, in distributing the Yachts, under
his authority, and in his presence; so that his Royal Highness gave himself the
Yacht of the Princess Dowager of Oreng: The Duke of Gloucester had that of the
Estates of Holland: The Princess Royal, one of the Yachts of the Council of
Estate. The Deputies of the Estates General had the other: The Deputies of the
Estates of Holland went into the Yacht of Mr. Beverweert, which received also
Don Estevan de Gamarra; (who went to meet the King at Moordijck, not in quality
of Ambassador of Spain, but as particular servant of his Majesty) the
Rhinegrave, the Lord Craft, and many other English Lords. The Chancellor of
England, with his family, and Sr. Edward Nicholas, principal Secretary of
Estate, and of the King's commands, and one of his most affectionate Ministers,
embarked themselves in a Pinnace, called the Maid of Zealand: The Marquess of
Ormond, Lord Deputy of Ireland, of the House of Butler, one of the chief, and
most ancient of that Kingdom, had the Pinnace of Captain Brouwer: The Marquess
of Worcester, Edward Sommerset, embarked himself, with his Family, in the
Pinnace, named the Postillion of Zealand: The Lord St. John, and Bellasis had
that of Mr. Wassenaer. Mr. Clarges, brother-in-law to General Monck, and his
company, composed of the Deputies of the Army, had the Yacht of the town of
Dort. The Lord Gerard, and many other English Lords, entered into that of Mr.
Noortwick, Governor of Sluice, and the 13th Yacht, which was that of the Prince
of Oreng, was reserved for the Chamber and Wardrobe of the Princess Royal.
Every Yacht had its Steward, and all other Officers necessary for the Kitchen,
and buttery; and they which had not the commodity to have their Kitchen aboard
themselves, were accompanied with other Barks, where chimneys were made for the
Kitchen, and ovens for the pastery, and provision of so prodigious a quantity
of all sorts of meats, of foul, of sweet meats, of wine, that all the tables
were perfectly served therewith; and in so great abundance, that the English
Stewards, though very much accustomed to abundance, were astonished thereat;
and confessed that they could not comprehend, how they could make ready in
Boats and agitation, twenty or five and twenty great dishes for every Table.

The intention of the King was to dine at Noon, in entering into the Yacht; and
indeed, the Steward, who was appointed there by the Estates of Holland, had
caused the meat to be made ready; but the wind was so strong, and the water so
tossed, that the Princess Royal, not able to endure the violent motion of the
vessel, lost her appetite, and finding her self incommodated with the
sea-sickness, was enforced to lie upon the bed. Hence was it that the King
caused the Captain to be asked, if there was means to shelter them, somewhat,
under some rising land, or trees, to ease the Princess a little; but the
Captain having answered, that there was no rest to be hoped for, but at Dort,
where they might arrive in an hour and a half, or there about, they went on
upon this hope. Notwithstanding, they came not in sight of Dort, till between
three and four of the clock in the afternoon. The Rampart, and Key, were
bordered with Citizens, which were put into arms, and with a battery of great
Cannon, which made many volleys, as well as the Muskets, (whilst the Fleet
passed there, during, and after the repast, which was taken in sight of the
town) and as long as they could discover the flag of the ship, which carried
the person of the King, with all the Royal family, they thundered.

The Fleet stopped, a quarter of a league, below the town, with design to cast
anckor that evening, and to stay, the whole night following, at the mouth of
the river of Leck, which gives its name to one of the fairest territories of
Mr. de Beverweert, and which is very well known through the great number of
Salmons, which are taken there every year. But there happened two things, which
obliged the King to change resolution. The first was, the return of Sir John
Greenvil, who arrived from England, whilst the King dined; and reported, that
the Parliament was resolved to beseech his Majesty, to come to take possession
of the Crown, without any condition or reserve; and that Admiral Montague was
at sea, with a good number of ships, to come to receive him in Holland, to
transport him unto his Kingdom. The other was, the advertisement which his
Majesty received, almost at the same time, by an express, that that Fleet
appeared, in the morning, in sight of Scheveling, and at nine a clock, had cast
anckor in the Rode, about half a league from the shore. The King presently
imparted it to Mr. Beverweert, as to the chief of the Deputation of Holland,
and caused the Duke of York to tell him, who was in person in the Deputies
Yacht, which joined side by side with his; that it was true, he had made
account not to arrive at Delf till the next day, about noon; to the end, to be
able to make his entrance into the Hague, at the hour which he had appointed
for his reception; but that he had received intelligence, which obliged him to
change his design, and to anticipate the hour that was resolved on; because it
was of the highest importance for him, to speak, as soon as might be, with the
Officers of the Fleet; and so, that he should be constrained to go the whole
night; to the end, to arrive at Delf at the break of day; whereof he prayed him
to give advertisement to the Lords the Estates, immediately, and by an express;
to the end that the Coaches, designed for his reception, might be there at
seven a clock precisely. Mr. Beverweert remonstrated, to his Royal Highness,
the difficulties that would accur in the change of the orders which were
already given; in telling him, that the Post, which he was to dispatch, could
arrive at the Hague but very late; and, perhaps, at an unseasonable hour, when
it would be almost impossible to make the Estates to assemble, and without
that, they could not change the time, which it pleased his Majesty himself to
appoint. Notwithstanding if the King desired it absolutely, the Deputies would
not fail to write immediately; and to advertise their Superiors therewith,
since they were there, but to obey his Majesty, and to serve him. The Duke of
York replied, that it was through an invincible necessity, and with an extreme
regret, that the King did thus; but that he hoped the Lords the Deputies would
consider the estate of his affairs, and oblige very much his Majesty, in losing
no time to dispath their Post; and in contributing, by that means, to the
advancement of his voyage, and embarkment, in this pressing conjuncture.

The Letters went away about five a clock in the afternoon, the King caused
anckor to be weighed, and passed, at evening, The King passes in sight of
Rotterda^.
before the town of Rotterdam; where the contrary wind enforcing the Fleet to
board, or tack about, and by this means to draw near the haven, two or three
times gave the town leisure to salute his Majesty, by the musket shot of the
Burgers, who were all in arms, with flying colors, on the rampart and port,
and with all the artillery of the town, as well as with all the Cannon of the
Ships which were there in the rode. He passed next to Delfs-haven, where they
had made a battery of sixteen pieces of Cannon, and stayed not till he came to
Owerschie, a village situate between Delfs-haven and Delf, where he would
attend the day.

The Estates of Holland had resolved to cause his Majesty to be received, at
the powder Magazin, upon the channel, which serves for line of communication
for the two towns, Delf and Rotterdam; for the town of Delf, having been partly
ruined by an accident of fire, which met with the powder some years since, they
thought it fit to lodge it without the walls, and without cannon shot of the
town. But the King having caused the Fleet to set sail, as soon as the Sun
began to appear on the Horizon, they were at the suburbs of Delf, by five a
clock in the morning, before the Deputies could give order to make the Fleet to
stay at the place designed for the reception. All the Citizens of the town were
in arms, from three a clock in the morning, and The King arrives at Delf.
a part had their post upon the Key before the port, where the King was to
dis-imbarck, and the Magistrate came there, in body, to do reverence to the
King in the Yacht; as soon as he understood he was arrived, and to beseech him
to do them the honor to repose and refresh in their town, whilst his Majesty
should attend the Deputies of the Estates of Holland; but the King excused
himself on the Estate of his affairs, which was so far from permitting him to
stay by the way, that it had obliged him to prevent the hour, which he had
taken and appointed for his reception.

In the mean time, the Letters of the Deputies were brought to the Hage, at
midnight; and immediately after the Estates assembled, and caused the orders to
be changed, which were given for the King's reception, at four a clock in the
afternoon, into others more pressing; and they sent word to the Deputies, by
the same Post, that they might assure his Majesty, that they would not fail to
receive him, at the hour he had appointed them, or at eight a clock in the
morning at furthest. And, indeed, about two a clock after midnight, they caused
the drums to beat, to summon to arms the six Companies of Burgers, and the
Regiment of the Guards of the States of Holland, of which there is but four
garrisoned in the Hage, and the other six in the neighbor towns, from whence
they were made to come, and at six a clock they were all at their Rendezvous:
The first on the Viverberg, and the others in the outward Court of the Palace,
where the Coaches assembled almost at the same time. Those who took the most
pain in causing these orders to be executed, and who have, without doubt, the
most part in the honor, which is due unto those who had the conduct of this
affair; (as they have that of the most important of the Province) are Mrs. of
Wimmenum and the Pensionary Counselor, who were seen to act every where, each
in his functions, with so much assiduity, care and judgment, that if the King
drew any satisfaction from the honor they rendered him here, this Estate is
partly obliged to the pains of these two great Personages.

The Coaches began to file toward Delf about seven a clock in the morning; and
immediately after the Burgers, who stood in Battalia in the great Place,
marched toward the way which goes to Delf; and the soldiers went to take
their Post on the Viverberg, where they made a guard even to the house of
Prince Maurice of Nassau, which was prepared to lodge his Majesty. The Estates
Deputies being arrived at Delf, and having spoken with those who had
complemented the King at Breda, and had had the conduct of his person in the
voyage, informed his Majesty of the order they had given for his entrance, for
his lodging, and for his treatment; to the end, that as their intention was to
submit wholly to the absolute will of his Majesty, they made that to be changed
therein, which might displease him. And after that the King had given them his
approbation, and that they had invited the Deputies of the Estates General to
honor this ceremony with their presence, and to take place immediately after
the King's Coach; they gave order that the Coaches should be drawn into a file
along the Key of the Suburb.

This done, the Deputies of Holland entered all into the King's The King is
complemented at Delf by the Deputies of every member.
Yacht, and said unto him, in very few words, by the mouth of the Pensionary
Counselor, that they were there from the Estates of Holland, who had sent
there a Deputy of each member of their Province, to offer their most humble
services to his Majesty; to express unto him their respectfull passion for his
person; and to conduct him to the place designed for his lodging at the Hage.
The King thanked the Deputies, with words full of goodness and civility, for
the pain which they had taken, and for the proofs of affection and zeal which
the Lords the Estates of Holland, caused to be given him. They stayed in the
Barge or Yacht, but to discourse a moment with the company, which was composed,
besides the King's person, of the Dukes of York and Gloucester, of the Princess
Royal, of the Prince of Orange, who was come there from the Hage early in the
morning, of the Deputies of the Estates General, and of some English Lords; and
immediately after the King went forth thence, to go into the coach of the
Princess his sister, which had that day the honor to carry all the Royal
Family. The King put himself in the midst with the Princess, the Duke of York
and the Duke of Gloucester sat before, and the Prince of Orange in one of the
boots; and as soon as they were placed, the whole company began to advance to
enter into the town of Delf. The King but passed there; the Citizens, who were
in arms with displaied colors, from break of day, marched on both sides of the
Coach, more then a musket shot from the gate which leads to the Hage, where
they stayed and saluted his Majesty with their volleys, whilst all the bells
rung, and the Artillery thundered from the bulwarks and rampires of the town.

It was near ten a clock when he departed thence, and past The King arrives at
the Hage.
eleven when he came at the Hage; where the six Companies of Citizens, which
could hardly be distinguished from the Soldiers, because that being born in
war, and bred in exercises of arms, they could not be known from the Military
men, but by their clothes, their plumes, and their scarfs, wherewith they were
covered, had in the mean time taken their post, and made a guard on the way
toward Delf, even to the bridge, which serves for a gate to this illustrious
Village, which has, without doubt, an advantage over all the fairest towns of
Europe, and may be put in parallel likewise with some of the greatest. In the
head of the whole train, marched some trumpets of the Estate, clad in their
coats of crimson velvet, embroidered with gold and silver. After them came a
long file of Officers, belonging to the war, of Young Lords and Gentlemen, very
gallant, and bravely mounted. Next to that, marched a great number of English
Gentlemen and Officers of the King's house, of the two Dukes, of the Princess
Royal, and of the Prince of Orange. After them came Mr. of Wimmenum, who
performed here the function of Master of the Ceremonies, in his coach, where
were also some Lords, preceding immediately that of the Princess Royal, which
carried his Majesty, and all the Royal House, as we have said. The Deputies of
the Estates General filled the two first after the King's: Those of the States
of Holland, the six following; and the other Coaches, which amounted in all to
the number of seventy and odd, each having six and four horses, were filled
with English and Dutch Lords.

It must be confessed, that this entrance was not made with an extraordinary
pomp and glory, worthy so great a Monarch, but it was impossible to make
greater preparations, in the time the King had appointed for it; and even when
they were constrained to change, in a manner, the first orders; which, without
doubt, would have rendered it much more resplendent, had it not been for this
change. And yet the crowd was so great, because the curiosity to see this
miraculous Prince, had drawn a great part of the inhabitants of the neigbour
towns to this entrance, that they were constrained to go very softly; so that
the Companies of Citizens, who had the vanguard at the entrance into the Hage,
had the leisure to cut some little streets, and to come to put themselves
behind, and so to make a guard, from the Highstreet, and along the great Place,
even to the Viverberg, where the Regiment of the Guards had taken its Post, and
made a guard on both sides, even to the House of Prince Maurice of Nassau,
which the Estates of Holland had caused to be furnished, and accommodated for
the King's lodging. As soon as the first coaches were entered into the Court,
and the King alighted, the Deputies of the Estates General retired, and left
the honor of the reception and entertainment, for that day, to the Estates of
Holland.

The King being gone up, found on the top of the stairs the Queen of Bohemia
his Aunt, led by the Duke of Brunswick Lunenburg, The Queen of Bohemia and the
Princess of Orange attended him.
who had the honor to salute, and to entertain the King at Breda, and the
Princess Dowager of Orange, led by Prince William Frederick of Nassau, her
son-in-law, and accompanied with the two Princesses her daughters, Madam the
Princess of Nassau, and the young Lady of Orange. The King saluted them all,
and being entered into the chamber, where he was followed by the Deputies of the
Estates of Holland, he received there another small complement from them, by
the mouth of the Pensionary Counselor, who said no other thing, but that the
Estates of Holland would give themselves the honor to come in full body to
render their duty to his Majesty, when they might do it without incommodating
him. The King answered him, that they should always be welcome; and that after
he had dined, they might take their audience. But the Pensioner replied, that
his Majesty being, without doubt, weary with his journey, they would not trouble
his repose that day, but would send to receive his orders the next. The King,
who was weary indeed, expressed a willingness to dine in private, so that there
stayed no body by him, but Mr. of Wimmenum, who was charged with the order of
making his Majesty to be served at dinner, and in whatsoever it should please
him to command. The Princess Royal, who had not slept the night before, was the
first that withdrew; and obliged the others, by her example, to do the like.
The Queen of Bohemia, and the Princess Dowager of Orange, followed her, and the
King, who would lead them, and who took the Queen by the hand, had the
goodness, after he had put her into the coach, to turn about to the end to help
the Princess Dowager to go up. There stayed with the King, at dinner, none but
the two Dukes, his brothers, who dined with him. His Majesty before he sat at
Table, would do Mr. of Wimmenum the honor to make him to take his napkin, to
present it him; but that Gentleman, who knew how to behave himself civilly,
excused himself through modesty, and yielded that advantage to him of his
Officers, who used to perform that function about the person of his Majesty.
The toil of the journey, and little rest he had taken, the two former nights,
made him desire to withdraw. And, indeed, they would have made the musketteers
to forbear shooting, (who gave continual volleys) if it had been possible to
smother the universal joy, which the whole world would express on this
occasion. To these volleys, answered those of a battery of eight and thirty
pieces of Canon, which were planted on the Viverberg, reinforced with another
of five and twenty pieces of a greater stamp, which they were enforced to plant
behind the Cloister Church of the Voorhout upon the rampart, in turning the
mouth toward the field, for fear the noise of that thunder might shake the
walls of the old Palace, and of all the adjoining buildings.

The Estates General had ordained, the precedent day, Mr. de Heyde, The Estates
General go to salute the King in a body.
their Agent, to go to Prince Maurice his House, and to know immediately after
the King's arrival, at least as soon as civility would permit him, when it
would please his Majesty to receive the duty, which they had resolved to render
him, in coming to do him reverence in a body; and his Majesty having granted it
them, at four a clock in the afternoon, it was resolved that they should all
meet, in the ordinary chamber of their assembly, half an hour after 3 a clock,
to go from thence, in a body, to the house of Nassau, They met accordingly, at
the hour appointed, to the number of five and twenty, viz. Mr. van Swanenburgh,
Burgemaster of Leiden, and Deputy to the Estates General from the Province of
Holland, who, at his turn, was President that week; the Baron of Gent, Mrs. van
Bemmel, Braeckel, Balveren, Vande Steen, Ripperda of Buirse, the Count of
Flodorff, Schimmelpennick, Vander Oyen, Huygens, and Ommeren, Deputies from the
Duchy of Gelders; Meerman, of Horn, and the Pensionary Counselor from the
Province of Holland; de Veth, Crommon, Vrybergen, Lampsins and Kien for
Zealand; Renswoude and Amerongen, Deputies from the Province of Utrecht;
Velsen, for the Province of Freesland; Ripperda of Hengelo for Overyssel; and
Schulenbourg and Isbrants for the town of Groaning, and the adjacent country;
with which it makes also a Province. As soon as they were assembled, they went
forth, two and two, in the same order as we have named them, going directly to
the King's lodging, which is separated from the Palace but by a Ditch, whose
two sides are joined by a stone bridge. That Palace is named the Court, or the
Court of Holland, because it served sometime for dwelling to the Counts; as it
comprehends now in its enclosure the apartments, where the Estates General
assemble; the Council of Estate of the United Provinces; the Estates of
Holland; the Council of Estate of the same Province; the Reckoning-chambers of
the Generality, and of the Province of Holland: The two Courts of Justice, and
the apartments assigned for the lodging of the Princess Royal, and of the
Prince of Orange. Before the Estates marched Prince William Frederick of
Nassau, Governor and Lieutenant General of Freesland, of Groaning, and of
Overyssel; the Rhine Grave, Commissary General of the Horse of the United
Provinces, and Governor of Mastricht; Mons de Hauterive Chasteau neuf,
Colonel of a Regiment of French Foot, in the service of the Estates, and
Governor of Breda, and many other Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, and other
Officers, as well of Foot as of Horse, all bareheaded. At the entrance into the
King's lodging, they were met with by the Lord Crafts, one of the four
Gentlemen of the bedchamber, accompanied with a great number of gentlemen. The
Marquess of Ormond, Lord Deputy of Ireland; and in this quality, the first and
most considerable person of all England, after the Dukes, came to receive them
at the stairs, and brought them into the King's chamber, All the high Officers
that marched before, being entered, the Lords the Estates could scarce make way
through the press, which was extraordinary great there; but at last, being come
to the King, the Baron of Gent, as chief Deputy from the Province of Gelders,
which is the chief Province of the Union, because of its quality of Duchy, and
as a person most fit for an action of this nature, as well because of his
handsome presence, as of his natural eloquence, made the speech, and spoke, word
by word, in these terms.

SIR, The Estates General of the United Provinces of the The Speech of the Lord
of Gent.
Low Countries, after having expressed to your Majesty, by the Deputies they
sent unto you at Breda, how they participated in the happy successes, which
follow your wise conduct, and the joy which they have to see you going to your
Kingdom of England, to take there the Scepter of great Britain, come here now,
in a body, to uphold the truth and sincerity thereof, by stronger, and more
solemn declarations. It is the same Company, SIR, which had the honor to
present it self to your Majesty, in this very place, in a sad and mournful
equipage; and which, with more grief in heart, then it could express by words,
pronounced the lamentable accents of a most bitter sorrow, which came then to
strike the soul, not only of your Majesty, but also universally of all the
Members of this Estate. From the same principle, which divided then their
affliction, SIR, proceeds now their rejoicement; to wit, from that of a most
tender, and most respectfull affection for the sacred person of your Majesty;
and from a most submissive zeal for your service, and for the good of your
affairs. The cause thereof is so just, and so touching, SIR, that we hope your
Majesty will be easily persuaded of the truth of the protestations, which the
Estates General, of this Republic, make thereof, here in your Royal presence.
And we may boldly say, that their joy exercises it self in its full extent,
which is so much the more vast, as these admirable events arrive, in a time,
when all human appearance seemed to remove them wholly. So must it be confessed,
that they are the mavelous effects of divine providence, which has made the
hearts of the children to return to their father; that is to say, of the
subjects to their lawful King; and levelled the ways, by which your Majesty
walks, at present, so peaceably, and without effusion of blood upon the
magnifick, and superb steps of your glorious and triumphant throne.

The Estates General of these United Provinces, wish, SIR, that these great and
important prosperities, which surprise us no less them we have wished them, may
be followed with the constant obedience of your people, with the respect of
your neighbors, and with the love of both; and that the Diadem, which the
great God has put upon the anointed and sacred head of your Majesty, being
accompanied with all the favors of heaven, may stand there a long train of
years, with a happy and glorious reign, for your sacred person, and remain
perpetually in your Royal posterity, even to the end of the world.

We will finish this discourse, SIR, by most humble thanks, which we render to
your Majesty, in that it has pleased you to choose this country, rather then
any other, to pass from thence into your Kingdom; for which the Estates General
will always esteem themselves honored and obliged; with the regret
notwithstanding, to see, that the reception which they cause to be made unto
you, with so good a heart, is not accompanied with all the pomp and
magnificence, that the Majestical splendor of so great and potent a Monarch
deserves, who is so dear and precious to this Estate; and of whose gracious
favor they shall endeavor to acquit themselves, by all the respects and
services, which your Majesty may desire from your true friends, most faithful
allies, and most humble servants.

'T is observable in this visit, that the King made not so much as a show to be
willing to be covered; not that his design was to hinder the Estates General,
who were there in a body, to be covered, since he did do that honor to their
Deputies, when they did him reverence at Breda; and seeing that he did it since
at home in their assembly; but without doubt, to the end to do something more
for them, then he could do for an Ambassador. Which appeared evidently in the
visit he made, in person, to the Estates General, and to the Estates of
Holland, when he took leave of them; of which, the sequel of this relation will
oblige us to speak hereafter, where he would fain be covered, to give them the
liberty to be covered also; and to uncover himself afterward, when he began to
speak, and to remain in this condition, whilst he was in their assembly, as we
shall say elsewhere.

The Lords the Estates were conducted, in departing from the audience, by the
same Lords that received them; and being returned in the same order, to their
ordinary Hall, they separated themselves.

The two other Sovereign colleges, composed of Deputies of all the Provinces,
to wit, the Council of Estate, and the Reckoning-chamber, The Counsel of Estate
and the Reckoning chamber have audience.
were at the audience after the Estates General. Prince William Frederick of
Nassau, made the complement for the Council of Estate, as President; and Mr. de
Cauwer ven-Reigersberg, Deputy to the Reckoning-chamber of the United
Provinces, from the Province of Zealand, (those who are here from Holland being
excused) spoke for the Chamber; the one, and the other, with so much applause of
those who were present there, and with as much satisfaction of the King's side,
being returned to the assembly, they were thanked for it by their Colleagues.

Some doubted if the Ambassadors, and Ministers of the Difficulties upon the
audi ence of the Ambassadors.
Kings, Princes, and strange Estates, which were at the Hague, should be
received to make their complements to the King without Letters of Credence; or
if after it were acknowledged that their character legitimated them for that,
they might be covered; since that having no character toward this Monarch,
they could not be considered, but as particular persons to him. The
difficulties which arose here, were taken away by the following considerations.
They said, that Ambassadors having a general Commission, and not being, as
they said, missi ad hoc, they might, and ought to do that which their Masters
would do, if they were there present in person; and so being certain, that
there is no Prince in Europe that would not do civility to the King of England,
if he should meet him in his passage, their Ministers, who were in the place,
could not fail therein also, without being wanting to civility, and to their
duty. Notwithstanding, since his Majesty was not in his Kingdom, he might use
them as he pleased; yet so, that although it was in his choice to admit the
Ambassadors, or not, he could not dispense himself of treating them, according
to the dignity of their character, and of making them to be covered, after
having admitted them, since they might, and were obliged to make their
character appear in all their public actions, in an Estate where every one
acknowledges them for Ambassadors.

And indeed, Mr. de Thou, Count of Meslay, Privy Counselor Audience of the
Ambassador of France.
to the most Christian King, and President in his Parliament of Paris, ordinary
Ambassador of France, having about three a clock, or a little after, obtained
the first audience; as well for that having demanded it first, as for that
there was no other Ambassador, at the Hage, that would come into competency
with him, he was met in the Court by one of the chief Gentlemen of the Chamber;
and on the top of the stairs, by the Captain of the Life-guards; which did, on
this occasion, the functions of introductours. As soon as the Ambassador had
made his reverences, and would begin to speak, the King covered himself
forthwith, and showed thereby to the Ambassador what he had to do. His
complement was very well received, but his audience was short.

Mrs. Otte Krag, Lord of Welberg; Bailey of Nieburg, and Senator Audience of
the Extraordinary* Ambassadors of Denmark.
of the Crown of Denmark, and Godsche of Bugwaldt, Lord of Gieresbeeck, Prevost
of the Covent of Uttersen, and Counselor of Estate to his Majesty,
Extraordinary Ambassadors from the King of Denmark, had their audience after
the French Ambassador, and after they were received and treated in the same
manner as the other was, the first, who is of a most illustrious birth in the
Kingdom, as his Colleague is also in the Country of Holstein, and a personage
of a full experience, betook himself to speak in these terms: That since it had
pleased the Almighty God to call again his Majesty into his Kingdoms, where his
great merit should have established him long ago as well as the right of his
birth, they would not fail to come to congratulate him, and to acquit
themselves by this means of the duty which they have as well to the near
affinity which is between his Majesty, and the King their Master, as because of
the straight alliance, which is, and has been always between the two Kingdoms
of England and Denmark* That they had cause to rejoice for this happy change;
not only because of the glory and felicity which redounded thence to his
Majesty, but also because of the advantage which the King and Kingdom of
Denmark, would draw from thence, which had not been afflicted and unjustly
oppressed so long, if that of England had been in condition to hinder it. That
the King their Master would not fail to witness himself, by a solemn Embassage,
the joy which he received from so surprising and so extraordinary a revolution,
as soon as he was advertised thereof, and that they hoped in this happy
conjuncture, that his Majesty would continue to live with the King their Master
in the amity, alliance, and firm confidence, in which their Majesty's have
always lived, and which for some years was not interrupted, but to their
irrepairable prejudice of both one and the other. And so that his Majesty would
oppose himself generously to the violence which is done to their King, and
succor him against the unjust invasion wherewith his Kingdom was afflicted.
Besides that they thanked his Majesty for the honor he had done them to admit
them into his Royal presence, and for the particular grace which they received
from thence in their persons.

The King thanked the Ambassadors for the affection they had expressed to him,
and said, that he knew very well, that not only from long antiquity, there was
a most straight tie between the Kingdoms of England and Denmark; but also that
the deceased King his Father, had such great obligations to the deceased King
of Denmark, father of him that reigns now, his good Cosen, and to the present
King himself, that one of the chief cares, whereunto he would apply himself, in
entering into his Kingdom, should be to renew the ancient amity with him; to
make known that the interests of the King of Denmark were as dear unto him as
those of his own Estates: Of which he prayed the Lords Ambassadors to assure
the King their Master; and that though he should not naturally have horror for
oppression and injustice, he could not but be touched with those which were
done him, and could not deny them the proofs of affection which they demanded.

Don Estevan de Gamarra, Counselor to the Catholic King in his Council of
Estate, and War, General Field Martial of his Armies in the Low Countries, and
his ordinary Ambassador with the Lords the Estates General of the United
Provinces, saw also the King the same day, but it was without demanding
audience, and without ceremonies; his Majesty having given him to understand,
that the affection which he had had for his interests, when he was at Bruxels,
permitted him to see him every day, and at all hours. So covered he not
himself, because the open war which for some years was, and is between Spain
and England, hindered him to make his character appear there; whereas the
particular devotion, which this Lord has always had for the service of his
Majesty, obliged him to be continually at the Court, and by his person.

As on the contrary, Don Enriques de Souza de Tavares, The Ambassador of Portu
gal cannot have audience.
Count of Miranda, Governor of the arms, of the Senate, of the town and castle
of Porto, and extraordinary Ambassador from the King of Portugal to this
Republic, could not obtain audience, what instance soever he made for it. But
withal, to the end not to reject him altogether, the King, who is without
doubt the best, and civillest Prince of the world, sent unto him the next day
Sir Edward Nicholas, Secretary of Estate, and of his commands, to tell him,
that if the Lord Ambassador of Portugal had Letters of Credence for his
Majesty, he would make no difficulty to give him audience; but being not in his
Kingdom, nor in a place where he might treat of affairs of Estate, he prayed
his Excellence to consider, how unhandsom it would look, if in going out of the
country under the obedience of the King of Spain, where he had received all
kinds of civilities, he should give, without any necessity, audience to his
declared Enemy. But that he might assure himself, that when he should be
returned into his Kingdom, he should always be ready to give audience to the
Ministers of Portugal, which should be addressed to him with Letters of
Credence.

After the public audiences, the King received the complements of many persons
of quality, and at evening went to make a visit to the Queen of Bohemia, his
Aunt, and next to the Princess Royal, his sister.

The Lords the Estates of Holland had a purpose to depute some of their body to
accompany his Majesty at supper, but for as much as it was made known unto
them, that the King would be very glad to sup in private, and to retire himself
in good time, after the toil of the two former days; and particularly after
the visits, and complements, which he had been obliged to receive, and
wherewith he had been almost oppressed that day, they would not hinder him to
take his repose; but resolved to reserve to themselves, that honor, for
another time, when they might receive it without incommodating his Majesty,

We said before that the King had advertisement the precedent day, that Admiral
Montagu was arrived, with a part of the Fleet in sight of Scheveling, which is
but a village inhabited by a hundred or six score families of fishermen, a good
mile from the Hague, which was found true. For as soon as they understood in
the Fleet then at anckor in the Downs, which is a rode at the entrance of the
channel that separates England from the main Land, what passed in Parliament,
in behalf of the King; and the public Declaration, which almost through the
whole Kingdom was made, it also declared for its lawful Prince, and set sail
upon the first orders of the Parliament, with so favorable a wind, that it
appeared on the coasts of Holland on Monday morning the 24 of May; and it had
the same Admiral that dispatched an express to the King, to let him know that
he was come there with a part of the Fleet to receive his Majesty's commands,
and to pass him into England. It was composed at first but of eighteen or
nineteen vessels; but those that carried the Commissioners of the two Houses of
Parliament, and of the City of London, having not yet joined with it, there
arrived others every day and hour, so that before the King was in condition to
embark, there were reckoned eight and thirty great ships, the most part of them
bearing fifty, sixty, and seventy pieces of brass Cannon. That of the Admiral,
called yet the Naseby, carried fourscore, where of the fir strank was of eight
and forty pound bore; the second, of two and thirty, and of four and twenty,
and the third of twelve pount bullet, all of brass.

The Commissioners of the two Houses of Parliament, and of the City of London
arrived the same day; but for as much as they were not of the King's train, and
had no Letters of Credence for the Estate, it was resolved that they should not
be treated, nor lodged by Harbengers. Notwithstanding, the consideration which
was had for the quality of the Commissioners of the House of Lords, which were
all followed with a great number of Gentlemen, and store of servants, clad in
very fair and rich Liveries, as also for some of the Lower House, because of
their birth, or merit, it was found good to lodge them by billets. They went
not a shore till the next day, and the Estate was careful to cause coaches to
be sent for them, by particulars, which brought them at the Hage in the
evening; but they did not reverence to the King till Wednesday the 26. as we
will say hereafter.

We have said also, that the Estates of Holland would not take their audience
the day that the King arrived; to the end not to oppress him with complements,
when he had need of rest; but they ordained Mr. Beaumont, their Secretary, to
address himself to one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, and to pray him to
know of his Majesty the hour of their audience, the next day; officiating, in
the mean time, under hand by Mr. Beverweert, that it would please his Majesty
to do them the favor to hear them in private, and to make all to depart the
Chamber, when they entered there; except the Lords, that were necessary for the
service of his person. Not that they had to entertain him with secret affairs
in a public audience, where they were but to felicitate his Majesty upon the
present estate of his Kingdom; but because that being assembled in a very great
number, and having to make their complement in a body, all the Deputies could
not enter into the Hall, nor approach the King, if entrance should be allowed
to all the world indifferently. The reason which obliged them to give order to
the Captain of the Regiment of the Guards, to forbid, that morning, entrance
into the House of Nassau, to all the inhabitants of the country, of what
condition or quality soever they were. They caused a Guard also to be made, for
them, of some Companies, from the door of their apartment, in the Palace, even
to that of the Prince his house, and prevented by this means the confusion,
which they would hardly have avoided without it. After then they had given
these orders, and understood that the King expected them, at nine a clock, they
came about that time to the place of their ordinary assembly, and went forth
thence in the following order. Mr Starenberg, Colonel of the Regiment of their
Guards marched first, and alone, bare-headed: After him came the Estates of
Holland in body, two and two, the Deputies of the Nobility, which are Mrs. of
Wassenaer, of Beverweert, of Schagen, of Wimmenum, of Nortwijck, of
Somelsdijck, of Duyvenvoorde, vander Mylen: to wit, Scagen, Wimmenum and
Merode, are politic; and as we say, of the robe, and the others have military
charges according to the order of their reception, and the other Deputies
according to the rank which their towns hold in the assembly: with this
difference, notwithstanding, that the Pensionary Counselor, who, although in
the assembly he has his place at the table of the Nobility, cannot, as
Minister of the Estates, pretend rank but after all the other Deputies, when
the Estates are together in a body; and yet takes place immediately after the
Nobles; because that being to make the speech, he could not without disorder,
make through the press, to approach the person of the King. Being thus arrived,
a foot, at the gate of the King's lodging, they were received there in the same
manner as the Estates General had been the day before.

The Pensionary Counselor made a very quaint discourse, which would give,
without doubt, much ornament to our relation, if that Minister would have
communicated it; but it could not be obtained from his modesty, which is so
much the more incommodious on this occasion; as it is well known that all the
productions of that accomplished wit have their perfection, and that this
little treatise cannot have it without that. We must believe, notwithstanding,
that he would not have rendered himself so difficult, if he would have
considered, that it is not in his power to take away the knowledge thereof from
posterity, who will find, one day, his Speech in the Registers, where the
Estates would it should be inserted, in the same manner as he pronounced it.
The subject was common to him with all those, that had spoken to the King 15
days before. Therefore the answer of his Majesty, must also relate to that
which he made to the oher complements. But that which was particular in this
audience, was this, that his Majesty having given occasion to the Estates to
enter into other matters, and the Pensionary Counselor, making use thereof, to
speak of the Estate of the affairs of the North, the King declared himself so
openly, and so favorably for the interests of the King of Denmark; that though
the Lords the Estates should draw no other advantage from the generosity and
vigor with which they carried their arms unto those quarters, then the sole
approbation of this great Monarch, the glory which returns unto them from
thence, would pay, in a manner, the great expense they were at there. It is not
fit to speak here of the particularities of that discourse, no more then of
those of the secret audiences, which the same Pensionary Counselor had after
this general and public one; but it shall suffice us to say, that the Estates
of Holland remained very well satisfied with the civilities they had received
in this, and with the declaration which his Majesty had made there. The King
gives audience to the Deputies of the town of Amsterdam.


The Estates of Holland being retired, the Deputies of the town of Amsterdam,
which made a part of them, gave order to Mr. de Groot, their Pensionary
Counselor, to demand a particular audience for them, and to address himself
for this purpose to Mr. Oneal, one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber, to know
the hour, that it would please his Majesty to appoint them for that. Mr. Oneal,
who is of most illustrious birth in Ireland, and by the King's favor to be
made a Count, after he had spoken to the King thereof, his Majesty said to him
that he desired himself to speak with Mr. de Groot, who presently was brought
into the chamber, where he found the King near the chimny, a little distant
from some English Lords, who were in affairs, with his Majesty. Mr. de Groot,
being come to the King, said that the Burgemasters, and Magistrate of the town
of Amsterdam, having understood, that this Majesty was come to this Province of
Holland, had ordained their Deputies to go presently to the Hage, most humbly
to beseech his Majesty to honor their town with his Royal presence, for so
little time as the estate of his affairs should permit him to stay in the
country; and that the Deputies had ordained him to know of his Majesty, when
they might, without incommodating him, have the honor to do him reverence in
private, and to make him the same request in person. The King answered, that he
had a very strong affection for the town of Amsterdam, and that he was obliged
thereunto by particular considerations; so that he would be very glad to see
once again that fair and great town, and to thank the Magistrate before his
departure, for the proofs of tenderness, which he had received thence; but that
he believed he should not be able to obtain it from the impressement with which
the Commissioners of Parliament, and City of London, spoke of the necessity of
his speedy return into England. Notwithstanding, that he would see the
Commissioners after dinner, since they were already disimbarked, and if they
gave him never so little time, he would employ it in making a voyage to
Amsterdam, and that in the interim he would attend the Deputies, as soon as he
had dined.

The Pensioner replied, that since his Majesty expressed an inclination to make
a journey to Amsterdam, he besought him most humbly to defer the audience of the
Deputies, until that after the hearing of the Commissioners of Parliament, he
could resolve himself upon the most humble supplication which the Deputies made
him. Adding thereunto, that his Majesty might be fully persuaded, that there
was no town, even in his own Kingdom, where he could meet with more tenderness
and respect for his person, and more zeal for his interests, then in that of
Amsterdam; and that the Burgmasters and Magistrate had no stronger ambition,
then to be able to give him effectual and indubitable proofs thereof. That they
had understood that his Majesty had some design to cause a Yacht to be made in
Holland, on the model of that which had passed him from Breda into Holland; and
likewise that he had the goodness not to despise wholly the offer which Mr.
Vlooswijck, one of their Burgemasters, had made him of one, which is newly
built at Amsterdam, and which upon the advertisement given them thereof, they
had caused to be bought of the College of the Admiralty, to which it belonged;
but they judged it not a present worthy of his Majesty, and that they should
not without some confusion make him a present of this nature. Notwithstanding
if his Majesty would be pleased to accept it, it would be necessary that he
should send some one, at the place, to order the contrivances, and
accommodations; as for their part they would endeavor to give it all the
embellishmens which might render it pleasing to his Majesty. The King answered,
that it was true; that the commodity which he had found in that kind of
building, on diverse occasions; and especially in his last voyage, coming from
Breda, had given him some thought to make one to serve his use on the Thames;
but that his intention was not to oblige the Lords of Amsterdam to present him
that which they had, though he would not refuse to receive again this mark of
their affection, and to charge himself with a new obligation toward that fair
and great town. That to this effect, he would send there the Captain of Mr.
Beverweerts Yacht, with order to cause that to be finished, which he received
from their hands, in the best and most commodious manner that he should judge
fit for his service. Moreover that he would give notice to the Deputies, of the
hour he could appoint for their audience, after he had heard the Commissioners
of Parliament.

The Estates of Holland had understood, that the Courts The Estates of Holland
forbid the Courts of Justice and the other Bodies to compleme^t the King.
of Justice, which they call the great Council, and the Court of Holland,
(where of the last is composed but of subaltern Judges for the Province, and
for that of Zealand, and the first serves for Parliament to the same Provinces,
for the appeals which are brought there, from all the others Courts of Justice)
had a purpose to demand audience of the King, and that after their example,
diverse other Colleges might demand it, as some of those, which make no body,
took a privilege to do it; before the King was arrived at the Hage, resolved
that notice should be given to the two Courts of Justice, to the Reckoning
Chamber of the Province, to the Consistory of the place, to the University of
Leiden, whose Rector was come to the Hage for that purpose, and to all the
other bodies and Colleges, that the Estate in making its complement, did it
for all its subjects, and that it would not that the King should be troubled
with other visits, after that which the Estates of Holland had made him in a
body.

The Estates General cause the Queen of Bohemia, their Royal Highnesses and the
Prince of Orange to be complemented.
The Estates General named this day Mrs. de Gent, Deputy of Gelderland,
Guldewagen of Holland, and Lampsins of Zealand to go to felicitate the Queen in
her Palace, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester, who were lodged at the House
of the extraordinary Ambassadors, on the re-establishment of the King, and on
the revolution of the affairs of England: and Mrs. of Renswoude of Utrecht,
Ripperda of Hengelo of Overysel, and Isbrants of Groaning were deputed to do the
same office with the Princess Dowager, and with the Prince of Orange.

The same day, Mr. Ripperda, of Buirse, having made report, in the same
assembly, of what passed in the voyage he made, with some other Deputies, to
the King at Breda, in order to their resolution of the 14. of this month, the
Deputies were thanked for it.

And for as much as the Estates General, (as it was agreed The Estates General
make a foundation of three hundred thousand gilders for the King's expense.
upon with the Estates of Holland) should be at all the expense that should be
made for the King, during the residence which his Majesty should make in the
Country, except that of his voyage, and that from the day that he arrived at
the Hage, they laid down this day a foundation of three hundred thousand
Gilders; and they required the Lord Ripperda of Buirse, Guldewagen, Swanenburg,
Stavenisse, Renswoude, Velsen, Ripperda and Schulenbourg, to attend his Majesty
at dinner.

The Table was doubly furnished, at the head of which, and in the midst sat
the King, having on his left hand the Princess Royal, and on his right, the
Queen of Bohemia, when she dined there. At the end of the Table, on the same
side, were the Dukes of York and Gloucester; and at the other end by the
Princess Royal, was the Prince of Orange her Son. And this order was observed
in all the repasts, only in the absence of the Prince of Orange, the two
Princes, his Majesty's brothers, separated and placed themselves at the two
ends of the Table. By this means one could well serve all those that were
there, because they were all at a certain distance, which permitted the
Officers to do their functions: as also the Deputies of the Estates, left space
enough between the King's Table and theirs, for the convenience of those which
served the meat before the Royal persons, putting themselves at the two ends of
the skirt, before the King, who would not that the Deputies Table should be
separated from his. Most commonly there was a Set of Violins; which divertised
pleasantly the King, during the repast; and in the healths that were drunk, as
the King never failed almost to drink the prosperity of this Estate, and very
often of each Province in particular, the Cannon of the Viverberg thundered from
every Battery.

As soon as they arose from dinner, the Commissioners of Audience of the
Commissioners of the Parliament.
the Parliament, and City of London, came to do reverence to his Majesty. The
Higher House had nominated six, viz. The Lord Aubery Veer, Earl of Oxford; the
Lord Leonel Cranfield, Earl of Middelsex, Foulk, Grevil, Lord Brook; the Lord
Charles Rich, Earl of Warwick, the Lord Leicester Devereux, Vicount of Herford,
and the Lord John Barcley; but the Earl of Warwick, being sick of the gout,
when the others embarked, was constrained to stay at London. The Lower House
deputed the Lord Eairfax, sometime General of the Parliaments Army, who on that
consideration drew upon him the curiosity and eyes of every one, and who would
see the King privately, to ask him pardon for the passed offense with
extraordinary submissions; The Lord Bruce, the Lord Falkland; the Lord
Castleton; the Lord Herbert; the Lord Mandevil, Sir Horatio Townsend, Sir
Anthony Ashley Cooper, Sir George Booth, he that levied an Army a year since
for the calling of a Free-Parliament, in behalf of the King, Denzil Hollis,
Esquire, Sir John Holland, and Sir Henry Cholmly. The Deputation of the City of
London was much more numerous, as being composed of twenty persons, taken
partly out of the Magistracy, and partly from amongst the principal
inhabitants, and from the Militia of the City. The chief assembled in the House
of the extraordinary Ambassadors; and the others, in the house where the
Citizens exercise to shoot at the mark, and learn to exercise arms. Both one
and the other went forth a foot, walking two and two, and having before them a
very great number of young Gentlemen, that marched in the same order. Being
brought into the King's chamber, they made a very low, and most submiss
reverence. The Earl of Oxford spoke for the Higher House: but those that were
there at that action, agreed in opinion, that never person spoke with more
affection, nor expressed himself in better terms, then Mr. Denzil Hollis, who
was the Orator for the Deputies of the Lower House, to whom those of London
were joined. He insisted chiefly upon the miseries under which that Kingdom had
groned for so many years, and upon the government of Cromwell, who tyrannized
the English in their lives, in their goods, and in their consciences; whereas
on the contrary, they could hope from the goodness of his Majesty, but repose,
but sweetness, and a lawful liberty; beseeching him to return forthwith into
his Kingdom, and to take again the Scepter of his Ancestors, without any
condition: which redoubled the joy of this Court, though it were already
assured thereof, by the mouth of Sir John Greenvil. The King received them with
much goodness, as well as the protestations of obedience and fidelity, which
they made him in the name of the Lords and Commons of England, and of the City
of London in particular; and after the speech, they did all reverence to the
King, in putting one knee to the ground, and in kissing his hand. After they
came forth of the King's appartment, they went to the Dukes, to whom they also
made complements from the Parliament, and City; they went there also a foot,
and from thence, in the same order, to the Queen of Bohemia, and to the
Princess Royal, where they acquitted themselves also of the duty which they had
order, from the Parliament and City, to render unto them.

After the audiences of the Deputies, the King received many persons of
quality, who in the impatience to see his Majesty had passed the sea
voluntarily, without any particular commission, they all did him reverence, in
the same manner the Commissioners had done.

Monsieur Friquet, Counselor of Estate to the Emperor, and extraordinary
Envoy from his Imperial Majesty to the Estates General, had also audience of
the King; and made him his complement in the name of the Emperor, his Master,
whose Predecessor had expressed a most particular affection for the King, even
in the height of his persecutions.

In the number of those that came to render their duties to the King that day,
was the Captain, or Master of the Ship, which received the King aboard on the
coast of England, and passed him into France, when that Illustrious Maid,
Mistress Lane, saved the fortune of the Kingdom, after the unfortunate battle of
Worcester; at least if one may give that Epithete to an accident, which God
has so favorably blessed, and who has so favorably disposed the affairs in
the glorious return of the King, without any effusion of the blood of his
subjects.

It is not our design to make here an unnecessary digression, in Particulars of
the King's escape after the battle of Worcester.
making a perfect narrative of all that passed in the miraculous escape of the
King after the loss of the battle, nor in what manner the King, being separated
from the Officers that were by his person after the defeat, was brought to the
house of a countryman, who changed clothes with him, and showed him a tree,
where he passed the night. How afterward being come to the house of Mistress
Lanes father, her brother received him, as servant, to wait on him in his
chamber, and how in this quality he rid a journey before that Gentlewoman. How
he had a care of the horses in the journey, and what encounters he met there,
because all these things are not of the subject of our relation, and deserve
well a particular one. But we think it not amiss to say; that the Lord Wilmot
deceased Earl of Rochester, who had been extraordinary Ambassador at the Diet
of Ratisbon in the year 1653. and who was he, that gave orders for the King's
passage, being come at the place where his Majesty was to embark, and seeing
the Master of the ship to enter into the chamber, where they supped, to tell
them that the tide would be good about midnight, and that they should do well
to embark before night, prayed him to sit at table, and to sup with them. But
the Master had no sooner taken his place, and observed the features of the
King's face, but he whispered Mr. Wilmot in the ear, saying, that he knew that
illustrious person, and that it was indubitably the King; the other denied it,
and would have him to relinquish that thought; but the Master, though he made
semblance to acquiess therein, during supper; said notwithstanding, in rising
from the table, that whatsoever they would make him to beleev, he knew the King
so well, that he could not be deceived; because that having been brought before
him a few years since, when his Majesty, being with a Fleet in the Downs, where
he caused some fishermen to be stopped, to whom he gave liberty, presently
after he had caused them to be brought to his presence, and he with the rest,
he had so well considered him, that since that time, he could not lose the Idea
of him. But that they needed to fear nothing, that the person of the King
should be always sacred to him, and in safety in his hands. Wilmot persisted
in his negative, caused the King to embark, and said no more to the Captain,
until that his Majesty being landed, on the coast of Normandy, he feared not
to tell him, that it was indeed the King that he assisted to save, and that his
Majesty would remember his fidelity and affection, when there should be an
occasion to acknowledge one another. And indeed, after the King had perfectly
well received him at his closet door, the Lord Craft, who had presented him to
his Majesty, assured him that he might hope for any favors from him.

The English Officers that are in the service of the Lords the Major Cromwell
does reverence to the King.
States, and were come to this town, did him reverence also, and among the rest
Mr. Cromwell, Mayor of a Regiment of foot of the same nation. He is Cosen
German, but issued from an elder brother of him, who is known to have
sacrificed the King his Sovereign to his irregular ambition, and detested that
brutal and horrible action; but seeing some apparent establishment in the
fortune of the Protector, he passed into England, where he rendered
considerable services to those of the good party, and even gave himself the
liberty, to remonstrate sometimes to his Cosen, what belonged to his duty: so
that instead of making his fortun there, he could draw from the Protector for
himself, and for his brother, who commands a Regiment of foot in the service of
the Lords the Estates, but a gratification of two thousand pounds sterling,
whereof they have received but the half; though the Major made an expense at
London where with he shall be long time incommodated. The King, who know the
intentions of this honest man, and permitted his brother to take the surname of
Williams, instead of that which shall be eternally in execration to all
Englishmen, and who had many good proofs of them, received him perfectly well.

This day came also to salute the King Sir William Davison a As also Sir
William Davisson.
Scott by birth, but since some years established at Amsterdam. His Majesty
had considered him, as a person most affectionate to his service, and was not
deceived therein, because that those who know how he behaved himself, cannot
doubt that he was most useful, and that he acted if not directly for the
re-establishment of the affairs of England; at least it cannot be denied, that
he has not been unprofitable therein. It was not long before, that the King
had given him some proofs of his acknowledgement, in making him Knight Baronet;
but this day he confirmed that quality to him, by letters pattents, in adding
thereunto a pension without comparison more considerable then that title. The
King gives it with very little ceremony; in making the Novice kneel before him;
he lays his sword on his shoulder, and says unto him, Rise Knight Baronet.
Those that are invested with this quality, follow the Barons, and precede the
ordinary Knights.

After this, the King went to visit the Queen of Bohemia, his Aunt, but it was
without ceremony, as he used to do the whole time of his residence at the
Hague, during which there passed not a day almost, that he saw her not. From
thence he went to the House of the Princess Dowager of Orange, who received him
on the stone stairs that go up into the Court. The King presented her presently
his hand, and led her through that fair hall, and through the Guard Chamber, to
that which they call the Chamber of presence, where the King treated her with
much civility, refusing to sit, till the Princess took her place at the same
time. After a conversation of half an hour, the King took leave, and retired
himself, but perciving in the fore-chamber that the Princess followed him, he
turned about, and would hinder her to go further; until that seeing, after a
contestation very agreeable, and very obliging, that he could not overcom her,
he took her again by the hand, and led her to the foot of the stairs, where he
made her again some civility; but seeing her obstinate to render him her
devoirs even in the Court, he yielded at last, went up into his coach, and
betook him to the Princess Royal, his Sister, where he met the Ambassador of
France, who had the honor to discourse there with his Majesty a good while.

The King having spoken, in the evening, at supper, to the advantage of the
Regiment of the Guards, which he had seen at his coming, and of which he had
always a Company in arms in the Court of his lodging, the Deputies of the
Estates General, who were by his person at the hours of his repast, offered to
show it him the next day in battle, to the end his Majesty might judge as
favorably of their skill, as he had judged of their show: The King promised to
be present, if his affairs permitted him to give himself that divertisement;
but the two Princes expressed, that they should see that exercise with much
satisfaction. And, indeed, the next day being the 27th. the Regiment of the
Guards, The Regiment of the Guards exercise.
having been in the field, from the beginning of the morning, stood in battalia
half the way to Scheveling, by the house, where Mr. Catz, sometime Pensionary
Counselor, and Keeper of the great Seal of Holland, made his retirement,
after he had passed through the fairest imploiments, wherewith his country
could have acknowledged his merit, in a very pleasant and fair plain; where the
two Princes, the Duke of Brunswick-Lunenburg, the Prince of Orange, Prince
William of Nassau, Governor of Freesland, the Rhine-Grave, and all persons of
quality that were at the Hage, repaired about ten a clock in the morning; and
after they had seen all that which skill could make a body perfectly exercised
and disciplined to do, both in marching and fight, under good Officers, they
made a course even upon the banks of the sea, from whence they considered the
Fleet, and went from thence to dinner, the Dukes of York and of Gloucester, with
some English Lords, to the Duke of Lunenburgs; and the rest to the Court. The
Estates General deputed there to accompany the King, that day Mrs. de Gent of
Gelders, of Merode, and Navander of Holland, Lampsins of Zealand, Renswoud of
Utrecht, Velsen of Freesland, Ripperda of Hengelo of Over-Ysel, and Isbrants of
Groaning.

The King was from the morning shut up with Mr. Hide, his Chancellor, who for
being chief of his Councels, and his most confident Minister, was lodged in the
same house; because that being incommodated with the gout, his Majesty would
that he should be lodged in a place, where he might make use of his councels at
all hours of the day. He was with him more then an hour and a half, sitting on
his bedside, and sometimes leaning upon the bed it self in a very secret
conference.

After the King was gone out of the Chancellour's chamber, the extraordinary
Ambassadors of Denmark caused his Excellence to be prayed, to appoint them an
hour, for a particular audience, which they obtained for the afternoon. They
received, in this audience, new assurances of the good intentions of his
Majesty, to the advantage of the King their Master, who would have profited
notably thereby, if the treaty of peace with Swethen, had not been too much
advanced, as, indeed, it was concluded a few days after.

We said, that the precedent day, the King had promised the Pensioner of
Amsterdam, that he would certify the Duputies of the same town, when he could
give them audience, to the subject of the request which they had to make unto
him, touching the journey, wherein they endeavored to engage him. And Audience
of the Deputies of Amsterdam.
indeed, the same evening, he sent them the Lord Wotton, second son to the Lady
Stanhop, since Countess of Chesterfield, who was to advertise them, that they
might see his Majesty, the next day, at nine a clock in the morning. This
Deputation was composed of Mr. Cornelius of Vlooswick, Lord of Vlooswick,
Diemerbrouck, and John de Huydecooper, Lord of Marseveen, Bourgemasters in
charge, Conrade Burg, sometime extraordinary Ambassador in Moscovia, Conrade
of Beuningen, heretofore extraordinary Ambassador in Denmark, and in Swethen,
and now named for the extraordinary Ambassador into France, Senators, and
Peter de Groot, Pensionary of the same town. The last, after he had made a low
reverence to his Majesty, spoke in these terms.

SIR, The Burgemasters and Magistrate of the town of Amsterdam, Speech of Mr.
de Groot.
who yield not in devotion and zeal for the glory and interests of your
Majesty, to any person of the world, thinking that they have not satisfied,
neither their duty, nor their affection, by the general testimony which they
have rendered thereof, by the mouth of the Lords the Estates General, and
likewise by that of the Estates of this Province, have commanded us to beseech
your Majesty, to grant them a particular audience, where they may give stronger
proofs both of one and the other. Your Majesty shall see them in the extreme joy,
which they have, for the glorious re-establishment of your Majesty upon the
throne of your Ancestors, the circumstances whereof are so much the more
considerable, as this miraculous revolution is made without effusion of blood,
and as your Majesty is obliged for it, but to the powerful hand of God only,
who has wrought therein by means altogether extraordinary. But you shall find
the proofs thereof particularly, in the most humble prayer which we have order
to make you, to honor their town with your Royal presence, for the few days
the time will allow you to remain in this Province; to the end, that so many
strangers, wherewith their town is inhabited, may be witnesses of the public
and real demonstrations which they intend to make, of the veneration which they
have for the person of your Majesty, and of the passion which they have for
your service.

Nothing can be added to the obliging words with which the King answered the
complement of the Deputies of Amsterdam, in thanking them with much affection,
for that of theirs, whereof he said he had received most illustrious proofs,
witnessing to be very sorry that he could not satisfy their request, seeing
that he had no less inclination for that journey, then the Lords of Amsterdam
could have passion to see him in their town; and assuring them that he would
eternally remember the amity they had for him. The Deputies replied in the most
submiss terms that respect could put into their mouths, and after they had
prayed for the prosperity of his Majesty, and for the perpetual felicity of his
reign, they retired.

Mr. Coyet Knight, Extraordinary Envoy of the King of Audience of the
Extraordinary Envoy of Swethen.
Swethen, to the Estates General of the United Provinces, had demanded audience
the day before; but those, which his Majesty found himself obliged to give to
the Estates of Holland, and next to the Commissioners of the Parliament and of
the City of London, made him to refer it to this Thursday at eleven a clock in
the morning. Mr. Coyet being come into the fore - chamber, at the hour
appointed, the King sent immediately unto him Mr. Wentworth, one of the four
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, to entertain him, till affairs permitted his
Majesty to come to speak with him, as he did presently after in the
Presencechamber. The Envoy made known to his Majesty, that he would speak
Latin to him, and as he was very well versed in that language, he had prepared
a very elegant discourse for him: but for as much as his Majesty signified to
him, that that tongue was not familiar enough to him to serve his turn to
answer readily, he made him his complement in French, as the Ministers of all
the other strange Princes did, extending himself on the present revolution of
the affairs of England, on the excellent and great qualities of his Majesty,
and of the amity which the Kings, and Crown of Swethen had from all time
received from the Kings of Great Britain.

The King answered him, that the testimonies of affection which he rendered him,
on this occasion, from the King of Swethen, were very acceptable to him, and
that he should find him always disposed, not only to execute with sincerity
the ancient treaties, which common interest has caused to be made between
England and Swethen, but also to confirm them by new, and streighter alliances.
After this, his Majesty informed himself of the age of the King of Swethen,
that reigns now, of the place where the Queen lives, and causes the King her
son to be brought up at present, and of many other things, which denoted the
great goodness, with which his Majesty would receive the Ministers of Princes,
with whom his Predecessors had always lived in good correspondence. After
this familiar discourse, wherewith the Ambassador came of very well, he went
to the Dukes of York, and of Gloucester, and afterward saw also the Chancellor
of England, to whom he spoke of the present estate of the affairs of the North;
and gave him to understand, that they were in terms of accommodation, between
the two Crowns of Denmark and of Swethen.

After this audience the King gave the rest of the day to the affairs of his
Kingdom, being in continual conferences with the Commissioners of the
Parliament, and of the City of London.

It shall not be from our purpose, to say here a word of the manner wherewith
the King was served, at his ordinary repasts, How the King was served.
and of the Estate of the expense which was made every day for his Majesty. We
have spoken of his Table, and how the Royal persons that did eat there, were
seated. They served up great Dishes in Oval form, at five courses, each
containing five dishes and twelve trenchers, because they changed the dishes
twice at every service, and every dish was so massive, that one shall not be
troubled much to represent the expense thereof, when he shall know that there
was two dozen of Pheasants in one dish, and that all the other dishes were
furnished accordingly. They served, besides that, five tables for the Lords,
and one for the Ladies, as for the Marquess of Worcester, etc. all at four
courses, and almost as full, and furnished with the same meats, as those of the
King's table, except one course, which was between the pottages and the roast.
All the sweet meats, as well at the King's table, as at the Lords and Ladies,
were pillaged at every meal, and exposed to the discretion of the people, who
were ordinarily there at those hours by the King in crowds. And not only they
served all sorts of delicious wines at the tables, but the sources steamed
therewith continually day and night, and were never dry, as well for the
English of what condition soever they were, as for all those of the town that
came to demand it. Every Table was of twelve coverings, and had its Steward,
its four Butlers, as many assistants in the buttery, and twelve men that served
up the meat and drink. But for the King's mouth, it was particular; there was a
Clark of the Kitchen for the pottages, another for the courses, another for the
pastry, one more for the roast, and one for the meats between the courses, every
Clark having four Cooks under him, for each service.

There happened this day a thing, which for having made a False advertiseme^t of
a design upon the King's person.
great noise in the beginning, deserves well to be spoken of here, with
circumstances which might make one believe the truth of what was spoken of then.

A man of a most mean condition, French by birth, being about 9 a clock in the
evening, in a remote place toward the Rampart, presented himself at the door
of a Millars house wholly affrighted, and almost senseless, (as he appeared)
out of breath, and said unto him, that having been enforced to draw off for
some necessity of nature, he stooped down toward that little rising, which
serves for entrenchment to the Hage, and which we called Rampart; where being
almost hidden, as well because that the place, where he put himself, was low,
as because it was near night, he presently saw three men to come, whereof two
were clothed in gray, and the third in black, who said one to another with
displeasure, as he could judge thereof, in bad French, as he reported, that
they failed twice, because of the great number of people that were about him,
and served him for guards; but they would so well take their advantage from the
two sides of the Coach, that he should not escape them. That rising upon this,
the others, wholly surprised to see a man in a place where they were come,
because they thought to find no body there, said that they were discovered, and
must dispatch him that might reveal them. That thereupon one of the three shot
of a Pistol, whose bullet pierced his hat, which he showed, wherewith he
staggered; but that the other thinking the stroke was not mortal, shot a second
so near, that he burned his hair: This had so astonished him, the he fell to
the ground, where having lain a while, until the three men were retired, he
arose, and went straight to the house of that Millar. And indeed, he gave such
an alarm, there, that the Millar went presently forth with him, and taking two
of his neighbors with him, that armed themselves with stones, like him; they
pursued those three men, but to no purpose, because they met them not;
therefore they went to the place, where he said he saw them at first; and where
they found, indeed, the cloak which he said fear had made him to quit. The
affair was judged of such importance, that the Court of Justice was ordered,
the next day, to make a most strict and most exact inquiry thereof. The
Informer being questioned herein, by Commissioners, persisted in his first
depositions, which were believed at first to be so much the more true; as the
accuser, though incommodated enough in his domestic affairs, witnessed to be
much uninterested, and demanded no recompense. Those, notwithstanding, that
stayed not much at fair apparences, and would that they should proceed to a
more exact examination of an affair of this nature, spoke of it, as of a
deceit, which the laws should either justify, or punish with the severest
punishment. Howsoever it was, it produced this effect, that the Estates judging
that they could not bring too much care to the conservation of the precious
pledge which they had with them, caused some troops of horse to advance with
all speed, which were already commanded, and which, being arrived, kept guard
with the standard on the avenues of the Palace, where the King was lodged, and
of which there was always a brigade, which followed the Coach wheresoever his
Majesty went.

And for as much as it was known, that there was found in the Fleet a man bold
enough to have resolved to put fire to the powder, when the King should go to
see the Vessel, where he served in quality of Mariner, which obliged Admiral
Montague to seize himself on the key of the powder Magazine, and to ordain all
the Captains of the other ships of the Fleet, to do the like aboard them, and
to carry always the key with them; the King was advised to choose a guard of
fourscore Gentlemen, under the charge of the Lord Gerard, Captain of his
Life-guards, and one of the four Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, which served by
Brigades; so that there was always twenty which marched on both sides the
coach, having one hand on the supporting staff of the boot, and holding a
sword, drawn out of the belt, but in the scabberd, in the other. But as this
posture was some what irregular, and offensive, in a country, where the person
of his Majesty was no less dear then in his Kingdom; the King considering, that
to hinder approach to his person, was sufficient to secure it, would that they
should wear their swords by their sides, and carry a cane in their hand, which
assured their countenance, and made their quality and charge to be respected.

The same day, the Estates of Holland gave Commission to Mrs. of Wimmenum,
Deputy from the Nobility, to the Council of Estate of Holland, Halling of Dort,
Marseveen of Amsterdam, and Hoogland of Alcmaer, to go to felicitate the Queen
of Bohemia, the Dukes of York and Gloucester the Princess Royal, the Princess
Dowager of Orange, and the Prince of Orange, upon the re-establishment of the
King of Great Britain. They executed this commission immediately after dinner.
Mr. of Wimmenum made the complement every where; and which was most admirable,
never using twice the same cogitation, nor the same words in all his speeches.

The Estates of Holland gave charge also to Mr. of Wimmenum, to know of his
Majesty, if it pleased him that they should make him a supper, where the
Estates of Holland might have the honor to treat him in private; and if he
desired that in this case the Estates should be there in a body, to render him
the more honor, or if he would rather they should send there Deputies.
Whereupon his Majesty, having expressed an acceptance of what they desired, and
made known that by the deputation of a single person of each member, he should
be as well satisfied as if the Estates were there in body, they fixed on Sunday
following for the day, being the 30 of the same month. They prayed Mr. of
Wimmenum to take upon him the whole ordering of the Feast, and to give
necessary orders for it; and the Estates named Commissioners, which should be
there from them, viz. Mr. of Wassenaer, Lieutenant Admiral of Holland, and Mr.
of Wimmenum for the Nobility: De Wit of Dort, Fabricius of Haerlem, Graswinckel
of Delf, Buytevest of Leiden, Marseveen of Amsterdam, Cant of Tergow, Vander
Meyde of Rotterdam, Vander Colck of Gorcum, Vander Eyck of Schiedam, Vander
Croest of Schoonhoven, Vander Berg of the Briel, Teylingen of Alckmaer, Jager
of Horn, Romer Cant of Enchuysen, Houtuyn of Edam, Houting of Munickendam,
Stellingwerf of Medenblick, and Roothooft of Purmerent, to whom were added Mr.
de Wit, Pensionary Counselor, and Mr. of Beaumont, Secretary to the Estates
of the same Province.

But to the end that nothing might be wanting to the testimonies The Estates of
Holland send victuals, and provisions to the fleet.
of affection which the Estates would render to his Majesty, those of Holland
ordained, the same day, that all kinds of refreshments should be sent to the
Admirals ship, to the Vice-Admirals, and to the Rear-Admirals, to be afterward
distributed to the whole Fleet. They communicated hereupon with Mr. of
Wassenaer, Lieutenant Admiral of Holland, and caused so much Wine, Victuals,
Citrons, Oranges, and other provisions to be bought, that the Lord Montagu was
constrained to confess, that he never saw so much. Notwithstanding, they sent
them not aboard before the King had fixed on the day of his embarkment, and the
Deputy Councillors, who were to execute the orders of the Estates of Holland,
gave the commission thereof to Mr. of Valquenbourg, of the Bosse, Captain in
the Regiment of the Guards, who caused the provisions to be carried aboard the
Admiral, to whom it was judged fit they should leave the disposing, to cause
them to be distributed to the other Ships according to his orders.

The Estates General of their side, writ to the College of the The Estates
General furnish
Admiralty of Rotterdam, that they should provide, and furnish such a number of
Hoys, and other Vessels, as the Officers of Uessels to transport the King's
stable.
the King's stable, of the Duke of York, and of Gloucester, should judge
necessary for the transportation of the horses, and of a part of his Majesty's
baggage, and of their Royal Highnesses; and order was given that they should be
kept and stabled in the town of Rotterdam, till they could be embarked, and
that the ships should be provided of hay, of oats, and of straw, for the time
that probably they might be upon the sea.

Friday the 28 of May, the Estates General, who knew they And cause the
Commissioners of Parliament to be complemented.
should please the King, in doing civility to the Parliament, deputed the Lords
Ripperda of Buirse, of the Province of Gelderland, and Schulenbourg of Groaning,
to go with a complement to the Commissioners of the two Houses of Parliament,
and of the City of London, upon the present Estate of the affairs of England.

The Lords Deputies of the Higher House, assembled in the The Estates of
Holland give charges upon the Kings recommendation.
House of the Earl of Oxford, who was lodged at Mr. Buisero's, Griffier or
Secretary of the Council to the Prince of Orange; and the Commissioners of the
Lower House, at the Lord Fairfax's, who was lodged in the House of the Baron of
Asperen, Deputy from the Province of Holland, to the College of the Admiralty
of Amsterdam, and received this civility with much satisfaction.

The same day the Estates of Holland, having deliberated upon the
recommendation which the King had made them, when they saluted his Majesty in a
body, of some persons and English Officers, which are in the service of this
Estate; whose affection, which they expressed to him in his affliction, as well
for his interests, as for the person of the Princess Royal, his sister,
ordained, that the three Regiments of Scots foot, which were reformed, and
reduced to two, in the year 1655, should be brought again to their first
estate, in behalf of Lieutenant Colonel Henderson, and that the command of the
third should be given unto him, with the quality of Colonel. I say the
quality, because that some years since, and in consideration of the peace,
where the Major Officers are without function, the Colonels have but the title
only, with the pay of the Major Estate of Lieutenant Colonel. They gave, on
this very consideration, a troop of Horse to Mr. Kerkhoven, son to the deceased
Lord Heenvliet, in his life time, great Hunter, or as they say, Forrester of
Holland, under the deceased Prince of Orange, and Intendant of the Princess
Royal her house, who would acknowledge the services of the Father, and the
affection of the Lady Stanhop, his Widow, whom the King made Countess of
Chesterfield, in procuring him that charge through the intermission of the
King, after having given him the conduct which his Father had of her affairs.
The Estates of Holland gave also a company of Walloon Foot, with the hope of a
troop of horse, to Mr Languerack, a Gentleman of the Country, of the House of
Boetselaer, who till then had found great obstacles to his advancement.

They ordained also that Mrs. of Wimmenum, from the Nobility, Halling of the
town of Dort, of Marseveen of Amsterdam, They send to complement the
Commissioners of Parliament.
and Hooglant of Alcmaer, should go to salute, from them, the Commissioners of
the two Houses of Parliament, and the Deputies of the City of London, and to
endear upon the affection with which they procured the King's return, and on
the zeal wherewith they labored to re-establish the affairs of the Kingdom, in
the same estate they were under their last Monarchs, being then in the most
flourishing estate of the world. They found the Commissioners assembled in the
same places where the Deputies of the Estates General had met them, viz. some
at the Earl of Oxford's, and the others with the Lord Fairfax, and Mr. of
Wimmenum said unto them: That the Lords the Estates of Holland, who had so much
cause to rejoice for that great Catastrophe, which they saw in England, could
not be silent in that wonderful conjuncture, and in that public, and
universal joy; but found themselves obliged to express it, with them that
contributed the most to it, and are the principal Authors thereof. That the
Parliament of England had this advantage, to be as the foundation of the
Estate, but that those which compose it now, had gained this glory to all
posterity, that they had not only drawn the Kingdom from its greatest calamity,
to carry it to the highest felicity; but also that they had been the first of
the three Kingdoms to declare themselves for so glorious an enterprise. That
the Lords the Estates, who in living with England, as they lived during the
Anarchy, and disorder, had manifested how dear the amity of the English was to
them, participated therein as they ought; assured the Lords Commissioners of
the perseverance of their affection, and prayed God for the continuation of the
prosperity of the affairs of the Kingdom, and of their persons in particular,
with all the fervency that could be expected from an allied Estate, and from
persons perfectly affectionated to their good, and interests. The Commissioners
answered, by the mouth of the Lords whom we have named; and after they had
thanked the Lords the Estates for the affection which they had for the King,
and for the Kingdom, whereof they have every day such glittering proofs, they
thanked the Deputies for the pains they would take in coming to give them the
greatest assurances thereof in their particular, offering to acknowledge both
one and the other, by their personal services, and by a perpetual and inviolable
amity of their Estate with this Republic, and conducted the Deputies even to
the coach.

Saturday the 29 of May, the Deputy Councillors, which make the Council of
Estate of Holland, considering the expense Advise of the Coun cel of Estate of
Holland for a foundation of six hundred thousand Gilders.
which the Province had made for the reception of the King, in his voyage from
Breda, and that which they must make yet, as well for the Feast which they
prepared against the next day, as for the presents which they purposed to offer
to his Majesty, and to the Princes, his brothers; represented to the Estates of
Holland, that it would be requisite to make forthwith a sum of six hundred
thousand Gilders. The Estates consented thereunto immediately, and found it fit
to furnish, for the King, the Bed, and the apprutenances, which the last
deceased Prince of Orange, had caused to be made for the lying-in of the
Princess Royal, and which she never used, because of the death of the Prince
her husband, who deceased eight days before the birth of the Prince his son.
This bed is, without doubt, the fairest and richest that ever was made at
Paris; and besides the teaster, the seats, the skreens, the hangings and the
other pieces necessary to make a furniture complete, the Estates would add
thereunto a most perfect fair hanging of the richest tapistery, imbossed with
gold and silver, (which they cause to be made of purpose) with a great number
of excellent pictures, as well of Italy, as of the countries ancient, and
modern, and whatsoever can compose a chamber, worthy to lodge so great a
Monarch in his greatest magnificence.

The same Council of Estate ordained also, that all the fisherbarks of the
Villages of Scheveling, and of Heyde, should be The Council of Estate gives
order for the imbarkment of the baggage.
stayed for the service of the Estate; to the end, to serve the imbarkment of
the Court and King's baggage, and that for the same purpose the Village of
Catwick on the sea, should send the next Monday to Scheveling ten, and those of
Nortwijck, Santvoort, and Wijck upon the sea, each eight barks. They also gave
order to Captain du Charoy to cause thirty open wagons to be in readiness, to
bring a part of the baggage to Scheveling, Monday following; and a like number,
with forty close wagons, to conduct the train Tuesday, which was the day that
the King had nominated for his departure, though it was deferred since till
Wednesday, the second of June, as we shall see hereafter.

The same day the Duke of York, brother to the King, accompanied with the Duke
of Brunswick Lunenburg, and with a great number of English and Dutch Lords and
Gentlemen, went to Scheveling, to take the Mariners oath of fidelity, in
quality of Admiral of England; but the wind being contrary, and the sea so
moved, that the Lord Montagu, Vice Admiral, thought it not fit to send boats
from aboard him, to fetch his Royal Highness; and the fishermen of the Village,
refusing to put him aboard, he was enforced to return to the Hage to dinner.

Monsieur Weiman, Counselor in the Council of Estate Audience of the
Ministers of Brandenbourg.
of the Elector of Brandenbourg, and his Chancellor in the Duchy of
Cleveland, had the opportunity to do reverence to the King at Breda, where he
went about the affairs of the wardship of the Prince of Orange, wherewith his
Electoral Highness would charge himself in part. Therefore he would not press
his audience, during the first days after his arrival, when his Majesty was
burdened with complements. But as soon as Prince Maurice of Nassau, who with
the government of the town of Wesel, and charge of Lieutenant General of the
Horse, in the service of the Estates General of the United Provinces, cease
not to be Governor of the Duchy of Cleveland, and of the Provinces annexed to
it, in the name of the Elector of Brandenbourg, was arrived, they judged fit to
make a solemn complement to his Majesty, in the name of his Electoral Highness.
The Prince was there the same Saturday, accompanied with Mr. Weiman, who
notwithstanding the imploiments which he has elsewhere, forbears not to
reside, some years, at the Hage about the affairs of the wardship of the Prince
of Orange; and with Mr. Copes, ordinary Resident from the Elector, to the Lords
the Estates. The discourse of the Prince was like a Cavaleer; so that after the
King had answered his complement, they spoke of indifferent affairs, which have
nothing of common with this relation.

The same day Monsieur Vicquefort, Knight, Resident with Audience of the
Resident of Hessen.
the Lords the Estates, for the Land-Grave of Hessen, made his complement for
the Prince his Master, which was so much the better received, as in his
particular he had had an occasion to render most important services to his
Majesty, as well as to the deceased King, his Father, of glorious memory. He
had the honor to do reverence to his Majesty at Breda; when in the voyage,
which he made there some days before, with the Duke of Brunswick Lunenburg,
the King expressed unto him, that he remembered the affection which he had for
his service. He spoke also for the Duke of Courland in such sort, that the
King, who witnessed to be touched with the affliction of that Prince, protested
that he would not fail to acknowledge the good offices, which that Prince
rendered to the deceased King, and to his own person, during the disorders of
his Kingdom.

Monsieur Walter de Raet, Counselor in the Court of Holland, Zealand, and
West-Freesland, being gone to Bruxels, in Mr. Raet is made Knight Barronet.
the beginning of the month of March, this present year, with Mr. Goes, his
Colleague, by virtue of a Commission from the Court, to speak to the Princess
Royal of the affairs of the Principality of Orange, understood that there was
notice given, that General Monck dissembled, in a manner, no more the
inclination which he had for the King's interests, and for the re-establishment
of the affairs of England, and from thence took the liberty to felicitate the
King. His Majesty received him so well, as also the words which he said unto
him, when being gone since about the same affairs at Breda, where his Majesty
betook himself, he gave him to understand the occasion which hindered the Lords,
the Estates, at present, to complement him on the estate of the affairs of the
Kingdom of England; that he said unto him, that he should never see him but he
would remember the good will he expressed to him in this conjuncture. And,
indeed this very day, the 29 of May, the King, remembering those marks of
affection, sent him his, in presenting him by Mr. Oudart, Counselor to the
Princess Royal, and to the Prince of Orange, her son, with Letters Pattents
under the great Seal of England, by which he gives to Mr. Raet, and to his
issue male, the quality and rank of Knight Barronet for ever. And for as much
as those whom the King honors with this title, are obliged to maintain thirty
foot soldiers for the service of Ireland; or to pay into the hands of the
Treasurer the sum of a thousand fourscore and fifteen pounds, his Majesty
caused the first Letters to be accompanied with a second, dispensing him of
paying that sum, and acquitting him in general terms, and his posterity after
him to perpetuity, of the said sum.

We have said elsewhere, that Don Stephen of Gamarra, ordinary The Ambassador
of Spain entertaines the King.
Ambassador of Spain to the Lords the Estates, went to meet the King at
Moordike, to express there, to his Majesty, the joy that he had for his
re-establishment. The residence which the King had made, for some years, at
Bruxels, where Don Stephen of Gamarra had the honor to lodge, some days, in
the house of the two Princes, the King's brothers, made him to be considered
quite otherwise, then he could hope from his character, in a time, when there
was open war between Spain and England, though against the intention of the two
Kings. The caresses which the Princes made him on this occasion, and the
extraordinary civilities which he had received from the King, proceeded from a
particular affection, as well as the goodness wherewith the same Dukes of York,
and of Gloucester prayed to dine with him, on thursday the 27 of this month.
The Marquess of Ormond, and many other Lords had dined there, the day before,
with the same familiarity wherewith the Lords German, Earl of St. Albans, and
Craft went to dine with the Ambassador of France, the day the King arrived at
the Hage; and upon the recital which these Lords had made to their Royal
Highnesses of the great cheer the Ambassador of Spain had made them, they
resolved to dine there the next day. But the King, who would dine that day in
public, with the Queen of Bohemia, the Princess Royal, the Prince of Orange,
and the Deputies of the Estates General, having desired that the Princes, his
brothers, might be of the company, the Ambassador, who had expected their
Royal Highnesses, gave himself the liberty to complain to the King in raillery,
for taking away his guests from him. His Majesty had the goodness to tell him,
that he did it of purpose to hinder their dining with him, because he would be
also of the Party. And indeed, that very Saturday, the King after he had ridden
to Scheveling, where he saw the Fleet, and at his return, visited the Queen of
Bohemia, went in the evening to the house of the Spanish Ambassador, where
were also the Queen of Bohemia, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, the Princess
Royal, the Prince of Orange, the Marquess of Ormond, the Lords Digby, Craft,
and Taff, the Lady Stanhop, Widow to the Lord Heenvliet, to whom the King gave
the title of Countess of Chesterfeild, and Madam Howard her daughter-in-law,
Lady of honor to the Princess Royal. The table was covered in the Hall, which
is one of the fairest and greatest of the whole Hage; but it would be very
difficult to make a pertinent description of this feast, because that although
they served up there but fish, and sallats, it was, without doubt, one of the
most splendid and stately that ever was seen at a private house.

There was two great services of fish, or rather of Sea Monsters, besides the
pottages, the courses, and the inter-meats; and there was served up so great a
quantity of sweet meats, dry and liquid, that all the persons of quality, which
were come, in great number, to see the order of that supper, returned thence
all laden. For the Master of the house had given order that they should have
enough; and that the servants should present Limonada, Hypocras, and all sorts
of delicious wines, to all those that should demand it, whilst the Officers of
his Majesty, and of their Royal Highnesses, were magnificently treated in the
other apartments of the house. The King appeared there in the best humor that
ever he was seen to be, and expressed so much content in this company, which
was composed of none almost but of his family, and of persons whom he saw every
day, that he stayed there even until one a clock after midnight;
notwithstanding, without the least disorder, or confusion that might trouble
their conversation and divertisement.

Every thing there was high and magnificent; but that which Downing presents
himself to the King.
was most remarkable, was this, that about midnight arrived there Mr. Downing,
who did the affairs of England, to the Lords the Estates, in quality of
Resident, under Oliver Cromwell, and afterward under the pretended Parliament,
which having changed the form of the government, after having cast forth the
last Protector, had continued him in his imploiment, under the quality of
Extraordinary Envoy. He began to have respect for the King's person, when he
knew that all England declared for a free Parliament, and departed from
Holland, without order, as soon as he understood, that there was nothing that
could longer oppose, the re-establishment of Monarchal government, with a
design to crave Letters of recommendation to General Monk. This Lord considered
him, as well because of the birth of his wife, which is illustrious, as because
Downing had expressed some respect for him, in a time when that eminent person
could not yet discover his intentions. He had his Letters, when he arrived at
midnight at the house of the Spanish Ambassador, as we have said. He presented
them forthwith to the King, who arose from table a while after, read the
Letters, received the submissions of Downing, and granted him the pardon and
grace, which he asked for him, to whom he could deny nothing, Some days after,
the King Knighted him, and would it should be believed, that the strong
aversions which this Minister of the Protector had made appear against him on
all occasions, and with all sorts of persons indifferently, even a few days
before the public and general declaration of all England, proceeded not from
any evil intention; but only from a deep dissimulation, wherewith he was
constrained to cover his true sentiments, for fear to prejudice the affairs of
his Majesty.

Sunday the 30 of May, the King would in the morning hear a Sermon, and to that
purpose it was ordained that Mr. Hardy, one of the Ministers which came from
England, with the Commissioners of the City of London, should preach before the
King in the Chapel of the Court, which serves for Church to the French that
live at the Hage, at eleven a clock in the forenoon, as soon as the French had
ended their ordinary devotions. And to the end, to prevent the disorder among
the people, which were come there in crowds from the neighbor towns, the
company which had the guard, was commanded to seize themselves of the avenues
of the Chapel, and particularly to possess the door, which leads into a little
Partition, where the Princes of Orange heretofore caused a bench to be made
clothed with black velvet, and covered with a canopy of the same stuff for
themselves, and for persons of quality, that were ordinarily of their train,
but they dreamed not to remedy another inconvenience, which deceived all the
other precautions that they used. For the French, instead of giving place to
the English, and of using the civility which they were accustomed to have for
strangers, would not go out of the Church; and even the persons of condition,
which sat in the little partition, whereof we have spoken, and who were for
the most part Dutch, refused to make place for the Lords, which were, in great
number, about the King's person; without considering that this very incivility
hindered them absolutely to satisfy the curiosity they had to see the King, and
to be present at the English Liturgy. The Reader of the Church exhorted the
people to withdraw; and likewise the Pastor, who made the Sermon, went up again
into the Pulpit, and represented to them the wrong they did themselves, as well
as their brethren of the same religion, and strangers, as they in this country,
in obstinately staying thus in their seats, after having heard the word of God,
in a place where they had been fed, and in failing of respect to the King, to
whom that very Temple was given by their Superiors; and where the English were
to hear it, after them, in their tongue. But these exhortations made no
impression on spirits prepossessed, no more then the other reasons which he
alleged; so that the King was enforced to do his devotions, in the place where
her Royal Highness is accustomed to have her preaching, particularly; since
most important considerations hindered her to go to the English Church, where
there entered as many as it could hold of the Lords of that nation. The Minister
took his text in the 26 Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah, verse 19, which he
applied to the present estate of the affairs of England, and made so learned
and so pathetick a discourse, that there was not any one there, which was not
touched, and edified therewith.

After the Liturgy and Sermon were ended, there presented themselves many
persons sick of the Evil, which the King was The King touches the sick.
to touch, after many others he had touched Friday and Saturday, the 28. and
29. of this month, in private. And for as much as this ceremony is done with
circumstances very remarkable, and different from those which accompany it in
France, when the King there touches the sick; it shall not be from our purpose
to speak here, of all the particulars thereof, since they make as well one of
the essential parts of our relation, which is to omit nothing of what his
Majesty did at the Hage. But before we engage us in this recital, it will be
necessary to undeceive the spirit of those that believe, that that which the
Kings of England do on this ocasion, is but a copy of that which is done in
France, and that it is not but because of the pretension which they have to
that Crown, and by virtue of the title which they take, and from the arms of
France, wherewith they charge their Escuchion, that they attribute to
themselves a grace which is given to the eldest Son of the Church. For it is
most certain, that the King of Great Britain, has this right and advantage,
not as King of France, though he takes the quality thereof in his titles, but
as King of England; and because the Kings, his Predecessors, have used it
efficiaciously, since the reign of Edward, surnanamed the Confessor; that is
to say, since the beginning of the 11. age, and long before the Kings of
England had declared their pretensions, as they did, when Philip of Valois came
to the Crown. Now this ceremony is performed, in the manner as we shall at
present relate.

Those that feel themselves afflicted with the disease, commonly called the
Kings-evill, because the King cures it, are obliged to address themselves to
his Majesty's chief Chyrurgion who visits them, and if he judges that it is
the disease, which the King cures, he appoints them a day and hour to be at
the Chapel, where the King is to touch them. As in France, the ceremony of
touching the sick is done in the morning, after the King has communicated; so
was it this day done in the Chapel of the Princess Royal, after the King had
been at the sermon, and public prayers. For the preaching being finished, they
placed a great chair for the King, in a place somewhat distant from the people.
And as soon as the King was sat, one of the Clarks of the Closet stands at the
right side of the chair, holding on his arm, or rather in his right hand, as
many gold Angels, every one tied to a ribband of white silk, as there were sick
to be touched, which were then to the number of eight and forty. But for as
much as the Angels, which is a kind of gold so named, because it has the
figure of an Angel upon it, are so rare, that they can scarce be gotten,
especially in these Provinces; the King uses ordinarily, as he did on this
present occasion, the ten shillings pieces, which are near of the same value.
The Chaplain, that makes the sermon before the King, and who for this purpose
takes ordinarily a text proper for the ceremony, performs the office afterward,
and stands on the left side of the chair, whilst the Chyrurgion takes place,
with the sick, right over against the King, but at a certain distance:
Notwithstanding, in the occasion whereof we speak now, the Ministers text had
nothing common with the ceremony, and it was not the Pastor who made the
sermon, that assisted there; but Doctor Brown, Chaplain to the Princess Royal,
who did all the functions thereof, representing the King's Chaplain, as he did
on all the like occasions at Breda, whilst his Majesty resided there.

After his Majesty had taken his place, having by his side the Secretary, or
Clark of the Closet, and the Chyrurgion before him, the Chaplain, who held a
New Testament in his hand, chused there the text in the Gospel of Saint Mark
the 16 Chapter from the 14 Verse, even to the end of the Chapter; and at the
same time, the Chyrurgion, taking one of the diseased by the hand, after having
both made three low reverences, came with him to put themselves on their knees
before the King, close to the chair, and whilst the Chaplain pronounced these
words of the same Gospel, They shall lay their hands on the Sick, and they
shall be healed; the King laid his hand on the two cheeks of the sick. This
being done, he that was touched, retired himself, and they brought another to
the King, who touched him in the same manner; the Chaplain repeating the same
words, as many times, as there were sick for the King to touch, and as they
brought them one after another at his Majesty's feet. The Chyrurgion, who was
always on his knees, whilst the King touched, arose not till the King had
made an end of touching, and then he made again three low reverences, and
retired with the sick to the place where they were before, and stood there till
the Chaplain had made an end of reading the rest of his text; which he
continued not to read, till after the King had touched the last of the sick:
This being done, the Chaplain began again another Gospel, taken out of the
first Chapter of Saint John, from the first verse to the 15; and whilst he
read it, the Chyrurgion brought again the persons touched, to the King, in the
same manner as he did before; and his Majesty taking from the Secretary of the
closet, whilst the Chaplain pronounced these words of the Gospel, That was the
true light, which lights every man that comes into the world one of these
gold Angels hanging on a silk riband, and put it on the neck of one of the
diseased which approached one after another, in the same manner, as they did
when the Chyrurgion brought them to be touched; the Chaplain repeating also
those words, as many times as there were persons touched. After this, they all
retired again to their first place, and then the Chaplain made an end of
reading the Gospel, to the verse which we have denoted. He read after that,
some other passages of the Holy Scripture and concluded the whole service with
the Lord's Prayer, and a prayer which they make unto God, that it would please
him to bless the ceremony, which the King had performed.

The Liturgy being finished, the Gentleman Usher (it was then Mr Sands, who
performed that function) brought a basin, an ewer, and a towel, and being
accompanied with two Lords, or Earls, viz. the Lord Leonel Cranfield, Earl of
Middlesex, and the Lord Henry German, to whom the King gave since the quality
of Earl of Saint Albans; he presented the basin and ewer to the youngest of the
two, who stood on the left hand of the Gentleman that carried the towel, taking
the right hand of the elder of the two Lords. The last finding himself in the
midst of them, they marched, in this order, toward the King; and after making
three low reverences, they put themselves all three on their knees before his
Majesty; and whilst the Earl of Saint Albans poured forth the water on the
King's hands, the Earl of Middlesex took the towel from the Gentleman Usher,
and presented it to his Majesty, who wiped his hands therewith. After this, the
two Lords, and the Gentleman Usher, rose up, made again three great reverences
to the King, and retired. And after that the King arose also, and went thence
to the Princess Royal her chamber.

It is certain, that the King has very often touched the sick, The English
doubt not the effect of this remedy.
as well at Breda, where he touched two hundred and sixty, from Saturday the
17. of April, to Sunday the 23. of May, as at Bruges and Bruxels, during the
residence he made there; and the English assure, that not only it was not
without success, since it was the experience that drew thither every day, a
great number of those diseased, even from the most remote Provinces of Germany;
but also that there was no person healed so perfectly, who was not infected
again with the same disease, if he were so unfortunate to lose, through
negligence, or otherwise, the medal, which the King hangs on his neck, after he
has touched him; without any hope to be cured of it, if he be not touched
again, and have another Angel about his neck. We have been loath to have
touched on this particular, if many grave persons, whom one cannot suspect of
superstition or deceit, spoke not thereof, as of a most constant thing, and of
which there is no doubt.

Coming from thence, the King and Princes, went to dine with the Princess
Royal, where they passed a part of the day, to divert themselves in private.
Toward the evening, he made a visit to the Queen of Bohemia; and at the
beginning of the night, all the Royal Family were at Prince Maurice his house,
where the Estates of Holland had prepared a most magnifick and stately feast
for his Majesty.

There is more then one door that gives entrance into the dining chamber, which
makes one of the fairest pieces of the Feast of the Estates of Holland.
whole building; and in entering through the middle door, which is over against
the great stairs, one of the fairest and costliest of all Europe, because it is
double, most large, and all built of a most rare Indian wood, one discovers it
fully; so that we see, at one and the same time, the cross barred windows
which front upon the Viver and Viverberg, the two chimnies of both sides, and
in the midst above, an overture, which makes a roundel, fashioned like the
foot of a lamp, shut with glass, and environed with a gallery, or with a
ballister, which makes the tower of the lover, or open roof. From the center of
this lover, descended low a Royal Crown, very gallantly made, in the midst of
four lusters, or crystal candlesticks; which with many other candlesticks,
arms of silver, and a great number of torches, enlightened all corners much
better, then the Sun could have done at midday. They gave, particularly, a
mavelous luster to the two bottoms of the chimny, which is on the left side;
where two partitions of painted wood shut up as many cupboards of crystal
glasses, and a great store of vessels, and of silver plate, and vermilion gilt.
The Hall was furnished with ordinary Tapistry, which is of crimson damask, and
had no other adornments, but that here and there, there were some fair
Pictures, and that the ends of the chimnies, and the void place above the cross
bar windows, were adorned with garlands, wreaths and figures of trees, laden
with oranges, and mingled with all sorts of flowers, which formed not only a
very regular compartment; but wonderfully refreshed also the chamber, and
charmed no less the smell, by their perfume, then they pleased the sight through
the diversity of their rich enamel.

The Table was made in double potence, and laid so, that that part, where the
Royal family sat, was a thwart before the chimny of the right hand, thrusting
from its middle a trunck, or skirt, which possessed more then two thirds of the
length of the Hall; and it was shut up with a balustrade of three foot high,
which reigned round about; yet so, that there was space enough, between the
ballister, and seats of those which were of the feast, to hold the persons,
designed for their service. This balustrade had diverse wickets, whose entrance
was recommended to the care of some Officers of the guards, which hindered
strangers to present themselves there.

The King took his place under a cloth of Estate of the same stuff, whereof
the rest of the furniture was made, between the Queen of Bohemia, his Aunt, who
was on his right hand, and the Princess Royal his sister, who was on his left.
The King's two brothers, were at one of the two ends, on the Queen of Bohemias
side, and the Prince of Orange at the other end, on the side of the Princess,
his Mother. The King sat so, that from his place he saw easily all the
Deputies of the Estates of Holland, who possessed that part of the Table, which
came from the midst of the King's; and were seated according to the rank,
which the Nobles and Towns hold in their Assemblies. They would fain that the
Rhine-Grave, Commissary General of the Horse, and Governor of Mastricht,
should have the honor to give the napkin to the King; but his Majesty would be
served the whole meal by Officers of his own, as well as the other Royal
persons by theirs. Mr. de Buat, Captain of the troop of light horsemen, which
was formerly that of the Guard of the deceased Prince of Orange, and now of the
Estates of Holland, and Mr. Itersum, Lieutenant Colonel of a Regiment of foot,
and Drossart of Rolduck, in the Country of Over-Meas, did the office of
carvers; and served the meat before the King, and before all the Royal family;
standing, for this purpose, in the empty space, which the Estates of Holland
had left between their places, and the table of his Majesty. Mr. of Boetzelaer,
younger son of the deceased Baron of Asperen, Mr. of Taillefer, eldest son of
Mr. of Mauriack, Colonel of a Regiment of French foot, Mr. of Steeland, son to
Mr. of Steeland, Lieutenant Colonel to the foot Regiment of Mr. of Beverweert,
and Drossart of Buren; and Mr. Desloges, son to the deceased Colonel of that
name, did the same functions at the table of the Estates, standing between the
ballister, and the table, and taking the dishes from the hands of the public
Messengers, whose custom is, to follow the Deputies of the towns to the
Assemblies of the Estates, to serve up the meat to the Lords. The King's table
was served with six great dishes, in oval form, and with two more laid a cross
the other, all laden like pyramides; and they changed the services five times.
There was on the Estates table eight and twenty great dishes, and many plate
trenchers, but they changed them no more then four times; to the end, to make
some difference between their table and his Majesty's. In the ordinary days
they served but seven tables, with the King's, besides the servants; but this
day there were sixteen, seven of which served as ordinarily, in the other
apartments of the King's house, and the rest in the Castellany, which is as it
were the Prison of the Castle, where they had given express order to receive
and treat all the English which presented themselves. It is forbidden me to
speak of the expense; but I think I may allege here the person of the King,
and affirm, that he said the next day, to Mr. of Wimmenum, that he never better
supped, then the day he arrived at the Hage; and that in all the feasts which
were made, as well in France as Spain, in Germany, and in the Low Countries,
where he had met stately ones; and among others, that which the Archduke
Leopoldus made in the month of May, 1656, when he went out of the
Low Countries, to go into Germany, he saw nothing come near that, wherewith the
Estates of Holland had entertained him the day before. It was two days since
the Lords the Estates caused the Troops of Horse to come to the Hague, whereof
we have spoken elsewhere; and this evening they caused a part of them to be
lodged in little squadrons, upon the avenues of the King's house, and the rest
to be put into battalia, in the Plain, which is a place by the house, worthy to
be called, for the beauty of the buildings which environ it, the Royal Place of
the Hague. The Regiment of the Guards had their Post, from one of the corners
of the house, to the Viverberg, and all a long that fair walk even to the other
end toward the Place, behind the battery of the Cannon. As soon as they begun
to drink the King's health, they gave the signal, with a torch, at one of the
windows of the house, which looks upon the Viver, to make them fire the Cannon,
to which answered the Musketeers of the Guards, and next, the Carbines of the
Cavallery, and the artillery from the Rampart. Four times this music served
for intermedium to that, which passed in the Palace during supper: whilst it
lasted, there was made to come forth from a boat, which was in the midst of
the Viver, or of that Pond, which washes the foot of the wall of the King's
house, as well as of the whole great Palace, an infinite number of squibs, and
of other artificial fireworks, which gave a most agreeable divertisement to
the people, the whole night.

Monday, the last of May, the Lords the Estates of Holland, Order of the
Estates General, and those of Holla^d, to complement the King in taking leave.
considering that the same reason, which had obliged them to honor the King's
arrival, obliged them to do the like at his departure and embarkment; and
thinking that the King would depart the next day, they resolved to dispose the
Lords, the Estates General, to take their leave of his Majesty at his house,
that day, or the day of his departure, as they should think fit; and to
signify to them, that the Estates of Holland could not suffer that any, but
them, should accompany his Majesty, either in body, or by Deputies, when he
departed. The Estates General, who know that the place of their ordinary
Assembly, is in the Soveraignity of the Province of Holland, acquiesced
therein, without repugnance, and were ready to desire audience, to take leave
of the King, that day, in body; when they understood that his Majesty's voyage
was deferred a day longer, and that he had signified to him of the Lords the
Estates, who was President that week, that the next day he would make them a
visit, in person, in the place of their Assembly. They would have been glad if
they could have dispensed themselves of receiving so extraordinary an honor;
but they chose rather, to leave themselves to be laden with civility at home,
then to commit an incivility, in opposing the will of the King. The Estates of
Holland, to whom the King signified, by one of the Secretaries of his commands,
that he would do them the same honor, received the advertisement thereof with
the same respect; and both one and the other, after they had agreed with the
Ministers of the Court, how they intended to receive his Majesty, with all the
submission they should be able to render to so good a Prince, and so great a
Monarch, they both gave necessary orders, in their several assemblies, for this
glorious and illustrious visit.

The Estates of the Province of Zealand, who were convocated extraordinarily,
in the town of Middelborough, on the occasion of the King's voyage, had named
also extraordinary Deputies, whom they ordained to complement the King upon his
re-establishment in his Kingdoms, conjunctively with the ordinary Deputies,
which are here from their Province in the Estates General. The Extraordinaries
arrived at the Hage, Sunday the 30 of May, and the next day, in the morning,
both one and the other had audience of his Majesty, who caused them to be
received and conducted in the same manner, and by the same persons he employed
at the reception of the Deputies of the other Estates, and the King made them
the same civility. Mr. Veth, Pensionary Counselor of Zealand, and one of the
eloquentest men of his time, brother to him, who so long time, and with so much
reputation, appeared to the Estates General; and who is there also, at present,
for the interests of his Province, took on him the speech, and made a most
excellent discourse, speaking in these terms.

SIR,

We are here from the Lords the Estates of Zealand, to do reverence to your
Majesty, and to assure you of our most humble and most respectful services.

We represent us, SIR, and acknowledge, in the person and sight of your
Majesty, the favors and assistances which our Province has, from all time,
received from the Kings of Great Britain, your most famous Predecessors; and
so we cannot felicitate you, and express the joy which we have to see the grace
which God would do unto your Majesty, in this admirable revolution of affairs;
wherewith your Majesty should be so much the more touched, as neither you, nor
the rest of the world presumed so much as to hope it.

If Great Britain has made bon-fires at the birth of your Majesty, whatshould
it do now in this mavelous conjuncture? where we see all the artifices and
attempts of your enemies disappointed, and overthrown; your Royal person
miraculously reestablished in the Throne of your Ancestors, and Crown (to
speak truth) sent from Heaven, rather then put upon the head of your Majesty,
by the hand of man. So we need not doubt that God, who is the particular
Protector of Kings; and who raises, at this time, your Majesty by ways so
extraordinary, will not fail to uphold you by that powerful hand, which laid
it on your Royal head, and that whole Christendom derives not advantages from
thence, which cannot be ordinary; since that God, by whom your Majesty reigns
so visibly, will make it so, that you shall reign for him efficaciously, in
rendering the good and repose of his Church, inseparable from the interests of
your Estate.

And hence shall it be, SIR, that, as from an inexhaustible spring, upon the
Councels and actions of your Majesty, shall flow all the blessings of heaven,
which shall settle the repose of your Estate, and assure the Scepter in your
hands, for the comfort of your people, for the protection of your Allies, for
the terror of your enemies, and for the establishment of a perpetual peace in
all Christendom; to the exaltation of the great name of God, and to the
particular glory of your Majesty. Especially we hope that this favorable
occasion, will serve to tie more strongly the knot of that Alliance, which,
from all time, has been so carefully maintained between Great Britain, and
this Commonwealth; particularly if her Highness, the Princess Royal, who is so
notably interested in the good and prosperity of both one, and the other Estate,
will labor herein, with the care which we promise us from her goodness.

Those are the most ardent prayers, SIR, which the Lords the Estates of
Zealand, your very humble servants, make unto God, and which they hope will be
heard in due time.

The Estates of the Province of Freesland, made the same diligence in sending
to salute the King, by Extraordinary Deputies, The Estates of Frees land send
to complement the King.
who had audience the same day, together with their ordinary Deputies, which
are in the Estates General, and were presented to his Majesty by Prince William
Frederick of Nassau, Governor and Lieutenant General of their Province. Mr.
Harinxma, Counselor in the Court of Justice of Leeuwaerden, addressed the
speech, and made his complement in French, like others.

Hitherto there was no Minister sent, express, by any foreign The Count of
Oldenbourg is the first of the strangers, which compleme^ted the King.
Prince, or Lord, with Letters of Credence, to felicitate the King upon his
re-establishment, and estate of his affairs: But this day there arrived at the
Hage Mr. of Cotteritz, Counselor in the Council of Estate of the Count of
Oldenbourg and Delmenhorst, and his Drossart in the Bailywick or Jurisdiction
of Farel, who had his audience after the Deputies of Freesland. This Lord, who
despised the quality of Prince, which was offered him, to conserve that of most
powerful Count of the Empire; and who is no less considerable, through the
prudence wherewith he governs, then through the honor which he has to be
the of same house, with the King of Denmark, who shall be partly his heir,
willing to give an extraordinary proof of the respect which he always has had
for the Kings of Great Britain, who of their side have, from all time, much
esteemed him, dispatched this Gentleman, as soon as he understood that the King
was to depart from Breda, to come into Holland, not so much to acquit himself
of that duty, by a simple complement, as to assure his Majesty, that the first
day he would send to render his respect unto him in his Kingdom, by a person,
who is very near unto him, whom he considers, and loves extremely. The King,
who is much more sensible of the good he receives, then of the injuries his
enemies have done him, would make known by a most civil reception, and
accompanied with much tenderness, and by a most obliging answer, which he made
to the complement of that Gentleman; that if he could forget the ill usage he
had received from some of his people, he was incapable to lose the remembrance
of the obligation, which he had to the Count of Oldenbourg.

We have said before, that the Duke of York, as Admiral of The Duke of York
caused the Fleet to take an oath.
England, would go, Saturday last, to the Fleet, to take there the Oath of
Fidelity of the Officers and Mariners; and that he was hindered by the contrary
wind and the tempest. But this day, the last of May, he embarked himself, and
was aboard the Admiral. The Fleet declared it self for the King, when it was
yet at anckor in the Downs, immediately after it understood the intention of
the Parliament, upon the Letter and Declaration of his Majesty, whereof we have
spoken in the beginning of this Relation; and it was not lately that the Lord
Montague, who commands the Fleet now as Vice Admiral, under the authority of
the Duke of York, had made his good will so well to appear, that not only the
King could not doubt thereof, but also that he had given some suspicion thereof
to those of the contrary party. But it was necessary to disingage the Officers
Soldiers, and Mariners of the Oath, which they had done to the last
Parliament, and to be assured there of by a new Oath of Fidelity for the King,
their Sovereign Lord. Therefore the Duke being arrived at the Admiral's Ship,
where he was received by the Lord Montague, with extraordinary honor and
submissions; he caused the Captain of the other ships to come aboard there, and
took their Oath, which the Captains caused to be administered since to the
inferior Officers, and to all the rest of the seamen in the other ships. The
Lord Montague had caused the flag to be changed before he departed from the
coast of England, and made the arms of the Commonwealth to be ra^ed out, which
appeared for some years on the castle of his proud poop; but he had reserved
the honor for his Royal Higness, to change the name of the ship, which Cromwell
caused to be called the Naesby, in memory of the great Battle, where the
deceased King was defeated; and by which the Rebellion gained principally the
strenght, which made it to subsist even to this last revolution. The Duke
thinking that he could not give it a name which should be more pleasingly
received, then Changes the name of the Admiral ship.
that of the King, made it to be called The Charles.

It is certainly one of the handsomest frames that ever sailed Description of
the Admiral.
upon the sea. For although it be of the greatest size that has been seen
after that which they call in England, the Sovereign, and carries fourscore
pieces of brass Cannon, amongst which more then twenty are of 48 pound bullet;
it is, notwithstanding, one of the best sailers of the whole Ocean. She had
aboard her above six hundred men, as well Soldiers, as Sailors, and the
Chambers and Galleries of the Castle, where the King was to lodge, and where
the Lord Montague lodges ordinarily, were all wanscotted, and gilded, and
furnished with fair beds of the finest cloth of England, fringed with gold and
silver, and with foot Turcky tapistry, for the Royal persons. But that which
was most remarkable, was that in the Admirals Kitchen there were six Clarks,
that labored but for the mouth; and that his table was better served on the
sea, then those of many Princes are in their Dominions. The plate, which was
all of silver, was of so prodigious a greatness, that they were seen to be
laden with pieces of roast beef (whereof the English have reason to make one of
their delicates) which weighed near a hundred pounds, and the other dishes of
plate, which accompanied that, were without comparison, massier then the
greatest washing basins that are ordinarily used, and so laden with meat, that
it seemed the whole Fleet was to be fed with the remains of that table, though
they were intended but for the attendants of my Lord the Duke. He dined there,
at the ordinary of the Vice Admiral, which might pass for a great feast; and in
going thence, he was saluted with the artillery of the whole Fleet, which did
him the same honor, when he came aboard.

The same day the King received Letters from a certain kind of people, which
are called in England Quakers; because that in the ordinary hours when they
make their devotions, or prayers, there takes themselves, a certain trembling
in all parts of the body, which they say to be a violent motion, caused by the
spirit of God, wherewith they would make men bebelieve that they are possessed.
It would be very hard to say, whether these people are fanatic, or
hyponchondriack, that is, mad or melancholy; but it must needs be, that so
great a disorder of spirit, as that which is observed in all their actions,
proceeds from an ill disposition of the body. They have not only lost the
respect they ow unto Princes and Magistrates; but they fail also in the duties
which are inseparable from the civil life: And they are so far from humility,
which is a virtue not known, but since the birth of Christianity, that hitherto
there was never seen an animal so impudent, and so proud. The Letter was
ridiculous, and impertiment throughout; but particularly, in most places, it
pronounced the threatenings of Gods judgment against the King, if he protected
not that Sect, and entered not into those thoughts.

The King having made known, the day before, to Mr. the The King renders a
visit to the Estates General.
Veth, Deputy from the Province of Zealand, to the Estates General, and
President that week for his Province, that his design was to render them a
visit, the next morning, in their assembly, as we have said, it was resolved
that they would receive this honor, with all imaginable respect; and to that
purpose would dispose of all things, in such manner, that his Majesty should
carry away from his visit, the satisfaction which he might lawfully promise to
himself from thence. And, indeed, Tuesday morning, the first day of June, the
Lords the Estates General, being come to their chamber, about ten a clock in
the forenoon, they named Mrs. of Gent, from the Province of Gelderland, of
Merode and Guldewagen of Holland, Stavenisse of Zealand, Renswoude of Utrecht,
Velsen of Freesland, Ripperda of Hengelo of Over-Ysel, and Sculenbourg for
Groaning; who repaired to the King's Court, and told him, from the Estates, that
they knew well, their duty obliged them to come to receive his Majesty's orders
at his house; but since it pleased him to do the Estates General the honor, to
transport himself, in person, into their assembly; they should receive that
grace in a most submissive manner; and that to this purpose, they were there,
by the command of their Chiefs, to serve his Majesty, and to conduct him unto
the Hall of the Council. They prayed the Estates of Holland, to cause their
Regiment to make a double guard, upon the avenues, from Prince Maurice his
house, to the Palace; and Prince William Frederick of Nassau, Governor of
Freesland, was required, from them, by Mr. of Velsen, and of Schulenbourg,
Deputies of the two last Provinces of the Generality, to go to Prince Maurice
his house, and to march before the King bare-headed, to conduct him, from his
lodging, to the place where the Estates would receive him, in a body; and from
thence, even to the seat which was prepared for him.

They caused a great train of coaches to come for the King's convenience; but
his Majesty had no sooner answered the complement of the Deputies, but being
upon the stone stairs of the Court, he caused the Lords of his train to
advance, and expressed a willingness to walk a foot that little way, which is
between Prince Maurice his house, and the Palace. Prince William of Nassau, put
himself immediately before the King, who not disposed to cover himself on the
way; the Deputies of the Estates that followed him, put themselves in the same
condition; and in this order between two files of Soldiers, they arrived at
the foot of the stairs of the great Hall, where the Estates General came, in a
body, to meet him, made him a low reverence, opened themselves to make him to
pass in the midst of them, and followed him thus, two and two, a long the
Hall, and then through the Gallery, where they sell Pictures; but whose shops
were shut up, that day, and through the withdrawing chamber, unto that of their
ordinary assembly; his Majesty, and the Estates, being still uncovered.

This Hall is more long then large, and there is seen in the midst a Table,
which reaches even from one end to the other of the length of the Hall,
capable to hold about thirty persons. The President of the Assembly, which
changes every week, according to the number and rank of the United Provinces,
has his place in the midst of the Table; but he quitted it then, to that
which is over against, where the Ambassadors and Ministers of foreign Princes
are seated, when public audience is given them; and in the ordinary place of
the President, they had made a foot-bank of seven or eight foot broad, covered
with a foot cloth of Tapistry; which reached along the passage, even to the
door of the withdrawing chamber. On the foot-bank was placed a chair of green
velvet; and over head, a cloth of Estate, or Canopy, of the same colored
velvet, which was hung between the Portraits of the four last Princes of
Orange, of the house of Nassau; which were separated so, that those of the
Princes, William and Maurice, were on the right side; and those of Frederick
Henry, and of William the second, his son, on the left side of the Canopy.

The King being come to his place, which represented a kind of Throne, Prince
William Frederick of Nassau, and some English Lords put themselves behind the
seat; and his Majesty, who stood, till all those which compose that illustrious
Senate, which is called the Estates General, and whose number was very great,
that day, because of the extraordinary Deputies, which were come upon this
occasion, were entered, would not sit, nor be covered, till all the Deputies
were disposed in their places; and then he sat and covered himself, but he
remained not in that posture: for as soon as he saw all the seats full, and all
the Deputies covered, he arose, and uncovering himself again, he thanked the
Estates General, in very obliging terms, for all the civilities he had received
from them, since he arrived in the country; assured them of the constancy of
his amity and affection, for the good of that Commonwealth; and recommended
unto them the persons, and interests of the Princess Royal, his Sister, and of
the Prince of Orange, his Nephew, in the manner as we shall have occasion to
say hereafter. Mr. Veth, who Presided then for the Province of Zealand, as we
have said, and was over against the King, answered in the name of the assembly,
in terms, which made known the respect wherewith they resented the honor they
had received.

This being done, his Majesty retired the same way, and in the same manner as
he entered, Prince William marching in the head, and the Estates, who went two
and two after him, conducting him, in body, even into the Court, to the foot of
the stairs of the great Hall, where they had received him.

It was there that the Estates of Holland came to meet his Majesty The King
makes a visit to the Estates of Holland.
in body. They had before them Prince Maurice of Nassau, Lieutenant General of
the Horse, and Governor of Wesel, marching alone, and bare-headed; and
performing, by them, the same function, which Prince William had done with the
Estates General. The order which was given for the convenience of the passage,
was so well observed, that there was no encumbrance in the Court; so that the
Lords of the King's retinue, and the Gentlemen and Officers of the Country,
walked, at ease, between two files of Soldiers, drawn so into a guard. Those
of the King's Court, and the Officers, went before the King's person, and the
Estates of Holland followed him, going two and two: first the body of the
Nobility, and next the Deputies of the Towns, directly from the great stairs,
to the door of the Estates of Holland their apartment. In entering, they turned
presently on the left hand, through a little Gallery, which leads into the
chamber, where the Deputy Councillors assemble, which compose the Council of
Estate of Holland, the beauty of whose simetry, the King admired; considered
particularly in passing by the seat of those Lords, who in the absence of the
Estates, are as Sovereigns in this part of the Province, which is called
South-Holland, which is in a bar shut up with a long balustrade, and covered
with a heaven, sustained by four columns, the ground all white, embellished
with flowers and leaves of gold in embroidred work. Coming forth thence, they
passed through the withdrawing chambers, whose planching is painted, but in
another manner then the first; and which are also very richly hung with Arras.
After that the King went up the great stairs to the Hall, where the Estates of
Holland use to assemble, when they are convocated in body. It is a building
made so few years since, that the proud work could not yet be finished, whose
roof is seeled, nor the rich Tapistries, wherewith it is to be furnished; but
notwithstanding, it is very fair and most magnifick, as it is, being highly
raised; its planched roof makes an arch, and the Hall opened with many great
windows, which butt upon the Viver, between two fair chimnies. The place is so
vast, that to the end, the voice of those that speak there, may not be lost in
the air, they were constrained to make a kind of cutting off with great
curtains, which reach from the roof to the floor; at the place, where a
balustrade is to be made, which shall shut up that part of the Hall, to which
one may lawfully give the name of Areopage, or rather of Sanctuary, because it
contains the seats of those who deliberate upon the most important affairs of
the Province, and consequently, of all the Estate, whereof it makes one of the
principal parts,

The seats are disposed so, that in entering one sees, from the door, the back
of a bench of three stories, made like a Council board with leaning pillows,
which are revested with green cloth, as well as the seats. This bench is
accompanied with two others, which are as two wings. That which is on the right
hand, is composed of a low seat; and that on the left, is of two stories; and
these two benches are a little separate from the first, which, by this means,
is in the midst, through a little intervale, which may serve for passage. The
great bench is over against one of the two chimnies; before which, it forms it
self, by that means, a great empty space, which is filled between the two wings
with a long table, encompassed with back chairs, for the Deputies of the
Nobility of the Province, (which are now but nine) and for the Pensionary
Counselor, who, though Minister of the Estate, cease not to have place
there; because, that having the charge to propose affairs to go to the
suffrages, and to conclude, he can, from the place where he is, speak
conveniently to all the Deputies of the Nobility, who deliver their opinion
first, and are to be agreed among themselves, before they can form the voice
only, which they have in the Estates of the Province. The Deputies of Dort, of
Haerlam, of Delf, and of Leyden, possess the bench on the right hand. The first
story of the great bench, which is over against the chimny, is wholly for the
Deputies of Amsterdam, which are in great number, because they will have them
at all the extraordinary deputations, which are made for the affairs, whose
discussion would consume too much time, if it were made in full assembly. The
second story, is for the Deputies of Tergow and Rotterdam; and the third, for
those of Gercum Schedam, Schoonhoven, and the Bril; and the bench of the left
wing is for the Deputies of the towns of North Holland, which are called in the
public acts, VVest-Freesland, and are Alcmaer, Horn, Enchuisen, Edam,
Munickendam, Medemblick, and Purmerent.

It was necessary to make this little description of the Hall, to the end, to
represent better all the circumstances of that remarkable visit, in the subject
whereof, I must say again, that they had taken away the ordinary table of the
Nobility, instead of which they had placed that of the Deputy Councillors,
which is not so long as the other; not just in the place of the first, but a
cross before the chimny; which is at the end of the Hall between the chimny and
table, was made a foot-bank raised with three steps, taking up the whole length
of the table toward the chimny, from whence it was a reasonable distance of;
and they had drawn the Secretaries table toward the windows; to the end, to
free the passage. The foot-bank was covered with a fair Tapistry, and charged
with a velvet chair under a cloth of Estate of the same stuff, which reached to
the chimny.

In entering into the Hall, they conducted the King along the back of the bench
on the right wing, to his place, where his Majesty stood, until all the
Deputies of the Nobility and Towns were placed in their ordinary seats. Prince
William, Governor of Freesland, held his left hand upon the back of the King's
chair; and Prince Maurice, who joined himself to the Estates of Holland, after
he had performed his functions with the Estates General, and put himself on the
left hand of the King, had his right hand there, and between them and the
chimny were four Lords of the King's attendance. As soon as the Deputies of the
Nobility had taken theirs, at the two other ends of the table, and before; yet
so, that forming a kind of half moon, which opened in the midst, they took not
away the sight of the benches from the King, his Majesty who had stood still,
and uncovered, sat down, and covered himself; but the King remained no longer
so, then till the rest of the assembly were sat and covered; and then arising
and uncovering himself, he spoke, if not in the same terms, at least upon the
same subject, wherewith he had entertained the Estates General, in the visit he
had made them. It was but an obliging acknowledgment of the civilities, which
his Majesty said he had received from the Estates of Holland, but most sincere
protestations of a perpetual and inviolable friendship with this Province, and
recommendations of the person and interests of the Princess Royal, and of the
Prince of Orange her son.

The Pensionary Counselor, who was placed so, that he was almost over against
the King, answered thereto in the name of the Estates of Holland, with his
usual eloquence, in thanking his Majesty for the honor he did the assembly,
and in witnessing unto him the acknowledgment which the Province should
eternally have of the fair mark of his affection, and Royal good will; which
appeared so evidently in that illustrious, and splendid visit. He said, that
the Lords the Estates of Holland considered, as an effect of his Majesty's
goodness, the satisfaction which he said to have from the little service which
the time and estate of the country permitted them to do, for to express the
universal joy, which his Majesty might observe in the countenances of all the
inhabitants, rather then in the reception, or entertainment which the Estate
had made him. That they received, with respect, the assurances which his
Majesty gave them of his amity, and that he might fully assure himself, that
his sole consideration would oblige them to embrace fervently the interests of
the Princess Royal, and of the Prince of Orange her son, though they should not
be obliged thereunto by other reasons, as they are to aknowledge the affection
and inclination which her Royal Highness has always had for the good of the
Estate, and for that of the Province of Holland in particular. And as for the
Prince of Orange, that the merit of his Ancestors, was still so present to
their memory, that there was no doubt, but the desires of his Majesty should be
fulfilled of that side.

After that, the King retired, in the same manner and order, as he came, the
Estates of Holland following him in body with design to conduct him even to his
house. But the King being descended into the Court, by the same way he went,
took that toward the Princess Royal her apartment, which is in the same
Palace; and the Estates, having conducted him even to the first story, took
leave of him, and returned through the gallery, to the Hall of their Assembly.

Every one was extremely surprised with so obliging, and so gallant a manner of
proceeding; but this joy was in some kind moderated, because the place being so
vast, that notwithstanding the cutting off, the most part of the Deputies lost
either the sense, or words of the King's discourse. The Pensionary Counselor,
who answered thereto, said unto those that asked it him in writing; that he had
perfectly well comprehended the intention of the King; but that he would not
undertake to relate, word by word, what his Majesty said concerning the
Princess Royal, and the Prince of Orange, which was that they most desired to
know. The King being advertised of the displeasure of the Estates of Holland,
had the goodness to call for pen, ink, and paper, in the Princess Royal her
Chamber, and to send to the Pensionary Counselor this following note, written
and signed with his hand.

Sirs, whereas I leave here in your hands, the Princess, my Sister, and the
Prince of Orange, my Nephew, two persons which are extremely dear unto me, I
pray you, Sirs, to take their intersts to heart, and to make them to resent the
effects of your favor, in the occasions which the Princess, my Sister, shall
request you, either for her self, or for the Prince, her son; assuring you that
all the effect of your good will toward them, shall be acknowledged of me, as
if I had received them in my own person; and was signed.

CHARLES R.

The Pensionary Counselor answered thereunto, by a formal discourse, and most
elegant, the substance whereof we shall only declare, and so it imported no
other thing, but that this note, whereof a copy was sent to the Estates
General, was inserted in the Registers of the resolutions of the Generality,
and of the Province of Holland.

Mr de Thou, Count of Meslay, Ambassador of France, took this day his audience
of leave, with the same ceremonies he took the first. Mr. Otte Krag, and Mr.
Gotsche of Bugwald Extraordinary Ambassadors from the King of Denmark took
theirs also, and added to the complement they made his Majesty, upon his happy
voyage, a most humble prayer, that being upon his return into England, it would
please him to remember his good Cosen and Ally, the King of Denmark, their
Master, and the estate of his affairs; as the King their Master, of his side,
would acknowledge, as lnog as he lived, the good Offices which his Majesty
should render him on so pressing an occasion. The King, after he had thanked
the Ambassadors for their complement, upon the subject of his voyage, said,
that he could not be ignorant that it was partly for his sake, that the King of
Denmark suffered, and that he should be no sooner returned into his Kingdom,
then he would employ all possible means to declare the part he took in the
interests of that Prince, his near Cosen; chiefly in a cause, the justness
whereof was so evident, and wherein he was interested in his particular. And
that he hoped, that the peace not being so far advanced, as they were made to
believe, he should have leisure to give him proofs of his good will. After
that, the Ambassadors retired, to go visit the Earl of Oxford, chief of the
Deputies of the Higher House of Parliament. The Ambassadors had caused the
King to be sounded, if he were pleased that they should see the Commissioners
of the two Houses; whereas his Majesty expressed to them, that they should do
him a pleasure therein, they had often caused audience to be asked both of one,
and the other; but their continual imploiments upon the King's person, joined to
the difficulty that was to assemble persons that diverted themselves in a
place, where occasions were not wanting to them, and in a time when all the
world rejoiced, opposed always their satisfaction; until that the Earl of
Oxford, who endeavored what he could to make the Commissioners of the Higher
House to assemble, but to no purpose. They prayed at last, the 31 day of May,
audience of the Lower House, with the Lord Fairfax, who had assembled some of
them in the house of the Baron of Asperen, where he was lodged, and the next
day, which was Tuesday, the Earl of Oxford did as much, in receiving them at
home with him, in the house of Mr. Buysero, Griffeer, or Secretary of the
Council of the Prince of Orange. Coming from the audience of the King, both one
and the other treated the Ambassadors with much honor and respect; but they
talked of the affairs of the North, as of a thing, whereof the King should
have, for the future, the disposition, since that in entering into the Kingdom,
he should have solely the whole conduct of the affairs of the Estate.

We have said elsewhere, that the Ambassador of Spain saw not the King, but as
his particular servant; and that he of Portugal, saw him not when his Majesty
arrived: Hence was it that there were no other foreign Ministers, that would
trouble him with their complements upon his voyage, after having officiated
with him upon his coming to the Crown. There was but Prince Maurice of Nassau,
who having had the honor to lodge the King in his house, which is, without
doubt, the only one in the Hage, capable to receive so great a Monarch, as well
because of its seat, being situated in the fairest place of the Town, and
chief avenue of the Palace, to which the Viver serves for Mote; as because of
the decoration of its apartments; in one of which, he caused to be represented
the Princes of his House, one of the most ancient and most illustrious of all
Germany, which would choose there an Emperor, in a time, when there was none to
be found in the other families; There was but that Prince, Isay, who willing to
acknowledge the honor he had received at home; and, at the same time, to
officiate with his Majesty for his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, made him
also a complement upon his voyage. His Majesty received him perfectly well, did
him civility in his particular, speaking very advantagiously of the merit of
his person, and thanking him for the affection which he would express unto him:
but it was with an extraordinary resentment, that the King spoke of that which
the Duke of Brandenbourg had had for the estate of his affairs, when all the
world believed them desperate; and said, that he would conserve eternally the
remembrance of the good Officers which his splendid Highness had rendered him in
the Empire, and of the great obligations which he would gain upon him in a
time, when there was no Prince, almost, that dared to declare for his interests.

Mr. Coyet, who had saluted their Royal Hignesses some days before, and had
had a particular conference with the Chancellor, contented himself to signify
to his Majesty, by Sir Edward Nicholas, that he would not trouble him, among so
many other complements, which he should have to receive, because the King, his
Master, would not fail to send an Extraordinary Ambassador to felicitate his
Majesty, solemnly, in his Kingdom, as soon as the distance of the places would
permit the advertisement of his re-establishment to be carried into Sweden.

But the Estates General, who had received an honor, whose memory shall be
eternally precious to posterity, thought themselves The Estates General take
leave of the King in a body.
bound to acknowledge it, in going, in body, to thank his Majesty for the grace
he had done them: and to complement him upon his voyage. They were there, as we
now say, in body, and in the same order as at their first audience; and the
Baron of Gent, who uttered the speech eight days before, was the Orator also
this time, and spoke thus.

SIR,

The Estates General of the United Provinces, having been The Speech of Mr. of
Gent.
advertised from your Majesty, that you purpose to embark to morrow, to
complete your voyage for England, return here again, to receive the honor of
your commands on the point of your departure. If your Majesty finds not on
their faces the same cheerfulness, which you might observe there, when they had
the honor to come to salute you at your arrival, it is because of the sorrow
they have to see themselves ready to be deprived of the splendor of so fair a
light, which your Majesty has made to shine in their Estate, during the little
time you would remain there. That which comforts them, SIR, in some kind, is,
that they know, that the interests of your Majesty press your departure; and
the good of the affairs of your Crown, permits you not to defer it longer.
Notwithstanding, the little residence which it has pleased your Majesty to
make amongst us; and the goodness, wherewith you would receive the endeavors
we have made to be able to please you, leaves there such signal, strong and
indubitable marks of your good will toward us, that we shall bless, eternally,
for it the providence, to which we ow those incomparable advantages. The
presence of your Majesty's sacred person, in their assembly, SIR, and the
obliging expressions, which your royal mouth would make in their Senate, are
such evident testimonies of the disposition which you have to honor this
Estate with your Royal good will, that they deserve that all posterity should
find them written in Letters of Gold, in their registers, as we have deeply
graven them in our hearts. If the entertainment which has been made to your
Majesty; and which it has pleased you to accept in so engaging a manner, has
no proportion with the greatness of so potent a Monarch, we beseech you most
humbly, to believe, that this defect proceeds rather from the indigence of
our country, then from the will of the inhabitants; in whose acclamations and
joy, we are persuaded that your Majesty may observe visibly the zealous
devotions, and ardent prayers, they put forth unto Heaven for the prosperity of
your affairs, and for the glory of your Majesty's person. And since the Estates
General are, through an indispensable necessity, to be deprived of the precious
presence of your Majesty, they will accompany, at least, your person with their
prayers, which they will make incessantly, that the sea and winds may favor
your passage, and make you happily to arrive at the haven of your Kingdom, that
calm and quietness may be open unto you, after that storm and tempest, had so
miserably held it shut to you so many years. As soon as the Estates General
shall have understood, that your Majesty is landed, they will not fail to send
to you their Extraordinary Ambassadors, as well to finish, with you, in your
Kingdom, the offices which they have begun here, as to receive and make more
particular overtures in the important subject of an alliance, whereof it had
pleased your Majesty to touch here something in general; being ready to answer,
of their side, the good and sincere intentions, whereof you had the goodness to
give such great assurances; because that with the affection which we have for
the good of your affairs, we have also a most deep respect for the sacred
character of your unction, and for the inestimable merit of your Royal person.

The King did but confirm, by his answer, the assurances he had already given
of the amity he had promised to conserve for this Commonwealth; and the
unparalled advantages which the Estate should find in the alliance which they
may renew with England; thanking them also for all the civilities they had done
him, since the time he entered into the country.

The Estates General being retired, the King employed the rest of the day in
visits of taking leave: The first he made, was to the Queen of Bohemia, his
Aunt, where he stayed not long. Coming forth thence, he went to the house of
the Princess Dowager of Orange; where he found also the Princess of Nassau, and
the Young Lady of Orange, her daughters. The conversation which he had with her
Highness, was more then a good halfhour, which was employed, not only in
civilities ordinarily practiced among persons of that condition; but also, (as
the wit of this Princess is capable of the greatest affairs) in a very serious
discourse on the present Estate of Europe, and on the most important interests
of its Princes, whereof she has a most perfect knowledge. She had received the
King on the stone stairs of the Court, and intended to wait on him even to his
Coach; the King opposed it, and protested, that he would never receive that
honor from a Princess, whom he esteemed no less for her merit, then for her
birth, and quality; but the Princess insisted therein so strongly, that it was
impossible, for the King, to overcome her civility, though at every step, and
at every apartment, he endeavored to hinder her. But, indeed, she reconducted
him, with the Princesses her daughters, to the same place where she received
him; and retired not, till she saw the coach go away, as she did at the first
visit. After this the King went to see the Princess Royal, who presented him
many persons of condition, either to recommend them, or to take leave. He
stayed there until supper time, whilst the wagons, which the Estates had
hired had brought the baggage to Scheveling, where they embarked it, as soon as
it came.

At evening, Mr. of Wimmenum laying hold of the occasion which the King gave
him, in speaking of the testimonies of affection which the Estates of Holland
had rendered him, said to his Majesty, that the intention of the Lords the
Estates of Holland, was to do something more, if there were any rarities in
their Estate that might be presented to so great a Prince. Notwithstanding,
Presents of the Estates of Holland to the Dukes of York and of Gloucester.
that they would give themselves the liberty to cause him to be accommodated,
and to send him, on the first occasion, some Presents, which they would beseech
his Majesty to consider, as proofs of their good will, rather then as effects
of their power. The King would put if off, in saying, that he needed no other
assurances of the affection of the Lords the Estates of Holland, then those
they had given him on this present occasion; that he was satisfied therewith,
and thanked them, not only for the effects passed; but also for the good will
they expressed unto him for the future. Those Presents which they had designed
for him, were not yet ready, as well because the stately bed of the Princess
Royal, which was to make a part of them, was not yet perfected; as because they
knew not yet what his Majesty would like most: Therefore was it that Mr of
Wimmenum would insist no more therein; but went from thence to the House of the
Duke of York, to whom he said, that the Lords the Estates of Holland, willing
to give some mark of their affection to his Royal Highness, had sought every
where for something that might be worthy of him, and that having found nothing
because of the small residence which his Majesty, and the Princes his brothers,
had made in the country, and yet not able to resolve themselves to let his
Royal Highness depart, without giving him a testimony of their respect and good
will, they prayed him to accept a bill of Exchequer of seventy five thousand
Gilders, which make seven thousand pounds, which he might cause his Treasurer
to receive, either at present in this Town, of Mr. Berckel, Receiver General of
the Province, or at London, or elsewhere, for no body will refuse to give it
immediately. The Duke received the bill with many testimonies of
acknowledgment; and signified that it was without repugnance that he charged
himself with this obligation toward the Lords the Estates. The Duke of
Gloucester, to whom Mr. Wimmenum presented also a bill of a like sum, received
it also very kindly, and thanked the Lords in most obliging terms. The Lords
the Estates of Holland had also designed a Present, to the value of four
thousand Gilders, for my Lord Craft, one of the four Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber, that brought them into the audience of the King; but they deferred
to give it him, for the same reason, that made them defer the King's, because a
chain of gold of that price could not be made in so few days.

At this time the days were at their full length, and yet it may The King
departs from the Hague.
be said, that not only the Hague saw Wednesday, the 2 of June, some thing more
early then the Sun; but also, that there was, in a manner, no night between
Tuesday and Wednesday; particularly for those, who finding no hole to put their
heads, because the houses not being able to lodge the crowd of people, which
ran there from all the neighbor Towns, the most part were constrained to walk
the streets. There was no night for more then fifty thousand persons, who from
the precedent evening were gone to take up place on the Downs, or sand-hils,
which border on the sea along the coast of Holland, from whence they might
discover the Fleet, and from whence they intended to see the King to embark.
The Boute-selle awaked the Cavallery before day; and at two a clock in the
morning, instead of the Moon, Drum did beat the assemble, as well for the
Citizens as for the soldiers. In the King's house it self, every one was
employed, the whole night, in causing the rest of the baggage to be laden, and
sent away; and there was seen nothing but Wagons, and Coaches full of English,
who went to embark themselves before the barks appointed for his Majesty's
service, were possessed by his domestic people and servants, who were to
attend upon his person. The Citizens came together at their ordinary rendezvous
of the Viverberg, and the Regiment of the Guards in the outer-Court, commonly
called Buitenhof; and both one and the other marched from thence to Scheveling,
where they stood in Batalia, on the sea shore, from both sides of the Battery
of the Cannon, which was brought there from the Hague.

The King was soon ready, and received the submissions and complements of many
particular persons, that would do him reverence, in expecting the Estates of
Holland, who had caused audience to be asked, to take leave in body. They came
about eight a clock in the morning to the Hall, where they had received the
King's visit, the day before; and went from thence to Prince Maurice his house,
in the same manner and order, as they observed, when they made him their first
complement. All the persons of quality that were about his Majesty, came to
meet them, and conducted them to the chamber where the King had given the most
part of his public audiences. The Pensionary Counselor, who his the organ,
by which this great body uses to express it self, and who had place, because
of that, immediately after the Nobles, and before the Deputies of the towns,
spoke near in these terms.

If one may judge of the displeasure which we have to see The Speech of Mr. de
Wit.
your Majesty depart from our Province, by the satisfaction we have had to
possess you, we shall have no great trouble to make it known unto you. Your
Majesty might have observed, in the countenance of all our people, the joy they
had in their hearts to see amongst them a Prince cherished of God, a Prince
wholly miraculous, and a Prince that probably is to make a part of their
quietness and felicity. Your Majesty shall see presently all the streets
filled, all the ways covered, and all the hills laden with people, which will
follow you even to the place of your embarkment; and would not leave you, if
they had wherewith to pass them into your Kingdom. Our joy is common unto us
with that of our Subjects; but as we know, better then they, the inestimable
value of the treasure which we possess, so are we more sensible of this sad
separation. It would be insupportable to us, SIR, if we re-entred not into our
selves, and considered not, that it is the thing of the world we most desired,
and the greatest advantage also that we could wish to your Majesty. We acquiess
therein, because we know that this removal is no less necessary for us, then
glorious to your Majesty, and that it is in your Kingdom that we must find the
accomplishment of the prayers we have made, and make still for you and us. So
we shall not fail to profit thence, as well as from the assurances which it
has pleased you to give us, of an immutable affection for the good of this
Republic. We render most humble thanks unto your Majesty for them, and
particularly for the illustrious proof, which it pleased you to give us
thereof, by the glorious visit, wherewith you honored our assembly. We shall
conserve the memory of it most dearly, and make the marks of that goodness to
pass to our last posterity; to the end, you acknowledge it with the same
respect, with which we have received it. The constitution wherein we see your
Majesty, ready to take horse for the continuation of your voyage, forbids us to
enlarge our selves upon a subject which would never weary us, if we had words
conformable to our respectful sentiments. But we have no mind to increase the
just impatience which your Majesty should have to see your self returned into
your Kingdom. We pray God, SIR, that it be quick, and happy, and that, as he
has disposed the hearts and affections of your subjects to acknowledge their
lawful and sovereign Prince, it will please him also to command the sea and
winds to favor your voyage; to the end, that after you have received on your
own coast the same prayer which we shall reiterate, you may enjoy in your royal
person, and in your posterity forever, all the felicity and prosperity, which
your most humble servants wish unto your Majesty.

The King thanked the Lords the Estates of Holland for the civilities they had
done him, during the residence he had made in their Province, as also for the
affection they had expressed unto him by the prayers they made for the success
of his voyage, and prosperity of his reign. He promised them also, that he
would not only continue to live with that Republic, in a perfect good
correspondence; but would also take a great pleasure to make a good and most
straight alliance with it.

After this, the King, who stayed but till this complement was ended, went
forth of his chamber; at the same time the Estates of Holland retired. He took
his way to the Princess Royal her apartment, whom he would visit at home,
before he took horse; and seeing that the Lords the Estates conducted him, he
would not be covered from his house to the chamber of the Princess Royal, where
being come, the Estates retired, to take coach, when they saw the King to go a
horse back. The conversation which his Majesty had with the Princess, was but a
moment; for immediately after, he went thence, and came down into the Court of
the The King goes out of the Hage.
Palace, where he mounted a horse back, with the Princes, his brothers, and
took his way for Scheveling with the report of the great artillery, which
thundered from the Rampire, marching in the midst of those two Princes, and
having before him the Prince of Orange, accompanied with Prince William of
Nassau, Governor of Freesland, with Mr of Wassenaer, Lieutenant Admiral of the
Province, and with many other persons of condition. The Queen of Bohemia, the
Princess Royal, the Princess Dowager, and the Princesses, her daughters, took
coach, as well as the Estates of Holland, who would accompany him, in body,
even to the place of his embarkment. The Ambassadors, and other Ministers of
foreign Princes, who sent not there their coaches for the same reason that had
dispensed them thereof at the entrance, and almost all persons of condition,
took the avantguard, and disposed themselves along the coast, where the
Citizens, the Horse, and the Regiment of the Guards, stood in Battalia. A great
part of the inhabitants, of the neighbor Towns, were there already, and those
that came not forth of the Hage, early in the morning, or the nightbefore,
followed the Royal Persons, in so great a multitude, that that place, which is
very populous, and could not lodge the people that were come there from all
places of the Province, was abandoned, and converted into a desert, in very few
hours. As soon as they saw the King to appear on the hill, which covers the
village of Scheveling, on the sea side, the Cannon, which was transported, two
days before, from the Viverberg, upon the strand, saluted him with its whole
battry, which ceased not to shoot continually, until being drawn off from
those coasts, could see no longer the honor they endeavored to render him.
The Citizens and the Guards answered thereunto with their vollies of Musket
shot, and the Cavallery with their Carbines, and invited thereby the Fleet to
make all their artillery to thunder, which afving lightened the air, filled it
with so thick a smoke, that those great floating Castles, disappeared in a
moment to the eyes of those that were on the land.

The King being alighted, received the last complement of the Lords the Estates
of Holland, (who had conducted him, in body, to the very brink of the sea, and
left him Deputies to conduct him to his ship) by the mouth of the Pensionary
Counselor. His Majesty next took leave of the Duke of Brunswick-Lunenbourg,
of the Princess Dowager of Orange, of the Princess of Nassau, and of the young
Lady of Orange, her daughter; and of all the other persons of quality, which
could not follow him, or might trouble him in waiting on him to the Fleet:
There were none but his nearest relations, the Queen of Bohemia, the Princess
Royal, and the Prince of Orange, that conducted him aboard the Admiral ship,
which was to pass him into England. The Estates of Holland had He imbarks.
caused one of the greatest barks of the place to be fitted for the Royal
persons. The body of the vessel was garnished with Tapistry, its Mast carried
the Royal Flag, and its yards were laden with garlands, and crowns of verdure
and flowers, amongst which there was one fastened, accompanied with a streamer,
which carried for Devise, Quo fas and fata, to denote, that the King, in
embarking himself, went to the place where the justice of his cause, and the
providence of God called him, and to allude to the ordinary Motto of the Kings
of England, Dieu and mon droict. The King entered there with all the Royal
Family; but seeing a shallop to approach covered, glased and tapistred which
the Admiral Montague had sent from aboard him, as soon as he saw the King to
appear on the Strand, he entered into her, and the Queen of Bohemia followed
him. This Shallop was accompanied with many others, and was rowed with oars, by
the sea men, who seeing themselves in possession of their Sovereign Prince,
made the whole neigbour shore to resound with their shouts; and expressed their
joy by all the marks that could be required from persons of that quality: some
in casting their caps up into the air, and others, in casting them into the
sea, to which some likewise abandoned their doublets and wastcoasts. The Lord
Montague, who had changed the Flag of the pretended Republic, before he
departed from the coast of England, and born that of the three Kingdoms,
whilst he was in the rode; seeing the King to approach, caused the Royal Flag
to be put to the main mast, and to the Castle of the poop, and received his
Majesty, with the greatest submission, that could be rendered to a Prince, at
the top of the ladder, by which one goes up unto the ship. The King rendered him
all the testimonies of goodness and affection, which he could expect from a
Sovereign, who acknowledged perfectly the important services he had done him,
as having been one of the most powerful instruments of his re-establishment,
whereof he had given him assurances long before; and a most certain proof, when
he departed from the Sound, upon the King's orders, to favor the design of Sir
George Booth, who had taken arms for the service of his Majesty, under pretense
of demanding the convocation of a free Parliament.

It was past eleven a clock when the King arrived at the Fleet, so that as soon
as his Majesty was never so little disingaged of a part of those that would
follow him to the ship, he put himself at table in the gallery of the poop,
with the other Royal Persons, and caused some persons of condition, and the
most confident of his Majesty, to be entertained in the other apartments; the
Lord Montague making as fair an expense at this repast, and at all the others
following, as at this passage of the King, which was but of two days, he
employed more then two thousand Jacobusses, though the Lords the Estates had
provided his ship, and the rest of the Fleet, with all kinds of provisions, and
refreshments necessary, beyond what needed for so little a passage. After
dinner, the King received again the last complements of some particular
persons, expressed great civility to the Deputies of the Estates of Holland,
(for whom Mr of Wassenaer, Lieutenant Admiral of the Province, uttered the
speech) and sent them away with new protestations of affection and amity. The
Sea was calm, and the Heaven so clear, that the King had a desire to discover
once again a Country, where he had received so many testimonies of respect and
love: to this purpose he went up on the top of the poop, and seeing that the
people, with which he had left the Downs covered, remained there still, he
could not choose but say, that he must confess, it was impossible that his own
subjects could have more tenderness for him, then those people, on whose
affections he saw that he reigned no less, then he was going to reign on the
wills of the English.

After this, he embraced the Prince of Orange, with the same tenderness, as he
could have had for his own Son, and gave him his blessing; and took leave of
the Queen of Bohemia. But when he was to depart from the Princess Royal, his
Sister, that Princess, who had with so much courage, and without grief almost,
looked all passed misfortunes in the face, and who had virtue enough, to
fortify that of her brothers, had need of all his constancy, to resolve her
self, to suffer this separation, which she had wished with so much impatience,
and whose consequences were to be so glorious both to one and the other. The King
himself, who had had resolution enough, to witness no weakness in his greatest
misfortunes, cannot resist the tears of a Sister, whom many other
considerations, as strong as those of birth render extremely dear unto him. She
would have been inconsolable, but for the hope she had to see again shortly the
King, her brother, in his Kingdom; and they would have been troubled to
disingage her from the arms of his Majesty, if Admiral Montague had not caused
the ankors to be weighed, and given signal to the other ships to set sail. The
Admiral ship was already under sail for England, when the Queen of Bohemia, the
Princess Royal, and the Prince of Orange, descended into the Bark, which was to
bring them back again to the land. All the artillery of the Fleet, saluted
those Royal Persons, and the Battry of the Downs answered it, with the small
shot of the Citizens and Guards. It was about four a clock in the afternoon,
that the Fleet did set sail, and about six a clock, it was gotten so far of,
that the people, which stirred not from the Downs, having lost sight of it,
retired themselves, whilst the King continued his way toward his Kingdoms,
with the same prosperity, which was seen lately to accompany all his affairs.

FINIS.


THE DEPUTIES OF THE ESTATES of Holland complement the King at Delf. Page 30.
What Is this we see presented to the ey
In such a neat, and handsome Symetry?
Let us survey the Piece in every part,
And then pass sentence on the Graver's art:
Behold a Town here which is known to be
Famous of old for many things, which we
Would instance largely here, if we had room;
But being tied to an Epitom,
We can but touch; surely the site is sweet,
The buildings well composed in every street,
And regular, its privileges great,
And which is more, it is the ancient Seat
Of the Auranian Princes, it is their Tomb,
Their Monument, where they must sleep till doom;
It Is called Delf, and if you think it fit,
We Will add the Fair, as its just Epithet:
Here did the Estates first in most Princely wise
Receive the King by their chief Deputies;
Here you may see their humble postures, and
Their lowly reverence, when they kiss his hand,
And from their Body thank him for the grace
They did receive to see him in that place,
And next at home, where to conduct him, they
Were come express on this their Holy Day:
All this, and more is with the Graver's knife
Carved, as in colors done, unto the life;
The Steel, and Pencil have not differed here,
If one draws smooth, the other cuts as clear;
Now give your censures, and your judgments right,
Can any thing exceed this black and white?
WILL. LOWER.

A POETICAL DESCRIPTION Of the Batavian Court. Page 34.
BEhold a Royal Prospect, here 's a Wood;
Fair Palaces, and in the midst a Flood,
Now called the Crowned Viver, since the beams
Of Majesty so richly gilt its streams:
The Graver has done wonders; let us stand
First on the Place, and view that piece of land
Adjoining to it, that sweet and Princely Grove
The Viverberg, or rather Walk of Love,
Where our scorched Gallants, to avoid the Sun
When the Dog reigns, under its shadows come
To cool their heats, and pitifully meet
With fiercer flames, which from the windows creep
Into their souls on either side the Stream,
First the Court ey, and then the Country beam
Make massacres of miserable hearts,
Which from all quarters feel those flaming darts,
And fall as bleeding Victims do: But we
Stay too long here, what is that house we see
So fair, is it not the Doel, that stately Inn,
Where Gamesters come, with an intent to win,
And to be rich, but often go beggared thence,
A place, indeed, of a brave vast expense,
Where the Town meets, and sometimes quaff a health
Unto the Prince, the Estate, and Commonwealth:
Let Us proceed further, and observe that row
Of beauteous buildings, much, indeed, I ow
To their rich merit, but I cannot stay,
Prince Maurice Palace calls my thoughts away,
To contemplate its beauties, and the rare
Magnifick structure, which may well compare
With any modern Work, in all respects
Of the best, and the skilfull'st Architects;
But its chief glory is that it can say,
It lodged him, whom Nations must obey,


Great Britains King: Let Us make but one step more,
And only look upon the Court before
We take our leave, here do the Prince and States
Meet, and resolve on all their wise debates,
Here is their Council, here their Residence,
Here is their gain, and here is their expense;
Our survey's ended, we have gone the round;
It rests only that the Piece be crowned.
WILL: LOWER.

THE GREAT FEAST
The Estates of Holland made to the King, and to the Royal family. Page 80.
THe Roman Story tells us that the feasts
Lucullus made to entertain his guests
Were such, and so prodigious, that the Sea,
The Land, and Air, were emptied every day,
To serve his table with all delicates
Of Fish, of Flesh, of Foul, and dainty cates:
Great Master of the mouth, voluptuous Lord,
Had thou lived now to see this Princely board,
This stately and magnifick service here,
Thou would cry out, mine was but homely cheer,
This a repast for pallets all divine
As those that sit here in these orbs, and shrine;
Raped too with admiration, thou would say
That all the Elements do strive to pay
A voluntary tribute to the Estates,
Of their most rich, and choicest delicates;
And that their fined, and winged subjects all
Offer themselves in sacrifice; and fall
Into the dishes of their own accord,
To furnish and adorn this Royal board.
What is there wanting here that may invite
The quaintest and most curious appetite?
Ladies feed freely, it is no mortal meat,
It Is rather an Ambrosia that ye eat.
Will you drink Nectar, Princes? here is a Wine
That Is richer, more delicious, more divine:
The Italian Malvoisy cannot compare
With this rare Juice sent down here from the air,
To please your tastes, and to be swallowed
In every health drunk to the Crowned Head;
The joyful thunder of th'Artillery
Proclaims it louder then that of the Sky:
The Violins, and other Instruments;
Strike pleasant airs here to delight the sense
In an harmonious consort, and the Spheres
Descend with Music to enchant those ears.
WILL. LOWER.

His Majesty taking his leave in the Assembly of the Estates General. Page 90.
SO looked great Caesar, when from his high Throne
He would descend sometime to honor Rome
By sitting in the Senate; but we see
Not the least sign of any Sympathy
Between these modern Hero's here, and those
Old Senators, whose surly brows spoke foes
Under a false respect unto their King,
Though his bright glory through the world did ring:
It Is different here, these brave Estates, though free,
And Sovereign, pay yet humility,
And lowly reverence, through a candid love,
Unto this Prince, as if he were their Jove,
And they his subjects; see with what respects
They entertain him by their sweet aspects,
And sober postures; how they seem to say,
You shall rule here, Sir, and we will obey;
Mount our Tribunal, all your words shall be
Our Oracles, and all your actions free,
As saving to us, since so wise a King
Draws them from perfect justice, as their Spring,
WILL. LOWER.





HIS MAJESTY TAKING HIS leave in the Assembly of the Estates of Holland. Page
93.
STrange revolution, Fate! here is Monarchy
In Council met with Aristocracy;
Though different in themselves, here they agree;
And by their pleasant gestures seem to be
Unanimous in all things; what the one
Demands, the other grants, division
Is banished hence; here is all harmony;
Love, and alliance, perfect amity,
A lasting League reciprocally signed
By promises, and both have but one mind,
Though different bodies, and a different frame
Of constitution, as a different name:
In cordial terms here they congratulate
Each others happy government and state,
Like twin-born brothers, they salute, embrace,
The one vows fealty, and the other, grace:
Long may they live united thus, and never
By any chance in their affections sever;
So shall they flourish both, grow great, and be
Feared throughout the Worlds vast Monarchy.
WILL. LOWER.

ON HIS MAJESTY'S DEPARTURE from the Hage to his Fleet before Scheveling. Page
105.
THus from the Belgic States delicious Seat
Triumphantly departed Charles the Great:
The World assembled from all parts to see
This Monarch pass unto his Dignity,
The Continent could not contain the press
Which crowded in all places to express
Their common joy; the Military Bands
Of Horse and Foot were ranged on the sands
To make a Royal Guard; young Mars stood by
The Illustrious York.
Duke, who by his hand and ey
Gave full directions, all the Cannon were
Disposed in order by his Martial care:
The Sky was clear, the Winds were still, the Sea
Looked like a fair Bride on her Marriage day,
When from the Crowned Bark the King betook
Himself to Sea with The Princess Royal.
Her whose only look
Can calm the Tempests; in the Skiff they went
Sent from the Fleet; the Seamens high content
To see their Sovereign cannot be expressed
But by their shouts; the Seas most loyal breast
Sweetly received its Master, the old Neptune.
God
Freely resigned his trident Mace and Rod,
To him who better could command and sway
That Element: The gentle Dolphins play
About the Boat, they dance in rounds, they skip,
And make a Sea-guard for him to his Ship.
Thus was the King embarked, when suddenly
The thunder of the Cannon shook the sky
From Sea to Shore, the smoke obscured the Sun,
And made a night ere half the day was done:
The Artillery, and small shot on the Strand
Moved the Sand-hills, and terrified the Land,
As if it felt an Earthquake; but at last
All this dissolved, and that great Triumph past
When our bright Star, which graced the Belgic Sphere,
Drew off from thence his clouded own to clear.
WILL: LOWER.



AN ACROSTICK POEM. In honor of his Majesty.
Call all those Sages, whose extended hearts
Heaven fills with light in the Astrologick Arts,
Ask their opnions of this Monarch, they
Reply, he is born the Universe to sway,
Look on this calculation, read his Star,
Seven Planets here all in conjunction are:
They smile upon his birth, no rude jars here
Hinder his motions under any Sphere;
Excellent Aspects! long live this great King
Supreme of all, let his bright glory ring
Even round about that Globe held in his hand:
Can earthly powers his conquering Arm withstand,
Or check his fortune, which the Stars proclaim?
Not possible, since Heaven inspires his claim.
Draw presently with an immortal pen
Kings in their colors, some quick Cherubin*
In Characters dropped drown suiting their souls,
Note revolutions in these sacred Rolls
Greatly to the advantage of our State,
Of much import, to make us fortunate
For many years under this glorious Reign,
Giving us hopes of the golden Age again.
Return, return, divine Astrea, now
Enter our Land; You shall not see one brow,
Among so many, furrowed with a frown;
Treason is dead, and foul Injustice down.
Behold our true Protector to his Right
Restored, the Impostour stinks in blackest Night:
Justice again is seated in the Throne,
Ti'd, and allied unto Religion,
And winged with Wisdom, Policy and Art
In the Reserve with Virtue have a part.
No powers of Hell shall ever shake this frame
So well composed, but must retreat with shame.
WILL. LOWER.

AN ACROSTICK POEM. On the most Illustrious and most Heroic Prince JAMES DUKE
OF YORK.
Judicious Nature in this Prince's birth
Advanced her Work above a frame of earth,
Making in him perfections all divine,
Equally lustrous, as well those that shine
So splendidly without, as those that be
Dearly preserved in his minds Treasury:
Ualour, and Conduct here hold equal ranks,
Kings have received their fruits with highest thanks;
Each of his warlike actions is admired
Of all Heroic Princes, and desired,
For imitation sake, to be enrol'd
Yearly in leaves, and Letters writ with gold:
Open your curtains, all ye azure Spheres,
Raped with his glory, strike our ravished ears
Kindly with music, whose sweet accents may
Loudly proclaim York's triumphs every day.
AN ACROSTICK POEM In honor of his Excellence the Lord General Monck, Duke of
Albemarl, etc.
Great Patron of this Isle, George styled Saint,
Envy thou may in thy old Monument
Our second Champion of that glorious Name,
Raised by his acts to an immortal Fame,
Glory thou had for quelling Monsters fell,
Even so has this for scattering The Rump.
those of Hell.
March bravely on, mount as thou have begun
On virtues wings, and shine still in the Sun;
Never eclipse, nor set, until bright Fame
Calls for a second Order of thy Name
Kings may be proud to wear, when thou art dead,
Since by the best thou art so honored.
WILL. LOWER.

ANGLIA TRIUMPHANS.

SIVE IN INAUGURATIONEM SERENISSIMI, POTENTISSIMI AC INVICTISSIMI PRINCIPIS,
CAROLI II, DEI GRATIA MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE REGIS, etc.
FIDEI DEFENSORIS, etc.

POEMATION: AUCTORE ROBERTO KEVCHENIO, JCto. BELGA.



HAGAE-COMITIS, Ex Typographia ADRIANI VLACQ. Anno M. DC. LX.

CAROLO. II. DEI. GRATIA. MAGNAE. BRITANNIAE. FRANCIAE. ET. HIBERNIAE. REGI.
FIDEI. DEFENSORI. TRIUMPHATORI. PIO. FELICI. AUGUSTO.
REgia jam tandem votis famulantibus Orbi
Numina, and indigetes radiant ad Sceptra Tiarae,
Exorantque Deos: Superum Clementia Terris
Annuit, and domito furiis fatalibus Anglo;
Insontesque Rosas, deploratumque reformat
Imperium, and fracta discors Testudine Regni
Circumvallat Ebur: veteresque ulciscitur iras.
Nec jam Fata Fidem, nec tollere celsius Orbis
Vota queant: nec adorandi Sublimior Ostri
Purpura Regalem sceptris ostendere Tantis
Progeniem; quam Se nunc Defensore STUARTO
Evehat, Alcidasque infra se spectet inermes.
Extulit Haeredem Solio Fortuna: Suisque
Transcripsit CAROLUM Regnis. Secura trumphos
Aspicit, unanimique favens Natura Britanno
Inchoat Augustum radiis regalibus Ortum,
Albionumque Diem; Thamesique affundit Olympum
Luminibus; mundique Deos and Numina, quamvis
Aequa minus, pavidaeque tremant ad culmina Musae,
Palladiosque procul superent Diademata fasces.
Maxim Rex, Non condignis, dum tolleris Ostro,
Numen adorabo Vestrum sub honoribus: aut His
Advolvar coram Imperiis: Non thure Britannum
Pancheo venerabor Ebur, flammisque sonantes
Tot Sceptris adolebo rogos: Non aemula Persis
Dona litaturus veniam, aut cumulantibus Aulam
Fulgidus ingrediar Trabeis, tantoque Triumpho
Passa, salutandis tangam Palatia Divis,
Regalesque Thronos: Quin dedignata Tiaris
Subsidit Sors nostra Tuis; Solioque STUARTUM
Territat horrentem instaurans Reverentia Cyrrham,
Dum Superum Te tollit amor, Celsumque Coronis
Majestas Tamesina Caput: dum coelitus astris
Prona Triumphantem resonant Te Numina Regem;
Anglicaque exertis radiant Diademata Sceptris:
Dum CAROLO se pandit Ebur, rutilansque Verendam
Purpura Regali circumdat Corpore Pallam;
Tutatamque Fidem Proavis, venerandaque Regni
Symbola, and augustos longo capit ordine Fasces:
Eloquar indignis tamen haec praeconia Musis
Advena; Tergeminoque Decus sub murice fulgens
Exemplo regnante canam, and subvectus ovando
Semideos inter, quamvis trans aequora, Patres,
Eminus auguriis consors Regalibus omen
Suffundam: Tantoque minus semotus ab Ostro
Fausta Caledonio advolvam praesagia Regno.
Viderat exacto Fidei, titubantibus astris,
Defensore, novis Solium confundere Turbis
Rem Britonum: Summosque apices and culmina rerum
Degeneres calcare Joves, subvertere Cinnas,
Desaevire Scines, jam fastidire Superbos
Motibus, and Divo Mariis turbantibus Aulam
Sanguine spumantem circum rubuisse securim:
Inversam trepidare Tyrum, Populique Tribunal
Tot Brutis jurasse nefas: cum Regia tandem
Et Jurata Fides, veteri venerabile Regno
Praesidium, Rectoris egens, Te Sospite Sceptris
Annuit, and laceri Corpus juvenescere Regni
Augusto moderante jubet: Mox Celsius istis
Ominibus Diadema patet, Tantoque Triumphans
Redditur Imperio Deus, and sub fascibus Haeres
Induit exutum fatis melioribus orbem:
Tunc enses stupuere feri, stupuere furores,
Et dementatae junctis Rectoribus uni
Succubuere minae: Tunc imperterritus iris
Palluit, and Magno docuit parere Monarchae
Mars Pater, atque alia illuxit Reverentia Luce,
Adventu gavisa Tuo, Regique litantes
Convenere Deae: quarum devota verendum
Excipit Haeredem Pietas, Sacrisque Deorum
Imbuit, and magno exemplum sub Numine format.
Huic comes augusto incedens Clementia vultu,
Parcere Subjectis, and debellare Superbos
Imperat, and geminis ostentans legibus ensem,
Te veniam, Nemesinque pari distringere Voto,
Regis ad exemplum, Majestatemque verendam
Prona jubet: Varios mox involvuntur in usus
Agmina Virtutum. Infracta Metus exulat Aula:
Illum Relligio, Justique innixa columnis
Calcat, and impavidis urget Constantia plantis,
Dum Regno sua forma redit, claustrisque solutae
Tristibus exsangues redeunt sub Vindice Leges.
Haud aliter, quam cum superato Gorgone Perseus
Terribilis, domito Furiis luctantibus Orco,
Et fractis Erebi monstris, jactantior alis
Iret, and aetherias Victor conscenderet arces:
Sic Superis, Auguste, Tuis subvectus, iniquum
Vis Regno trepidare nefas, fassumque subactis
Exemplis horrere scelus: formidine Poenas
Exuis, and solo quamvis liventia damnas
Toxica contemptu, castigandosque ferorum
Consiliis spernis major Regalibus ausus:
Et regno laudanda facis: jam clara Priorum
Excutitur Regum facies, and avita regendo
Suppeditant exempla fidem: generosa STUARTIS
Sceptra probas, tantisque vigens Rectoribus ostrum,
Et fortunatam Proavis veneraris Iernem.
Quaque triumphatis Victrix trans aequora terris
Albion, and domitas pelago gens Martia classes
Stravit, and hostilem toties turbavit Iberum,
Celtarumque truces populos, tumidumque Garomnam,
Et furias, Normanne, Tuas; ereptaque Gallis
Littora; pugnantes pro Liberate Siluras,
Exutosque Tagi Dominos, flentemque Medinam,
Massagetumque feros animos: qua Concanus armis
Desmonio quondam sub bellatore rebellem
Addidit imperio tractum: Regalibus hauris
Expendens arcana Sacris, tantisque decorum
Anticipas fastis precium, and meliore vagantem
Fortunam ratione domas, mentemque per altos
Dirigis annals Veterum. Jamque omina Regni
Prospicis, and studiis animum civilibus imples,
Venturumque levas furiis fatalibus Anglum.
Ac velut aethereo rutilans praefulget ab axe
Phosphorus, obductisque polo micat altior astris,
Stellarumque choros ducit: Sic Praevius orbi
Affundis regale jubar, fulgesque Serena
Majestate Pharos, Istis Tua Lumina Terris
Dividis, exemplis servans communibus omnes.
Quin ne prisca suis desint fundamina normis,
Volvis ad Ausonios Regum primordia fastos,
Romulidumque sacris incumbens legibus, aulis
Ac regno servanda notas: Jam suspicis unum
Relligione Numam, jam Fundatoribus Ancum
Annumeras, damnasque brevis compendia Tulli,
Arcentemque diu paucis pugnantibus Albam
Eximis, Argolicum Latia qui subdolus art
Miscuit ingenium, and vafros uxorius astus
Induit, indignum culpas moderamine Priscum;
Nec quae Tarquinio nocuit sub conjuge, regni
Pars Tanaquil placet: Infidum stat Foemina sceptris
Nomen, and occultas interserit aemula frauds.
Cum legis illustrem circum juvenilia flammam
Tempora, nascentis quondam praesagia Servi,
Coelestemque fidem: obscuris qua Martia cunis
Roma coruscantem regno inclarescere Vernam
Vidit, and aeternam moderari fascibus Urbem:
Commendas miranda Deum, sed regna dolosis
Insidiis quaesita negas: quin cruda Superbi
Coepta, triumphantem cedente papavere Virgam,
Summorumque neces poenis insontibus orbas
Abnuis. Invisum format Vis publica Regem;
Plus Proceres vindicta, suis si fidere Regi
Principibus, fulcrisque nefas: Conspectius illud
In se crimen habet vitium, quantoque relucet
Altius, horrentes tanto plus explicat umbras.
Nil Gracchis vacat alma Fides; fastidis ovantes
Dissidiis, laetos in seditione Tribunos:
Despicis atroces gladiis in Caesara Brutos,
Mox ausum Rubicone scelus: sed facta Valentis
Attilii, impavidosque probas duo fulmina belli,
Scipiadas; Deciisque cupis pugnantibus orbem
Credere, and infractum bellis civilibus Anglum.
Sic antiqua Tuis regnorum exempla volutans
Exordiris Ebur, grandisque ab origin Sceptri
Nomen honorandum Populis, and sanguine Regum
Conficis: and Fama major succedis avitis
Culminibus, nec ab his sancto moderamine differs,
Par recto, Par imperio, nec honoribus Impar:
Sceptriferis: Jamque arma Fidem tutantia tractas,
Ut jurasse Deo lex sit; Populoque Triumphos
Addixisse Suo; Martemque insignibus ausis
Res Patriae ferat, and Magnum Virtute STUARTUM,
Hoc discis Rectorque doces: quaesita coactis
Bella geri damnanda: Decus poscentibus armis
Explorare Ducem: Paci concedere Ferrum:
Sat late regnare, Suos qui Justus adunat
Externis: Vastum Imperiis se pluribus Orbem
Devincire, nec hunc uni succumbere Sceptro.
Inde Tuo salvas cives, Te civibus, ostro;
Injustamque domas Vim: Pro communibus aris
Attollis vexilla: Focos defendere, causam
Bellandi non ira, Salus jubet: Ictibus orbis
Contundi suprema caves, and viribus Athlas
Saepe labascentem vana formidine mundum
Eximis, and cunctos humeris regalibus abdis.
Dumque metus avertis ovans, sub Numine Regem
Induis, and Soli subdis Tua Sceptra Tonanti.
Despicis insultus: Illi, quem perfida Regum
Regna reformidant, dum scis regnasse Regentum,
Exemplum Te Regis habes: debebitur uni,
Te Rectore, Deo; si, qua Regnantibus itur,
Extimeas confer gradus, interque Supremum
Numen agas, Tantumque Pius venerere Regentem.
Quam Superis, Auguste, places! quam sidere laeto.
Redderis Imperio, and Sceptris Venerable fulgens
Exemplar Solio Proavum, Regumque Tiaris
Assereris! Tibi Pacatus desaeviit ether,
Armatae cessere hyemes: Tibi saevus Orion
Condidit exutum furiis ultricibus ensem,
Et formidatum monstris dominantibus astrum,
Fatalesque minas: Regique invisa, Deoque
Robora fulmineo feriens Tirynthius ictu
Obruit: armato circum trux aegide Perseus,
Ille Tyrannorum domitor, dum grandis Athlantum
Vis pavet, aequatisque minus constantior ausis
Excidit; aethereo tumidos discussit ab axe,
Et conjuratos dextra deterruit ultor
Debellante Gygas: Fugiunt trans aequora gentis
Relliquiae, quocunque Vices, dum Fata recusant,
Seu gravis ira Deum, ostendent turbantibus undis
Exitium. Vastis pridem circumfluus iris
Vota fremit Pelagi Deus, and jam mancipat aequor
Obsequio, motosque jubet componere fluctus.
Quique cruentato, Regem indignatus and Aulam
Gurgite defluxit Tamesis, Tibi lenior amnem
Sternit, and aequato tranquillans murmura jussu,
Sceptra vocat, facilesque Deos: quin forsitan undis
Exilit, and pronos intendit ad oscula fluctus,
Et Regni pars grandis ovat. Quo numina visa est
Erexisse caput bellatrix Anglia, concors
Successore tumet, plaususque animosa Triumphis
Confundit, Rex Magne, Tuis; laetissima Sceptro
Sufficit, unanimique favens adsuescit Ierna
Imperio, and Triplici distinctum murice Regem.
Destinat haeredi felix salvantibus ostro
Auguriis: circum pelago qua spectat Olympum
Albion, and mediis incumbunt Orcades undis;
Qua procul arcanis abdit se Scotia Sylvis;
Aebudumque natat populus; quo Cambria tractu
Dives agri; gemino surgunt sub climate gentes
Grampiadum; paribus radiant Diademata votis,
Regnaque communi coram gratantia Sceptro
Exiliunt, tantisque parant praesagia coeptis.
At nunc prona Tui Populi, applaudentibus astris,
Collige Vota, Pater, faustumque ordire Triumphans
Augurio gratante diem: Te, Maxim Victor,
Toll Throno; cape Sceptra Deum; Tantisque verendum
Fascibus instaura Numen: dum coelitus Ether
Annuit, and grandi sua Sidera destinat ostro:
Illa Triumphales rutilant fulgentia Currus;
Ac velut augusto quondam micrantibus Ortu
Praelusere polo radiis; Celsamque STUARTI
Progeniem, Magno natum de Numine Regem,
Excepere Deum laetis fulgoribus astro,
Londino spectante Faces: Sic gaudia Sceptris
Adgeminant nunc festa Tuis, and sidere juncto
Regia coelestes radiant ad Lumina gemmae.
Ipsa Serenatum nebulis absolvit Olympum
Publica Lux, dum Majestas Se Publica mundo
Commodat, and Socium Phoebo confundit honorem,
Astrorum Rex Clarus ovat, dum clarior Orbi
Rex vacat, and Solio fulget Sublimis avito:
Undique moerentes Coeli indulgentia nubes
Exuit, and nitidis inter diademata stellis
Expandit Natura polos; Rutupinaque circum
Littora in oppositum diffundit lumina Belgam,
Vicinosque ciet Populos, and amica Tiaris
Nomina: dumque novos animat sub Rege Brigantas,
Nos tacitos moerere vetat; magnumque putamus
Cum Regno gaudere decus. Tu fracta Tyrannis
Anglia, regali supplex advolvere Pompae,
Et veterem circumda humero Laetissima pallam,
Signatamque Rosis Geminis superindue Regi
Gratatura Stolam: Tecum devota Caledon
Accedat fluidis, libans sua dona, lacernis,
Foecundas Telluris opes: Haec Sceptra STUARTIS
Progenuit, Tantosque Deum de Sanguine Reges.
Tertia Regalis pars Majestatis Ierne,
Tot Populis animosa, procul famulantibus undis
Supplicet, and sociis inclinet flumina regnis:
Adstent condecores votis spumantibus amnes,
Ausoba, pacatoque ruens sub murmr Duris
Unanimes confundat aquas; plaudensque boando
Argita, belligerum ripis servilibus hostem
Conciliet, rapidoque undantem vortice Senum,
Liberiumque suis felix involvat alumnis:
Tuque resultantem confer Sabrina Tuaedam,
Vindiciasque adverte Tuas. Decorique Supremum
Obsequium dona Regali, ostroque Verendum
Numinis Haeredem concors venerare STUARTUM.
Ite triumphantes pariter: Sit debita Tellus
Quaelibet, and quantum Proavis concessit Honoris,
Reddite Regnantis Solio. Vos aequa Leonis
Foedera, Belgarum Patres; dum regia Pompam
Londinum, grandisque parat vadimonia Sortis:
Salvantes conferte sonos: interque Potentum
Agmina, Semideumque choros confundite plausus;
Festaque Tergemino coram suffragia Sceptro.
Tuque adeo Regale, Brito, dum Numen adoras;
Hunc Illum reverenter habe, quem cernis, Athlantem,
Regnorum sublime Caput: Dis Regibus ortum
Ter Fidei venerare Patrem: famulantibus astris
Pro CAROLO instaurans CAROLUM, nunc altior Isto
Coelitus exactos post Defensore Tyrannos,
Sceptriferum dum condis Ebur, Solioque reducis
Augustos Proavum numeroso Rege STUARTOS;
Excute Tarquinios fastis regalibus hosteis;
Factaque, fortunasque Virum: and sub Numine Tanto
Regia prostratis iterum Diademata monstris
Irradient: Trino rutilet Reverentia Sceptro,
Majestatis amor: Longum furialibus armis
Indefensa Fides, tandem tutantibus orbi
Destinet Invictum fausto moderamine Martem,
Tot Regum Praelustre Jubar: divulsaque regno
Sceptra, Coronato parens submittere Regi
Gestiat, atque Uni fasces advolvere Dextrae.
Aspice fatales foliis vernantibus illo
Ut coeant sub Rege Rosae: civilia rursum
Symbola foecundis portendant otia seclis.
Ipsa Caledonias socians Testudine Gentes
Arctius unanimes Procerum Constantia jungat
Obsequiosa manus, exultabundaque passim,
Qua graditur, festis circumferat omnia votis
Rectori gratanda suo: Quae numine Divum
Erigitur, tantoque tumet fulgentior ortu,
Trans Tamesin digno sub Regnatore Potestas;
Discat honorandis Solio debere Deorum
Cultibus: Augustae Supplex adsuescere Stirpi,
Evitare minas: Tanto nos credimur Orbi,
Atque eadem Belgae Sors est, quae salva Britannis.
Nostra Triumphanti concors assibilat Anglo
Libertas, pelagoque Potens sub Vindice pugnat
Rege Leo; ternisque juvat septemplice Telo
Consentire Rosis. Fidei Par Numen adorat
Res Concors, Secura Domi, Si Libera Septo
Sufficit, atque uno imperium moderamine firmat.
Qui Genitor Britonum fatis salvantibus Haeres
Celsius evehitur, Trino Augustissimus Ostro;
Grande Patrocinium Belgae est: Quo sospite nobis
Continuat Fortuna foris, pelagoque potentes
Imus in oppositos Regum ludibria fastus,
Et debellandos laetis arcessimus hosteis
Auspiciis: Salva sub Majestate triumphant
Foedera Belgarum: and Tanti Spes Celsa Leonis
Junior Auriacae erigitur Dux Stirpis Julus
Exemplo formante Virum: Praetextaque fervet
Martia Nassavios consummatura Parents
Ausibus, and dignis Proavum contendere gestis.
At Tu, Grande Decus, Famae Pars altera, MONCKI,
Inclyte Cunctator Britonum, quo Vindice Regno
Parta Salus; Te tot Fabiis praelustribus aetas
Posthuma, magnanimis feret exaequanda Camillis
Gloria: Tu Populo non indignantibus armis
Eripis imperium; Tu Regno Sceptra Jovemque
Concilias: magno Solium damnante tumultu
Luctantes animos, tempestatesque sonoras
Discutis, elapsamque suo moderamine Gentem
Fascibus instauras: Per Te languere Potentum
Consilia, and pavido mutans Vis Perfida Sceptro
Suc cubuit dominis Scelerum: Tu subvenis Orbi,
Quassatumque diu dubiis Rectoribus Anglum,
Totque truces Regni ruituro culmine motus
Solus ad obsequium, majestatemque reducis
Pervigil. Inversis parent Tentoria signis,
Castraque regali tollunt fastigia jussu,
Mutatisque Ducum juxta stant agmina turmis.
Te Ductore suis Mars impavidissimus armis
Creditur excussam monstris trepidantibus Uni
Conjurasse Fidem CAROLO: generique rigentes
Explorasse manus: quin Defensoribus Istis
Obstrinxisse ferum tutandis Viribus ensem,
Et Dominis cessisse lubens. Tunc undique bella
Subsedere; vago passim Discordia mundo
Exuit armatas fracto molimine parts:
Regalesque procul Borea melioribus astris
Diffugere minae, and circum furialibus armis
Proscripsit Bellona moras: Quae nuper Ibero
Militat adversis concors secedit ab armis
Gallia, certatimque alio sub foedere differt
Martis opus: cuncto species praetenditur Hosti,
Dissimulatque suos anceps Europa furores.
Per Te tuta novo rediit Fiducia Regno,
Dum novitas obversa labat; civilia Gentis
Aequora divulsis fidunt contraria Turbis,
Insultusque ruunt rabidi: Spes redditur Orbis
Imperio, quid in arma suis sub Regibus ausit,
Quo bellatrici diffusa Britannia dextra
Suppostas pelagi puppes, and praelia formet
Mox nutu formanda Tuo, cum classica poscet
Regalis Vindicta; Duces in bella ciebunt
Ultoresque viros animi. Te vindice Celtae
Et vicinorum sternens hostilia Regum
Agmina, Consiliis ibit validissima septis
Publica Vis: Triplicique Fidem jurata Coronae
Acer in oppositum Virtus desaeviet hostem,
Praefractisque feras subdet Cervicibus iras.
Nec cedet sub Rege Salus Te Nectore, Tanto
Te Cynea Decus Imperii: cum Posthuma tandem
Fama parentabit Cineri, Virtutibus Aetas
Annuet, and celsis Laus indelebilis astris
Sceptra redonantem CAROLO transcribet Achillem.
KEUCHENIUS.

ROBERTI KEUCHENII JC. EPIGRAMMATA AUGUSTA In Restitutionem and Adventum
SERENISSIMI MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE REGIS. CAROLI
II, FIDEI DEFENSORIS, etc. OMNES COELICOLAS, OMNES SVPERA ALTA TENENTES.
CAROLUS II, MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE REX; FIDEI
DEFENSOR.
IMPERIUM OCEANO, FAMAM QUI TERMINAT ASTRIS.
QUantum Instar Superis, quantum Regalibus Instar
Vultibus: Hoc tantum Fulget adinstar ebur.
Anglia sic Regem videt instaurata STUARTUM,
Et Solio Dominum Ter veneranda suum.
Coelitus Hoc victrix radiat sub Sole Caledon,
Talis adorandum cernit Ierna jubar,
Et populos, terrasque Deum diffundit in omnes,
Quaque patet, tantum Luminis Orbis habet.
Qualia servando Britoni Di sidera volvunt,
Qui Britoni Tantum restituere Jovem.
HENRICA MARIA, AUGUSTISSIMI DIVI CAROLI I. VIDUA.
LAETA DEUM PARTV, CENTVM COMPLEXA NEPOTES,
Illa Fgo Borbonia germen de stirpe, STUARTO
Nupta, Caledonias cerno redire faces;
Et Divum regnare genus: Thamesique Serenum
Regibus and Sceptris irradiare Diem.
Pro Superi! quantis scintillant sidera fulcris,
Sera quibus Patrium vespera condit ebur.
Non Druidum jam Nata queror; non fata Brigantum,
Dum meus imperiis conciliatur amor.
Regnantem si far nefas, amplectar orantem
Spreta Tyrannorum gloria, Laeta Deum.
MARIA STUART, PRINCEPS AURIACA.
MAGNVM COELI VENTVRA SVBAXEM.
QUalis ab opposito fulgens Latonia Sole,
Spargit inexstinctum suspicienda jubar:
Talis adorandi Soror imperiosa STUARTI
Splendet, and AURIACO cum Duce Matter ovat.
Celsa triumphatum CAROLUS diffundit in orbem
Lumina, and imperio fulminat astra suo.
Cunctorum Sol ille micat; de Lumine Cujus
Pandit inassuetum Luna, MARIA, diem.
JACOBUS STUART, DUX EBORACENSIS.
MISSVS IN IMPERIVM MAGNVM, CVI DEINDE SVBIBIT.
QUem superi Imperio, Vi proscripsere Tyrannis,
Exiliisque Parem, Rex Thamesine, Tuis:
Talibus Infractus Dux EBORACENSIS in armis
Emicat, and regni Pars veneranda patet.
Castora si cernis Regem, cum Castore Pollux
Fulget, and alterno sidere splendet apex.
Imperio stat salva salus: Si deficit Athlas.
Nec dum etiam fracti succubat orbis onus.
HENRICUS STUART, DUX CLOVERNIAE.
OSTENDENT TERRIS HVNC TANTVM FATA. NEQVE VLTRA ESSE SINENT.
ME quoque Me Sceleris vis imperiosa Britanni
Jussit ad externas profugitare manus:
Trans pelagus proscribor inops: Feror exul in altum.
Et queror in Flandro littore solus opem.
Condolet Auriacae clemens Fortuna Sororis,
Et dubiis consors subvenit una meis:
Par fatis nunc tollor ovans Regalibus: Illum
Di Soliis, and nos inseruere Polis.
HENRICA STUART;
MARTIS SOROR ET DIVARVM SANGVINIS VNA.
NYmpha Caledoniae Venerabilis altera Stirpis,
Filia Dis geniti relligiosa Patris.
Venit Laeta Duci congratatura STUARTO,
Et Geminos inter constitit alma Deos.
Andegaro nuptura: Soror nunc altera Martis,
Mox Soror, and Conjux imperiosa Jovis.
GUILIELMUS III. PRINCEPS AURIACUS.
ALIQVIS MAGNA DE STIRPE NEPOTVM.
ORte Diis, geniture Deos: Spes Celsa Leonis;
Gloria Belgarum suspicienda Patrum:
Indue magnanimum augurio jam Stirpis Julum,
Et Proavos vultu belligerante refer.
Indue Pellaeum generoso Junior ausu,
Vel praetextatis Hectora pande comis.
Martius Auriacos mox consummabis Achilleis,
Et Magno haud poteris degener esse Patri.
Hoc spondent jam Fata Deum: dum Julius alter
Erigis armisonam Rege vigente fidem.
GEORGIUS MONCK.
TV MAXIMUS ILLE ES, VNVS QVI NOBIS CVNCTANDO RESTITVIS REM.
PUgnasti Dux Magne domi: Te vindice, MONCKI,
Contudit infractum sors inopina scelus.
Cedunt attoniti furiis fatalibus Angli,
Consiliisque Pares succubuere suis.
Reddis adorandum Solio Populisque STUARTUM,
Sceptraque Tergeminis conciliata Rosis.
Cum superis partire decus Cunctator: ovantem
Instaurasse, Deum est; praevaluisse, Tuum.
IN REGIAM CORONAM, VENERANDO LEMMATE RESTITUTO REGI OBLATAM. PATIENTIAE
DABITVR.
Maxim Rex, Soliis pridem exturbatus avitis,
Cum lueret fatis Sors truculenta suis:
Maxim Rex, soliis Idem Sublatus avitis,
Annueret fatis cum luculenta Tuis:
Vim, noctem, scelus, arma, dolos transgressus and iras;
Passus inaequandis tot graviora malis:
Accipe Regalem, Meriti diadema, Coronam;
Imperiique decus, Ter Venerande, Tui.
Illam devotis offert Patientia dextris,
Donat inoffensa religione Fides.
Qui Patiens, qui Passus ovat, non dignius Illum
Cingere, quam titulis Di valuere Suis.
Imperitare, Deum est: Sed and hoc: tolerante STUARTO,
Tandem etiam regnis imperitante, PATI.
Scribebam Arnhemi Gelrorum, Anno Christi M DC LX. Restituti Regis mirabilis
ROBERTUS KEUCHENUS. JC.

ROCHUS HOFFERUS ZIRIZAEUS AUGUSTO BRITANNIARUM etc. REGI. CAROLO II,
S.
DUm discors, qua terra patet, regnabat Erinnys,
Et Bellona vagos Martis agebat equos;
Dum furor armorum bellum undique and undique bellum,
Jactabatque feras, sanguineasque manus;
Atque, Europaei disrupto faedere mundi,
Flagitii, and facies plurima caedis erat:
Tuta Caledoniae peragebant otia gentes,
Et tranquilla suis Insula stabat aquis.
Pax populos concors divisos orb ligabat;
Non timor armorum, non peregrinus amor.
Res fallax Fortuna rotat, quae regna, vel urbes
Faelices stabili non sinit esse gradu.
Hinc data libertas odiis, diductataque parts
In varias Manes Anglia passa suos.
Non longam potuit pacem, non far quietem;
Armorum rabiem movit and ipsa quies.
Et Mars civilis, turpisque licentia ferri,
Et placuit proprio sanguine foeda man us.
Et juvit mediis etiam pugnare medullis,
Visceraque imperii dilacerare sui.
Persuasit sibi quisque nefas, discordia jussit
Omne malum, and cives conseruisse manus.
Inque suum saevire Patrem, sacrumque cruento
Ense, pudor saecli! desecuisse caput.
O furor insani sceleris! Men's talia fando
Horret, and a lacrymis vix tenet ora meis.
Hinc fuga tot Procerum patria de sede, Ducumque,
Dum vix spes vitae, aut mortis honesta fuit*
Dum rupit vis jura ferox, Astraea madentem
Tristior infanda caede reliquit humum.
Exililium miseris fati solamen acerbi,
Erroresque mali mite levamen erant.
Si peteret solas, vel ficto crimine, fiscus
Insidiosus opes, poena benigna fuit.
Ipse Britannorum Princeps regnisque, domoque
Expulsus, sociis fratribus, exul erat:
Carolus exul erat triplicis diadematis haeres,
Securae vario nescius orb fugae.
Sed tamen ante, licet disjectis undique turmis,
Venturi faelix temporis omen erat;
Emicuitque favor nova per miracula coeli,
Quum fugit laqueos, Cromveliane, tuos.
Servavitque unctum rebus melioribus olim,
Mira caput magni cura, manusque Dei:
Perque infaelices duxit faeliciter oras,
Ambiguasque vias, implicitamque fugam.
Hoc nemus Hamptoniae novit, saltusque profundi,
Queis licuit paucos delituisse dies;
Atque annosa cavo profugum quae robore quercus
Texit, and hospitio fovit amica suo.
Arbor erat longos fessi miserata labores,
Mitior and populis sylva ferebat opem.
Hic jacuit cultu regali exutus, and armis
Carolus, at jacuit non sine Rege tamen:
Hic domus, hic seeds, magnique palatia regni,
Et, quod Londinum non erat, arbor erat.
Ferratam vireat nunquam passura securim,
Hospitis aeternum stet memor illa sui.
Janaque Lana fuit tantarum conscia rerum,
Et vidit Domini tristia fata sui;
Vidit, and ingemuit; tandem est gavisa periclis,
Per varios casus, tot superesse tamen;
Praesumpsitque boni praesagia laeta futuri,
Et cepit fausti Numinis inde fidem.
Mascula se Regis commisit foemina fatis,
Et voluit metui praeposuisse necem.
Expediitque dolis Dominum sub imagine Servi;
Elusitque truces, host sequente, minas.
O pietas aevis nunquam moritura nepotum!
O pulchrum famae nobilioris opus!
Sic quaesita fuit, sic Regi inventa per arts;
Posteaque in totum restituenda salus.
Interea subigit cunctas Olivarius urbes,
Et capit indigna regia sceptra manu.
Libera gens servire cupit, parere Tyranno;
Et juga truncato Principe dura pati.
Libertas ut vera perit, sic ficta ministros
In miserum populos compede nectit opus.
Tandem and ficta perit, vario confusa tumultu;
Impatiensque novi est Terra Britanna Ducis.
Aemula vis animos hominum moderamine nullo
Concitat, and praeceps ambitione furor.
Hic tenet, ille petit regnum, variata potestas
Fluctuat, estque fides lubrica, nulla quies:
Vix color imperii, minimas discordia rerum
Concutit, and turpes datque, iteratque vices.
Anglia mactati damnat sua crimina Regis,
Anglia, quae dederat funera, funus habet.
Servitiumque suum, atque extorris triste perosa
Principis exilium, quaerit, and optat opem.
Sed nescit medicina viam, dum Monquius aequum
Gentibus e Scoto limite sidus adest.
Solus hic astringit lacerati vulnera regni,
Congeriemque rudem solvit, and omne chaos.
Et removet civil nefas, gentisque pudorem,
Et reddit patriae jusque piumque suae.
Et Regem regnare facit, reducemque paternis
Restituit sceptris, restituitque suis.
Vendicat Albiones veteri sine sanguine fato,
Et cum Rege suam vendicat ipse domum.
At tu magna Patris, prolesque augusta Stuarti,
Dum fortuna redit, dum tibi prisca salus;
Dumque tibi meritis, non armis, fama resurgit,
Dumque animos hominum, non modo regna, capis;
Dum sperata diu cernunt spectacula cives,
Dumque suum Dominum te reverenter habent;
Parce precor Patriae, culpamque ignosce fatenti,
Posse est magnanimi plectere, nolle tamen.
Horret ad invisi nomen ferale Tyranni,
Fataque, quae sensit, Cromveliana timet.
At se legitimo laetatur Rege potitam,
Et vovet ut regnis sit tibi firma domus.
Parce precor, sceleris labem tersisse laborat,
Et, quo se miseram polluit, odit opus.
Sed quid ago? Tu sponte tua placabilis irae es,
Tuque Tuos populos, sicut amaris, amas.
ROCHUS HOFFERUS, ZIRIZAEVS.

IN EFFIGIEM REGIS CAROLI II. AD FORTUNAM.
HUnc sese artifici Populis dat in aere videndum
CAROLUS, Augustae spes recidiva domus;
Quem fata immeritum regnis fraudare Paternis;
Post rerum infestas erubuere vices.
Ille diu (quod victa viri virtute fateris)
Perfidiae crimen, sors inimica tuae;
Sacra Britannorum turbatis anchora rebus,
Et Patriae sero jam sapientis amor,
Suspicit excussum Capiti diadema rogatus,
Sceptraque plebejas non been passa manus.
Profectum, Fortuna, nihil, vel caede Paterna,
Vel quati exilio, bis scelerata, tibi est.
Accepta auspiciis proavitis Regna referri
Dum prohibes meritis vindicat empta suis.
Dilue Sacrilegae maculam, rea, dilue noxae;
Ne tibi Posteritas hoc licuisse gemat.
Fata nisi expugnas fatis adversa secundis,
Aeternum invidiae Colla gravabit onus.
Expiet innumeris Patrium caput ille triumphis.
Absolvi haud alia lege, nefanda, potes.
NICOLAUS HEINSIUS, Dan. F.

Ad Augustum Britanniarum Regem, CAROLUM SECUNDUM, DE MONKIANIS LAUDIBUS.
INspice scripta Duci facilis praeconia magno,
Maxim Rex: neque enim sunt aliena tibi.
E domito victor quam Monkius host paravit,
Auspiciis causae debita palma tuae est.
Fortissimo Heroi GEORGIO MONKIO, Oppressae rei Britannica Liberatori inclyto.
HIc Vir, hic est, sera cumulent quem laud nepotes,
Quemque senes Fasti, Musaque jactet anus;
Quo conculcatae respirant vindice leges:
Tempore sustinuit qui bonus esse malo.
Invictam praestare fidem qui Regibus ausus,
His patriam asseruit, cum sibi posset, humum:
Cesserat in spolium latronibus, inque rapinam
Squallidus assidua caede Britannus ager:
Captivo Procerum stipatus ab agmine carcer,
Vixque pares poenis tortor and uncus erant:
Exilium vitae numeratum in part beatae:
Undique nil meritas fiscus agebat opes:
Regia carnifici cervix objecta nefando,
Sceptraque plebei praeda furoris erant:
Credita mancipiis regni tutela salusque,
Et populus viles liber adorat heroes.
Tentarant alii numerosam tollere pestem,
Haud datur indomito par medicina malo.
Contudit obscooenae fregitque tyrannidis hydram
Monkius, Herculea versus in arma manu.
Monkius amovit funesti dedecus aevi,
Saeculaque absolvit crimine nostra suo.
Harmodios Atthis, Brutos ne Roma loquatur;
Pulchrius haec long dextra peregit opus.
Sanguine (quod stupeas) nec adorea constitit ullo,
Palmaque se facilem passa sine ense capi est.
Hinc trepidas ultrix mentes agitabat Erinnys:
Hinc laesa stantes pro pietate Dei
Dant animos, coeptisque favent vix Mart parato,
Laurea praevenit spem properata suam.
Dira reos scelerum facies and conscius horror
Impulit attonitos, admonuitque sui.
Cesserunt causae damnantis imagine victi,
E debellato laus minor host foret
Poenaque cum culpae nec crux sat digna daretur,
Vindictam posuit nobilis ira suam.
Opprimit armatum clementia nuda furorem.
Hoc patriae Patrem mite decebat opus.
Incutere haud ullum sceleri tormenta ruborem,
Optime Dux, poterant: sed tua dextra potest.
NIC. HEINSIUS. Dan. F.

Fortissimo Heroi, GEORGIO MONKIO, Britannici Imperii Regisque Restauratori.
CReditur and memorant, monstrum letale subactum,
Quo Regis tandem filia salva fuit.
Quod clarum facinus celebratur and esse GEORGI;
Hinc Tutelaris Anglicus ille Deus:
Nomine servato nunc haec non fabula de te
Narratur, sed res perbene gesta patet:
Nam Britonum subigis monstrum, cui lumen ademptum,
Quo regna infandis libera facta malis;
CAROLUS imperio jam dudum exutus avito,
Illi nunnc etiam restituendus adest.
Sic in te verus datur esse GEORGIUS Heroes:
Te Protectorem terra Britanna colat.
JACOBUS BASELIUS. Ecclesiastes Kerckwerviensis.

CAROLO SECUNDO Magnae Britanniae, etc. Regi.
SIc variat Fortuna vices! Sic nubila tandem
Secula, and infandi disperiere dies!
Anglia Tartareis dudum concussa sagitis,
Et Domino and sceptris heu! viduata piis,
Nunc tandem rediviva, caput super aethera tollit,
Et Regem and Dominum noscit, ut ante, suum.
Alma dies, sperata dies, quo Regia sceptra,
Et viget afflictae Relligionis honos:
Quo Batavum communis amor, communia surgunt
Omnia, and Vnanimes in Tua vota Patres.
Alma dies, sperata dies, quo Belgica Regem
Suspicit, and toto gaudia cord trahit.
Alma dies, sperata dies, quo viribus altis
Anglia cum Batavis pangere foedus amat.
Alma dies, sperata dies, quo vita resurgit,
Et Regi, and Regi subdita tota cohors.
Anglia creed mihi, si fas ita credere Vati,
Nunc Tua, quae jacuit gloria, nata domi est.
Belgica creed mihi, si fas ita credere Vati,
Nunc tua si dubia est gloria, certa domi est.
Addite vim vestris debellatricibus armis,
Et tremat heroa, pars inimica, manu.
Sic Sucones, sic arma ruant adversa Tyrannum,
Et cadat horrendis, qui negat orsa, modis.
Pax orbis, Tua sceptra cluant. Sit mundus Eous
Testis, and Occiduae, proh diadema! plagae.
Haerco in obtutu qua se explicat aureus ether,
Et qua se laetis ingerit ominibus.
Quid verbis? dum verba negant se offerre paratis,
Et Vatem and mentem Fata stupenda tegunt.
Read Deo, Rex magne, Tuo quae debita Regi,
Et regat haec quae sunt sceptra gerenda Deus.
FRANCISCUS PLANT. V. D. M. Bredanus.

Serenissimo Potentissimoque Principi CAROLO SECUNDO; D. G. Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defensoris etc. E Batavis in Angliam ad
Regnum vocato and proficiscenti.
ANglia, Protectore diu suppressa feroci,
Erige te, Regi restituenda tuo,
Et detestando statuam pro pegmate divis
Manibus ante sacras pone, severa, fores,
Quae gravis insculptas truncati Principis umbras
Imperet a tota posteritate coli.
Regnorumque trium solio Successor avito
Perduraturum in saecula sumat ebur,
Invidiamque odiumque sui proscribat amore,
Et Superis gratum tollat ad astra caput,
Tota quod obverso Tellus veneretur ocello,
Propitiumque sibi cernere Belga queat.
Sic tua se tractus diffundet Fama per omnes,
Oppositisque tibi Gentibus horror eris.
Albionum Populi Regnatorisque STUARTI
Bataviae crescet vincta salute salus.
Hoc reduces Domina cum Majestate curules
Atque uno cultus postulet ore Deus.
Sic placidae Carolo faveant afflatibus aurae,
Pacatasque secet, quae tua puppis, aquas.
Excipiatque suum generosa Britannia Regem,
Et Patriam damnet relligiosa necem,
Authoresque solo Nemesis deturbet inulto;
Aeternumque procul mittat in exilium.
Vive diu felix, MONKI, pretiumque laboris
Accipe quod sceptri dat tibi largus amor.
Dirige tantarum tanto sub Principe rerum
Pondera, and augustam perge fovere domum.
Vosque Viri geminas, reliqui qui conditis Aedes,
Et famulam Solio contribuistis opem,
Vivite concordes, Caroloque carentia nuper
Regna coronato condite cum CAROLO.
C. BOYUS.

IN DISCESSUM CAROLI SECUNDI MAGNAE BRITANNIAE etc. REGIS e littoribus
Hollandiae.
CAROLE Rex, modo qui, soliis exutus avitis,
Lusus Fortunae luxuriantis eras:
Te, nova pertaesi, revocant ad prisca Britanni,
Raptaque de manibus sceptra paterna tuis.
Classis adest; and jam ripis allapsa Batavis
Stat Sceverinaeo multa carrina salo,
Nil restat praeter celsas conscendere puppes:
Nunc aderit, pandat qui tua vela, Notus.
Te cava servavit quondam e certamine quercus:
Nunc cava te quercus in tua regna vehet.
Hunc dant fata tibi finem, Rex magne, laborum:
Sceptrum fit longi terminus exilii.
J. WESTERBAEN.

Ad Serenissimum ac Potentissimum PRINCIPEM CAROLUM SECUNDUM MAGNAE BRITANNIAE
etc. REGEM, Regno recenter restitutum.
QUam subito cecidit cujus scelerata tyrannis
Altius esse aliquid Regibus ausa fuit!
Quam subito rediit, populi Pater, exilio Rex!
Tempora, fata, vices tam mora nulla rotat.
Ecce alius toto vultus jam cernitur orb,
Nec modo quae placuit, nunc quoque larva placet.
Vix hostis dempta est facies, succedit amici:
Ecce triumphator, qui fuit exul, adest.
Sed Tibi qui tales vultu, REX maxim, scenas
Immoto, immota cernere mente potes,
Quam tibi in adversa, tam constans sort secunda,
Hoc ego (nec melius quid datur orb) precor:
Ut possis Veros prudens discernere Amicos
Tot Personatas inter Amicitias.
ROMAN

In Effigiem Ejusdem MAIESTATIS.
MAjestas and amor populi, gravitasque benigna
Quam been Regali cernitur in facie!
Ignoscis Populo, REX Clementissime; sed qui
Jam grave supplicium, Te caruisse, tulit.
Ne furor is redeat modo docta Britannia tantum
Sis memor, and dicas: Te sine qualis eram?
Per DeVM regnet CaroLVs:
Per CaroLVM regnet DeVs.
IDEM.

VIRGINIS DORDRACEAE Ut primogenitae and primariae Hollandicarum urbis
CONGRATULATIO Dicta CAROLO SECUNDO, Magnae Britanniae etc. Regi, in transitu
Hagam Comitis versus proficiscenti die 14 May 1660.
ACcede auspiciis laetis ad Virginis Urbem
Regali Princeps sanguine Nate sacro.
Moenia tuta petes, nec quae potuere ruinae
Vincere, ad exemplar, cujus es ipse typus
Rex invicte malis: prima hic vestigia siste,
Et gravidum multo pone labor caput.
Flumina lassato tribuant tibi nostra quietem:
Nulla quies mediis, qua fruiturus aquis
Gratior esse potest, queis cum tribuisse salutem
Juverit, ornabit te quoque diva Salus:
Et stabit fortuna loco, non mobilis omni
Utraque; si vires si capimusve vices,
Regibus ulla fuit Statio non fida Britannis
Plus, quam quae cernis tecta paterna, domos:
Hinc seeds petiere suas, and sceptra Parentum,
Qualis Honos, ex his Finibus Hospes abis,
Patria prima mihi merito dedit otia fandi.
Nunc tecum fari munera prima puto.
Ne peregrina tibi videar Rex optime Regum,
Aspice quae Regni membra virosque gero:
Suspiciesque simul populosi regna Britanni,
Qualiter ex ipsis unguibus esse Leo
Noscitur; hic populi prostant commercia vestri.
Quae Regni socios more modoque ligant.
Militiam lustrato tuam, qua Patria pollet:
Praesidium quin Spes Urbibus una fuit;
Cum ferus adversus saeviret membra Tyrannus
Albanus; furias, Castra ducemque premens.
Illinc cognosces numerosi Militus usum,
Anglia quem Regi servat Amica suo.
Arma virosque, rates videas in portibus ipsis;
Ista Britannorum propria nempe manent,
Mauricius queis Ductor Ovans, Fredericus in armis
Natus Arausiades, and Gulielmus avus,
Saepe hosts vicere truces: quae Moenia Bredae
Incolis, exiguo tempore praeda fuit.
Nassavium germen, Patris morientis ideam,
Et Matris Mariae pignus utrumque vide:
Illic invenies permistum sanguine sidus,
Quid posset Batavo clarius esse Polo!
Henricaea Parens gaude, quocumque locorum
Te tulerit luctus, Rex tibi natus adest:
Ille tibi lachrimas vultu deterget obortas
Restauraturus pignora chara tibi.
Rex Lodovice fave fratri sua regna petenti,
Add preces, jubet hoc Regia causa, pares.
Vosque Patres Patriae Redivivi Patris amoena
Nomina adorate, and sit pia cura simul,
UT BEEN CONVEN^ANT ET IN UNA SEDE MORENTUR
MAIESTAS ET AMOR, gentis utrimque datae,
Sis salvus, Rex Magne, mihi; Tibi terna resurgunt
Regna, Deus votis debuit ista piis.
Ajax armatus, sis cautus inermis Achillis
Consilio, virtus monstret ad astra viam.
Sit dispar Patris Fatum tibi; Maxim Regum,
Nestoreos annos, fataque laera precor.
Sis bonus usque tuis, cum nunc antiqua SECUNDUS
Regna recepturus, sis memor usque tui,
Et socios defend tuos; COLLIDIMUR UNA,
FRANGIMUR: haec eadem sors utriusque manet.
Jamque Vale, Rex Magne, mihi; sed vela priusquam
Vota ferant, paucis, non rediture, Vale:
CAROLE READ VICEM: QUID GAUDIA NOSTRA MORARIS?
TE MO DO REGE DATO, CAROLE READ VICEM.
R. de CARPENTIER.

AD CAROLUM SECUNDUM, Serenissimum Magnae Britanniae etc. Regem, Urbem
Dordrechtum praetervehentem 25. May 1660. quando continuo ictu, lapiedei
Martis, qui ante portas est, caput humeris avulsum and in terram prolapsum est,
and civis non vulgaris, cui nomen Petro van Godewijck, ad pedes Regis casu
provolutus est.
PErtaesus Martis, magno, Rex, flumine Mosae
Dum veheris, cecidit Martis inane caput,
Et non aequa Deo qui gestat nomina Petrus,
Adlapsus pedibus, Carole Magne, tuis.
Omen inest rebus, nec nomen displicet ipsum.
Petrus and ipse casus signa benigna duo.
Anglia sic pariter saevi discrimina Martis
Propulset felix, bellaque dira cadant.
Lapideum cecidit caput and Petrina figura
Belligeri Petri, sed tibi Papa cadat.
Est casus in lapsu Petri non unus, ad ima
Quod ruit is casus est; quod prope Te casus est.
At casus a coelo est. sine Numine nil cadit usquam.
Petrus Papa tuos sic cadat ante pedes.
JAC. LYDIUS.

Ad Serenissimum Potentissimumque Principem, CAROLUM SECUNDUM, Magnae
Britanniae, etc. Regi.
Maxim Rex, qui post digna atque indigna relatu
Fata, jubar remeas in tua regna novum,
Sed prius introitu Batavos dignaris amico,
Nec quoque praeteriti vis meminisse mali,
Et cupis, ut rursum coeant in faedera dextrae,
Auspice quae coelo conciliavit amor,
Duceris Haganis humeris invectus and ulnis.
O fortunatos Te veniente lares!
Excipit hospitio Te Belgica, quale mereris,
Et quo non Batavum grandius orbis habet:
Mauritius, nomen nunquam fine laud loquendum,
Sidus inocciduum Solis utraque domo,
Te venerabundus, Te publicus hospes adorat,
Withaliumque tuum nunc cupit esse tuum;
Illud in augurium praesens, Auguste, vacabat,
Humanoque patens debuit esse Jovi.
Hic Britonum-votis, hic applaudente Batavo,
Antiquaque fide, CAROLE, laetus ades.
Offertur, quod jure suum est; Diadema coronae,
Confluit huc Britonum purpura and omnis honos.
Te dominum sibi speratum Thetis omnibus undis
Te, Te expectatum vela secunda vehant.
Creed quod interea vox haec comitetur euntem;
SCEPTRA STU ARTORUM IUGITER ASTRA BEENT.
STET FORTUNA DOMUS, ET AVI DOMINENTUR AVORUM,
NEC NISI CUM MUNDO DEPEREUNTE RUAT.
HENRICUS BRUNO.

In Conspectum S. R. Majestatis CAROLI SECUNDI MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, etc. REGIS Et
Celsissimi Principis GULIELMI HENRICI AURAUSIONENSIUM PRINCIPIS, etc.
QUalis purpureo Titan porrectus ab ortu
Diffundit rutilas, dum fugat astra comas,
Talis, Io, CAROLUS lustrat feliciter urbes;
Talis ab occasu rite Parentis adest;
Ille quidem triplicis tot post spineta coronae,
Post male truncatum per scelus omne caput,
Nunc videt aeterni miracula laetior horti,
Elysii campi lilia, mista rosis,
Nunc movet Angelicis comitatus caetibus haeros,
Davidica Christo caelica plectra lyra.
Calcat and insani, calcat ludibria Mundi,
Sanctus and ignoscens hostibus inde suis;
Filius, ingenuis dudum sperata Britannis
Aurea, post caeli nubila, stella micat:
Perfundit splendore, poli meliore sereno;
Numine praesenti, te decus, Haga, novum.
Cernitur and tenero surgens Gulielmus Eoo
Andromacha soboles Hectore digna, Puer.
Cernitur, aetherea cum lampade, cernitur, ecce,
Sic geminis Soles hic triplicare diem.
O utinam tenebrae nunquam post tanta sequantur
Lumina, Belga tibi, sive, Britanne, tibi.
Non prius his terrae privetur lucibus orbis,
Quam videat caelum destituisse jubar.
HENRICUS BRUNO.

In Effigiem Regiam.
EFfigiem Regis, quem jure Britannia matter
In gremium recipit devenerata suum,
Suspice, Belga, nec aspectu satiare sereno:
Nubila si subitis vidimus astra malis,
Si Batavis nox ulla fuit, nox ulla Britannis,
Hic facie reddet, reddet utrisque diem.
IDEM.

AD CAROLUM SECUNDUM, POTENTISSIMUM REGEM BRITANNIARUM. SUPER PUBLICATA AMESTIA.
LUbrica quam multos patitur prudentia lapsus,
Quantus and humanis casibus error inest?
Dixerunt veteres, Sueton. in Tiber.
regnabit sanguine multo
Ad regnum quisquis venit ab exilio.
Nos aliter long, quia nunc, ter Maxim Regum,
Illa fit exemplo regula falsa tuo.
Ne quisquam vitae metuat cavistis uterque,
Anglia te revocans, Tu been prospiciens.
Illa quidem non victa, ast tot pertaesa malorum,
Trina dedit dextrae sceptra gerenda Tuae.
Tu, bonus ignoscens rapuit quos devius error,
Suscipis imperium, sed sine caede, novum.
Dicet posteritas, regnabit sanguine nullo
Ad regnum been qui venit ab exilio.
GUIL: GROTIUS.

AD CAROLUM SECUNDUM Magnae Britanniae Regem etc.
LAEta per innumeros se tollit Fama triumphos,
Ingentemque suo jam nomine personat orbem
CAROLUS, and veterem jam prospicit Anglia Regem:
Anglica se quantis attollet gloria rebus?
Et quantos iterum tali sub Rege Britannos
Cernemus? solus veterum Decora alta Parentum
Restituet, sua Templa Jovi, sua Praelia Marti,
Et Themidi sua Jura: Sibi sic denique reddet
Anglia se, Gentique decus, cum Sceptra resumet
CAROLUS, and laeto dominabitur ore Britannis.
Faelicem nimium tanto sub Principe gentem!
Faelices etiam Batavos! queis jungere dextram
Et cupit aeterno componere faedere bella.
Vos Dii, qui tanto decorastis munere terras,
Et servate diu, serusque patentia caeli
Limina defunctus repetat, sic Anglia terris
Imperium and magno lauds aequabit Olympo.
JAC. VANDER DOES.

IN NUMMUM TRIUMPHALEM RESTITUTO REGE EXCUSUM FLORENT CONCORDIA REGNA.
EMinet, and rutilo victor supereminet auro,
Auguriique faces vibrat in aere Sui.
Undique Regalis scintillant fulgura recti:
Jamque Deum visu publicus orbis habet.
Floret tergemino constans Concordia Regno,
Sceptraque tot validis colligat arcta modis.
Nunc inscripta novis nascentur nomina terris
Regis, and in Geminis conspicienda Rosis:
Quin auro qui floret ovans; florentia Musis
Condet, and Imperiis aurea secla suis.
KEUCHENIUS.

VOTVM ET SALVS AD ILLUSTRUM VIRUM CONSTANTINUM HUGENIUM EQUITEM, ZULECHEMI ET
ZEELHEMI TOPARCHAM; CELSISSIMO ARAUSIONENSIUM PRINCIPI A CONSILIIS ET SECRETIS
PRO SALUTE ET IMPERIO, MAGNI BRITANNIARUM REGIS CAROLI II. KALENDIS AUSPICIBUS
ANNI POST RESTITUTO MIRABILEM SEQUENTIS, CHRISTI M DC LXI,
SAlve Poeta: plurimumque, CONSTANTER
Salve Senator, and Toparcha ter salve.
ZULECHEME salve, and vive Principi salvus,
Idemque Princeps and Salus Poetarum
CONSTANS perenna: dum STUARTUS and BELGA,
Regisque constat Belgicaeque Majestas.
Haec vota festis nuncupata sub fastis
Cape tota, Regi queis Britannico sacros
Precamur annos, Imperique longaevam,
FIDEIQUE, Solio praevalente Tutelam.
Non jam Triumphis, maximisque mirandis
Superbus insto, grandiorque regales
Apto cothurnos: ALITER HOC SACRUM CONSTAT
CUI CONSTAT UNUS, QUI SUIS SUUS CONSTAT,
DEBEMUS OMNES: Debito repraesentat
Hos insolutos Musa Gelra (...).
MARS ORBIS HAERES, TERROR ORBIS AC TUTOR,
MARS ORBIS, ATHLAS, IMPERANTIUM LUMEN,
FIDEIQUE NUMEN COELITUS REDONATUM:
DOLOS ET ARMA, MACHINASQUE TRANSGRESSUS;
INVICTUS ARMIS, NEC TAMEN FEROX ARMIS;
ASTU STUARTUS MAJOR, AT VALENS ASTU;
FELIX TRIMPHIS, ET PIUS TRIUMPHATOR,
CUNCTIS VERENDUS, INDOMABILIS CUNCTIS,
DIS ET BRITANNIS, BELGIOQUE SUBVECTUS,
DIS ET BRITANNIS, BELGIOQUE REX VIVAT.
KEUCHENIUS.


