A RELATION Of a Bloody and Barbarous Murder, Committed on the Body of Mr.
Wright, a Protestant Minister, On Thursday the 24. of this Instant February:
With the manner of the Discovery, and of the Coroners inquest thereon.
THE discovery of Murder is that general Providence, that the Grave cannot
hide, nor the Deep it self conceal it; some attending Vengeance still haunts
the Bloody Hand, and so traces the steps of the Murderer, that sooner or
later, the Guilt is detected, the Criminal taken in the Snare, and Justice and
Judgment both glorified in the due and just Reward of so crying an Impiety. A
more Barbarous Instance of this kind has not been known then in the Butchery of
a poor Gentleman found last Thursday in the Thames, near Black-Fryars-Stairs.
The manner and circumstance whereof, are as follows. He was discovered lying
Dead under a Timber-Wharfe near Black-Fryars-Stairs in his Canonical Habit.
After which, he was taken up and laid in the Timber-Yard, exposed to the View
of all Persons desirous of seeing so miserable a Spectacle. Being visited by
several of his own Profession, his Person was soon discovered to be one Mr.
Wright, an Usher to a School at Camberwell, at present out of Benefice, about
40 Years of Age, a Lusty Fresh-Coloured Man. The Water had no partin his Death,
for he was no ways swelled, which was a plain Indication that he received his
Death from some other violent Cause, which was too plainly evident by his Skull
being cracked, his Breast Infinitely bruised, and his Left Arm very much
swelled by a Blow, which may naturally be supposed to have been received in
warding and defending of his Head from the Assault of his Murderer. His Neck
was likewise broke, as is imagined for his last and free Dispatch. In his
Pocket was found only one halfpenny in Money, with a Table Book, and a Letter
concerning some Church Preferment that he was speedily like to obtain, in all
which, his Person and Name were more fully discovered. The Coroners inquest
thereon has been very Diligent and Industrious in a due Examination of the
Cause of his Death, for which reason his Body has been kept three days
unburied, as having not yet fully insisted into the matter, however, they have
already so far traced the Inquiry, that they have disocovered where, and in
what Company he dined that Thursday he was first found, and that he was then
seen to have five Shilling in his Pocket. He was a Person of a very honest and
civil Deportment and Conversation, which makes his death so much the more the
Subject of common Wonder. The small matter of Money about him being thought too
poor a Provocation for so horrid a Murder. But as the Murderers are not yet
detected, though the Jury have too plain demonstrations of Murder, and have
given their Verdict accordingly; yet some showed Suspicions begin to appear,
and God of his Justice, we hope, will soon more perfectly bring Truth to Light,
and Guilt to its due Punishment.

LONDON, Printed by W. Downing, 1693.


