AN HONEST LETETR TO A DOUBTFUL FRIEND, ABOUT The rifling of the Twentieth
part of his Estate.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1642.

By special Command.

TO HIS MUCH ESTEEMED FRIEND and Kinsman Sir H. W. at his House in Westminster.
THe indisposition of my body has confined me to my Chamber, we must now
therefore discourse by letters: your Petition for peace I see is not so happy
as to find success in Parliament, at which while I wondered I began to consider
the reasons, which are diverse as the persons opposing it, Therefore you must
first observe the opposers, and then the reasons will be evident. It is not fit
the Houses of Parliament should deny the obedient Citizens of London any thing,
for that may be distasteful to the City; nor yet grant the req^est of the
Petition, for that may be destructive to the Profit of many Members of both
Houses, and to some even of the City it self. It was therefore wisely done of
my abortive Lord Major and his Zealous Sectaries to attempt the strangling of
it in the birth, by Committing some that were active about it; their Reasons
are Reformation of Religion, that is, abolishing the Book of Common Prayer as
Popish, though justified by the Composers Martyrdom imder the Popish tyranny,
but that will make way for their new doctrines and extemporary bablings; next
the dissolving of Bishoprics and Deanries will rep^y the money lent upon the
public faith, for advancing the Lords Wa^r, (for so they miscall Treason) and
conclude, that being the Lords debt, it is fittest to be p^id out of the Lords
inheritance: then Bishop being eradicated Elders may grow up and flourish as in
Susannaes days. And it is Considerable, that the estates of Malignants will be
just rewards for the godly laborers in this harvest, all which will be lost by
a beggarly accommodation.

Touching the Houses of Parliament, which consists of about 140 Lords, and 500
Commoners, of which not a fifth part do attend in their several Houses, some
being voted out, others committed for not conforming their Consciences to the
sense of the House; and very many, disliking the proceedings and tumults, left
the House and repaired to the King, with whom a greater part I am sure is, then
attend both Houses, being come to preserve their oaths of Allegiance which is
personal to the King.

Take (Sir) but a view of such as sit and act the business in the Houses of
Parliament, observe who among them have Commands and places of profit in and
about this war; then examine their small estate, with their great debt and
charge; the rich profit of their command with their poor Revenew. You may find
the Earls of Northumberland, Pembrook, Rutland, Salisbury, Holland, sitting in
the Lords House; and in the House of Commons Sir Edward Hales, Sir George
Stonehouse, Sir Alexander Denton M. Edw, Waller, M. Maynard, M. Thomas Cook,
Sir Thomas Hutchinson, M. Phillips, M. Ellis, and others, all voting for Peace,
to preserve the Estates they have, not find them in the list of Officers to get
maintenance. All men know my misled Lord of Essex lost the best of his estate
in lost Ireland, and his whole debt, and great Account to his Nephew Shirley is
to be paid out of a small Remainder; has not my Lord of Warwick sold all he
can, but yet his creditors take new promises for old debts, though he be
responsall for 400000 pound prout per account? are the Lords of Peterborough,
Stamford, Say, and Brook, necessitous? their debts and charges pressing? then
their commands are double; both horse and foot. The Lords Hastings, Rachford,
wharton Sr. John Mandevill, Peelding, Gray of Grooby, Sir Hugh Chamley, Sir
Samuel Luke, S^r John Merick, M. Nathaniell Fines, M. Martin. Master Wingate,
M. Walton, M. Cromwell, Colonel Venne, M. John More, and others, are men whose
credit (as appears by Screveners books) is as great as their estates, not
invited to Commands by the profit of their places, but by their Conscientious
zeal to the Cause; others of the Houses (least any water should run beside
their Mill) prefer their Sons, Brothers, and near friends, to places and
employments of profit about this war, as M. Pym is son Alexander, Sir H.
Mildemay his brother Anthony, my Lord Say his son, John, and others other
friends, while some men of the House have confessed that the pay made them
undertake the cause; and which of all these, save Sir John Merick, knows ought
of his place but the profit? Nay many of them for the better service fight by
their Lieutenants, as they pay debts by their suerties, and how many of them,
save two or three which are taken prisoners, received a wound, or struck one
blow in the late battles of Edge and Brainceford, what hopes then these men
will give their Votes and 12 or 1500 l per ann. for a barren peace? Will my
Lord Major subscribe a Petition that shall take away his toll, 12 d for passes
out of London? or Colonel Mannering, the crased Mercer, Captain Basse the
Lace-man, Captain Mason, the Button-maker, Captain Witherly the Pewterer,
Captain Capcote the Broaker, Captain Lee the Vintner, with the Cunnyskin
Captain in Southwarke, and diverse other Debt-compounding-Citizens their pay and
protections against Creditors, and leave themselves naught but a Goal to live
in? What can you hope for by your Petition that these men, and the like, can
hinder?

Now surveigh the Popish and beggarly Lords and Cavaliers for and about the
King, as the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess Hartford, Earls of Cumberland,
Darby, Lindsey, Bath, Dorset, Bridgwater, Danby, Leicester, Devonshire,
North-Hampton, Chesterfield, Bristoll, Westmerland, Barkeshire, Newcastle,
Carnarvon, Kingston and Thanet. The Lords Mowbray, Mountague of Baughton,
Dainecourt, Shandoys, Spencer, Gray, Mohume, Dunsmore, Newarke, Seymore,
Capell, and others; Then of the House of Commons, Sir Christop. Hatton, Sr.
Jarvas Clifton, S. Guy Palms, S. James Thin, M. John Coventry, M. Henry and M.
John Bellassey, Sir Tho: Fanshaw, Sir Richard Lewson, Sir Thomas: Danby, Sir
Ioh. Packington, Sir Ric. Lee, Sir Charles le Gross, Mast: Catline, Mast:
Holborne, Mr: Bridgeman, Mr Chadwell, Sir John Strangewayes and his son, M.
John Dighy, Sr Edw: Derring, Sr Will: Widdrington, M. Venables, Baron of
Kinnerton, M. Rogers, M. Newport, Sir Edw: Alford, M^ Whitmore, Mr Chitchley,
M. Edgcomhe, M. Tho: Fanshaw, M. Crook, M. Nowell, M. Sutton, Sr Will. Oagle,
Sr Will. Poole, and one hundred more then my paper will hold, men of
understanding and known integrity, and which of all these whose age and health
would permit, adventured not their lives and estates in this war with the
King? Now let us examinine their Religion, and you shall find them daily at
Sermons and service with the King, hearing and practicing the same Protestant
Religion and Lithergy, that saved our Father, and has been in our Church ever
since the Reformation, and which we have volved by the late Protestation to
maintain, then (no doubt) neither the King nor they are likely to bring in
Popery, nor be Separatists.

That they are men of Estates the Counties that elected them (if not the
Kingdom) k^owes, and which of them has any profit by the war? which of them
goes not himself and servants to the war at his own charge? Nay, which of
them has not otherwise in a large manner contributed to the maintenance of the
Kings Army, and that without any Command of any Ordinance; yet even against the
Declaration of the Houses? what would they and others then have done, had an
Order of the Houses directed it as on the other side? By this then you see they
are neither Popishly nor beggarly; Nor can have any reward or hopes of repair
out of the estate of the adverse party.

But they would induce arbitrary government: I pray what proof is there of
that? what one ^ct has the King done since the Commence of the Parliament that
savoures of arbitrary justice? whom has be distrained, committed, or turned
out of the Town for not lending? nay what has he not done to assure us the
contrary? Read His Declarations, observe his regal promises and
protestations, and then tell me what Christian (that has charity) or what man
(that would be believed) will not believe him; Has he not regulated the
Councell-Table; damned the Shipwrits; suppressed the High Commission and
Martiall-Court: Nay, has he not left all things to be tried by strict
proceedings of Law?

Whom can arbitrary justice more prejudice, then those now about and with the
King, the Rich and welthy men? surely then they will not be a means to induce
that law that shall undo, and inslave them, their children, families and
estates. Yet must we lend money, send horses, and raise Arms against these
popish and beggarly Cavaliers, For it is not against the King, that were
Treason, and breach of our late protestation, which is to defend His Majesty,
yet was the King; Person in danger at Edgehill Battle, when the
undistinguishing shot took some persons even about the King; but God did
then, and I hope always will cover His hoadlin the day of Battle.

Upon these Considerations, Sir I cannot believe or fear the reducement of
Popery or arbitrary Justice; nor think my conscience, person, or estate, tied
by the necessitous Ordinance of both Houses (for want of an act of Parliament)
to pay or let the twentieth part of my estate (which you know may come to three
or four hundred pound) be taken to support a war, wherein the Person of the
King (which God forbid) may be hurt.

I am sure that while God promised the Scepter to Juda, he put the Lawgiver
between this feet, to let us know, That the legislative power is neither
above, nor without the King. And I know the King by His Writs, does call them
to advise with him, not to resolve without him. I will therefore keep my hands
from giving and so preserve my conscience; I will fast bolt my doors, and so
preserve my person and estate, until a stronger then I come. For I had rather
others committed trespass in taking, then I treason in giving. And I am sure
that both Armies are not on the right side, but one, with all their voluntary
maintainers and a betters, must, without Gods insinite mercy, be guilty of the
blood of all the men slain on either side. I shall therefore, for my
particular, believe and follow the rule of the Apostle, to obey the King, for
He is set over us by God; rather then run with the new opinions and contrary
doctrine of our militant Evangelists, Dr Burges, Dr Downing, Mr. Marshall, and
Sedgwick, whose consciences start out of the way at a white Surplesse, but
never boggle at garments rolled in blood. There are other things considerable
with us Citizens also, as the return of Sir Faithful Fortescue, Leivetenant
Colonel Wagstaffe, and my L. Essex favorite, Captain Scrimpshaw, unto the
King; next the danger and jealousy we are in, that even some of the great ones
will follow, for these are but harbengers,) and rather then come empty handed
to their King, will make us their peace offering.

Let Us consider the event of War, wherein we can yet boast nothing but our
success at winchester. But had we had the day at Edgehill, and totally routed
the Cavaliers, would that have determined the war? I fear rather have called
in all the Monarchs of Christendom to maintain Monarchy; and then were we
engaged, like the low Countries, in perpetual blood. How great then is our
straight, for if we succeed we undo our selves. If the King by victory, (or
treachery of our Commanders) the labor's saved us then, for having refused his
mercy, we must expect his justice.

I have now, Sir, unbosom'd my self to you my friend, let therefore my errors
find a friendly reproof, rectifying my mistakes by your advice, which I shall
take as Commands, return you the thankful acknowledgement of

Read and burn.

Your friend and Kinseman T. R.
Milkestreet London, 28, December. 1642.

