A RELATION OF The Birth, as well as of several Remarkable Passages during the
Minority of the Victorious JAMES Duke of Monmouth, Eldest Son to his MAJESTY of
great Britain, France and Ireland, with the true Account of his many signal and
heroic Victories in Holland, Flanders and Scotland to his Immortal Fame: With
the manner of his Departure from Whitehall, and of his joyful Reception in
Holland. Honey soit qui Mal y pence.
JAMES Duke of Monmouth, Born During the time of his Royal Fathers (and our
dread Sovereigns) most unjust exilement by those monstrous bloody Tyrants that
usurped a Jurisdiction over his undoubted Right, those Fiends compacted in the
shapes of Men, first brooded in the lower Hell, and like Pandoras box sent
thence to plague the World, and fill it with unwholesome Ills; therefore it may
be said of his Grace in part, as it was of Anibal that Carthagenian Prince and
Masterpiece of War, though not born in a Winter-Camp where Drums and Trumpets
charm the Globe, yet born in Tumults and bred up to great Exploits, for no
sooner had he passed his tender Years, but thirst of Military Glory spurred him
on to baffle danger, and contemn those panick fears, that like to Millstones
clog the Soul, and with too much grossness and humidity keep her from soaring
to her proper sphere, quenching those heroic fires that otherways would blaze
bright, and curle among the Clouds or born on the Wings of Fame, illuminate the
Nations round about, and make pale envy Groan that his Grace was somewhat
extravagant in his Minority we needs must own, playing many wild freaks, not
without hazarding his Person, yet this he might be over-perswaded to comply
with by some far reaching Politician, who foresaw to what a height his Virtues
would aspire, and in envy unto which might seek this way to nip them in their
early bloom, the like president we have in Henery of Monmouth, or England's
Fifth Henery, that heroic Prince whose name and worth yet haughty France may
know there writ deep in characters of blood his prodigious Victories declare
themselves by a total Conquest annexing that Crown to ours, the possession of
which was after lost by his unhappy Son King Henery the sixth, but to return to
his Graces more Manly resolution, soon gained the superiority over those
frailties, and sent such Chimera's to wander with their mother-clouds addicting
himself to actions worthy his high Birth, Arms and the God of Battle raged in
his breast, and then began his Fortunes to appear, for we not having any
Hostilities in these his most Sacred Majesty's Dominions: But blessed with the
happy accents of a flourishing Peace, the greatest comfort next the Gospels
freedom that a Kinstdom can enjoy: but on the contrary our neighboring Nation
then groaning under the heavy oppressions of Sword and Fire, whereupon in order
to his Royal Fathers will (whom God grant long to reign over us, and make his
days as the days of Heaven) he crossed the raging Bellows, leading an Army in
favor of the French, (though most unworthy of his service) who were then
engaged in War against the Dutch our Protestant Neighbors, where being
arrived, although but Green and unexperience as to the practick never before
having charged an Enemy, yet with the English Parties under his Command he
performed such wonderful Exploits that many politic Monsieurs that had been
trained up in War for many Years, stood amazed at so brave a resolution, and so
courageously he behaved himself for the honor of his Country and the true old
English valor, that many of the French Nobility began to envy what they durst
not imitate, a common Maxim amongst great Ones, for at the several Sieges
during his Commission, there he was for the most part put upon the dangerousest
Exploits which always contributed to his honor, though perhaps by some
intended to a different purpose, for such was his courage and resolution, that
though he was sent out with Parties much inferior to the Enemy in number, yet
he charged with such Gallantry that the Sallyers were beaten back, nor able to
abide such force being often persued by him even to their Lines and Trenches,
when the Beseigeds Cannon played most furiously, in their defense, and shot
like Hail sung round his Warlike Head, who can forget that brave Exploit
performed by him at Seige of Mastrech, a Seige that got to be so Famous at the
loss of many Thousand lives, the French Army having lain before it and such an
Army that was Composed of all the Flower of that Kingdom for several Months
their King in person, Animating them at several Visits that he made, but yet
not daring to attempt any thing of Moment, the Counter-scarp, Ram-parts,
Bastion, half Moons, and Pallasadoes, being so Advantageously made Guarding
every Pass, with such Vast Quantities of well Mounted Cannons, the which
continually playing beat the Frenchmen, daily from their works; slaughtering
them in Numbers upon every hand, so that many began to despair of better
success, and that it would be impossible for them ever to become Masters of the
Peace, and it is thought they would have raised the Seige without Atcheive any
thing worthy of Noat, had not his Grace with his, by that time well seasoned
English Soldiers, backed them on, and in the Height of courage and cavalry,
boldly lead the Van, as if Inuulnerable he could unconcerned smile at Death and
brave the frowns of Fate, for few or none Expected, he could have escaped a so
Gallant and so daring an attempt (but Caesar's Fortunes, Favor Caesar's Son)
preparing for the asault no sooner had he drawn his Soldiers up and come
within danger of the Mines, but the Beseigers sprung all though with
Inconsiderable Execution, yet notwithstanding this might much a disheartened
them in their proceedings, but Animated by his Graces Example and Courage, they
cried lead and furiously pressed on here we may aply to his Grace that Sentence
of the Warlike Trajan Prince, when in the like danger (Tucer ducet Auspice
Tucro) for although the great half Moon was defended with two Bastions, a wing
or Flancker of small shot from the Palasadoes, and several Thousands, in the
work it self being recruted with fresh Soldiers from the Town, yet so far was
his Grace from being disencouraged, that he charged them in their, lines and
came to Push of Pike; leaping over the Works and Trenches in his proper Person,
whose Example his Soldiers Imitating, he still persued the Enemy in their
retreat; beating them from one work to another, till at last he had obliged
them to quit the main attacking them in their redoubts, bravely defending what
he had gained, although the Enemy twice Sallyed in the Action whilst the
Mounsiers stood gazing at a distance, not daring to aproach till he had won
the works; and consequently by his securing them, obliged the Town to a
surrend, the which in few days (with as little loss as can be Imagined, in so
Perilous an Enterprise) was effected, yet instead of a reward and an eternal
wreath of laurel, for so great a piece of service done ungrateful France,
unworthy such a Soldiers Arms aspersed his Candior and diserving Fame, with
many Base Indignities; as enving him the Glory of that Enterprise, his
conquering Sword had won (Sed Cressit sub pondere Victus) nor can their malice
shroud his high deserts. Fames Brazen Trump; Placed in her lofty Tower, will
sound the worthyes Praise, and Virtue is a Monument more lasting then the
Mosulie and higher then all the Pyramids the Architect of Man can frame it is
that which devouring, time has not the power to waist.

After this singular piece of service, the greatest advantage that the French
has obtained over the Dutch, before or since; his Grace seeing his warlike
endeavors prized at no higher a Rate, diserted their party, and retireing
himself, yet long could not be content with the pleasures of this bounteous
Isle, nor the sollace of his Royal Fathers Court, his active Soul disdaining
sloathful Ease, Fame still egging him on to great designs, he once again
resolves to Court her in the field, and try his Fortune in some brave Exploit.
Flanders then being almost subdued by the power of France, and in great danger
to be totaly lost, the Duke of Luxemburg, lying encamped in the Heart of that
province with a powerful Army of, between 30 and 40 Thousand Horse and Foot,
men disciplined from the beginning of the War, the which till his approach, the
Germans, Dutch, nor Spaniards, durst not Face; but his bold Encouragement gave
them New Life; as if great Mars himself had then defended from his bloody
Throne, and raged through all their Camp, each Soldiers Eyes shot Death; and
cried lead on, lets presently engage; whereupon his Highness the Prince of
Orange taking hold of the opportunity, advanced with his main body, resolving to
attacque them, the disadvantage was very great, for the French being Encamped
upon the most Comodious Ground in strong alodging between St. Denis and Mons
backed with Woods and Flanck'd, with Lanes almost unpassible, the disproportion
being so great that when the Duke of Luxemburg first saw the Princes Army begin
to Move, he uttered these Expressions to several of his chief Commanders, then
assembled to receive farther orders, (viz.) surely these rash Boys will not
dare to attempt any thing upon us in our Lodgings etc. But the answer was a
Thundering charge, and Deaths Herangues Sounding loud on every side, for his
Grace with the English, Regiments charged the Enemy on the Right, with such
fury that at the first Brunt he overset them disordering their Horse and
putting them into Confusion that they fled far; and near whilst he persued them
even to their Camp, slaughtering them through defile or duty Lanes, the which
were a most Impossible as likewise my Lord of Ossery behaved himself with much
Gallantry after his Grace had beaten their Right, he turned upon the Left, and
charged the Dragoons who lay Flanckers with such an undanted resolution and
bravery, that notwithstanding their utmost resistance, and many succors sent to
their releif, several Thousands were left upon the place, whilst the dredful in
Arms Rod through the Squadorns and Buttalions giving necesary orders, and for
the most part where the shot flew thickest, by which means he gave the
Germans, Dutch and Spaniards, to force and disorder the Enemies main Body,
and oblige them to retreat with the loss of about 8 Thousand men and the next
day to quit their Camp. And silently depart, cle^ing great quanteties of their
bagage behind them, this was the first V ctory that Holland e're could boast,
during that so tedious War, and doubtless had not gained this, had not his
Grace so bravely managed the affairs, where Caesar is there Caesar's Fortunes
will attend, that which History afirms of Henry the Fifth, of Monmouth may here
be worthy, our observation where it is related that he never fought but still
remained Victorious, and that in his many Battles during his War with the King
and Dauphen of France, for the possession of that Crown and Kingdom, it is noted
as a wonder the chance of War never turned against his Army, if that he was
there in person.

As likewise Scotland, can amply witness, Monmouths brave renown, those daring
factious Scots, that durst Rebel against their Sovereign Lord, and take up
Arms to spoil a peaceful Land, whose unexpected Murders, Rapines, and fierce
violence began to rage in Cities Fields and Walled Towns, slautering our
forces that were set for the securing of the peace and quiet of the Realm, with
Insolences scarce e're known before, but when brave Monmouth Winged with War,
first set his Foot on that Rebellious soil to Curb their daring Arrogancies,
an auful dread seized on those trembling slaves, as if some mighty Earthquake
had unhinged the Word, and Nature did begin to sink, their lofty Spirits failed
and they became so stupefied, that fear had conquered e're his Sword came on,
for they being about 40 or 50 Thousand in Number, Guarded with a river in the
Front, and Hambleton-Park, on the Rear, with all the advantage of Ground
Imaginable, yet notwithstanding, the great Soul'd Duke, after their desiring a
Parle for some time, and his generous promises to do his best in their behalf,
to persuade his Majesty to mild Terms, if they would lay down their Arms, and
yield upon discresion, but they first bogling and at last refusing, he
commanded to sound the charge, charging the defenders of the Bridge (then which
was a strong party, sent down from the Rebels Camp) on the Right, with such
fury and battering their order, with some Pieces of Cannon from the Left; that
in less then an Hours space, he forced them to retire to their main Body; which
was advancing from the Hills, whereupon the Bridge being left undefended, his
Grace with the greatest part of his Army (the which was much inferior to the
Rebels in Number) passed over and charged their Right Wing of Horse, who had
advanced and ranged themselves to receive the first Front, but stood not long
to it, for the Kings forces turning upon them they were soon broken, nor stood
they the first shock but wheeling of in much disorder, finding no place of
retirement by Reason of their Hot persute, rushed through the Ranks of their
own Body of Foot; who had not been as then Engaged, so disordering them, passed
on and left the Field, not once so much as ralying; in a short space after his
Grace sent to charge the remainder of the Rebels that had Ranked themselves
again, and stood Entire and commanded a party of Musketeers to full the hollow
Ground, and serve as Flanckers to the Left, the Rebels Foot viewing this well
disiplined order, and not seeing their Horse to appear, standing only 2 or 3
Volleys of shot, and the Duke no sooner pressing them on the Right, but all in
confusion, they fled, and throwing away their Arms and bagage, every one
shifted for himself, most of them absconding in Hambleton-park thus in less
then a full day was by his Graces Courage and conduct, was this great Rebellion
de^issipated, and in few days after quite Extinguished, the which many wise
Politicians did adjudg to have gotten to that hight, that it was too great to
Quell especialy with so small a force, as his Grace then lead not being above
Eleven thousand and most of them the unexperienced Millitia of the Country,
etc. such a Soldier in a Nation, is like watch Tower, or a Bulwark, of
defense, to Guard it from its during Foes, (...) Pillar to support the sacred
Throne, and Guard it with his Loyal Sword, from all the subtle contrivings and
Infernal Counsels, that the Roman Tyrant can devise, for such a ones Welfare
next their Sovereign Lords, all good Protestants are bound to pray.

It Is much to be observed (that after his Grace had sollemnly taken leave of
the Court, and in obedience to his Royal Fathers pleasure, Entered one of the
two Barges, that attended at the back Stairs of the Palace of White Hall, in
order to his departure, the which was on Thursday, the 25 of September. 79.
etc. what a general silence and Consternation seized on the willing Crowds,
that Vieued his passage down the River, so eager and steadfast were their Eyes
fixed on him, as if they would have gazed away their Souls, and sent them to
have borne him Company not having power to remove them till the happy Object
was beyond their Prospects; uttering many dear Expressions of sorrow every one
varying in their Opinions, with sighs and flowing Brine as if they would have
made the Tide swel greater then it was Men Women and Children; flocking from
all parts adjacent to take their farewell of the Noble Duke, whom the half of
them never saw, yet had they heard of him by Fame, and his Heroic Virtues, were
too bright for envy to lay silent in the dust, where Conquering Laurels Flourish
Green; their Branches spread both far and wide, Braveness of Spirit, is the
Virtue which adornes a Prince, that made disputes so aften arise, whether the
mighty Caesar in his conquest of the World; won more by clemency, or by his
Sword, this doubtless made the Duke so much beloved and made the Nation more
concerned for him, then he was for himself, and may the same a speedy Motive be
to reconcile him to his Royal Fathers and our gracious Sovereigns bosom, as at
first, the which past doubt, is the wish of all the Loyally affected, that
Tread on the British soil, and his Grace having with a fair, wind passed the
Seas, arrived safe on the 28th in Holland where he was received according to
his Carrecter, with all the civil entertainment Imaginable, not only at
Vtreich, but at most of the places, through which he passed, making some stay
at several places, it is said, he was congratulated by many of the Dutch
Nobility, with great respect, and farther that his Grace is designed to pass
on, to Hamburrough, a free City of the high Dutch, which City the King of
Denmark, and Elector of Brandenburg, are coming down to besiege; and already
have begun to Block it up, part of the Danes forces lying in the Elbe, etc. his
Graces presence may be sure of much Importance, and that through the Mercies of
a never faling God, we may again behold the Royal Father smiling on his Son
with joy, when he shall see him Laden in fresh Victories; and Caesar's Fortune,
I wait on him in all his brave attempts.

FINIS.

