A RELATION OF The Two Pretended Apostles, THAT CAME Invisibly into the Great
City of THOLOVSE in FRANCE, from DAMASCVS in GALILEA, Aged above a Thousand
years.




SOME days ago arrived in Languedock in the City of Tholousa two Old-men, who
called themselves Apostles, who pretend to have the Spirit of Truth; none saw
them come into the City. They are Apparelled after such a manner as the like
was never seen. They walk the Streets and Preach to the People Repentane, and
forsaking of their evil Lives, for the wrath of God is kindled against the
Romans. They say this City is a second Sodom. That the Iniquity of the People
is ascended to the Heavens; and that within three months (in they do not
repent) the City shall perish by fire. They have continued now Eight days
Preaching in the City, bare-headed and barefooted, with joined hands. The
Magistracy have forbidden them to preach, but they returned this Answer, That
they were sent from God to move the People to Repentance. They were put in
Prison, where the Jesuits went to visit them, and disputed with them in the
Latin, Hebrew and Chaldean Tongues. They know such as live a bad life. Their
meat is Bread alone, and drink Water. They name the day wherein the Lord shall
come. Being asked how long it should be before the day of Judgment? They
answered, That the first day of the Year 1690 should be the last day of the
World. They say that they are a Thousand years of Age. The Magistrates demanded
of them whence they were? They answered, That they came from Galadiam in Damas,
a City of Gallilea, and sent by God to Preach Repentance to the World. The
Jesuits have prevailed with the Magistrates to let them be conveyed to Rome, to
the Pope. The said Apostles say, That they knew very well what would become of
them, and that it was not necessary that they should inchain them with such
magnificence, and that they hada great desire to see Rome, and so broke the
Chains all in pieces. The people were all astonished, and judged them Saints.

They Prophesied that In the Year 1681, shall be Wars over all. In the Year
1682, shall be no Pope, and Rome shall have no Head. In the Year 1683, they
shall Preach throughout the World. In the Year 1684, shall Jesus Christ be
known to Mankind. In the Year 1685, a great Man shall rise. In the Year 1686, a
great Earthquake shall happen. In the Year 1687, all Africa shall burn. In the
Year 1688, The four parts of the World shall be greatly astonished. And, In the
Year 1689, shall be the time when God shall judge the world.


LONDON, Printed for R. Janeway in Queenshead-Alley in Patemoster-Row, 1680.


