A RELATION OF THE DIABOLICAL PRACTICES Of above Twenty WIZARDS and WITCHES Of
the Sheriffdom of Renfrew in the Kingdom of Scotland. CONTAINED, In their
Trials, Examinations, and Confessions; And for which several of them have been
Executed this Present Year, 1697.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Newman at the Grasshopper in the Poultry.

To Sir T. M.
SIR,
ACcording to your Request, I send you Enclosed the Proceedings of the
Commissioners appointed by the Lords of His Majestys most Honorable Privy
Council, for enquiring into the Witches and Witchcrafts in the Shiriffdome of
Renfrew, of which I have had Opportunity of knowing more than many others, as
having been with the Commissioners on the Trials; And shall add nothing here,
save what passed at the first Diet of the Trial, which was at Paislaw, where
were Met of the Commissioners, my Lord Blantyre, my Lord Halcraig, Sir John
Maxwell of Polock, Mr. Francis Montgomery, Blackhall, Duchall, with several
others, to the Number of Eleven. There was Deputed in the room of the King's
Advocate, Three Advocates, viz. Mr. John Menzies, Mr. Grant and Mr. Stuart. The
Panalls being 21 in number, were frequently called to see if they could be
brought to Confession; They were Confronted with Bargarens Daughter, and the
three little Confessors, Elizabeth Anderson, and the two Lindsays. But they
still denied all: which put the Court to Cull out 7 of them, against whom
Threatenings, and some Malifice following could be proven. These were Margaret
Lang, in Cartinpan, a Woman Famous for Religion, ever since the 60 year of God,
and really a Person of extraordinary Gravity and Wisdom; I know not whether to
call it Natural or Diabolical; but I have never heard a Woman speak so Gravely,
Pertinently, and Religiously both to the Ministers and Judges then she did. The
other were Katharine Campbell, Agnes Nasmith, John and James Lindsays, Agnes
Fostur, and Margaret Fulton: This Kate Cambell is a young Well-favour'd Lass,
20 years of Age; but the rest most part Old, both Men and Women.

The Commissioners, after their first Assay to have them confess, before they
brought them to a Formal Trial, would have them Tried by Pricking, which really
to me seems strange, for there was not any of them, save Margaret Fulton, but
Marks were found on them, which were altogether Incensible, That a Needle of 3
Inches length was frequently put in without their Knowledge, nor would any
blood come from these places, and tho many, especially Doctors, ridiculed these
as Storys, yet after we called Dr. Bisbin and Baird, and let them see a Needle
of a great length put into the top of one of the Vertibrae of the Back, and one
into Margaret Lang, a handbreadth beneath her Ribbs in the Region of the Lower
Belly, they both thought it wonderful, being in a place where, in another
Woman, the Needle could not but pierce the Gutts: All the other 14 were also
pricked and marks found in most of them. But I was most concerned for Martha
Semple Daughter to Margaret Lang, who was most exactly searched twice, yet no
mark found; tho the pricker mist not to search the very Soles of her Feet and
other more Secret Places, for when there was any difficulty to find the mark
they did quite uncloath them, but then it was in a Room, and not publicly,
before one or two of the Justices, a Minister, one of the Advocatrs, and the
Clark, my Lord Halcraig and I were only present with Martha; but realy she is
as well Favored and Gentile a Lass as you will look on, and about 17 or 18 years
of Age, I took up Mr. Wily to her to see if he could bring her to any
Confession, he spoke long to her but she denied all notwithstanding of what you
see in the Encloased paper, but she was the only person amongst them all that
ever I saw Weep.

They were at last on the 15 th. of April to have been brought to their Trial,
after 3 or 4 days triflling with them by pricking, and to bring some of them to
Confession, but just as the Assize was constitute they moved to have a little
more time to provide themselves Advocates, which the Justices yielded to, and
adjourned to the 2 d. Tuesday of May, and in this Interval the two Brothers did
Confess, and upon Examination said the same things that the two Lindsays and
Anderson had declared, as you have it in the within Paper. Another Man also
confes'd, But the Devil Strangled him in Prison, for he was found fitting in a
Chair with a Cord about his Neck but slack and tied to no thing. After the
Adjournment the Judges met again, and having Sufficient Evidence of several
Mallefices done by each of the Seven abovenamed, with the Testimonys of the
five Confessing Witches, all concuring in the same Acts, Sentenced them to be
burned the 10 th. of June, which was accordingly Executed. The other 14 being
Respited till the Kings Advocates Pleasure, among whom is one Morison Wife to
Francis Duncan in Greenock called in the paper the Devils Gentlewife Antiochia,
on whom many marks are found; of which you will receive further Information by the
Incloas'd to which I referr you, and am, Sir,

Your much obliged Humble Servant, T. P.

A NARATIVE Of the RECOGNITION Taken by the Commissioners, Appointed by the
Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, for Enquiring into the Witchcrafts, and
Witches, in the Shirrifdom of Renfrew; with Relation to the Afflicted Case of
Christian Shaw, Daughter to the Lord of Bargarren. At the Place of Bargarren,
Feb. 5. 1697. Present, the Lord Blantyre, etc.
THE said Christian Shaw, being Confronted with one James Lindsay (whom
Elizabeth Anderson, one of the Confessing Witches Underwritten Declared, Was
one of the said Christians Troublers in her Fits) Did, upon Touching the said
James, take a very Violent Fit, Leaping, Starting and Staring, with such a
Stiffning of all her Joints, that it was hard for the Assistants to keep her
from Falling, and, at last, fell, as quite Dead, and Senseless, for some time;
and, after Recovery, being Confronted with one Catherine Campbell, who being
once Servant to her Father, for a Mis-representation of her to her Mistress,
Cursed her; and is the Aledg'd Instrument of all the said Christian her Trouble.
The said Katherine being by the said Commissioners Interrogate on several
Points, in the Hearing of the said Christian, she Denied all, and particularly
her Accession to the said Christian her Trouble, or the Rise thereof. But the
Child still Charging her, Conjured her to tell the Commissioners, Why she would
never Pray, That God would deliver her from that Ill, and Restore her well
again. Katherine did not disown her Refusal, but shifted about for frivolous
Excuses which the Commissioners bearing home on her, as a Great Argument of her
Guilt; and finding she could hardly evade the Force of it, Katherine offers to
run at the Child (they being then at some distance from one another) and the
Child did all she could to shun her Touch. Katherine Complained; saying, Now I
would Pray for her, but she will not let me. But the Child being forced to
suffer her Touch by the Bystanders, the most Unwillingly, and with great Fear,
she immediately after fell down, in a most Violent Fit, as before, on James
Lindsay's Touch: But thereupon Katherines Tongue was loosed, and she said, The
Lord Bless her, The Lord Deliver her; which nothing could Oblige her to do
before: And the Child her self declared, after that Fit, and Katherines Prayer,
she now found her self free of all Fear to Touch the said Katherine, or any
other of her Tormentors.

The Commissioners were then Earnest with Katherine, to tell why she would, or
could not Pray before she Touched the Child? But, to this, she could give no
Satisfactory Answer.

Afterward the Commissioners called a Young Damsel, Named Elizabeth Anderson,
whom they found a very Useful Person in the said Enquiry, as being many times
admitted by her Father, and other Friends, to their Meetings with the Devil, as
her Confession hereto Subjoyned does Evidence, to which you are Referred. As
also the Commissioners having Examined Christian Shaw, about the Persons
Represented to her as her Tormentors in those Fits; and finding her Testimony
Confirmed by Elizabeth Anderson her Confession, with relation to many of the
Persons Accused by Christian. The Commissioners, on that Evidence, Ordered them
all to Prison, (viz.) Alexander Anderson, Father to the said Elizabeth, Agnes
Nasmith, John Lindsay in Barrcloch, John Lindsay in Formachin, James Lindsay
his Brother, Agnes Foster, Margaret Fulton, and the said Katherine Campbell,
where they are to lie till farther Orders. But the said Christian Shaw knows
and remembers another Person, whom she declares she has not the Power to Name:
And she has many times attempted it, but is still seized with Fits when she
Assays to Express it; She came, at last, to say, for her first Name, Margaret,
or Pincht Margaret (a Name given her by the Devil, from a Pincht Cross-Cloath,
ordinarily worn on her Brow) But cannot express her Patronimick, or Surname.
The Commissioners were so concerned at this, that they urged her to Write it,
which being loath to try for fear of Torture, she nevertheless essayed it; And
beginning to Write other Names, she was desired to try that too, but could
Write no more save Margaret, and the Letter L. of her Surname, being presently
taken with a most Violent Fit, the Pen falling out of her hand, and she falling
Dead, as above, with Groans, heavier and sorer then ordinary. Within a while
the Commissioners having caused her to take a little of a Julip, after her
Recovery, some Ministers standing by, Presented her with a Bible, desiring her
to Read a Passage in it, which they pointed to her; but no sooner had she cast
her eyes on the Book, but instead of Reading, she fell to Sing a very Melodious
Tune, such as is used in Opera's; and, within a little while after fell in her
Fits again, and even then the Music ceased not, tho she appeared as one dead,
with her Mouth open, but neither her Lips nor Tongue stirring, She remained
long in the Fit, till one of the Commissioners, desired the Book might be
Closed; which done, she Immediately came to her Self; and being Asked what she
meant by Singing, when she was desired to Read, she was not sensible she had
Sung, and declared she did not remember it.

Bargarren-Place. Febr. 5. 1697.
ELizabeth Anderson, Daughter to Alexander Anderson, Aged 17 years, or thereby,
Declared that about 20 days ago, she was Invited by her Father, to go along
with him to Bargarrin's Yeard, about Twelve a Clock in the Day, who went both
together; and having come there, they met with ane Black Man, who had ane
Bonnet on his Head, and a Band about his Neck, whom her Father, and Agnes
Nasmith, then present, told her, He was the Devil And that there was in Company
with that Black Man, whom she thought was the Devil, the Persons following;
viz. the said Alexander Anderson her Father, Agnes Nasmith in Park of Erskin,
John Lindsay in Formaken, called, The Bishop, James Lindsay his Brother,
Margaret Fulton, Spouse to Robert Wallace in Kilpatrick, and Sister to the
Grandmother of the said Elizabeth, who Dyed in Paislay Tolbooth, Accused of
Witchcraft above half ane Year since, or thereby. And that their Discourse was
at that time concerning Christian Shaw, Daughter to the Lord of Bargarren, who
was then not well, and whose Life they all promised to take away by Stopping of
her Breath; and that she saw the Devil several times before in her Fathers
House, in Company with her Father, and several others. And that the Devil, with
the Company foresaid Danced all in the said Yeard the time foresaid. And that
her Father Discharged her to tell any thing she saw, or else she would be Torn
in pieces; And that she was more Affraied of the forsaid Persons, then she was
of the Devil. And being Examined whether or no any Person in the Company
foresaid Desired her to Engage in the Devil's Service? She declared, That both
the Devil and her Father Invited her several times to the Devil's Service,
Promising to Reward her for her pains But that she altogether refused to
Engage therein: And that notwithstanding thereof, she went along to the
foresaid Yeard, to the said Meeting with her Father; Where she heard the Devil
say, That no body would see them: At which the forsaids Persons then present
did Laugh. And being asked, If she was Afraid when she saw the Devil in the
Yeard? She Declared, She was Feared not, because she had seen him several times
before.

Elizabeth Andersons Additional Confession, who Compear'd, and being Examined
upon the Point of Witchcraft, Declared the Particulars following.
Renfrew, Feb. 18. 97.
THat about Seven years since or thereabouts, the (...) Elizabeth Anderson was
with the Deceased Iean Fulton, her Grandmother; and playing about the door of
the House she saw ane Black grim Man go into the House to her Grandmother; who
abode with her a considerable space, talking with her; and afterward she came
to the door, and desired the said Elizabeth Anderson to come in; and upon her
incoming, desired her to take the Gentleman (as she named him) by the Hand, and
she would give her ane Bony Black new Coat, which accordingly she did; which
seemed to her very cold: whereupon she was afraid, and immediately he vanished
and went away. About a Month after her Grandmother and she were both in the
House together, when the aforesaid Gentleman appeared to them, (which the said
Elizabeth then suspected to be the Devil) and he and her Grandmother fell a
talking together, by rounding in others Ears, but understood not what they
said; and afterward her Grandmother desired her to take the Gentleman by the
hand, but she refusing, saying, It was the Devil, which her Grandmother
denying, said, It was a Gentleman a Friend of hers; and she still insisting and
threatening her if she would not take him by the hand, she would get none of her
Clothes, but the said Elizabeth Anderson would not be persuaded to do it, but
saved her self from him, saying, the Lord be between me and him, whereupon her
Grandmother said, she need not fear for it was not ill thing, and upon that the
Devil went away in a Flight, she knew not how; and declares, for a long time
after, she was no more troubled with the said Gentleman. Till one time her
Father Alexander Anderson desired her to go with him through the Country to
seek their Meat; to which she replied, she need not go seek her Meat, seeing
she might have Work: But her Father pressing her, she went with him, where he
took her to ane Muir in Kilmacolme, where were gathered together, before they
came, Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fulton, John Lindsay, called Bishop, James
Lindsay, called Curat, ane Heighland Body, Katherine Campbel, ane Gentlewife
called by them Antiochia, Thomas Woodrous's Wife in Carslup, Margaret Lang in
Cartinpan, and her Daughter, Martha Semple, John Read Smith, John Stuart and
his Wife, Annable Read, Margaret Sherer, Margaret Rodger in Park, Ianet Rodger
her Sister, Robert Wallace in Kilpatrick, Allason there, Thomas Birkinyers Wife
in Stamne-butts, and several others whom she does not know or remember, when
the aforesaid Gentleman who appeared to her formerly, came to the said
Elizabeth Anderson, bidding her Renounce her Baptism, promising her if she
would consent thereto, she should be better then she was then, and she would
get better Meat and better Clothes, and she would not need to beg. But (as she
declared) she would not Consent to him; And he enquired of her, What brought
her thither? then she replied, That she came with her Father. Whereupon the
Devil and her Father went together, and talked to one another; but she knew not
where-about: And declares that the cause of her meeting at that time (as she
said) was about the forming of a Picture, of Mr. William Flemings Minister at
Innerkeppe his Child, who at that time effected the same; the Main Actors
being, her Father, Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fulton, Isabel Cochran, and some
others, who at that time put in Pins both small and great; but their Master
told them they behoved to have some other thing before it could take Effect. As
also she Confesses, she was present at ane Meeting with that Crew, above the
Town of Kilpatrick, where were present her Father, Mother, and Sister, Margaret
Lang and her Daughter, Margaret Fulton, Agnes Nasmith, Margaret* Rodger and her
Sister Ianet, Margaret Sherer, Robert Wallace in Kilpatrick, with the foresaid
Gentleman, whom they called their Lord; where they formed ane Picture of Mr.
John Ritchie Minister of Kilpatrick his Child, and they all Stabed Pins in the
same, both great and small; and heard the said Margaret Rodger say, stay a
little till I stop ane Pin in the Heart of it, which accordingly she did. And
declares, she went with her Father to the Ferrie-Boat of Erskin, where he took
her on his Back over the Water to Kilpatrick in a Flight. Farther Confesses, To
have been present at the Drowning of Brighouse, and the Ferrier of Erskin,
where was present in the Boat, the Devil, her Father and Mother, William Miller
at Formakin, the Ferriers Mother-in-Law, Margaret Fulton, and some others; and
there were on Erskin side of the Water John Lindsay the Bishop, James Lindsay,
the Curat, Margaret Cochran, Tarbet, Jennet Waugh, Margaret Shearer, Margaret
Lang, and her Daughter, John Stwart, and his Wife, the Highland Body, Catherin
Campbel, and several others, with her Self; and heard them say, That they would
have saved one of the Horse, but they could not get it done, unless they had
saved also one of the Men which were Drounded, and which she believes was John
Glen, had not his Mother-in-Law prevented it. Moreover she declares, she was
present at the putting down of a Child of William Montgomries in Bargarrans
Land, where were present Margaret Fulton in Kilpatrik, Agnes Nasmith, her
Father Mother and Sister, John and James Lindsays, Bishop and Curat, Margaret
Lang, in Cartinpan, Ianet Waugh, Margaret Sherer, Thomas Woodrouse's Wife in
Carsslup, Thomas Lindsay, James Lindsay his Brother, John Reid Smith, and
several others whom she does not know or remember, with the Black Man whom they
called their Lord, about two a Clock in the Morning, where they Strangled a
Child with a Sea Napkin: The Main Actors, being Agnes Nasmith and Margaret
Fulton, who opened the Door of the House, and after they were entered, went to
the Fire and lighted ane Candles, which was blacker nor your Candles usually
are, somewhat bluish; and none in the House ever stirred or wakened, and they
stayed all in the House upwards of ane Hour; And declares, that she heard Agnes
Nasmith say, What if the People of the House awake? To which Margaret Fulton
replied, You need not fear. Like as confessed, That upon Wednesday about sive
Weeks since or thereby, her Father brought her out of his House with him, and
come all the way with her on her foot to Bargarren out-Yeard, where they come
in by ane Shap in the Yeard to ane Meeting, where where present Agnes Nasmith,
Margaret Fulton, John Lindsay Bishop, James Lindsay Curate, Agnes Foster, the
Highland Body, Janet Waugh, Margaret Sheirer in Eskingram, Margaret Lang,
Margaret Cunningham Spouse to Thomas Woodrow in Carsslap, John Read, Smith,
John Steward and his Wife, Thomas Birkinyers Wife, Thomas Lindsay, James
Lindsay his Brother, and Alexander Anderson, the Declarant, her Father; Where
was also present the Devil, who had on ane Black Coat, ane Blew Bonnet, ane
Blew Band, who Played on a Pipe, and they all Danced. At which Meeting they
were Contriving and Consulting with the foresaid Black Man, whom they called
their Lord, about the Destroying of Christian Shaw, Daughter to the Lord of
Bargarren; where some of them were for Stabbing her with a Touck; particularly,
Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fulton, Margaret Rodger, Thomas Woodrouse Wife,
Margaret Sheirer, and others, were for Hanging her with a Cord, particularly
the Highland Body, John Read, and his Daughter; and others for Stopping her
Breath, and Choking her, and particularly Janet Waugh, John Lindsay Bishop,
James Lindsay his Brother, and the Gentle Wife, whom they called Antiochia, as
also Declared that she heard some of them say, That if ever they should have a
Meeting again, they should have her out of the House and destroy her: But
fearing they would be taken before they should have ane other Meeting, their
Lord, as they called him, gave them ane place of ane Unchristned Bairns Liver
to eat, except her, and the other Two, who has Confessed, viz. James and Thomas
Lindsayes, telling them, that though they were Apprehended, they should never
Confess, do to them what they would. And farther declares, That several of them
were feared, That the said Elizabeth Anderson should Confess and tell of them,
in regard she had done it formerly. They threatened her, if she did, They would
Tear her all in pieces, if ever they got their hands on her, and particularly
Margaret Lang, who Threatened her most. And farther declares, that against the
next Meeting, they intended, if they were not Apprehended, To Form the said
Christian Shaws Picture, and then they would get a get of her; And when the
Meeting was ended, which continued upwards of Two hours, or thereby, they went
all away in a Flight, except the said Elizabeth Anderson, who went home on her
foot. Farther Confesses, That one Night her Father raised her out of her Bed,
and took her to the Ferry-Boat of Erskin, where he took her on his Back, and,
in a Flight, carried her over the Water, and went from that both together to
Dunbarton, to the Yeard of Mr. John Hardy, Minister there, where were present
Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fulton, Robert Wallace her Husband, Margaret Lang, and
her Daughter Martha Semple, Alexander Anderson, Thomas Woodrous Wife, James
Lindsay, Thomas Lindsay his Brother, Mc. Killops, Mother-in-Law to John Glen
the Ferrier, Katherin Campbell, the Highland Body, John Lindsay Bishop, James
Lindsay Curat, William Miller in Formakin, the Gentlewoman called by the Crew
Antiochia, and the foresaid Black Man, whom they called their Lord; where the
foresaid John Lindsay Bishop, Played on a Pype, and all Danced; at which
Meeting they Formed the Picture of the said Mr. John Hardy, which was made of
Beeswax, Hair, and other Materials, and Dabbed it full of Pins small and
Great, and thereafter put it amongst Water and Ale Mixed, and then put it on a
Spit, which Agnes Nasmith and others told her, they Roasted at the Fire, the
Main Actors were, the said Agnes Nasmith, and Margaret Fulton, who made the
Same Picture, and when they had done they went all away in a Flight, except her
Father, and her self, who come upon their Feet to the Ferry again, and carried
her over, in a Flight as foresaids: And Declares, That the foresaid Agnes
Nasmith, got the Picture in Custody when they parted; And also Declares, That
the Words that her Father spoke, when he took her on his Back, and Flew with
her, were Mount and Fly; And also Declares, That no Person promised her any
good Deed, or Reward, to make the said Confession.

Feb. 18. 97.
JAmes Lindsay being examined Confesses as follows, (Aged 14 years, or
thereby,) That one day he met with the Deceased Iean Fulton his Grandmother at
her House in Inchannen, where she took from him a little Round Cap and a Plack,
But being loath to part with the same, required them from her again; which she
refusing, he called her an old Witch and run away; upon which she followed him
and cried, that she would meet him another time with an Ill turn: about 8 days
thereafter, as he was begging thorough the Country near to the Town of
Inchannen, he met again with his Grandmother at the Back of the yard of that
House at the head of the Causey, where there appeared to him ane Black Grim
Man, with black Clothes, ane black Hat, and blew Band; his Grandmother desiring
him to take the Gentleman by the Hand, (as she termed him) who accordingly did
as he was desired, whose hand seemed to the said James to be exceeding cold,
and gript him very straightly; whereupon the said Gentleman inquired at him, If
he would serve him, and he would give him a Bonny black Coat and a black Hat,
and several other things? to which he replied, yes I Will do it; and continuing
there a little time they parted, when the said Gentleman (which he knew
thereafter to be the Devil) and his Grandmother went away together from him,
but he knows not how. This the said James Landsay declares was the first time
that ever he saw the Devil, or engaged with him; and thereafter confesses he
was frequently at Meetings with him and others, and particularly the Meetings
after specified, besides many others: Viz. That about 5 Weeks before Iennet Ker
was Apprehended he went with her to a Muir in Kilmalcolme Parish upon a Hill to
a Meeting there about 4 a Clock in the afternoon, where were present whom he
knew (besides several others whom he does not know or remember:) The said
Iennet Ker, Iennet Woodrow, Margaret Alexander, Margaret Cockran, Tarbett,
Alexander Anderson, and his Wife; John Lindsey Bishop, Agnes Nesmith, John
Lindsay in Barclough, Iennett Waugh, Margaret Sheirer, William Miller in
Formaken, Margaret Lang in Carterpan, Martha Semple her Daughter; Kat, Ferrier
at Craigtownburne, John Reid, John Stuart and his Wife; Patrick Lindsey in
Formakin, Katherin Campbell, ane Highland Body, called by the Crew their Drudg;
and ane White-haird Man which he says was James Lindsay Curat, who played upon
a Fiddle to them and they all Danced with the first Gentleman, whom they called
their Lord, who came to the said John Lindsay, and took him by the Hand and
forbad him to tell, at which time they were contriving about the Drowning of
Brighouse, when he should come over the Ferry of Erskin, (the foresaid Iennet
Ker being the main Instigator) where he heard their Lord say, That if they
could not get him out by the the Hairs of the Head, they would sink the Boat
and all therein, and Iennet Woodrow replied, That if they could get Brighouse
Drowned alone they would be content, John Glenn the Farrier were saved, but
Mckillops Mother-in-Law to the said Farrier (who was also present) said in
regard he had put her out of the House a little while before the Meeting, she
should have him Drowned also. And likewise Confesses, That at the Comitting of
the said Fact, the heal forenam'd persons were present with several others,
except the said Iennet Woodrow and Iennet Ker, who were then at that time in
Prison; and that the Devil was at the Head of the Boat, and Alexander Anderson,
William Miller, the Farriers Mother-in-Law, and John Steward, and his Wife were
in the middle of the Boat, and the rest of the Crew abovenam'd with himself and
several others upon Erskin side of the Water.

As also Confesses, he was present at the putting down of a Child of Matthew
Parks in Parkland, with the Persons abovenam'd, and several others, as Thomas
Lindsay his Brother, Elizabeth Anderson, Daughter to Alexander Anderson, where
was present with them ane Black-haird Man, bare-headed, in ane black Coat and a
long blew Cravat, which was don late at Night about 12, when the whole Family
were asleep except ane Servant-lass, who waited on the Child, who at this time
went to the Door a little, and in the Interim before she returned they put a
Cord about the Child's Neck and Strangled it; the main Actors of the Fact being
Margaret Fulton, and Agnes Nesmith, and when the Lass came in again to the
place where the Child was, they heard her cry these words, Matthew, O Matthew!
Matthew! The Bairn is Dead; whereupon they all went away.

Note, That the foresaid Elixabeth Anderson another Confessant, agrees in her
Confession to this Article, that the Bairn was in the Cradle when the Fact was
Committed, and that when they had don they took the Cord with them. Likeas
Confesses, he was present at the Strangling of a Child of William Montgomerys
in Bargarrins-land, with Martha Lang in Cartanpan, Martha Semple her Daughter,
Thomas Lindsay his Brother, Margaret Rodger, Alexander Anderson, and his Wife
and two Daughters, Jane and the said Elizabeth Anderson, John Lindsay Bishop,
James Lindsay Curate, and Patrick Lindsay his Son; Agnes Nesmith, Iennet
Landsay in Barloch, Iennet VVaugh, Margaret Shearer, Crooked William Millar,
Kath, Ferrier in Craigtown-burne, John Steuart and his Wife, Kath Campbel, and
the Highland-body their Drudge, and several others, whose Names he does not
know or remember; Where was present the foresaid Black-hair'd Man, nothing on
him but ane black Shirt, and a black Hood, called by the Crew their Lord, where
they Strangled the Child with ane Sea Napkin, and heard Agnes Nasmith cry draw
the Lowp, and at their entering to the House Agnes Nasmith opened the door and
went in, and the rest followed her to the Fire side, and lighted a Candle
tending to a bluish color, where they stayed a considerable space upwards of
ane hour, and during that time none of the House awakned, for he heard one of
them, to wit Agnes Nasmith, say, she would keep them from Wakening; the main
Actors were the foresaid Agnes Nasmith with Alexander Anderson and another
Woman whom he did not know, and who is condescended on by the other two
Confessant, viz, Thomas Lindsay his Brother, and the said Elizabeth Anderson,
to be Margaret Fulton in Kilpatrick. Further Confesses, That upon a VVadensday
about fyve weeks since or thereby, he was taken on a sudden in a Flight, where he
was begging near to the place of Inchannen, from that to Bargarrens Orchyeard,
to a Meeting with the Crew, where were Agnes Nasmith, the foresaid Margaret
Fulton, his Brother Thomas, John Lindsay Bishop, James Lindsay Curat, the
Highland Body, Jennet VVaugh, Margaret Sheirer, Margaret Lang and her Daughter
Martha Semple, Thomas VVoodrow's Wife in Cairslop, John Reid Smith, John
Stewart and his Wife, Thomas Birkmire in Stainie-butts and his Wife, Alexander
Anderson and his Wife and two Daughters, ane Gentle Wife called by their Lord
his Wife Antiochia, and several others whom he does not know or Remember; where
the Devil their Lord, as they called him, played upon a Pype and they all
danced; at which Meeting they ware advyseing and consulting the destroyeing of
Christian Shaw Daughter to Bargarren, where some of them ware for distroyeing
and pulling down of the House upon her, some for Choking and Stopping in Pins
in her Throat, others for hanging her with a Cord, some for seeing if they
could get her out of the house and distroy her. And Confesses, They all agreed
to the Forming of her Picture against the nixt Meeting if they ever should have
ane; but fearing they showld be apprehended ere that time; their Master gave
them all ane piece of ane Unchristned bairns Liver, excepting himself and
other two, viz. Thomas Lindsay his Brother, and Elizabeth Andersone, they
telling them though they ware apprehended they would never Confess do to them
never so much.

Lykeas Confesses, Being in Bed in the house of William Killoch in Davistown
late at Night he was taken out of his Bed in a Flight, where he never knew till
he was in Dunbar-town, in the yeard of Mr. John Hardy Minister there, where
were present at the Meeting of the Crew, Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fulton, Robert
VVallace, Margaret Lang, Marthew Semple, Alexander Anderson, his Wife and
Daughter Elizabeth, Thomas Lindsay, his Brother who agrees to his Confession;

Mc. Killops, Mother-in-Law to John Glenn, Farrier, Kathrin Cambel, the
Highland Body, John Lindsay Bishop, and James his Brother, Thomas VVoodrow's
Wife, William Miller in Formaken ane Gentle Wife, called by their Lord his
Wife Antiochia, with several others whom he knows not or remembers; where the
forsaid John Lindsay Bishop played on a Pype, and they all Danced, at which
Meeting they framed the Picture of the salid Mr. John Hardy, and dabbed it
full of Pins and great, and thereafter put it in Water and Ale mixed and then
Roasted it at the Fire, the Main Actors being the said Agnes Nasmith and
Margaret Fulton, who formed the same; and when they had ended their Meeting,
declares he was taken back to his Bed again in a Flight, as said is And
declairs, Agnes Nasmith got the Picture in Custody when they parted. Further
Confesses, he hes several times appeared to the Child (white in the foot) both
in Glasgow and Bargarren, tho Invisible to Spectators, with others as Agnes
Nasmith, and Alexander Anderson, the Highland Body, (in John Davisons) and
Margaret Lang tormenting the Child, where he declares, he and the foresaid
Persons and some others were the Occasion of the foresaid Christian her putting
out the Coals, Cinders, Bones, Hay, Fire, Sticks, and other trash which they
put in her Mouth, intending to Choke her. And further acknowledges, That he and
the foresaid Persons and others did oftimes Prick and Stab her as if it had
been don by Pins, and the way and manner how he had don it was his having a
Needle, which if he put in his Clothes, her Body would be pricked and Stabbed in
that place where he Stabbed the Needle, and if he should put it in his Hair,
that part of her Head where he put the same would be Stabbed. And further
declares, He was present when the said Christian Shawe put Pins out of her
Mouth, which he and the aforesaid persons and others had put in, and also at
the time of his doing these Arts, the said James cried their Words, Help John
Davison, who was also then present; and also when the Minister began to pray in
Bargarrens House, the Devil, he and the rest immediately went away. And also
declares, There was no Person promised him any Reward for making the foresaid
Confession, and declares he cannot Write. And also declares, That the Devil and
the rest of the Crew called John Lindsay Bishop, The Post.

THomas Lindsay declares, That one Night lying in Bed in his Grandmothers House
Jane Fulton, late at Night there came in a Black Man, with black Clothes, ane
blew Band and black Hat, into his Grandmothers, but he being asleep at the
time, she awakened him, desiring him to take the Gentleman by the hand, and she
would give him a Black Coat, which accordingly he did, whose Hand seemed to be
very Cold, and inquired at him, If he would serve him, and be his Man, and he
would give him a Red Coat, which he said he would do* And thereafter he
declares, The Gentleman, which he knew thereafter to be the Devil, went out the
Broad side of the House: And Declares farther, That when he gave his Consent to
serve the Devil, he Nipt him in the Neck, which continued Sore Ten days space.
Thereafter, one day, coming by his Grandmothers House (she then being dead) as
he thought, she Appeared to him, Clapping his Head, Desiring him to be a good
Servant to the Gentleman to whom she had Gifted him, and forbidding him to
Reveal it. And thereafter she Evanisht out of his Sight. Likeas Confesses, one
Night Lying in Bed in the House of Robert Shaw in Barscobe Hill, late at Night,
he was Awakened out of his Sleep, and taken away in a Flight, to the House of
one Matthew Park in Parkland, to the Murdering of a Child of his; where were
present, Iennet Ker, Alexander Anderson, and his Wife, and Daughter Elizabeth;
John Lindsay Bishop, and James Lindsay Curate, Agnes Nesmith, Margaret Fulton,
John Lindsay in Barloch, Jennet Waugh, Margaret Sherer, Crooked William Miller,
Margaret Lang, her Daughter Martha Semple, Katharine Ferrier, John Reid, John
Stuart, Anaple Reid his Wife, Katharine Campbell, the Highland Body, James
Lindsay his own Brother, Jane Park in Paisley, Ross, her Mother, and the said
Gentleman, whom they called their Lord; where they Strangled the Child with ane
Small Cord, while the whole Family were Asleep, except a Lass who Waited on the
Child, who at that time went to the Door; and before she returned, Jennett Ker,
and Margaret Sherer, put the Cord about the Childs Neck, and Strangled it, and
after they had done, they all went away in a Flight: And Declairs, he was
brought to his Bed in the same manner again. As also Confesses, another Night
being in Bed in the House of Walter Alexander of Ersken Kirk, he was taken away
in a Flight to a Meeting at the House of William Montgomry in Bargarrens Land,
with the Crew, where they Strangled his Child about two a Cloak in the Morning,
being there present Margaret Fulton, Agnes Nesmith, James Lindsay his Brother,
Alexander Anderson, and his Wife and two Daughters; John Lindsay Bishop, James
Lindsay Curat, Margaret Lang and her Daughter, Jennet Waugh, Margaret Shearer,
Thomas Woodrow's Wife in Cousslop, Kathrin Campbel, the Highland Body, and
several others, with the forsaid Gentleman whom they called their Lord; the
Main Actors being Agnes Nesmith and Margaret Fulton, who opened the door of the
House, and when they were entered the House went to the Fires side, and lighted
a Candle which was blacker then other Candle but somewhat bluish; and none of
the house ever stirred or awaked, and heard the said Agnes Nesmith, say, What
if the People of the House awaked? to which Fulton replied you need not fear,
which was in the mean time whilst they Strangled the Child with ane sprekled
Sea-Napkin, and after committing of the Fact they all went away, the said
Thomas was brought in a flight to his Bed again.

Likeas Confesses, About five Weeks since or thereby, coming by Finlastown
about Twelve a Cloak midd day, was taken in a sudden Flight, when he never
knew, till he was in Bargarrins Ortchyeard, where were present Margaret Fulton,
John and James Lindsay Bishop and Curat, the Highland Body, Jennet VVaugh,
Margaret Shearer, Margaret Lang and her Daughter, Thomas VVoodrow's Wife, John
Reid Smith, John Steuart and his Wife, the Gentle Wife called by the Crew
Antiochia, Thomas Birkmyres Wife, James Lindsay his own Brother, Alexander
Anderson his Wife and two Daughters, John Lindsay in Barloch, and the foresaid
Gentleman whom they called their Lord, who played on a Pipe and they all
Danced, and after the merry fit they fell a consulting about the destroying of
Christian Shaw Daughter to Bargarrin, where some of them were for Stabbing her
with Pins, some for Stabbing with a Tuck, some for hanging her with a Cord,
some for geting her out of the House to destroy her, but declares he heard them
all consent to the making of her Picture against the next time, but fearing
they should be apprehended ere the time. Their Lord gave them ane piece of ane
Uncrissened bairns Liver, except himself his Brother and Elizabeth Anderson;
And he told them tho they were apprehended they should never confess, after the
eating of that, do to them never so much. And after the Meeting was ended,
which continued about two hours space the said Thomas Lindsay was carried back
to the verry same place from which he was taken away.

THE Copy of a Letter SENT, From Bargarrens Lady to him, being then at Ranfren,
dated Febr. 18. 1697.
My Dear,
I Thought it fit to give you ane Account of Christians Condition, this day
about two a Clock in the Afternoon she said she saw the Devil in likness of a
Man, she seemed to be somewhat feared, and I desired her to say The Lord Rebuke
thee Satan, but the use of her Tongue was taken from her, yet recovering it in
a short space she asayed to speak, but was presently seized with a Fit, and
when that was over she went about the Room deaf and blind as you your self have
seen her before, but still speaking, as to a Bumbee, said, With the Lords
Strength thou shall not put Straw nor Stiks into my Mouth, houlding her hand
fast on her Mouth all the while, then walking a little faster she cried out, the
Bumbee is Stinging me, and sitting down looked on her Leg where was the
Impression, very deep of finger Nails. The Devil appeared to her again in the
Bed like a Gentleman, she standing at the Bedside reasoned with him after this
manner; Thou thinks to make me a VVitch but through God's Strength thou shall
never be the better; I charge thee in the Name of God to be gone and thy Papers
too, for I will have non of them, I will not fear thy ill, stand here see if
thou dare come one stop nearer me: I think thou art feareder for me then I for
thee; then turning she went up and down the Room as before, and again was
bitten with Teeth in the hands very deep, and Impressed with Nails of Fingers
more then twenty four times, which made her cry aloud every time she received
them, and showing the place where she was hurt by getting her hand upon it; but
we neither saw nor heard any thing about her. She continued in this Fit from
two a Clock till past five at night, she said in the Fit Margaret Lang had
given orders to Torment her, so by the Lass you will get a fuller account; till
meeting; I remain

Your, etc. Sic Subscribitur, Christian M'gilchrist.

FINIS.

