ACT, Against Land lords setting of Houses to Vn-free Persons; And also, an Act
for purging the City of Vagabonds and Beggars.
EDINBURGH, the Twenty Eighth Day of October, One Thousand Six Hundred Eeghty
Five Years.
THE which day, the Lord Provost, Bailies, Council, and Deacons of Crafts,
being conveened in Council, taking to their Consideration, that notwithstanding
of diverse Acts of Council made for purging the City of Vagabonds Beggars, and
other idle Persons, who daily trouble the Inhabitants, and others His Majesty's
Leidges resorting thereto; Yet they are so numerous, that the Citizens and
other His Majesty's Leidges, cannot without great trouble walk upon the
Streets, which is very burdensome to the City, and disgraceful to the place:
Considering that by the 15 Act of the third Session of our late Sovereign Lords
first Parliament, it is Declared that it shall be leisome to all Persons or
Societies, who have, or shall set up any Manufactories within this Kingdom, to
seize upon, and apprehend any Vagabonds, who shall be sound Begging, on who
being Masterless, and out of Service, and have not wherewith to maintain
themselves by their own means and work: And impowering them to employ the said
Vagabond persons and their Bairns, in their common work, and declaring they
shall continue therein during their life*time, and shall be subject to their
Masters correction and chaftisement, in all manner of correction, (life and
torture excepted) The said persons being always employed by the said
Manufactories with advice of the Magistrates of the place where they shall be
seized upon. And the Council being now resolved that all the Vagabonds,
Beggars, and other idle persons, and their Children that are above the age of 5
years, that can be found upon the Streets of the City, or in any part of the
samine, or Suburbs thereof, shall be apprehended and put into the
Correction-house, and set at work to Spin and Card, and working such
Manufactory work as they shall be employed to do by the Keeper of the
Correction-house and his servants, which they judge to be the best expedient
for purging the City and Suburbs of the said idle Persons and Vagabonds, and
preventing the increase of them in time coming. Therefore, they hereby Command
and Charge these persons who shall receive the Magistrates Commission, to take
and apprehend all such Vagabonds, idle Beggars, whores, Thieves, and Masterless
persons, and their Children above the age of 5 years, who shall be found within
the City, or any part thereof, or Suburbs of the same, and present them to the
Magistrates, that thereafter they may be Imprisoned within, the said House of
Correction, to be set at work by the said Master of the Correction-house and
his Servants, in manner foresaid; who are to remain therein during all the days
of their lifetime, conform to the tenor of the said Act of Parliament, during
the which space they are to receive all manner of punishment and correction,
(life and torture excepted:) And in like manner, the Council taking into
consideration, that the City has been, and is greatly abused, by suffering
Strangers, Vagabonds, un-free Persons, poor and indigent Bodies, to plant and
have their Habitations within this City; and that by harboring of the said
persons (and such as they resett) the Town is defiled with all kind of Vice,
the liberty of Freemen usurped, the City over-burdened with sustaining of that
kind of people, their Wives, Children. and such as they resett, particularly in
the time of Death, and the Monthly contribution appointed for their own poor,
employed and consumed upon them: and that for remeed thereof, the Magistrates
and Council by their Act of the Date the 22 th. day of December, 1676. years,
did Statute and Ordain, that no persons set their Houses or Lands within the
City, or Suburbs thereof, in any time hereafter, to any unfree persons, that
are not Landed Gentlemen, or Members of the College of Justice, without a
special Ticket from the Bailie of the Quarter in Writ, within whose Bounds the
said Lands lies, under the pain of an Un-law of Twenty Pounds, to be taken off
the Setters or Owners of the said Lands, or Houses, ilk person to whom their
Land or Houses was to be set, with the Escheat of an Years Mail to the Towns
use: And where any Lands or Houses are set to such persons that the Owners, or
Setters, remove the said persons instantly; and that the Bailies shall give no
Ticket to the said unfree persons, but upon Caution to be found Acted in the
Town Books, that they shall keep and fulfill the Articles following; to wit,
That they shall receive no Vagabonds, Naughty or Vicious Persons, nor any who
are suspect of Theft, or Reset of Theft, or of keeping of Brothel-houses, nor
Masterless-persons within their Houses, under the pain of Twenty Pounds, so often
as they failzie Item, They shall use no unlawful Vocation, or usurp the Liberty
of a Freeman, under the said pain- Item, That neither they, their Servants,
Wives, nor Children, shall be burdenable to the good Town, under the pain of an
Un-law of an hundred Merks. Item, That they shall be no ways disobedient to the
Church, or Magistrates, or Officers of the said Burgh, under the said pain, and
their Penalties to be paid by the said Cautioners. The Council do revive the
foresaid Act, in the whole Heads, Articles and Clauses thereof; and Ordains the
same to take effect, and to be put to due Execution in all time coming. And
further, it is Statute and Ordained, that Out-land poor Beggars, and other
poor, that has been Burgess Bairns in this Burgh, remove and dispatch
themselves forth of this Burgh, Bounds and Liberties thereof, and to retire to
the place, or Paroch where they were born, or formerly recided, so that they be
not found nor seen within the samine, at any time hereafter, under the pain of
putting them in the Thieves-hole, 48 hours for the first fault, and Scourging of
them thereafter; as they shall be found within the Bound foresaid. And Ordains
this presents to be Printed, and Published through the City and Suburbs, by
Tuck of Drum, and affixed upon the most conspicuous places of this City, that
none pretend ignorance. Extracted by me,

JO. RICHARDSONE.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most sacred
Majesty, City and College, 1685 This may be Reprinted at London, RLS. November
the 13 th. by D. Mallet 1685.


