ACT FOR LEAVYING OF SOME FORCES For Securing the PEACE OF THE KINGDOM, Until
the meeting of the PARLIAMENT.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1648.

Edinburgh, 14. October, 1648.
Act for Leavying some Forces, for securing the Peace of the Kingdom until the
meeting of the Parliament.
THE Committee of Estates, considering how necessary it is that some Forces be
raised for securing the Peace of the Country, until the Forces of these who
were in Arms in and about Stirling, and of their adherents who by Commission
and Warrants, or encouragement from them, have taken Arms to the endangering of
the Peace of the Kingdom; And until these who are now in Arms in the Isles,
Highlands and Northern Shires of this Kingdom, for whose disbanding their was
no undertaking by the Articles of agreement, be fully disbanded, and put out of
a condition of troubling the Kingdom, and disturbing the Peace thereof; Taking
also into their consideration the many Insolences and disorders committed by
those that are disbanded, and that diverse persons of quality, and others that
were in the Engagement and Service, have not signified their agreement and
submission to the said Articles of Treaty, but are rather endeavoring by
Intestine Insurrection, or Foreigne Invasion, to overthrow the grounds of that
late agreement, and in pursuance of their own ends to continue the troubles of
the Kingdom; And the Kingdom of England having desired this Kingdom to use all
means to prevent and suppress any design of reinforcing a new Engagement
against that Kingdom, to the weakening of the Amity and Union between both
Nations; And the Committee of Estates, in discharge of the trust committed to
them, being most desirous and careful to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom,
until the next ensuing Parliament, to which the determination of all questions
and differences relating to the public good are referred; Have therefore
thought it necessary and expedient, and do hereby Ordain, that the number of
two Thousand seven Hundred and thirty Foot, and the number of six Hundred and
twenty Horse, be forthwith Levied and kept on foot, as a standing force in the
Kingdom.

And because there are above seven Hundred Foot already together, That the
particular numbers of Horse and Foot underwritten, be presently raised in the
Shires following, viz. Out of the Sherifdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk Fourscore
and twelve Foot, and one and twenty Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of Berwick
Fourscore and twelve Foot, and one and twenty Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of
Haddingtoun, Fourscore and twelve Foot, and one and twenty Horse. Out of the
Sherifdom of Edinburgh, Fourscore and twelve Foot, and one and twenty Horse.
Out of the Sherifdom of Lithgow forty Foot, and twelve Horse. Out of the
Sherifdom of Peebles, twenty nine Foot, and seven Horse. Out of the Sherifdom
of Dumfreis, Fourscore and twelve Foot, and twenty five Horse. Out of the
Sherifdom of Wigtoun and Kilkudbright, Fourscore and twelve Foot, and twenty
four Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of Air and Renfrew, Fourscore and twelve Foot,
and forty two Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of Lanerk, one Hundred and six Foot,
and one and forty Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of Sterling and Clackmanan,
Fourscore and one Foot, and twenty five Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of Fyff and
Kinroshire, one Hundred and eighteen Foot, and forty eight Horse. Out of the
Sherifdom of Pearth, one Hundred and seventy Foot, and forty eight Horse. Out
of the Sherifdom of Forfar, one Hundred and sixteen Foot, and twenty nine
Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of Kinkairdin and the Earl of Marshals part of
Aberdeinshire, Fourscore and twelve Foot, and eleven Horse. Out of the rest of
the Sherifdom of Aberdein, and out of the Sherifdom of Bamff, one Hundred
twenty and three Foot, and fifty seven Horse. Out of the Sherifdom of Elgin,
Narine, and that part of Innernesse one this side of Nesse, one Hundred and
eighteen Foot, and twenty five Horse. Out of the Earl of Seaforth and Lord
Lovatts division of Innernesse, Fourscore and one Foot, and twenty five Horse.
Out of the Earl of Seaforthes part of Innernesse, Sutherland and Cathnes, one
hundred twenty and three Foot, and twenty five Horse. Out of the Marqueis of
Argyles division of Innernesse and Badzenoche, fourscore and four Foot. Out of
the Sherifdom of Bute six Foot. Out of the Sherifdom of Dunbartan three Horse.
The Sherifdom of Argyle exeemed, be reason of the late vastation thereof. Out
of the Sherifdom of Orkney, fourscore and four Foot.

And to the end that the Forces abovewritten may be the better Ordered,
Regulated and disposed of, to the best advantage for the present Service of
this Kingdom, The Committee of Estates Ordains the whole number of Foot to be
divided into six Regiments, and commanded in manner following, viz. That the
Lord of Lawer's be continued Colonel of a Regiment consisting of six hundred
and fifty men effectively* And to the end that the said number may be made up
and completed, he is to have out of Pearth-Shire one hundred men. And out of
the Sherifdom of Peebles 29. That General Major Holburne have the command as
Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, consisting of four hundred, whereof he is to
have out of Roxburgh and Selkirk Shire 92. Out of Berwick Shire 92. Out of
Haddingtoun Shire, 92. Out of Lanerk Shire, 106. Out of Lithgow Shire 18. Inde
four hundred. And ordains the said General Major Holburne to be Governor of
the Castle of Stirling, and to place therein the number of (...) men, out of
his foresaid Regiment. That Lieutenant Colonel James Meinzies have the command
of a Regiment, consisting of five hundred Foot, viz. Out of Orknies 84. Out of
Pearth-Shire 59. Out of Forfar 32. Out or Kinkairdin and Marshalls part of
Aberdein, 92. Out of the rest of Aberdein and Bamff Shire, 128. Out of Elgin,
Nairne, and that part of Innernesse on this side of the Water of Nesse, 100.
Foot. Out of which Regiment, the foresaid Colonel is to Garrison Ennerlochy,
Dowart, and the Ruthven of Badzenoch. That Sir James Frissell have the command
as Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, consisting of three hundred, which are to be
placed for a Garrison in the Town of Innernesse, viz. That he have out of
Elgin, Nairne, and that part of Innernesse, on this side of the Water of Nesse,
18. Out of Seafort, and Lovats division of Innernesse 82. Out of Seaforth part
of Innernesse, Sutherland, and Cathnes, 123. Out of Argyles part of Innernesse,
and Badzenoch, 84. That Colonel (...) Pitscotty have the command of a Regiment
of Foot, consisting of four hundred; viz. Out of Stirling, and
Clackmanan-Shires, 71. Out of Fyffe, and Kinro-Shires, 118. Out of
Pearth-Shire, 11. Which with hose under his command already on Foot, makes 400.
Out of which number, he is to place a sufficient Garrison in the Town of S.
Johnstoune, and in the Houses of the Blair of Atholle, and Garth. That Colonel
John Innes have the command as Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, consisting of
four hundred, viz. Out of Lithgow, 22. Out of Edinburgh-Shire, 92. Out of
Dumfreis-Shire, 92. Out of Wigtoun, and Kilcudbright, 91. Out of Air, and
Renfrew, 92. And out of Stirling-Shire, 10. Out of which number, he is to place
ane sufficient Garrison, in the Houses of Strabogie, and Boge of Gight. And
Ordains out of the Sherifdom of Forfar, forty men to be placed, as a Garrison
for the Castle of Edinburgh, and other forty men for the Castles of Dumbartan,
and Duglas.

And for the better regulating of the foresaid number of Horse, the Committee
of Estates, nominats, appoints and Ordains the Lord Chancellor to have the
command of ane Troop, consisting of 80. Horsemen; which proportion, is
voluntarily and freely offered to be advanced to his Lordship by the College
of Justice. And that the Lord General his Excellency, shall have the command
of ane Troop of Horse consisting, of 60. viz. Out of Roxburgh, and
Selkirk-Shires, 41. And out of Berwick 19. That Lieutenant General David Lesly
have the command of a Troop, consisting of 60, viz. Out of Lanerk 12. And out
of Fyffe 48. That Colonel Robert Mongomry, have the command of a Troop
consisting of 60. viz. Out of Dumfreis 25. Out of Galloway and Kirkcudbright 4.
And out of Air and Renfrew 11. That Colonel Scot, have the command of a Troop
as Ruitmaster thereof, consisting of 60. viz. Out of that part of Aberdein not
belonging to the Earl of Marshals part of the Shire, 46. One of Elgin, Nairne,
and that part of Innernesse on this side of the Water of Nesse. 14. That
Colonel Gilbert Ker have the command of a Troop, as Ruitmaster thereof,
consisting of 60, viz. Out of Elgin, Nairn, and that part of Innernesse, one
this side of the Water of Nesse 11. Out of the Lord Seafort and Lord Lovats
division of Innernesse 25. Out of Seaforths part of Innernesse, Sutherland and
Caithnes 25. Out of Dumbartan 5. Inde 66. And because of the great distance of
the places allocat to the said Gilbert Ker, and the difficulty of raising his
said proportion out of the same, the General Commissar is hereby Ordained to
give him allowance in money for such men as cannot be well raised out of those
parts, to make up his Troop of the said number of 60, as is appointed. That
Major Strachane have the command of a Troop as Ruitmaster thereof, consisting
of 60, viz. Out of Berwick-Shire 2. Out of Haddingtoun Shire 21. Out of
Edinburgh-Shire 21. Out of Lithgow-Shire 12. Out of Stirling Shire 4. Inde 60.
That Major William Stewart have the command of a Troop as Rutmaster thereof,
consisting of (...) viz. Out of Stirling-Shire 9. Out of Forfar 29. Out of
Kinkardin, and my Lord Marshals part of Aberdeen, 11. Out of Bamff Shire 11.
inde 60. That (...) Robert Hacquet be Ruitmaster of a Troop, consisting of 60.
viz. Out of Pearth 48. Out of Stirling 12. inde 60. That L. Col James Lundy be
Ruitmaster of a Troop consisting of 60. viz. Out of Air and Renfrew 31. Out of
Lanerk 29. Inde 60.

And to the end the country may not be further burdened with Billettings and
Quarterings of Soldiers, after the said Forces shall once be raised and
delivered to their several Commanders, at the days of Randevouze after
mentioned; the Committee of Estates Ordains, the haill Officers, Troops and
Regiments aforesaid, to have local assignments given to them by the General
Commissary upon the several Shires, for their maintenance and entertainment;
And that it may appear that the establishment of the said maintenance is made
proportionably, and with as great ease to the Country as possibly may be. The
Committee does Ordain and allow that the ten Ruitmasters above expressed, shall
each of them have of pay monthly, two hundred pound Scots, Inde per mensem.
2000. l. Ten Lievtenants of Horse, each of them an hundred pound monthly, Inde
per mensem. 1000. l. Ten Cornets, each of them an hundred marks monthly, Inde
per mensem. 0666. l. 13. sh. 4. d. Ten Quartermasters of Troops, at forty five
pound a piece, monthly* Inde 450. l. Thirty Corporalls at 36 pound a piece
monthly, Inde 1080. l. Ten Trumpets, each of them thirty six pound monthly,
Inde per mensem 360. l. Ten Farriors or Smiths, each of them thirty pound
monthly, Inde 300. l. Six hundred and twenty common Troopers, each of them 16.
sh. a day Inde per mensem. 14880.

And true every one of the foresaid six Colonels of the Foot Regiments, shall
have each of them two hundred pound of monthly pay, Inde per mensem 1200. l.
Majors of Foot, each of them an hundred pound monthly, Inde per mensem. 600.
l. Twenty six Captains of Foot, each of them an hundred marks monthly, Inde
per mensem. 1733. l. 6. sh. 8. d. Twenty six Lievtenants of Foot, each of them
forty pound monthly, Inde per mensem. 1040. l. Twenty six Ensigns, each of
them thirty pound monthly, Inde per mensem. 786. Six Regiment Quartermasters,
each of them forty pound monthly, Inde per mensem. 240. l. Six
Provest-Marshalls, each of them forty pound monthly, Inde per mensem. 240. l.
Fifty and two Serjants, each of them eighteen pound monthly, Inde per mensem.
936. l. Seventy eight Corporals, each of them twelve pound monthly, Inde per
mensem. 936. l. Fifty two Drumers or Pypers, each of them twelve pound
monthly, Inde per mensem. 624. Twenty six Captains at Arms, each of them
fifteen pound monthly, Inde per mensem. 390. Two thousand seven hundred and
thirty common Soldiers each of them 6. sh. per diem. Inde per mensem 25389.

And to the effect the several Shires and Burghs in the Kingdom be not
unnecessarily burdened and deceived by false musters, and so pay for men who
are not in Service, the Committee of Estates Nominats and Ordains Hugh Kennede
to be General Mustermaster, and allows to him two hundred pound per mensem,
for his service, commanding him monthly or quarterly to take a survey of each
Regiment, Troop and Company of the foresaid Forces, and to take up a list of
the true number thereof, and this to be done in presence of a General Officer,
where the same can be conveniently had; With power to him to put in due
execution all former Acts made against false Musters.

And further, the said Committee discharges all free quarterings of officers or
soldiers after the day of Randevous underwritten appointed for the foresaid
forces, and prohibits any to be quartered in Noblemen or Gentlemen's houses,
without special order from the Comittee of Estates, or some General Officer
for that effect. And that this may be the better put to execution, the
Committee nominats and appoints the Lord of Arnot younger of that ilk to be
General quartermaster, allowing to him two hundred pounds monthly for his
service, and commanding him to take special care that the Kingdom be not
further burdened with free quartering, but that he be careful to see all
former Acts of Parliament to be put into due execution, which have been made to
restrain the abuses anent quarterings.

And to the end the several sums of money to be paid throughout the whole
Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom, for maintenance and entertainment of the
forsaid forces appointed to be kept up for the public good may be the better
collected, and for supplying of the public necessities of the Kingdom in time
coming, and for discharging the public debts which have been contracted since
the first of September last, for arms, ammunition, provisions and other
necessaries for the forces which were lately on foot under the Command of his
Excellency the Earl of Leaven, The Committee of Estates nominates and appoints
Sir James Stewart Provost of Edinburgh, General Collector, With power to him
to substitute deputs in ilk Shire, and to appoint a Clerk of collection, Which
collector deputs, as well of Shires as of Burghs and Parishes, and Clerk of
collection shall have such like fees as is allowed in the Act of Taxt and Loan,
and that to be uplifted out of the said Shires and Parishes, by and at-over the
said maintenance; and the Burghs to be free, in respect they collect their Taxt
upon their own charges; With power also to the said General Collector, to put
all the former Acts of Parliament standing yet unrepealed, to due execution, so
far as may conduce to the better and easier ingathering of the maintenance.

The said Committee of Estates likewise allows to his Excellency the Lord
General, one Secretary, and to have (...) monthly for his attendance, and the
like to the Lieutenant General to have (...) monthly for his attendance.

It is further Ordained, that each Governor of Castles, Towns, or houses
within this Kingdom, commanding the number of fifty men or above in garrison,
shall have an hundred Merks monthly, and commanding under that number to have
the pay of a Lieutenant of Foot: And allows to his Excellency, present
Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, one Lieutenant, one Sarjant, two
corporalls two Gunners, one Smith, one Wright and one Drummer. And ordains,
that after the 16. of October instant 1648. their be only forty Soldiers
entertained in the said Castle, and that the allowance of such of them as the
exchequer should maintain, be repeted from the Exchequer.

Moreover it is hereby specially provided and Odained, that the Committees of
War, (consisting only of such persons as have not been accessory to the late
Engagement against England) in the several Shires, and particularly in the
Sheriffdoms of Clidsdail, Air, Renfrew, Galloway and Kirkcudbright, Teviodail,
Midlothian, Lithgow, Dumbartan and Fiffe take special care to levy the
foresaid proportions of Horse and Foot appointed to be put forth by each Shire
upon the charges of those alane^ly, who are dis affected, and have been
promoters of the late unlawful Engagement against England: And that those
only who came forth in arms against the authors and abettors of the late
Engagement and continued with the Army until they were dismissed by order, and
such other persons who have declared themselves against the Engagement, opposed
the Enemy at home, and are known to have been constantly well-affected to this
Cause, and particularly such Noblemen, Gentlemen or Burgesses who dissented in
Parliament, be exempted and made free from all charges and expenses in this
Levy.

And the Committee of Estates having seriously considered the manifold dangers
and inconveniences from time to time issuing and arising to the straight,
vigorous and active prosecution of the Cause and Covenant of God within this
Kingdom, through the want of that due care and circumspectnes that ought to be
used in the choice of Officers and Soldiers worthy to be employed in so good a
Cause, as the sad experience of former and late times has made too evident:
Have therefore Ordained, and by these presents appoints and Ordains, that all
the Shires and Burghs within this Kingdom faithfully endeavor to send forth in
this Levy the ablest and best affected men they can have, and none but such as
are of good life and conversation, testified under the hand of the Minister of
the Parish or Session thereof where they live; And that they carefully avoid
the sending forth of any Soldiers that have been in Arms for the late
Engagement; And if they shall be necessitated to employ any of them, that upon
no pretense any other be admitted, but such as shall have testimonials of their
Repentance for joining in the late Engagement from the Minister of their
Parish, or other ways from the Commission of the General Assembly; and shall
give their faithful promise never to plead or speak in time coming publicly
nor privately in defense or in favor of the late most unlawful Engagement
against England; And the General Muster-Master is hereby specially Ordained to
receive Testificats from all such Troopers and Foot Soldiers that are or
desires to be employed in this service, and have been in the late Engagement,
of their Repentance, and satisfaction given according to the Articles concluded
by the Commission of the late General Assembly of the Kirk, under the hands of
the Ministers or Sessions of the Garrisons where they live or from the
Commission of the General Assembly; And whosoever produce not such certificats,
shall not be admitted to this service, and the out-reikers of such shall be
forced to put out others in their place; and the Commanders and Superior
Officers are hereby Ordained to use their faithful endeavors that those
Soldiers which are to be Levied and put under their command, be qualified as
is before expressed, with certification, that if they sail, their shall be no
allowance of Leviemoney granted to them that shall present the said Soldiers.

And because there be in this Kingdom a competent number of very faithful,
able and honest Commanders and Officers, who by the special providence of God
and his singular mercy to this distressed Kingdom, have all this time kept
themselves free, and have not been involved in the guiltiness of the late
unlawful Engagement, nor have suffered themselves to be infnared or entangled
by the alluring baits of outward honors and profits; so that it were both
against the principles of policy as well as piety, to entrust those with the
charge of commanding our Forces or any part thereof, who have been lately in
Arms against us: Therefore the Committee of Estates Ordains, that no Officers
who have been employed, or accessory to the late unlawful Engagement against
England, shall be admitted upon any terms to bear charge in this new model,
and that the Committee may have the more full assurance of the punctual
performance hereof; Ordains all the Ruitmasters and Colonels of Foot foresaid
to give in perfect Lists of all the inferior Officers to be employed by them,
to be approven or not approven by the said Committee; with certification that
the Committee will proceed to appoint inferior Officers to all such as within
(...) hours after notice hereof, shall not give in there foresaid lists.

And the Committee does hereby declare, that it shall be left to the option and
arbitriment of such Commanders and Officers as are of known integrity, and
qualified as is before expressed, to take from the several Shires and Burghs,
either the number and proportion of men and Horses that are to be put forth by
the said Shires and Burghs, Or to take the sum of eightscore pounds for each
Horseman and the sum of forty pounds for ea^h Footman, providing always,
that if any of the said Commanders shall choose rather to take money, then
Horse or men from the Shires; in that case they are to furnish and provide men
able, welaffected, and qualified as is before expressed, as they will be
answerable to the Committee of Estates, With certification that if they having
received moneys for Horse and men, do notwithstanding faill, in raising and
presenting Horse and men to the General Mustermaster at the time of
Randezvous, or that the men raised and presented by them, shall want
certificats of their qualification in manner before expressed, not only shall
the Soldiers wanting such certificats be rejected, and not admitted upon the
service, but also the leavy-moneys of those Soldiers are not to be allowed to
the Officers, but to be refounded if they have received any, and the Officers
themselves to be cashiered with disgrace.

And for the more speedy raising of the foresaid number and proportion of Horse
and Foot: The Committee of Estates Ordains all Heretors, Proper Woodsetters,
Life Renters and other Subject in out-putting of Horse and Foot conform to the
Acts of Parliament, (excepting always such as are before declared to be eximed
by this Act) To put out their proportion of Horse and Foot well armed, and well
mounted, the Foot two part with Muskets, and third part pikes, and all with
swords: And to bring their several proportions of Horse and Foot armed and
provided as aforesaid to the pla^e of Rendezvous in each Shire, to be delivered
to their several Officers under the pain of four hundred Merks for each
deficient Horseman, and under the pain of a hundred pound for each deficient
Footman not brought to the foresaid Rendezvous, which are hereby ordained to be
kept at the Dyets following, viz. all the Shires on the South side of Tay upon
the twenty sixth day of this month, and those upon the North side thereof upon
the third day of November or at furthest within six days, after intimation
hereof, shall be given to the several Shires by the foresaid Officers, or to
the Committees of War therein as they are now constituted by Warrants under the
Lord Chancellor his hand: And the Committee Ordains the said Colonells of Foot
and Rutemasters to be assisting to the Committees of War in the several Shires
(secluding from the said Committees such as are before excluded) in poynding
and distrenzing the goods of any heretors and others foresaid who are deficient
in outputting either of the Horse or Foot at least in giving money therefore:
viz. for every Horsman wanting at the day of Randezvous the some of 400. marks
from every heretor and others foresaid who are liable to put them out, and for
every Footman wanting, the sum of 100. pounds, and further declares that the
foresaids deficients shall be esteemed as Enemies to and hinderers of the
public service of this Kingdom and the good of this cause.

Mr. Tho. Henderson.

FINIS.

