ACT Rescinding two ACTS, Past in the last SESSION of PARLIAMENT: The one for
excepting of persons from public Trust; And the other for voting the same by
Billets.

Edinburgh, the ninth of September, 1663.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAjESTY, 1663.

ACT Rescinding two ACTS, Past in the last SESSION of PARLIAMENT: The one for
excepting of persons from public Trust; And the other for voting the same by
Billets.
Edinburgh, the ninth of September, 1663.
OUr Sovereign Lord, out of His innate goodness and love to this His ancient
Kingdom, being desirous, that now, after so long troubles, a perfect peace be
settled within the same, and that all His good Subjects might enjoy the
happiness and blessings of His Government in a full and free Act of Indemnity,
Pardon and Oblivion; Did, by His Instructions to the Earl of Middleton, His
last Commissioner, before the second Session of this Parliament, Declare His
Royal Pleasure concerning Fines to be imposed, both as to the crimes, for which
fining was allowed, and as to the proportions; and this moderat way of fining
(which His Majesty intended to employ for the relief of His good Subjects who
had been sufferers) being the only punishment His Majesty gave warrant for; And
His Majesty being careful to see His Royal Grace and Favor to His people
extended as large as He intended it, He commanded the Act of Pardon and
Indemnity to be transmitted to His own consideration, before His Royal consent
were given to the same. In obedience whereunto, the Earl of Middleton, in
summer, one thousand six hundred and sixty two, dispatched Sir George Mckenie
of Tarbet to His Majesty, with a Letter of credit: He carried two draughts of
an Act of Indemnity, the one excepted only as to Fines, the other excepted
also as to incapacity from public Trust; the last he publicly owned to be the
desire of the Parliament, and earnestly pressed, in name of the Parliament, the
incapacitating of some few of the most guilty, not exceeding twelve; to which
His Majesty at last consented, merely to gratify that which was represented to
be the desire of so faithful and loyal a Parliament: And having desired to
know the truth hereof from His Parliament, they, by their unanimous opinions
and votes, upon the twenty two of July last, Declared, that they gave no
warrant to desire of His Majesty, that the Act of Indemnity should carry an
exception of incapacitating from public Trust, nor any warrant at all to
desire, in their names, His Majesty's consent to the incapacitating a few; and
that notwithstanding thereof, they had seen the double of an Instruction given
in the contrary by the Earl of Middleton to Sir George Mckenie, signed, and, in
presence of the Parliament, owned by him to be a just double; bearing, that it
was much desired by the Parliament, that some should be excepted from public
Trust: And it was also declared by the Parliament, that there was no other
ground for incapacitating, but that it was His Majesty's pleasure to have it
so, and that this was the rise of bringing in the Act of Billeting, as the most
expedient way of voting the Act of Incapacitating: By which it appears, both
His Majesty and His Parliament were abused, as to that exception from public
Trust. And Our Sovereign Lord considering, that this way of Billeting had no
color of warrant from His Majesty, and that His Royal consent was given to it
without His knowledge, and very far from His intention; and that in the
contrivance and carrying on of the same, sinistrous courses were taken, and
designs laid, for incapacitating the Earls of Crafurd and Lauderdaill, and Sir
Robert Murray; Persons, who for their eminent loyalty to, and great and long
sufferings for, His Majesty, are deservedly in His high esteem, and who, for
the time, had the special approbation of this present Parliament for these
great employments they had from His Majesty, as His Officers of State and
otherwise; and that therefore He has, with much reason, declared Himself most
unsatisfied therewith: Yet, He does not attribute the concurrence of His
Parliament in Billeting to any thing, but to their unparalled affection to
His Person and Service, and their obsequious compliance to every thing was
represented to them to be His Majesty's intention, or which might be acceptable
to His Majesty. And considering the way of Billeting to be most pernicious in
it self, and of a most dangerous consequence, as tending to the dishonor of
His Majesty and His Parliament, and to the subversion of all Justice and
Government; it being a way never before that time practiced in this Kingdom, or
in any other place, under Monarchical Government; being so derogatory to His
Majesty's Authority and Royal Dignity, and so contrary to the honor, freedom
and gravity of Parliaments, to all former Practices, and to the rules of common
Justice; every man, even these of greatest merit, being thereby rendered
unsecure of their honor, estates, liberties and lives; His Majesty's Officers
of State and those of nearest relation to Him, being exposed to infamy and
ruin, to be, by color of His Authority without His knowledge, torn from Him;
and His Royal Prerogative, in the choice of His Counselors and Servants
asserted in this present Parliament, violated and made contemptible, and all
His Majesty's good Subjects made liable to censures, without being accused,
heard, or legally condemned. In regard of all which, Our Sovereign Lord, with
consent, and by the special advice of His Estates in Parliament, Does hereby
Rescind and Annull two Acts, past in the last Session of this Parliament, on
the ninth of September, one thousand six hundred and sixty two; the one
Entitled, Act appointing the manner of voting by Billets, and the other
Entitled, Act concerning persons to be excepted from public Trust, together
with the Cl^uses relating thereto in the Act of Indemnity and in the Act of
Fines; and Declares the said two Acts, with the Clauses aforesaids relating
thereto, to have been from the beginning, to be now, and in all time coming,
void and null; and Ordains the same to be expunged and razed out of the
Records. Likeas accordingly, the said principal Acts being called for and
presented in Parliament, were publicly torn and destroyed; and the Act of
Indemnity and Act for Fines, with the Records of the minutes of Parliament,
being also called for, the Clauses contained therein, relating to the excepting
of persons from public Trust, and the voting of it by Billets, were expunged
out of the same: And the Clerk Register is hereby Ordained to take care, that
from henceforth the Act of Indemnity and Act for Fines be extracted and
recorded according to these amendments, and that any extracts already given
out, be void and null, as to these Clauses thus amended. Likeas, Our Sovereign
Lord, to evidence His just dislike of so pernicious a course, Does, with advice
and consent foresaid, Discharge all voting by Billets for the future.

And forasmuch, as the Parliament, in obedience to His Majesty's commands, did
transmit to His Majesty, the original Depositions of those who were examined,
concerning this whole business, to the end He might declare His further
preasure; His Majesty Declares, That having taken all that relates to the
business of Billeting into serious consideration, He will, in convenient time,
make known His further pleasure therein.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAjESTY, 1663.


