ACT For an Additional Excise.
Edinburgh, May 5. 1693.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT, Taking to Their consideration, that the present
Dangers of the Kingdom, do Require for its necessary Defense, a greater number
of Forces to be Levied and Kept up, for which Additional Fonds to the present
Supply upon the Land-Rent will be requisite: Do therefore, for one of these
Fonds, over and above the Excise of two Merks on the Boll of Malt annexed to
the Crown, Heartily Offer to Their Majesty's, for the End foresaid, an
Additional Excise of three Pennies upon the Pint of all Ale and Beer Browen, to
be Vended and Sold: As also of two Shilling upon each Pint of Aquavity and
strong Waters Browen or made of Malt, to be Vended and Sold within the Kingdom:
And likewise an Additional Excise, of two Shilling upon each Pint of Aquavity
and strong Waters Browen, not made of Malt, excepting what is made of Wine:
which Excise, is to be paid in manner following, viz. For the first two Months
of June and July, upon the first of August next 1693: And thereafter quarterly,
during the space of twenty three Months, Commencing from the first day of June
next, and ending the first day of May 1695: For making of the which Offer
effectual, Their Majesty's with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of
Parliament, Do hereby Impose and Ordain the foresaid Additional Excise of three
Pennies upon the Pint of Ale and Beer, and two Shilling on the Pint of Aquavity
and strong Waters made of Malt, or otherwise as aforesaid, to be Raised and
Uplifted from all Brewers of the said Liquors Browen and made, to be Vended and
Sold, as said is, for the said space of twenty three Months. And for the
Raising, Ordering, and In-bringing thereof, they do hereby Appoint and
Authorize the Commissioners of the new Supply, Nominat and Appointed in another
Act of this present Session of Parliament, to be Commissioners of Excise for
the several Shires for the end foresaid: And the Royal Burghs to have the same
number of Commissioners, as was appointed by the fourteenth Act of the
Parliament one thousand six hundred sixty and one; Impowering them fully for
that effect, conform to the Rules and Orders formerly Enacted, for Raising and
In bringing the foresaid annexed Excise: As also, to set down and cause observe
such other Rules, as they shall judge necessary, agreeable always to the Acts
of Parliament already made, about the foresaid former Excise. And to the
effect, that abuses in this matter may be prevented, Their Majesty's with
Consent foresaid, Do hereby Declare and Enact, that if any Brewer in use to
Brew for Sale and Change shall give over Brewing after the Date of this Act,
without an Allowance in VVriting from the said Commissioners of Excise, for
good and seen Causes, the said Brewer shall not be permirted to Brew for
Change, for the space of five years thereafter, but shall be, and is hereby
Discharged and Rendered Incapable to do the same. As likewise, it is hereby
Statute and Ordained, that no Persons whatsoever, who have not been in use to
Brew, for the Service of themselves, and their Family, in time bypast, shall
presume to Brew after the first of June next, for their own, and their Families
use, and if they Contraveen, that they shall be liable in payment of Excise,
for what they shall Brew. And Their Majesty's with Consent foresaid, Do Ordain
the first Diet of Meeting of the said Commissioners, to be as follows, viz.
For these Shires on this side of the River of Tay, upon the sixteenth day of
May instant, and for the Shires be-north Tay, upon the twenty third day of May.
And grants VVarrand to the Sheriffs, and Stewarts of the several Shires and
Stewartries, and their Clerks, to Conveen the said Commissioners to that
effect, with power to them thereafter, to appoint their own Conveener, and
subsequent Dyets of Meeting. And it is hereby Declared, that if any Tacksman,
or Collector, or other Person, shall exact any thing over and above his Excise,
for the Discharges thereof, or for the Discharge of any other Public Dues
whatsoever, it shall be repute as Oppression, and punished accordingly by the
said Commissioners, who are hereby Empowered to proceed against the Persons
guilty: And Their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Do Authorize and
Empower the Lords of Privy Council, to prescribe such other Methods and Orders,
as they shall judge neessary, for making this Act effectual. Extracted forth of
the Records of Parliament, by

TARBAT, Cls. Regist.


