REMARKS Upon the CONTROVERSY BETWEEN THE East India COMPANY and the New
SUBSCRIBERS, Setting forth The Extreme Difficulty of making the present Company
the ROOT for Carrying on the Future Trade.
A Confirming of the present Company by Regulation, will, I presume, by
consequence imply the Necessity of a Valuation of their Stock, in order to
rendering the Trade more extensive and truly National; for it must be confessed in
favor of the greatest part of the present Adventurers, that they do not expect
an Establishment upon the ^arrow and poor Foundation they now stand, since it is
a larger Concession than they pray for in their Petition, and do themselves own
in their Accounts, that they have not Forty Thousand Pounds clear Estate in
England to carry on their Trade: Why then the next thing to be considered, I
conceive, will be, how to value their Stock. This, indeed, may be sufficient to
pose any thing under Omniscience; for as 'twas well observed by a late Author,
their Accounts given into the Parliament carried in them the highest suspicion
of Prevarication and Fallacy; they look like Accounts dressed up at Wanstead,
without recourse had to their Accomptant General, calculated to intrigue the
World, and to serve a Turn at this Juncture, I shall not insist upon this
particular, being sensible that the Artifice and Imposture which has been
practiced in this matter, will be represented to the Parliament in so clear a
light, as will make it appear a great Aggravation of their other Miscarriages,
to obtrude so bold an Imposition on the great Council of the Land; from which I
infer, That the time which will be spent in endeavoring to adjust the
Valuation of the present Company's Stock will be in danger of being lost, and
all Attempts of that nature in human appearance be attended with Difficulties
insuperable.

To what I have been urging, some forward Men give such an Answer, as will put
an end to the Controversy, if granted them according to their suggestion. They
say, That by the assistance of an Act, they can carry on their Trade without
Valuation or Additional Subscription; but that Jest has been so often explained
and exposed, that 'twill need no further Confutation.

They do of late give out with Pertness and Insolence enough, That they have
laid such a Scheme that they cannot fail of carrying the day in defiance of
their Adversaries: but what they mean by that Expression, or what Topiques they
use, they will not so readily acquaint us.

To conclude, I shall only add, that without the help of a Prophetic Impulse, I
will not take upon me to divine what will be the issue of the present Dispute,
but thus much is easy to foresee, that should they be so fortunate as to have
this great Oriental Trade settled on them and their Successors, exclusive of
their Fellow Subjects, without any Regulation, there are Three Members of this
Company, who in Ten Years Trade (computing only after the rate of their
Acquisitions hitherto, and supposing they will still use the same Conduct and
Management, of which they have not yet forgot the sweet relish) may value
themselves at more than half a Million of Money each Man, the the better, for
so advantageous an Act, 'Twould invest them with Estates greater than that of
many Sovereign Princes, and in a word render them formidable Subjects.

Sed a tali Triumviratu libera nos Domine.

