THE TRUE CONDUCT OF Persons OF QUALITY.

TRANSLATED OUT OF FRENCH.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

The TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE TO THE READER.
THIS Little Tract is bent Honestly to inform in a few Words the Upper Rank of
Men with such Rules of unerring Morality, as may be therefore more seasonable,
because they are addressed to Generous Minds, which may be taken by Hints, when
neither their Leisure, nor their Inclination will permit 'em to be approached
by eloquent Harangues of a nauseous length. The Translator has endeavored that
the Author might breath the Strength of his own Thought, and live tolerably in
our Clime; but his chief Aim is, that these Maxims may conduce to the carrying
up of Virtue to a Noble Pitch, and that he may not lie under the Reproach of
wanting the Will to do good to those, whom he fancies very often to stand in
need of the following Suggestions; which are presented to your View in this
Order. Because an Honest Man is not so well as abandoned, but upbraided for
being steadily so: In the First Section he is set forth as a suitable
Preliminary to usher in the other Heads. In the Second, the Duty of Honoring
Parents is Countenanced and encouraged. In the Third, the Importance of
Education is Recommended, as the most Beneficent Act of Indulgent Parents, the
most universally necessary to fashion Great Men, and to Relieve the Unhappy.
The 4th. specifies the Particulars of the Education, and describes to you, What
a young Gentleman is to Learn. The Fifth draws him a Line from whence he is to
make no Excursions, by showing him, what ought to be the Scope of his Studies.
Under the Sixth Head he is confined to make a Right Use of his Knowledge, but
this cannot be done, as the Seventh acquaints him, without doing what becomes
him for his Relations. The Eighth, advises you to be subject to the Laws of
the Country; and not to arraign 'em, if there should be a Maladministration.
The Ninth tears up all Rebellion by the Roots, by showing, that the Duty of
Allegiance is the supreme Law. The Tenth is a pointed Satyr against them who
dare censure the Government. The Eleventh lashes those who make Inroads upon
our Quiet, as all Fomenters of Plots and Disturbances do. The Twelfth chalks us
out the true way to gain Esteem. In the Thirteenth, the Advantages of High
Birth, and Reputation are set forth. In the Fourteenth, that he may not be
fluctuating what he shall choose, nor do it rashly, Rules are set him for the
Choice of a Station in the World. And because a Man of Quality may not so
readily part with Ease, the Fifteenth gives him Reasons why he should be
vigilant, intent, and laborious. The Sixteenth puts him upon designing his
Actions so justly, that he may be sure not to miscarry in the First
Undertakings. The Seventeenth puts him into the Track, how he may with most
Ease form an Interest in the Esteem of Princes and Great Men. The Eighteenth,
from a due Picture of the Misery of those who are deprived of Friends, takes
occasion to exalt the Blessings of those who find 'em. The Nineteenth naturally
then leads a Man of Quality nicely to distinguish what sort of Friends they
are, whom he will commission to preside in his Soul. In the Twentieth, our
Time, which so unperceivably steals away, is arrested by the Observations of
this Author; and as the Fate of misemploying it is set forth, a Model whereby
to improve it is proposed. The Twenty first taxes the Vanity of Tatlers, and
labors to fill your Imagination with the Convenience of Silence. The Twenty
second is so far from allowing any Honor to be acquired by Duels, that he shows
that all that are interested in 'em are disobedient to an Excess both against
God and the King. The Twenty third shows, that Ministers of State are neither
servilely to be applied to, nor is it reasonable to expect to be entitled to
their Protection by slighting of 'em. The Twenty fourth Maxim circumscribes
your Pleasures within a due Compass. The Twenty fifth acquaints you what
awkward Conduct Men are under the Power of, for want of thoroughly studying
themselves. The Twenty sixth discovers how useful it is to hold Conversation
with Men eminent for Wisdom, and of great Abilities. The Twenty seventh
represents, what Variety of Friends is necessary to abate the Ruggedness of
Life. The Twenty eighth describes what Turn your Mind must have if you will
embark in Great Designs. Affectation makes every thing look so roughcast, so
strained, and unnatural, that the Twenty ninth hisses it off the Stage. The
Thirtieth puts a Man of Quality upon diving into what will take with the Age.
The Thirty first instructs him, that he may find useful Pleasantry to entertain
himself with when he is alone. The Thirty second blames those who will run down
an Undertaking, which is not answered with a prosperous Event. The Thirty third
marks the Limits how far the Compliance with a Friend is warrantable. Tho the
Thirty fourth does not permit a Person of Quality designedly to turn Droll, yet
it commends him for sprinkling some Gayety in his Humor. The Thirty fifth
shows that by a Neglect in a slight Matter, a whole Hopeful Design may be lost.
The Thirty sixth describes the ways of becoming a Darling thoroughly settled,
and to be Riveted in the Favor of Great Men. The Thirty seventh pares off the
Folly of Superfluity, but gives Neatness its due Character. The Thirty eighth
insinuates what Length a Man's Diligence must reach who will create to himself
no Enemies. The Thirty ninth is an Exhortation not to be dispirited under the
Crushings of the strongest side. The Fortieth neither gives us leave to be the
Tools of other Men's Pride, nor to propagate any of our own. The Forty first
requires such who would be Cast-keepers for the Public, to give Proofs
beforehand, with what Management they can Govern their own Expenses. The Forty
second introduces Men of Quality to an Acquaintance inconsiderable for Number,
but such as have a great deal of intrinsic Value. The Forty third severely
checks all Satirical Reflections, and Sharp Raillery. The Forty fourth gives
Sincerity that Panegyric to which it is justly entitled. In the Forty fifth the
Author modestly declaims against such as having once taken up a Feud are averse
to be reconciled, and in some measure tunes the jarring of Men's Minds; and when
their Pulse beats even, then he looks upon it as a proper occasion in the Forty
sixth, to show that it is beneath the Dignity of a Man of Honor to be Fickle.
The Forty seventh scourges all who are of a Cowardly and Faint-hearted
Character. The Forty eighth discovers that Gratitude is not only a Good
manner'd Virtue, but that those who only consult Interest are no Losers by that
Treasure. The Forty ninth gives so mild an Admonition, that a Disputer of the
keenest Mettle is thereby restrained in the Vehemence of his Carier. The
Fiftieth recommends Regular Conduct of Life, and shows where it is inoffensive
it should be All of a piece. The Fifty first plainly makes it appear, that the
quickest Understanding cannot pronounce judiciously of a Man, unless they have
seen him under the Gaudy Temptations of a Full Fortune, or the pressing
Necessities of a Scanty. The Fifty second prefers that Man of Quality as
deserving the most ample Commendations who can steer evenly betwixt both, with
an easy Indifference. The Fifty third sets down the Inconvenience there is in
reaching forth Credential Letters to every one who has the Confidence to
request 'em; and if that renders Men of Honor liable to be put upon, signing
'em with Blanks, carries 'em into double Danger. The Fifty fourth stints
Curiosity, and discovers where its true Use is to be fixed. The Fifty fifth
puts an Incapacity upon two Sorts of People for Companions which are Deboshees,
and Cowards. In the Fifty sixth all Tricking is arraigned, besides what is
necessary to countermine the Trickers. In the Fifty seventh you are told what a
fatal Stroke the Death of a Friend is; and which is the best way to heal the
Wound it makes. The Fifty eighth bids a Man of Quality seriously consider what
ticklish Ground he stands on at Court, and how many are at work to trip up his
Heels. The Fifty ninth gives us to understand, what a Provocative to Laughter
the Motly Figure of a Grey-headed Gallant is. The Sixtieth specifies what
Counsels a Man of Quality is not only to excuse, but to encourage, and what he
is obliged in Honor to reject, and to punish the Broacher. The Author in the
Sixty first seems to be sensible what a number of untraceable Spirits a Man
advanced to a high Statior, has to conjure down; and therefore he proportions
suitable Qualifications, either to carry on the Attack agaisnt 'em, or at least
resolutely to stand upon the Defensive. Because Froth is always ways uppermost,
the Sixty second Section advises never to answer when you are in a Ferment;
for when the Matter is of Moment, it is good to stay for a becalmed Temper. The
Sixty third clears that Truth, that he who has already a profligate Bias, ought
to have no Patron by the Authority of his Reputation to countenance him farther
to outrun his Duty. The Sixty fourth teaches a Man of Quality thus to deal
with the Ungrateful, not to be suddenly vindictive, but by the wonted Tenor of
soft Treatment, to shame 'em into a Sense of their own Omission. In the Sixty
fifth you are given to understand, that because there are no petty Consequences
which attend Great Undertakings, it is stark Nonsense to bring an ordinary
Application to 'em. The Sixty sixth leads a Person of Quality into a Belief how
necessary Secrecy is to him, that it is a mighty false step to proclaim his
Steerage to the World, and so arm his Adversary to undo him, and that nothing
can dispense with his divulging of a Secret, but where the concealing of it
would affront his God, betray his King, and naturally tend to the Ruin of his
Country. In the Sixty seventh the Author makes it a proof of a Misshapen Mind,
that it must either be flushed with extravagant Hopes of Things that are out of
its reach to determine upon; or else with as irregular a Motion to be
immediately tossed into the Depths of scandalous Despair. The 68th. Section
endeavors to convince a Great Man, that it is his Duty to deter Vice, and to
take Virtues Part, let the Attempt cost what it will. The 69th. makes it appear
how wretchedly Trivial that Humor is, to be continually hovering about
Business, and entering upon none; spinning out Time so long till the Lucky
Minute for executing a Design is slipped by, and can by no Art be bribed to
return. The 70th. give secure Directions to moderate that over-boiling Heat by
which Men are precipitated to pass fatal Sentences on themselves by making a
wrong Judgment both on Persons and Things. The 71st. Head decyphers both how
unmanly and impolitick that Conduct is, where two have been Partners in an
Undertaking that has succeeded, for one to usurp all the Praise, and to rob the
other of his Share. The 72d. marks out the Road a Man of Quality must pursue,
when he is ( urpriz'd by a sudden Accident which is just upon the Verge of
breaking all his Measures. The 73d. Section is a little Medley of Moral
Lessons, about Good Turns, Rewards, and the wise Disposal of Employments. The
74th. derives down to us the Knowledge of what a Power there is in some Men's
Method of obliging, their Kindness flows so easily, that it insinuates it self
with Variety of Charms into the Soul of the obliged; it is here you learn the
Knack how some Men of Quality can lend away Petitioners satisfied at the same
time they are refused. The 75th. points out to you both the Advantages that a
Man in Solitude has to discover Truth, and the Comforts which finish the Repose
of his Mind in that Thinking State, but yet discovers that all are not to be of
this Bookish Phlegmatic Form, this Machine of the World can never be turned but
by Wheels that move with moan Vigor; and therefore as the Shoulders of Men of
Quality are loaded with the Weight of public Affairs, they deserve at least
Commendation to help 'em to support it. The 76th. unveils to us what noble
Thoughts may be extracted from a quick Inspection into the Creatures we daily
converse with. The 77th. draws Banishment in such fair Colors, that a
State-Officer disgracd may fetch Armor eno' from this little Magazine to
defend him from any harsh Resentment of such a Change. The 78th. sets forth
this Consolation, that if a Man of Quality keeps up but those three Springs of
Innocence, Patience, and Resolution in his Frame, he can never have one uneven
Motion in a Prison. In the 79th. the Author bids you step off the Stage of a
tumultuous World, and to make a Christian-like Preparation for the Climes of
Bliss, puts you upon this single Duty, to give Wings to your Devotion, and to
be inflamed with such a resin'd Love of your dearest Savior Jesus Christ, as
may exert it self in a suitable Imitation of his bright Example. And now to
wind up all, this kind Hand that has led you rhro' all the Mazes of a tedious
Life, would not forbear accompanying you to the last Apartment, the Chambers of
(what has been called the King of Terrors, and Grisly) Death. But with the
truest Stamp of Friendship tells you, you may make it as desirable as you
please; and tho there may be a little Violence at the first separation of two
so nearly allied as the Soul, and the Body, yet upon an antecedent pious
Provision, the Reunion of those dear Companions will be attended with such
Ecstasies of Joy, that no Man living need stand shivering on the Brink of
Eternity, at the Minute he is to launch, but venture on the Experiment with a
grave and becoming Cheerfulness. I have no more to add, but my Hearty Prayers,
that these Instructive Moral Notices, tho short, may convey some seasonable
Information to those Minds that we cannot come at to cultivate another way, and
then my Satisfaction will be equal to their Advantage.

The True CONDUCT OF PERSONS of QUALITY.
THO Persons of a High Rank have commonly better Parts, and a quicker Insight
into things than others, yet they sometimes slide into those Mistakes which
sacrifice their Fortune and Reputation in the World. It Is easy to discover
from what Fountain the unlucky Occurrences in their Lives flow, it is only that
in their Steerage most of 'em set themselves no Rule, but often act as Humor,
Freak, or the Extravagance of a Passion leads 'em; yet it is chiefly for the
sake of Persons of good Extraction that Rules of Management are necessary,
because their Affairs are of moment, their Employments considerable, their
Interests nice, and difficult to conduct. Besides they have usually more secret
or declared Enemies, who with critical Inspection comment upon all they do, and
are intent to get into a poor esteem by the blasting of others Credit. All this
shows the necessity they are under not to act but by the Rules of Prudence and
true Conduct; and this also has prevailed with me to lay down here the Maxims
which it is requisite for them to pursue, in order to recommend their Wisdom,
and maintain their Character honorably in the World. There is not one of these
Maxims which I do not believe to be as profitable in the Practice, as it is
useful in the Speculation; yet I do not pretend that they are to be blindly
followed without due examination. I only propound that which appears to me the
most reasonable, and the most safe, with all the Sincerity which an honest Man
ought to use; who in writing does not solely aim at the Discovery of his Wit
and Skill, but who would nakedly impart the Observations he has made, to those
who for want of Reflection, or Experience, are not sufficiently instructed in
many Occurrences of Life, where it is of the highest Importance they should be
informed. To conclude, I have endeavored to show in, this Tract, how
advantageous the Practice of true Wisdom is, if it be considered only for its
Influence on Civil Life, yet I have no design to insinuate thereby, that Men
should level their Cares only to acquire or preserve worldly Affluence; I have
remarked on the contrary, that we ought to terminate our Prospect in an End
infinitely more noble, and to make this alone the Spur to push all our Actions,
to render our selves accomplished in the Eyes of God, by an Obedience that is
invigorated with Love, and grateful Acknowledgment.

I. An Honest Man.
TO be a Man of this Character exceeds all other Qualifications, seeing that it
contains the eminent Virtues which we must necessarily make use of in the
prosecution of our Duty, and is at the same time the Foundation of true Merit,
and the Groundwork of substantial Happiness. Now as this excellent
Accomplishment purchases for us eternal Glory, so it naturally conduces to
make us live reputably, and to promote our Quiet in this lower World: For a
person of singular Probity, is the Point where all wise and understanding Men
center their Esteem, and his Desert opens his way to Employments of the first
Rate; besides, as he is exempt from all irregular Passion, he enjoys that happy
Tranquillity which reigns in unspotted Souls, and never finds the Peace of his
Mind ruffled by the Variety of Accidents which affect others, because being
always submissive to the Decrees of Providence, his Consolation is lodged in
his own Virtue; and as nothing is able to ravish from him that precious
Treasure which is included in himself, so nothing has power enough to render
him unhappy.

This is not the Case of them who build their Happiness upon Health, Beauty,
Riches, Dignities, and such other Largesses, as they have received from
prodigal Nature, or blind Fortune; for all these are often a Prey to a thousand
unforeseen Casualties, or by the sudden slipping out of their Hands, proclaim
themselves akin to all other human Affairs; and then are they so much the more
miserable, because they do not find within themselves any suitable Consolation
springing up, wherewith to compensate the Loss of those fleeting Possessions
which they were so passionately enamoured of Nothing then is of more Advantage
than to labor to become an Honest Man: To be so indeed, it is necessary to
have a sprightly and clear Faith, or in other Words, to be strongly convinced
of all the Truths of Christianity, to follow its Rules exactly, and to have an
extreme Abhorrence of all Libertinism and Impiety. Our Religion carries along
withit such manifest Marks of the Divinity of its Original, it is so Amiable
and so Holy, that the incredulous who dare to contemn it, are altogether
inexcusable. When it is examined without prejudice, with a sincere Desire to
penetrate into it, at the first unveiling you find it venerable for its
Antiquity, pure in its Morals, sublime in its Mysteries, divine in its Source.
What surer Course can we then steer, than to submit our selves to the Law of a
God, who after having established his Church in the midst of Idolatrous People,
in spite of all worldly Opposition, has obliged those very Men, notwithstanding
their Pride and Prepossessions, to acknowledge him for their Creator, and to
pay him the Adoration which he justly claims? What can we do more becoming
reasonable Men, than to embrace a Doctrine confirmed by so many Miracles, born
up with the Testimony of so many Martyrs, taught uniformly during so many Ages,
defended by so many Great Men, as famous for the Purity of their Manners, as
for the Solidity of their Judgment, and the Profoundness of their Learning?
Besides Faith, Love must be annexed, and the Fear of God; the Love of him to
make all our Actions subservient to his Glory, and the Fear of his Judgments to
retain us in the Rounds of Duty, when his Love is not strong enough to stop the
Fierceness of our Passions: It Is this Love mixed with an useful Fear,
enlightened by Faith, and animated by Hope, which is the proper. Virtue of a
true Christian, and which consummates his peculiar Character; a Character
infinitely more Glorious than all others, and which alone worthily maintained,
is able to procure us unperishable Felicity. Those who adore Jesus Christ as
their God, and who are engaged notwithstanding in Heresy, flatter themselves
in vain to arrive at this Sovereign Happiness; for we learn of this Divine
Master, that there is but one way to attain it, which cannot be the way of
those that go every one their own way, abandoning the Catholic Church, which
is the only Spouse of Jesus Christ, the only Depository of his Will, and the
faithful Interpreter of his Word. Let us then remain inviolably adhering to the
Holy Church, it is thereby that Men will deliver themselves from Doubts, quiet
the Remorses, stifle the Troubles and Disorders wherewith Heretics and
Unbelievers are agitated. It Is by this, I say, that in the important Business
of Religion, our Lives glide in a sweet and calm Security. Nevertheless, let us
not believe that our Happiness depends only on our Faith, without the
Concurrence of our Works; an Acknowledgment must be paid for the Heaps of
Favors which the Almighty does confer, it is he who has made us what we are,
our Bodies and our Souls are the Workmanship of his Hands, our Virtues are the
Gifts of his Grace, our Temporal Advantages are but the repeated Streams which
flow from his inexhaustible Bounty; it is he who supports us in Temptations, who
fortifies us in Sufferings, who comforts us in Discontents; it is he lastly, who
has devoted his Son to Death for our Redemption, and who has prepared an
eternal Recompense for the faithful Observers of his Laws. Let us not be
insensible of such a Throng of Gifts, and since God only expects the return of
a sincere Heart, let us love our Benefactor so exalted, and so amiable; let us
obey his Commands, and persuade our selves that no real Pleasure, or true
Satisfaction can be found, but in an entire Submission to his Adorable Will.

II. Honoring of Parents.
THis is not, to speak properly, so much a Preceptive Maxim, as an inviolable
Law, which has ever been observed, as well by Barbarous, as the most Refined
Nations; which is a plain Argument, that a Law so engraven in Men's Hearts is no
other than what is natural. On the other side, God who knew that the Voice of
Nature is not loud enough to be heard by Men in the Hurry of their Appetites,
has given them an express Command to honor their Parents, and threatens them
with the severest Chastisements, if they ever dare break through the Tie of
this Command. Our own Reason at first sight discovers the Justice of this
Precept; for is there any thing more equitable than to pay our Respects, and
devote our Services to them, who next to God Almighty have conferred a Being on
and in our defenseless years guarded us by their Cares? Let Children and more
especially those of an illustrious Descent, who ought to have more generous
Inclinations than others) not fail to make the Duty of Obedience as bright in
the Practice, as it is lawful in the Obligation: And if they will not draw down
upon themselves the direful Effects of an incensed God, and be publicly
stigmatized with the Brand of Ungrateful, or rather Unnatural, not worthy to
load the Earth; let 'em always preserve the Sentiments of Love to their Parents
undiminished, and never relinquish the Submission, and grateful Acknowledgment
wherewith undesigning Narure has inspired 'em.

II. The Importance of Education.
CHildren without doubt have out-grown their Innocence when they have weakened
their Respect to their Fathers in any part, but their Guilt swells when they
have heedlesly with cool Advances drowned that Obedience which they owe: But
Fathers, who at random bring up their Children, are not much less criminal,
since it may be said, that for the most part, the Happiness or Unhappiness of
Life depends upon Education. A wicked Disposition is the fruitful Original of
all Vices, if there be not a laborious Application to correct, and turn it into
a new Track. A sine Genius uncultivated, pitiably destroys it self, and at an
Age when the Passions are so fierce, a Heart flatter^d by the Smoothness of
inviting Pleasures delivers it self up at a short Parley, when there is no kind
Informer to alarm it with the Poison that is under 'em. We see but too often
the lamentable Effects of an unpolished Education. A young Man who has never
been acquainted with Knowledge or Desert, is unfit to enter upon any
Employment, his Passions (whose full Swinge he indulgeth) engaging him to spend
his Estate, to risque all for their Gratification, and at the same time to
contemn and hate all the World; his Disorders never miss of involving him in
Troubles, and sometimes they are carried to that height, that he thereby
tarnishes the Glory of his Family, and everlastingly buries his Reputation.
What a gnawing Discontent haunts the Father who has disfigured his Son's Mind,
in not seasoning him with Instruction, not furnishing him with Piety, by
withdrawing those Helps for the Regulating his Manners and Demeanor, which he
was indispensably obliged to administer? But the Joy is all Rapture which flows
in upon a Parent, who, after by his own sedulous Application he has formed the
Understanding, and molded the Faculties of his Son, sees him no sooner
launched into the World, but he is flushed in universal esteem; that all civil
Men are fond of him, that he distinguishes his Performance in the first
Employments he undertakes, derives an Honor on his Family by his fine
Accomplishments, and every day more confirms the Reputation of his Virtue,
Wisdom and Abilities. Sec what is the Product of a good Education, a sedateness
in this Life, and the Felicity of the other are inseparable from it. Fathers
then are to leave no Stone unturned, nor to discover any Parsimony, when it is
to set out their Children with Advantage in the Voyage of the World; and
Children ought to look upon that time inestimable which is employed to instruct
them in their Duties, and to lay such necessary Principles into 'em, of which
they themselves will own the Benefit in the several Stages of their Lives. They
are obliged, I say, to second by their industrious Pursuit, and by their
Tractableness to encourage that Care which is taken of their Education; since
that is an Affair which aims directly at their Good, and in which they are more
interested that any others.

IV. What a Young Gentleman ought to Learn.
THE Variety of Truths in every Science is wrapped up in Difficulties, and as the
Bent of our Dispositions urges us to a Discovery, so there is always a
Satisfaction that sufficiently enterrains us in our Researches after it. But
yet all Sciences are not to be courted with an equal Passion; some are modish,
and we learn 'em only for Divertisement; but there are others which are
necessary, and more especially for a Man of Quality. Morality, Politics and
History are of that sort; the first plants steady Rules in his Mind, by which
he is to square his Behavior; the other two acquaint him with the Rocks where
other young Beginners have been shipwrack'd.

Mathematics contain so many convincing Discoveries, they relish so well with
the Palate of this Age, that at the least it is requisite to be acquainted with
the easiest and most useful part of them, as Arithmetic, Geography, and the
Doctrine of the Sphere; to which we may subjoin a slender Familiarity with
Geometry, which makes them who drudge after it reserved, and circumspect in
their Judgments, teaches them in their Quest of all sorts of Truths to mingle
an exact Method, and which inures them to keep the Mind intent, and eager, a
thing so essential to gain Sciences, and transact Busiess. It Is yet of more
moment to be Master of true Rhetoric, I mean that which does not only instruct
a Man to speak smoothly, but to carry away his Audience with a persuasive
Force; this taking Art upon some nicking Occasions, is strangely significant,
where blundering Courage and blunt Valor are baffled; this skillfully
insinuates it self into the Soul of Princes and great Men, Manages Friends,
Enemies, Strangers, uncontroulably conquers Hearts, damps popular Fury, and
even stops the Torrent of a flushed Armies Rage. Philosophy also must not be
excluded, it goes a great way in fashioning of the Mind, it gives it Wings, and
more elevates the Flights of it; Logic and Metaphysics make a Man more Just,
and more Acute; and natural Philosophy, by unfolding the Secrets of Nature, and
exposing the Beauty, the Order, and the admirable Harmony of the several Parts
of the Universe to a Man's Consideration, influenceth him at the same time to
adore the Author of such a mavelous Composure, The Study of the Tongues is to
usher in the Study of more serious Sciences, excepting Morality, whose
Principal Rules can never be learned too soon: The manly Exercises of the Body
are not to be neglected, they keep it in good Repair, they strengthen the
Constitution, and scatter a free Air through all a Man's Address, and a certain
Grace which surprizingly takes at first sight; which is no little Advantage in
the World. I do not speak here of Sciences proper for each Order of Men, I
suppose a Man designed to serve the Church is to dive into the Bottom of
Divinity; a Man of the Long Robe to pry into worm-eaten Laws, and superannuated
Customs, and a Sword-Man to cut his Way into all Military Knowledge.

V. What ought to be the Scope of his Studies.
ACtions which in themselves would challenge Esteem, are stripped of this
Privilege when they are founded on ill Principles. To undertake Study is of it
self an Employment decent, and honorable; but one ought to observe exactly what
Spring it is that turns the Engine, it is commonly to be puffed up with the popular
Gusts of vain Applause, or to exalt themselves to some advantageous Post, or to
be serviceable to the Public in Compliance with the Directions of Providence,
which would have every one exert all the Powers of their Souls, and display the
Vigor of every Talent they have received. The two first Motives are base and
unmanly; 'twere better never to be studious, than to be indebted to Ostentation
and Interest for the being so. The third being the easy Suggestion of the Law
of Nature, and the Genuine Product of innate Religion, is valuable, and worthy
of the Pursuit of a Noble Mind; so that those who are entrusted with the
Education of Children, ought seasonably to inform them, that their Studies
cannot be well employed, if they do not terminate in the Glory of God; if they
do not tend to their own Improvement, and to the Public Good of the Community
where they live.

VI. To make a Right Use of Knowledge.
I Am of Opinion, that they who would plead for any Priority of Esteem upon the
Account of their Birth, or their advanced Post in the World, must, by a
proportionable Extent of Knowledge, show that they are fairly entitled to it;
at least it will be allowed, that the Improvement of Reason is highly
advantageous to a Man of Quality, provided that he applies it dexterously; and
instead of being conceited of his own Acquirements, makes use of 'em only to
regulate his Mind, and to perfect his Understanding: For this Reason let a Man
have never such a Latitude of Capacity, he ought at no time impertinently to
hale his Learning on the Stage, nor to dispute eagerly for Trisles, nor to
impose his own Sense on every Body, and grate upon the Ears of Company with a
dogmatick Tone; this pedantick Way is never digested by Men of Sense. The
penetrating into Learning refines our Manners, inspires us with the Sweetness
of Address, gives us Discretion and Circumspection. So we see commonly, that
where Knowledge is exalted to the true Pitch, a great deal of Moderation,
Humility and Wisdom is intermixed with it; because as such Men's Souls have a
sort of Expansion beyond others, so they more suddenly discover, either the
Ornaments that polish, or the Flaws which subject their Minds to the casual
Thrusts of Calumny and Reproach.

VII. What a Man is to do for bis Relations.
THE Laws of Nature, and Decency, oblige us to pay our Relations that Respect
which they may challenge; to defend their Honor, to sustain their Interest when
we may do it justly; for besides that it is our Duty to be strictly united in
the most endearing Ties to those who are allied in Blood to us, it carries a
mighty Stream of Advantages along with it; you seldom see Families so cemented,
surprizingly blown up: They mutually support and cherish one another, either by
themselves, or by the Train of numerous Friends which they draw after 'em; and
this harmonious Intelligence preserves both in Splendour, and Authority in the
World. Put case our Kindred had not so much Desert to invite our Respect, yet
Decency and Charity forbid our Breaking with 'em; their Imperfections ought not
to make us inhuman, but rather generously to cover in them what we our selves
have a Regret to see, and to clap in with every Opportunity to do 'em Service.

VIII. To be Subject to the Laws of the Country.
THE Divine Prerogative, the Order of Civil Society, and the Public Good do
require that every individual Member in a Community should submit himself to
the Laws of it: In a Monarchy Subjects are obliged to honor and revere their
King: and in Commonwealths, the Magistrates, by Compact, lay Claim to
Obedience. In both, the Duty is indispensable; and it is a Law that has always
been stamped with the Approbation of every Clime. Whatsoever has been
authorized in a State by long Continuance, is not to be set aside to Humor an
ambitious Freak, or a popular Maggot, nor to undergo any Change, but for
Reasons more weighty than those which contributed to its first Establishment;
for People who would not be choused of a well grounded Settlement, had need
make sharp Inquiries, whether the specious Project of a Reformer does not
justle out that universal Repose which they who before enjoyed it, are equally
still obliged to promote. Innovations which private self-interested Men would
introduce into the Administration of a Kingdom, have often unhinged a Regular
Frame; but we rarely hear that they corroborate the old, or enlarge the Power
of any Realm. History swells with Examples which clinch this Truth. How
unanimously have Civil Laws ever past Sentence on Rebellion, tho it has been
gilded with the fairest Colors which could be laid on. It Is attested by the
Experience of all Ages, that the horrible Ills which Intestine Wars do produce,
are a greater Burden on any People, than those which they may sometimes risque
to incurr from their Prince, by his holding the Balance of his Government,
with some Unevenness, and seeming Partiality. Besides, if every sorry Pretender
of Grievances, should have License to disobey his Superiors whenever he had a
Mind to be delivered of a Complaint, (which all Rebels suppose themselves
privileged to do) farewell Society, for no Form of Rule can subsist on these
extravagant Terms, since every one hurried by his Passions, would never want
plausible Reasons whereon to ground his Plea of opposing the most lawful Powers
that ever were. So that however they who are Clothed. with Sovereign Authority
may misimploy it, People have no more to do but to be easy within the Bounds
of their Duty and Obedience, let 'em from thence acknowledge, that God by the
Proportion of his Chastisement seems irritated; and therefore as he disposes
of the Hearts of Kings, must be supplicated to enrich their Princes Minds with
such necessary Virtues, as may induce 'em to Govern with an equal Mixture of
Clemency and Justice. In the mean time that Nation we may call Happy, where a
King caresses his Subjects, as his Children; and they again, as to an indulgent
Father, pay back the acceptable Homage which they owe. Happy is that Realm
where the Prince with indefatigable Application propagates the Welfare of
those under his Care; and at the same time those who Bask themselves under that
Sunshine, smother the Popular Gusts early, before they become Gloomy Clouds,
big with impending Ruin, to darken the Luster of Royal Grace.

IX. The Duty of Allegiance is the Supreme Law.
THis Maxim naturally springs from the foregoing; for the Laws of all Countries
oblige us to obey the King, (as Streams gratefully to own the Fountain from
whence they do derive) and forbid us entering into any Engagements that by the
widest Construction might seem to clash with that first Devoir. Now such as by
an implicit Surrender devote themselves entirely to the Disposal of any Person
who is elevated either by Birth, or Office, to a Station superior to 'em, are
in great danger to strip themselves of their Fidelity to their Liege Lord, when
their Leader (who ought to animate the Allegiance of the Lower Orders of Men)
becomes himself the first Deserter. Therefore wise Men have always disapproved
these too strict Confederacies, and those private Alliances that should at any
time clash with our Natural Obligations. It Is enough if I give a Minister of
State the Respect that is due to his lofty Seat, without becoming so much his
Vassal, as to sell him that Liberty of mine, of which my Sovereign only is the
Master. It Is not I that blame in general a Deference that is paid to great Men,
if their Authoritative Influence does not Hand over Head betray us to comply
with their Criminal Passions; for if there be no Repugnancy to our Duty, who
can condemn it? It Is worth the while therefore to observe whether the Grandees
themselves are Loyal, and true to the Interest of their Sovereign, and whether
there is not a Snake under the Grass, and that under the Pretense of
communicating Favors to us, they have not a crafty Design to hook us into an
Association that undermines the Throne of our Prince, and is a forward step
toward his Deposing. But if we get any Light that they drive at so black an
Attempt, it is then we must with eager Haste retreat from the Perfidious, and
generously sacrifice to our Duty the Hope of any Glittering Advantage
whatsoever; besides, the Golden Promises, which those Grandees, who are the
Heads of Parties, make, prove for the most part a Fairy-Land; for instead of
being able to assist others, these empty Politicians are overwhelmed with every
revengeful Calamity, they precipitate those who adhere to the Wheel of their
Fortune; and both, at last, sink under the Punishment which they have taken
such pains to deserve. Let us then be persuaded, that whatsoever Revolutions
start up in a Realm, it is always best, inviolably to stick to the King; for as
his Side is the justest, so the Advantages of cleaving to it will be the most
honorable, and satisfactory.

X. Against those who dare censure the Government.
IT IS only the Effect of a giddy Presumption that spirits on tumultuous
Subjects to quarrel with the Administration of the State, imagining that
public Assairs would roll more smoothly if they were managged by their
fanciful Schemes, whereas it is their Duty to submit to the Laws, and to banish
murmuring, and stifle Opposition, when a Conformity to their Regulations is
required. If Abuses do insinuate themselves into any Government, and by length
of time encroach upon the Constitution; no doubt we ought to wish they were
Reformed; but the Means to do it are so very difficult, that to undertake it
without a Lawful Commission, would tend rather to the shaking of the Monarchy,
than the amending its Defects. It Is an Insolence in private Men to brand the
Government which they live under. It Is the Business of the King and his
Ministers to examine if there be any Disorders in the Community uncorrected;
nevertheless, if the particular Assemblies of the Estates, which are held in
different Places, find out any Miscarriages in their respective Provinces, they
may make use of the Authority which the King allows 'em for their Reformation;
and tho this Authority should prove insufficient for that End, and that the
Blots we would clear, still remain, we ought to acquaint his Majesty with the
Issue of our Endeavors, that he may give consent for the Prescription of new
Remedies, most for the Ease and Advantage of his People; but after all that
State-menders can allege, the King is to remain the Judge of any Alteration;
and tho he should not agree to such Demands as carry a fair Plausibility of
Right for their being granted, still we ought to acquiesce with this
Confidence, that his Non-concurrence Is for die real Good of his Subjects, tho
the Reasons are behind the Curtain to us, they are evident and demonstrative to
himself and his Counsel.

XI. Against the Fomenters of Plots and Disturbances.
IT IS easy to make a Judgment from the foregoing Principles, what a great Deal
they have to answer for, who by that State-craft of pressing for Redress of
Grievances, raise State Hurricanes, and by an unjustisiable Revolt stir up such
Commotions as sometimes shatter the Constitution, and (as our own Memories 100
sadly can inform us) often entirely deface, and overturn it. When these
dangerous Incendiaries first set out, the greatest Sticklers for Reformation
amongst 'em, to awe the Government, take great pains to show themselves
disaffected, hoping that they shall be taken off by Court-Favours, and
gratified by profitable Employments only for being tolerably honest. It Is a
false Step in the Politics, and an unwarrantable Reach of Subtilty, which puts
Men on such sharking Methods to mount themselves near the Helm; Experience
tells us, that this Cunning is not crowned with Success, but much otherwise;
and that more commonly the wild Pursuers draw down the Ruinous Consequences on
their own Heads. The Strength of these Reasons, and above all, the Eagerness to
do our Duty, ought to oblige us constantly to reject with Disdain all such
Propositions as are opposite to it, and to avoid even the least Occasions which
might call our Fidelity in question.

XII. The True Way to gain Esteem.
THere is nothing which sweetens the Toil of Life so well, as to know how to
win the Love of those you converse with. He that is a Master of this Sort, can
scarce tread the Stage unsuccessfully, because the World is Crowded with his
protecting Friends: but you will say, how shall a Man get admission to a Heart,
which it is so difficult effectually to conquer? It Is not a Task so insuperable
as you imagine; the fittest Qualification to set up with, is Civility; it makes
the Mind pliable, ready to embrace Instruction, generally pleasing; it takes
off our Ruggedness in opposing others, and makes us stoop to all Humors, as
far as the Obligations of our Duty will give leave; Complaisance, and the
Impressions which it naturally makes in the Circuit of our Life, repays us with
a plentiful Benevolence in the Receivers. Sincerity also has a great Stroke in
engaging the Affection and Trust of those we keep company with; provided that
you do not separate this Virtue from Prudence, and Discretion. A bountiful
Temper makes the Victory still more assured over another's Soul; for at the
very minute we conceive a Man serviceable and friendly to us, we cannot shift
off our Inclinations of loving him before we know him; and his Character, which
we have already begun to dress up with so many Advantages, wants nothing but
his Presence to complete it. To these various Methods of acquiring Respect, we
may add one which seems to comprehend all the rest: Would you be beloved of
others? Show them first the Example your Passion and Value for them will
strangely whet 'em to Imitation. The Satisfaction of being loved is so sweet,
that you must love irresistably in your Turn, and make the Party who occasions
it your Favorite. These are some of the general ways made use of by such as
would insinuate themselves into the good Opinion of others. Most Men are remiss
in sailing by this Compass, and then it is no wonder, if so many dash themselves
against the fatal Rocks. I do not set down the particular Means which may be
made use of to be riveted in the Love of Men; this depends on their Age, their
Humor, the Posture of their Affairs, and the different Turns of their
Understanding. I only add, that almost all have a blind side, one domineering
Passion, where, if you attack 'em, they lie open, and unguarded, and
consequently are quickly taken by surprise; but as that very Passion is
commonly exorbitant, no Man ought to be such a Coward as to flatter 'em where
they are least defencible, to gain some dishononorable End we have to serve;
for this would be to break through the Laws of Honor, founded on the Principles
of Christian Morality, which could never countenance any wicked Means, tho it
were to help forward the justest Undertaking whatsoever.

XIII. Of High Birth and Reputation.
IT were much better for a Man of Quality to lose his Life, than lose his Honor
by any reproachful Action; and the more illustriously he is descended, the more
Guilt he derives upon himself if he degenerates from the Virtue of his
Ancestors: Great Wealth, Dignity, and being nobly Born, which exalt the Merit
of Persons already in Estimation, only contribute to swell the Confusion and
Shame of those who have buried their Credit by the Repetition of their
Extravagancies; how can so many People then assume the Pretense of Quality,
when at the same time they are the Scandal of Christianity, and act below the
Worth of a Modest Man? Do they take their Honor to be an Hereditary Estate, and
that the Glory of their Predecessors shall redound to their Advantage, so long
as they have Vices enough to cloud the others Immortality; and (if it were
possible by unhallowed Practices) to unembalm their Memories? True Nobleness,
and real Grandeur has its Residence in the Soul; and if in any instance we give
Gentlemen the upper Hand of Plebeians, it is because we suppose 'em stocked
with-Endowments suitable to their illustrious Original; a happy Mixture of
Uprightness, Generosity, Courage, actual Bravery, conspicuous Loyalty to their
Prince, and hearty Zeal for their Countries Good, make up that glorious
Composition, that distinguishes them from the Level of other Men. It Is by the
Practice of these Virtues that Men confess deceased Heroes outdone, that they
recommend their Pedigree with more Advantage, and outshine the Luster of those
who lived before 'em. But then let 'em reflect, that their standing is so
ricklish at that height, that one ill Action is sufficient to mine a Credit
that has been building up many years; and what ill luck it is, that a Man
should part with a little Indies, only to take the Range of a Libertine, and to
surrender his Reason a Captive to wild Passion; if young Gentlemen would but
consider how serviceable a fair Reputation is; doubtless, they would be better
Husbands of it, and not lavish it away with such a customary Prodigality. Let
'em cast their Eyes around, and see if any thing gives equal Access to the good
Graces of the Prince, it is this that is the Inlet to Advancement both in Camp
and Court; it is this makes Merit sterling, which is idolized every where. To
conclude, it is this which begets Friends, and to which all contribute their
Countenance and Regards.

But one who lies under the Scandal of Dishonesty, draws upon himself universal
Hatred, and Contempt; he is fled from as a Pest, no Body will entertain
Conversation with him; he must not pretend to be a Favorite of his Prince, or
his Ministers; for who cares to prefer him whom he does not value, but by
consequence suspects? So that there are no Gifts, no Employments that a Man
without Honor can hope for, if he has a great; Estate, perhaps some miserable
Slaves to Interest will stick to him, but he will never muster one true Friend,
but always see himself under a Sentence of Banishment from the Society of
Honest Men.

XIV. Of the Choice of a Station in the World.
TO choose precipitately that Condition of Life from which a Man is never to be
divorced whilst he breaths in this Lower Region, is an Action that has as much
danger as weight in it, a Man ought not to come to a Determination about it,
till he has made the utmost Scrutiny into his own Inclinations, his Abilities,
the Suitableness of his Talents, and afterward considered whether from the
united Force of all these, he is capable to discharge all the Offices which the
Profession he would embrace, necessarily does challenge from him. And if he is
able to undergo the Fatigue and Pains that he must encounter, if he will be
faithful in the executing of it; It Is good upon such an occasion, to take along
with you the Thoughts of a discreet and knowing Friend; unveil to him with
Confidence your most private Sentiments in the Case. As the fixing upon an
Employment is the greatest Affair of a Man's Life, his first Care ought to be
to consult God about it, to desire his Benevolent Concurrence; for without that
Divine Direction, it is impossible to fathom what Course of Life Providence has
designed you to pursue. Every one ought to be very jealous of himself, and
narrowly to observe the Tendency of his Disposition, because it is to be feared
the Licentiousness of the Age may influence our Natural Genius to that Degree,
as to sway it to enter upon this important Choice for bare Temporal Ends,
without looking to the grand Point we have to negotiate, our Salvation. Be
sure, that Self-Love has no share in any Resolution you shall take in so nice a
Juncture. But if after having seann'd duly all Circumstances, you do not find
that God calls you to another way of Living, you ought to acquiesce in that
wherein you were bred. But to dispose otherwise of himself without such an
Intimation, to make Vows, to change Professions, and the Road of Life We have
trodden, is rather a fallacious Cure for Discontents, than any real promoting of
a Man's Happiness. When a Man rambles from one Estate to another, he risques a
great Deal by the Change, at least if he does not do it by the known Rules of
avowed Wisdom. Be very wary therefore in changing your Profession, for a
foolish Whim, or to sooth a weak Passion; such an Alteration seldom proves
happy; but is often followed by a Long Repentance, if Reason enlightened by
Faith does not judge it both necessary and advantageous.

XV. To be Vigilant, Intent, and Laborious.
IF a Man would do a Thing well, let him spare no Application to Complete it;
for if we see Men of the best parts (after all the Sedulity and Drudging you
can imagine) miscarry in the finishing of what they had projected, what Success
can a slender Wit expect, that is Loitering and Lazy in the Pursuit? When a Man
pushes at Advancement in the World, a thousand Rubs encounter him in the Road,
no Man ever aimed at a Triumphal Chariot, but those who envied him, would be
sure always to clog the Wheels. What is more common than to see Rivals justling
to get that Post they see others aspiring to? They that are before do all they
can to clip the Wings of such as are sluttering to mount; and they that follow
a Rising Man, lest they should lag a little behind, make the swiftest Efforts
to overtake him; they that go along with him labor to outrun him: Now how is
it possible to defeat all these Enemies, without summoning all our Wariness to
assist us? Besides, we live in an Age that will not be put off with what our
Forefathers would have digested; nothing but what is excellent, and
superlatively fine in its kind, will engage the Affections of those we have to
do with; any thing that is but indifferent, is either thrown back with Disdain,
or at most but very coldly received. Now let a Man have never such a towering
Genius, it is almost impossible to arrive at Perfection in any thing without an
extreme Study for the Mastery; it is therefore an impotent Flattery of ones
self, to conceive one can start up a topping Man, unless he be tenaciously
resolved to take a great Deal of Pains for the Character.

XVI. Of the First Undertakings.
IT IS a common Maxim, but of great Use, that a Man ought to lay a good
Foundation before he attempts to erect any Building, so that he may ward
himself against Reproaches it a Miscarriage should happen. A Man ought to rally
all his Forces, that he may not be baffled in his first Enterprises. It Is
generally observed, that a Man's future Fortune, and Reputation are flourishing
in proportion to his Success at his first setting out. If he be unsuccessful at
the first step, his Judgment is called in question; and it is presently imputed
to his want of Conduct, so that they are jealous of trusting him a second time
with any Employment considerable enough to give him an opportunity to signalize
himself; for instance, in the Army such a hotheaded young Fellow fought
unseasonably at such a place, undoubtedly his Rashness would disappoint that
hopeful Design we have in hand: It Is much more eligible to give the Command to
one that has more Discretion to execute it, when all this while the forward
Spark was not to blame; he was not justly chargeable with the Fault they lay
upon him, he behaved himself like a good Officer, all is one, if he misses his
first Aim, that shall justify his Accusation of Imprudence. Now since the
World is unjust enough sometimes to condemn even those who are Innocent, what
Pardon will there be allowed to those who misbehave themselves the first time
they are employed? The Impressions that are made so early, last so long, that a
young Gentleman cannot be too sollicitous to begin well All will conjecture, by
the early Budding, how you will flourish afterward.

XVII. Which is the best Way to gain the Esteem of Princes and Great Men.
IT IS as Glorious to purchase our Sovereign's Applause by sine Actions, as it is
shameful to entitle our selves to his Smiles, by sneaking Compliances and mean
Flatteries: A Gentleman at Court ought to bear up his Character with Honor, nor
to let any Interest out-sway the Obligations he has, to do nothing unworthy of
his Quality. He that would serve Persons in this exalted Sphere, must give
larger Testimonies of his Deference to, and his Regards for 'em; he ought
plainly to pull off the Disguise from those Truths which others masque, and of
which it is of exceeding Moment they should be informed; but yet it is to be
done with such Care, and dutiful Respect, that it may seem to be nothing but
the sincere Product of Standard-Allegiance: He that adheres to this Management,
falls very rarely in Disgrace, because his Actions commend themselves; it is
true, sometimes Plain-dealing is offensive; yet when it is accompanied with
Reverence, and a due Mixture of Discretion, and has also a solid Virtue for its
Basis, Princes and Great Men, who have an innate Generosity, will cherish it
more than you would imagine. But fulsom Flatteries are their Aversion, they
despise those who are guilty of 'em, as sordid Souls, who will stick at no
Baseness, if thereby they may preserve their present Fortune, or mend it.
Princes know exactly to distinguish an Honest Man, on whom they may with
Security rely, from a fawning Courtier who has only a Weather-Cock-Loyalty,
that will shift about when his Interest is in danger. It Is a wrong Course then
to acquire the Estimation of Great Men by creeping in their Presence, and
humouring them with the poor Arts of Servility. A Man who plainly honors 'em,
and serves 'em when Occasion is offered, but who is downright, sincere, and
whose Duty no Consideration can separate from his Principles, pleases 'em
better, and they will more readily prefer him.

XVIII. Of the Advantages of true Friendship.
MEthinks one may make a better Judgment of the Blessing of a true Friend, if
he does but consider the Condition of that Man who is stripped of all; he is
even an Exile in his own Country, and when he is in the greatest need to be
supported by Counsel, and Assistance, he has no Refuge to befriend him, no
Sanctuary either to revive his Hopes, or calm his Fears; if any good Luck
befalls him, it alters the Case but a very little; for the Sense that no Body is
a Sharer with him in it, swallows up the greatest part of the satisfaction: and
if he be out of Favor, it is more difficult to bear the Disgrace, because he is
over-loaded with a Burden which it requires more than one to stand under; but
a faithful Friend is Co-partner with us both in Joy and Grief, he makes us
easy in our Discontents, raises our prostrate Courage, and like a Man of
Honor stakes down his own Credit and Estate to make our tottering Fortune
steady. The interposing of a Friend's. Counsel makes the Current of our Affairs
glide more smoothly; his staid Advices oblige us to rectify what is amiss in
our Manners, and blameable in our Deportment. But without enumerating any more
of the good Offices we are indebted for to a Friend, how extremely taking is
the Pleasure that arises from Friendship barely so called? It Is certainly one
of the highest Contentments of Life to Love, and be Beloved. Nothing is so
agreeable as this Union of the Wills, and that Harmony of the Sentiments as is
always found betwixt two true Friends. What is there more charming, than that
Reciprocal and undisgnised Interchanging of one another most retired Thoughts?
And yet all I have said, is but an imperfect Representation of the Benefit and
Delights of true Friendship; our Expressions are too flat and pinioned, and we
cannot rise high enough to describe 'em, and no Man can speak pertinently of
'em who has not loved a Friend to an exalted Pitch.

XIX. Of the Choice of a Friend.
THE Advantages of a well meaning Friendship are not so considerable, but that
the Hazards to which a false Friend exposes us, are as great; for besides that
in some sort we are made accountable for his Errors, he engages us in
perplexed Affairs, and involves us in the same Misfortunes he has drawn by
Imprudence upon himself; it is therefore of great Consequence not to contract
Friendship but with a Man who has the necessary Qualifications of a stanch
Friend; the chiefest and most essential of 'em is Piety, for without that
Cement the strictest Friendship is but a Rope of Sand; there is no other Tie
sufficient to prevent a Dissolution of it; the jarring and contrariety of the
Passions will quickly disunite such as only Interest holds together, or some
other Motive yet more pernicious: But it is requisite, that the Friend we pitch
upon, besides Piety, be stored with Wisdom, and a sharp insight into things;
for that, without Prudence, will not do his Business in the World; let his Soul
be soft, provided, that it be steadfast and gallant the same time; let him be
courteous, modest, and of a frank Temper, with a good Command over his
Passions, firm in his Duty; and to sum up all, he must be completely an Honest
Man. If we our selves possess these recommending Qualities, we shall never
think our selves well matched but with a Friend of this Character; and a
Friendship so well settled, will mightily advance our own Happiness; but is
there such a Rarity to be found? I confess, it is difficult to find so many
Accomplishments concentred in a single Person; after all, if he be not wholly
Angelick, his Conversation will much becalm our Minds; if we find in his Soul a
plentiful Distribution of Piety, Discretion, Civility, and Constant Attendance
on his Duty, we must resolve to pass over the other concomitant Imperfections;
for as we are not without ours, and are desirous to meet with the charitable
Construction of others, it is but Justice that in our Turns we should have some
Indulgence for the small Escapes of Friends, when there is so much
superabundant Merit in other Instances that adds a Luster to all they do.

XX. Of the Good, and Ill Use of Time.
THere is no way so certain to arrive at Tranquillity in this Life, and to
assure our Happiness in the next, as a thrifty Employment of our Time;
wherefore, in my Opinion, this is to be done. A Man must set upon Study, and
proportion it to the Prospects he has in the World, and the Condition he
designs to embark in; he must choose first wisely what he will Read, and then do
it methodically; let him meditate at his leisure; and as he should dote on
Truth, let him follow it through all Disguises. Let him converse often with the
Learned, dive into Men in general, and himself in particular, and acquaint
himself exactly with the Business he designs to follow; and when he is once
entered, let him discharge his Obligations exactly; but as (if we do not move
upon good Principles) we cannot promise our Happiness to be well grounded, our
fundamental Care ought to be to love God, to serve him in a faithful Current of
Duty, to bring all our Actions to that Test whether they do set forward his
Glory. They who spend their Time so, never are tired, but live in the greatest
Sedateness; they fill their Minds with abundance of useful and entertaining
Knowledge, which satisfactorily busies 'em when they are alone, which makes 'em
serviceable to their Country, which tends to polish their Manners, and direct
their Affairs, and procures all Persons of Merit to be their Advocates; but
they that immerse themselves in Pleasures, and lay aside their useful
Endeavors, and commendable Labor, fall even below Scorn: as these People for
the most part are so sunk into the Ignorance of what they are to do, and will
never look home where their Stock is so poor, they drop insensibly into
Debauchery, which after it has infected their Mind, spreads a Contagion into
their Understanding, and plunges 'em in Libertinism and Impiety; so that their
Life which was at first but a dead Weight, and useless in the beginning,
becomes afterward guilty, and in the Consequences always unhappy. Since then
the Result of yawning Idleness is so fatal, and that by making use of our Time
well, we reap so many Advantages, is it not extremely surprising, that most Men
are unconcerned for this Trifling; that they only take pains to get it off
their Hands; and that they can be so senseless as blindly to tread the Path of
Life, and resolve to do nothing for God, the public, or themselves. Let us not
be imprudent to this height, to commit a Fault of this Magnitude as to be
irreparable, and which will entail on us an eternal Repentance.

XXI. To Speak Little, and Hear Others.
SOme Men have a mighty Fancy to be admired in Company; they love to unload all
their Store at once, and to lay their Understandings naked on the Stage, and
but to hear 'em is to tickle their Vanity; so that if you be silent, and seem
to devour what they say, you will infallibly strike 'em in the Right Vein; for
he that engrosseth Discourse looks on those he speaks to, as Pupils that fit
for Instruction: These Talkative Animals are to be shunned, and left in those
Clouds to which they raise themselves, because you will be worn out with their
long Twittle Twattle, with their nauseous Tautologies, and the lamentable Trash
they are drawn to at last to keep on vexing: A Man of Wit, and who knows Men,
and who submits to the Penance to hear what they say, speaks seldom, but
always to the purpose, and especially is very reserved in his Determination on
nice Subjects, So that concealing his own Sentiment, if Prudence will not
permit him to declare it, and Decency does not oblige him to it, he learns the
Reach of others, he can make a Judgment of the Depth of their Understanding,
and thereby gets clear of those Shelves which boisterous and overhasty Talkers
run themselves upon.

XXII. Of Duels.
IT IS strange, that the horrid Custom of fighting Duels has continued so long
in France: What a Madness is it to cut one another's Throats for some private
Quarrel, and most commonly for the veriest Trifles? One cannot without
Astonishment observe the Issue of these inhuman Practices; he that rages to
this height, loses all his Estate, is forced to quit his Native Country, to be
banished for ever from his dearest Enjoyments, he hazards his Life in the
Scuffle, if he overcomes; for what his Adversary leaves, the Scaffold takes,
and to make him completely miserable, if he falls in the Rencounter, his Soul
is sacrifie'd to his Passion; but some will say, it is to preserve his Honor,
that he endangers his Person at this Rate: A Pretense as wicked as it is false.
How dare Men then where Christianity is Professed set this Plea on Foot, that
they are repairing Honor, at the same Minute when they violate the most
eminent, and most indispensable of all other Duties, which is, to obey God? if
a Man be persuaded, that it is glorious to execute the Orders of his Prince, can
he believe, (if he be not out of his Wits) that it is a Wound to his Reputation
to fulfill the Law of the King of Kings; and for his sake to stifle Resentments
that are often so unjust, and taken up intemperately on petty Scores? But
setting aside the Divine Law, the Monarch, or more properly the Hero, which
reigns in France, very well understands in what true Bravery consists, yet he
reckons 'em both Generous and Brave, who in Compliance with his Edicts can be
as impenetrable as a Rock, where others drew immediately for satisfaction; and
he either himself determines the Compensation for the Injury, or transmits 'em
to such Judges, as so tenderly guard Honor, that the Affront is sure to be
repaid with an adequate Punishment; so that those who do not take their own
Revenge, are secure from Insults, since their Prince is Guaranty to chastize
the Attempters; besides, all wise Men will allow their Conduct the best, who
can smother their Sense of Wrongs, when God and their King command them to
repel the Passion: For they know that he who delivers himself over to his
Choler, and is sunk into the Extravagance of Revenge, does a thing that tastes
too much of the Brute; but he who keeps the Reins strict over his headstrong
Passions, shows that he is of the truest Mettle, and gives the most convincing
Proofs of a great Soul. Is there any farther need to urge more Reasons to let
you into the Sense of the Crime, and Stupidity of those Sparks who dare yet
revive Duels, that are very near already hissed of the Stage? Let no Man then
imitate these rash Fops, but let the sad Reflection, that so many Gallant Men
have died with counterfeit Honor in these prohibited Quarrels, and the looking
back to the danger to which they thereby expose themselves, stop the mad Carier
of such as are impetuously hurried by Boiling Choler, or Red-Hot Revenge, and
prevent their being precipitated into those numberless Misfortunes, which
naturally attend these unjustifiable Actions.

XXIII. To give Ministers of State the Honors which are due to 'em.
TO Crouch meanly before Court-Favourites, and to idolize those who are the
Darlings of the People, is too servile an Office for Mankind; to despise them
is a piece of Stateliness not to be justified; to upbraid them with
Mismanagement is a dangerous Fool-hardiness, since thereby a Man may provoke
their Resentment, and expose himself to all the dire Effects of it, which we
have the more Reason to fear, because it is in their reach so easily to crush
their Adversaries. Betwixt these vicious Extremes there is a middle way to
steer, which is to pay all the Deference and Respect which Persons of Quality
can reasonably expect to those who are the Dispensers of a Prince's Favors,
who divide his Cares, and sweeten the Toils which attend a Crown. It Is no
lessening to a Man of Birth, to endeavor to gain their good Will, and not to
slight the Advantages which he may reap from their Protection, provided that it
be not purchased by an unmanning of himself. But if a Man has received any
Instance of their Benefaction, the Laws of Honor oblige him to show all the
opportune Acknowledgments, where they do not interfere with his first
Engagements, and do not run counter to an inviolable Allegiance.

XXIV. Of the Love of Pleasures.
THere are People in the World who so eagerly abandon themselves to their own
sensual Satisfactions, that the Consideration of their Health is no restraint
to 'em; for whether it be at the Expense of Impairing or Ruining of it, they
will pursue their Debauch. What Title have such to Christianity, who, to
gratify disorderly Passions, will violate all the Sanctions of their Religion?
What Pretense have they to Rationality, that rather than be abridg'd of a
Pleasure, will have it at the cost of over-leaping all the Boundaries which
Reason has prescribed? Is it not a Nickname to call 'em Men, when by their
culpable Extravagance they depreciate themselves, and sink into the Form of
Brutes, and by having less Command of themselves than other Animals, they are
in some sort inferior to the vilest Beasts, whom Nature has instructed to
grasp no more than is necessary to their Preservation. That we may not fall
into such Disorders, let us use discreetly, and without vehemence, such
Pleasures as refined Reason and the Divine Law have indulged us. Let us not be
wedded to such flitting and vain ones, as have no Tendency to make us happy;
but let us rather dispose the just use of 'em to the Glory of God, which is our
end, so we shall entirely save three considerable Things which Debauchery would
wrest from us; I mean the Purity of our Souls, our Bodily Health, and the
uncontrolled Freedom of our Minds.

XXV. To Study Himself.
SElf-Love always turns the Tables on the smoothest Side, every one screws up
his own Price, and by a Partiality of Representing sets a greater Value on
himself than he has. It Is true, what therefore must be done to obviate it,
there is no such way as to study our Selves, that is to say, to examine
strictly, and without any Biass; this Enquiry lets us into the Character of our
Understanding, the Disposition of our Mind, and this Scrutiny is of very great
use to us, it assists us to all Intents and Purposes, to make the best of our
Endowments, to rectify our ill Inclinations, to strip us of our Vices, and to
advance our Virtues. We say, such an one would be a very fine Gentleman, and
would rise apace in the World, if he had not one great Fault that he is not
sensible of, because he never looks at home to see what is out of Order there.
We ought also to reflect with Precaution upon our Actions, but especially on
those we have already done, that we may in Futurity show better Steerage; and
upon those we are to set about, that they may be decently circumstantiated, and
all revengeful After-claps may be avoided. It costs dear sometimes to give way
to a Passion, or a Crotchet, and an unseasonable Omission, or a mere Maggot
inconvenes us afterward with a tedious Repentance; it is yet of the highest use
to pry into every Ones Good or Bad Deeds; it is good to keep a Model of some
Men's Discretion in our View, and where others have been shipwrack'd, may well
teach us not to sail on the same Coast.

XXVI. To Converse with Wise Men, of Great Abilities.
WHen we first appear in the World, an Ignorance as profound, as it is
universal, lies by us in the Cradle; the Studies which employ us in out Youth,
dissipate in some measure those Clouds which clog our Understanding; afterward
we creep into Knowledge by Custom, and we imbibe a few Notions which are
serviceable to make our Conduct Regular; but the Stock we take in is so scanty,
that it is not adequate to the Occasions of a Man of Quality, who is to move in
a higher Orb; how much Speculative Knowledge does he want, besides what more
immediately concerns his Profession, in Morality, History, and the Politics?
Perhaps he has neither Leisure nor Wit eno to learn of himself what is most for
his Advantage, and most suitable to the whole Course of his Affairs, what must
he do then to arrive at Instruction? He must keep company with Men who are most
eminent in their way; it is requisite to have a judicious Tutor by him, who by
long and unwearied Endeavors, has waded into the Depths of Learning; for he
has separated the Trash of it, and will insensibly scatter in his Occasional
Addresses into his Pupil's Mind all the refined and necessary Treasure that
every Science locks up. A Great Man with this Management can never fail to
serve his Country successfully, and to gain the Height of Applause; for his
Society with the Virtuoso's, the Men of Letters, and the most celebrated Wits
of the Age will scarce admit him to be unaccomplish'd in any thing. And as he
adorns his Mind with the Flowers he collects from such as are singular in their
several Professions, when it best serves his purpose, he appears a persuasive
Orator, a sharp Philosopher, an intelligent Lawyer, an observing Statesman, and
an experienced Captain: In a Word, one extremely able to surprise the Vulgar,
and takingly to affect the Learned.

XXVII. To have Variety of Friends.
AMongst all the Maxims of true true Policy, this is none of the least useful;
indeed a Courtier, or one who lives amidst Persons of Quality, wants a thousand
different Props to bear him up in the World: good Counsels in the first place,
how to manage himself with Discretion, the Advices of a sincere Friend to
rectify his Errors, some Glittering Metal to defray his necessary Expenses,
Favor to lead him up to Preferment, or to secure him in the Continuance of
what he has; a Man ought to contract Friendship with those who have the Knack
to make him Gay when he is sowr'd, that can support him when he is overborn
with Disgraces, that can remove his Fears when the Load is most anxious, he
must have others to commend his Desert, and still more to inform him of the
Designs of his Enemies, to side with him against their Stratagems, and steadily
to help him in his own Undertakings. Now it is very difficult for one single
person to do all this; for tho he had the Will, often it will not fall within
the Compass of his Power; it is therefore necessary to have Friends of all
sorts, but such as are branded with the infamous Note of Dishonest. Where one
Friend is deficient in Assistance, another may supply it, and that which each
in particular is not able to effect, their united Application will easily
accomplish. When I say that a Man must have different kinds of Friends, I would
not be understood, as if I intended a strict Cementing of Affections with
abundance, I mean no more than that a Man ought to make it his Business by fair
and obliging Carriage, and above all by his readiness to do any Civil Office,
to gain the Love of those he converses with, so that in any Exigence he may
confide in 'em, and not be lurch'd of their Kindness when he most wants it.

XXVIII. Of Great Designs.
GReat Projects are commonly so dangerous, and ripen with such Difficulty,
there is such a Genius, such a suitable Capacity, so much Prudence and
Resolution required to bring 'em to maturity, that they are only extraordinary
Men who can succeed in 'em to arrive at that glorious Undauntedness, which is
especially needful in these hazardous Occasions, and which not only arises
from the Strength of Reason, but from a natural Disposition for it; a Man ought
timely to fortify himself with that Armor, that he can stand the Shock of
Danger, and defy it; that he is not to be frightened with any Hercules
standing in his way; nor discouraged by any Accidents which come athwart him; a
Man thus prepared, is ready when he is called forth to some great Action: For
instance, to Replace a Crown that has been wrested from the Head of a Lawful
Sovereign, to Restore a Dishonored Religion, or to deliver a Groaning Country
from its Shackles, he has Vigor eno to conceive, drive on, and execute a
Design that has such a Latitude of Generosity. History affords us signal Proofs
of the Advantage of this Maxim; for it shows us, that when Affairs seem
irretrievable, that Men are dispirited with Fear, and dwindled into an
universal Consternation, one brave Fellow, who is fearless, and has a competent
Mixture of Prudence with his Courage, may rally a desponding Army, revive
drooping Communities, quicken their shrunk and dying Hopes, extirpate
State-Locusts, is able not only to settle absent Peace, and to surround a
Kingdom with its old Tranquillity, but also to augment its Glory, and be once
again a Terror to its Enemies.

XXIX. To Affect Nothing.
AFfectation is so far from setting off the Luster of Beauty, that it abates
its Charms; and persons who are otherwise handsome, by this aukwardly Air prove
always disagreeable; why should People constrain themselves to please, Graces
are not like Flowers that will thrive in any soil where you would have 'em;
it is easy Nature that gives 'em Being, and in spite of that it is fruitless to
expect 'em. As the Eyes of the Mind are more acute and delicate than those of
the Body, so the least shadow of Affectation obscures and impairs 'em, and
nothing agrees with 'em so much as what appears without Ornament, easy,
unforced, and inartificial; a Man must follow his Genius, and never depart from
it: it is this which improves the Pleasure we meet with in conversing with
ingenious Men; some have a great share of solid Judgment; others have
surprising Strokes of excellent Wit; others there are who invite our Respect by
the Softness of their Address; others steal away our Souls by their Lively and
Jovial Humor: And if all these that are Masters of so many good Qualities,
should go out of their Road to offer at those they are unacquainted with, under
pretense that they would agree better with 'em, they would go a great way in
making themselves ridiculous; let therefore every one keep the Character which
suits him, with assurance, that he will cease to please that very moment he
quits it, to usurp another which he does not understand; not that it is
improper to hide any Deformities in Body or Mind; and if it be possible to make
'em passable, at least, those of the Mind, but no Man should go in Quest of
artificial Set-offs, which, when they are obtained, will still look unnatural,
since it is certain, that every Body is so much the less lovely, the more pains
they take to appear so. This holds equally in Virtues, where Affectation in 'em
destroys all their Charms, and blasts the whole Merit they pretend to.

XXX. To know what will take with the Age.
THO Men in all Times agree in many Things, yet they widely differ in many
others; there is a visible Difference betwixt ours, and our Ancestors Way of
Living. If any one will give himself the Trouble to make the Comparison, we may
see an old Courtier, that was a Complete Master in the Art of treading
Court-Mazes, who now would be much perplexed to know how to demean himself; for
it is with Courts under diverse Reigns, as it is in Comedies, Love and Ambition
sit out the great Characters of the Stage, yet the Intrigues of both are
managed with great Variety; the Heroes and the Milk-sops do not sight and whine
the same way; so Ambition, Love, and other Passions haunt Courts still, but
they are not now to be managed the same way they were heretofore: Besides as
the People that are now in that Labyrinth are more sly and subtle, new Tricks
must be tried to fathom 'em; we must study the Customs, the Ways, and the
Disposition of our Age, not thereby to gratify our guilty Affections, but
rather to take special Care of our Understandings, that they may know how to
shape themselves to the present Posture of Things, to unravel the hidden Clues
which lead the Persons we have to do with; and lastly, to discover which are
the nearest Ways to gain every Bodies Favor, and so get the Point we are
desirous to obtain.

XXXI. To know how to be well Employed when we are alone.
THE Aversion which Men entertain for Solitude, is most commonly an Indication
either of the Narrowness of the Understanding, or of depraved Manners, and yet
there are whole Shoals in the World which are tired downright with the privacy
of one half hour; their Time lies upon their Hands, they are disquieted, and
fretting, and even drowned in sorrow, being a Burden to themselves; but Men
who are well weighed, dispose of every Minute of their. Time to Advantage, and
are never busy to more purpose, than when they are alone; it is then they form
the Schemes which do 'em most good; they scan with Niceness the Particulars
they are to set about; they pitch upon the likeliest way to serve their
Friends, and to defend 'em from the Attacks of their Enemies, to crown their
Undertakings, commendably to discharge their Duties. To conclude, it is then
that they bestow a thousand needful Reflections on their own Conduct, and other
Men's; and if there be any overplus time, they make use of it to read Books,
which instruct and divert at the same moment; or they fasten upon some
ingenious and noble Art, or they single out that Science they delight in, and
polish it; Experience daily acquaints us what a Fund of Life we provide, when
we wisely dispose of our vacant Hours; for my part, I do assure you, as the
Practice of this Maxim highly vindicates our Conduct, so it is a main Pillar on
which our Happiness does rely.

XXXII. Not to Judge of Actions by the Event.
FOrtune is so used to play the Jilt, that she has often baffled the best
concerted Designs, but then she cannot pillage us of the Glory of having taken
prudential Methods to succeed; it is eno' for an able Man, that he has omitted
nothing which might reasonably conduce to bring his Enterprise to a good Issue;
and then a lucky Hit, or a Miscarriage should neither cramp nor amplify that
Commendation which he deserves. I confess the Humor of the World runs
violently the other way; for if a Man's Sails be filled with Success, then he
shall be vogu'd for a Man of Conduct; but if he is once stranded by a
Disappointment, he shall never get off the Ignominy: They, whose Reach is so
shallow that it strikes no farther than the Surface of Things, are led away by
the bare Impressions of Sense; but Men of correct Judgments are not thus
imposed on, being taught by Experience, that Accidents often break the justest
Measures; they can distinguish nicely what share uncertain Fortune has in an
Action, and where it is that Prudence gave Birth, and Direction to it: Some Men
will hunt after Reputation in the ready Road to lose it, they will commit
intolerable Blunders in their Contrivance, and yet by Chance-Medley, get through
'em, when at the same time time others shall lay as hopeful Schemes as if they
were overcharged with Wisdom, and yet can borrow no Success to recommend 'em.
Nevertheless it is ten to one, if he, who keeps clear of Rocks, and gets safe
into Port, be not only applauded, but advanced, tho it was the most unadvised
thing to run into the Mouth of so much danger; but let a Man have never so much
personal Worth, that it rises very near Veneration, and sends abroad but one
abortive Issue of his Brain, the ill-natured World presently snatches up
Pretensions of Rashness, or Neglect, whereby to worry and devour his Credit. So
partial are the most of Men, as to approve that which ought to be condemned,
and where they should be eminently favorable, there to lay the most frowning
Sentence, yet, let not any ill-grounded Censure be big eno' to damp our
Courage, but rather, when we recur to the Testimony of our own Conscience, and
in Conjunction with this, find, that those who do not run with a Biass, put an
equitable Construction on our Actions, and beyond all this, that there is an
indispensable Submission due to the Will of God, who orders, or permits all
that befalls us; let us rally amidst all Oppression, smile under the Cloud, and
be more than Conquerors over an inhospitable Race of Wou'd-be-Men.

XXXIII. What a Man is to do for his Friend.
AS there is no Man consummate in every Point, so doubtless a Gentleman is
brought to this Dilemma, either to quit all Friendship, or to bear with the
Defects of his Friends, but perhaps it may be started, whether we are bound in
all Emergencies to assist those whom we are endeared to? This Question has been
decided by what has been said under the Head, Of the Choice of a Friend; and
indeed, if two Friends do not wear Masks, and answer the Description I have
given of 'em, they will never ask any thing of one another which is not just,
and so consequently must be granted on both sides; but if one of, 'em proves a
shrouded Friend, and would require any thing of the other, which has a direct
Repugnancy to his Duty, he has all the Reason imaginable to expect a Refusal.
Such an Offer is an Act of Hostility, and Treachery is seen through the Cloak of
Kindness; here is no Specimen of Love, but rather the visible Improbity which
arises from Hatred, that can be willing to drive a Friend upon the Precipice
of Ill; these have a Design to break in upon our Christianity: but there are
other fantastical sort of Friends, who believe a Man obliged by the Seal of
Friendship to be always of their Opinion, and upon this false Principle take
pet, if you oppose their Impertinence; People of this Temper do but ape
Friends; yet they ought to be acquainted, that such a blind Complaisance is
unreasonable; and if that will not satisfy, I conceive it the best way to
retire insensibly from such Company, and to let Friendship dwindle into bare
good Manners. But if a Man chance to live in such a blessed Angle of the World,
as to find a wise and virtuous Friend, we ought never to be uncompliant in his
Service, but prevent his Requests, and if it were possible, to step forward,
and anticipate his Desires, there is no more to be done; but that every one
spares the Importuning of his Friends, when he finds the Application is their
Torment, and never overload 'em with the worst part of his Humor; for nothing
more discoves an Ignorance of the Rules of Friendship; no powerful Temptation
can engage an Honest Man to make his Friend uneasy, but he will take a
thousand Steps to remove all the Obstacles of his Happiness.

XXXIV. Of a Gay Humor, and the Use of Jesting.
IF to be Merry and wise can stand together, at least commonly they are
opposite to one another, the first shows a volatile Inclination is unfit for
great Exploits; but the other on the contrary discovers a profound
Understanding, which despising Trifles sets upon what is solid, and is addicted
to nothing but what is of moment; besides, the Custom of Joking does by no
Means, in my Opinion, suit a Man of Quality; it is the Business of common People
to make sport for Company; if any thing is well said, it is applauded; if they
prate foolishly, they are laughed at; and what signifies all this? But such as
are distinguished by their Birth, or their Figure in the World, sink their
Character much when they turn Drolls, and expose themselves to the Derision of
their Hearers; it is too undervaluing an Employment to arrive at the knack to
make all others laugh, unless it be by chance, and without any labored Design,
to say a sine thing; yet I am not so Stoical, that I would have Persons of
Quality entertain one another in the Saturnine Way; let 'em rally, but
inossensively; let the Raillery be noble and fine, such as may divert the
Company with Strokes of Wit, interlarded with Mirth and Vivacity, but let these
witty Jests be always becoming the Dignity of the Speaker, let 'em strike home,
but clean, and such as may make no Inroads upon Civility and good Breeding.

XXXV. To Neglect Nothing.
AS Profitable as this Maxim would be in human Life, yet it is not put in
Execution with any great Care. A young Man especially, who does not love to be
contradicted, takes but little pains to observe it, because it would put him to
the Expense of some Reflections upon his Conduct, and the Postute of his
Affairs; but he does not mind all this while, that the Omission of a Duty which
he thinks unnecessary, may defeat him of that Post he is reaching to obtain.
This happened to Mr. -- he lost an Opportunity of Rising, for want of a Pat
Visit to the Duke of -- that was to be discoursed about a great Employment: one
cannot be too nice, or too careful in the Transacting a considederable Matter. A
wise Man that enters upon Business, endeavors to remove any Impediment that
may cross it, or be a Block in the way of his Advancement; for he foresees that
a little Obstacle unremov'd, either through Inconsiderateness, or because it is
slighted, sometimes balks a good Design, and prevents its coming to a good
Issue.

XXXVI. Of the Use is to be made of Great Men's Favors.
Disgraced Courtiers may say what they will, that their Fall is by the
undermining of their Enemies, or the Maggoty Turn of Fortune's Wheel; but if it
be severely examined, their Disgrace generally arises from their own ill
Conduct, they abuse the Credit, Princes and their Patrons give 'em; and when
they have done so, how unreasonable is it for 'em to imagine they should not be
under a Declension? Favor in it self is very ticklish, and there are a
thousand Ravishers lie at catch to seize it; whence it follows, that to
preserve it, Men must govern themselves with Care, and make use of it
prudently, and with much Precaution; if you will be assured of this Treasure,
and not let it slip out of your Hands, pursue this following Advice: Be civil,
honorable, and modest; for Haughtiness and a lofty Humor, will draw upon you
Clouds of Hatred, and Black Envy, whereas Genteelness and fair Carriage will
imprint a Belief that you deserve your Post. In the next place never beg any
thing for your self, or at least very rarely, if a Prince or a Great Man
understands, that your Application to his Service is sincere, and
disinterested, his Largesses will be beforehand with your Entreaties, then, be
sure you never move for an unjust thing; Fourthly, do not stake down your own
Credit, but for persons who have a large Stock of it themselves, and that too
but seldom: In the fifth place, let your Requests be always well timed, and
tendered with great Modesty and Respectfulness. Lastly, be not lame in
acknowledging the Bounty you reap, and publish to the World by your redoubled
Zeal for your Mastet's Service, that you are not insensible of the Value of
your Benefactor. It Is thus you are to manage the Favor of of Great Men, and by
such a Method you will assuredly oblige 'em to retain the Affection for you.

XXXVII. Of Superfluity and Neatness.
TO be Neat, is not only advantageous, but one may even vouch for its
Necessity; for besides that it contributes to our Health, it goes a great Way
in mending our Decorum in the World, so that a Genteel Man must by no means
neglect himself; yet there is a great deal of Difference betwixt being cleanly,
and being overnice; every one in this matter is to live in a due Compass, and
to have Respect to his Age, and his Quality: In reference to another sort of
Neatness which consists in the way of Dressing, I hold it to be innocent, and
as to that we may follow the Mode; but to be extravagantly expensive in
Clothes, in Furniture, in Buildings, in Entertainments, in Equipage, to value
himself for eclipsing others in any of these, and even to Rival the
Magnificence Princes, is an Effect of Pride, and an Affectation unbecoming a
wise Man. They that take such Pains to be distinguished by things that scarce
deserve our Thought, give great ground to believe, that being conscious of a
Deficiency of Merit, they would dazzle their Admirers with outward Splendor.
When a Man comes once to understand what true Glory is, and to find himself
capable to acquire it, he contemns that Luxury which so much puts upon the
Brutal Herd of Men.

XXXVIII. To have as few Enemies as you can.
YOU cannot beat it into some Men's Heads, that there is any reason to fear the
Underling World, which they scorn, and abuse on all occa^^ons; say they, we
stand on such high Ground, that their Arrows, tho levelled at us, can do us no
Mischief ('it is as whimsical as the Giants Attempt to dethrone Jupiter) but they
are much in the wrong; for Hatred and the sweet Desire of Revenge are such
ingenious Passions, they are so wakeful to gain their Ends, that they will sall
upon such Methods as you could never have imagined they would pursue, Men of
the vilest Condition having nothing of their own to save, are easily whetted to
have at all of other Men's, and as inconsiderable as we think 'em, it is
dangerous to drive 'em to extremity. Now if a Set of Enemies beneath us have so
much Power sometimes to plague us, what shall become of us, if we provoke the
Malice of our Equals, which are in better Circumstances to annoy us, or by
inflaming our Superiors, blow up that Fire which is nor to he quenched but by
our own entire Ruin? It follows from hence, that we are to disoblige no Body,
but to behave our selves with such Circumspection, and discreet Management
toward all, that we may leave every Body vying who shall have the best Opinion
of us.

XXXIX. Not to be Discouraged.
IT IS the peculiar of a narrow Soul to have his Courage flatten'd at the
approach of the least Difficulty; a Man of Resolution, and who truly bears his
Maker's Image, is astonished at nothing, but finds a Cure for every Ill; he
stands brave, where others sneak, where others stumble, and are born down with
fear, he stands his Ground, and snatches an Occasion from hence to look above
danger, and to triumph where others fell; it is then that by a more vigorous
pursuit he doubles his Pace, and pressing on with extraordinary Efforts, he
often breaks through every thing that stands in his way: Great Men never show
more Courage, than when they are at the very Brink of Despair, because
Experience has informed 'em that a little Matter has changed a whole Scene of
Affairs, or at least, that a seasonable Show of Boldness, and generous pushing,
has not only extricated themselves out of Danger, but struck Terror in their
Enemies; this stout Resistance in terrible Shocks, tho it should meet with ill
Success, would yet mightily befriend the Character of the Commanders, and
therefore it is chiefly necessary for Kings and Generals of an Army; for if they
be stunned, and do but seem staggered with any frightful Apprehension, the main
Body of the Soldiers immediately eye it, and will not stay to stare Death in
the Face, but become a cheap Prey to the willing Conqueror.

XL. Of Pride.
WHY should we value our selves so much upon our Desert, and give our selves
the Preference to so many others, who perhaps have more worth concentred in 'em
than we have; are not our Bodies derived from the same Original, and our Souls
the bright Product of the same Author? whatsoever Advantages we are endebted
for, either to Nature, or Fortune; it is a great Instance of our Weakness, it
they make us more high-spirited; for these are but a poor Enjoyment at the
best, but yet they are presently weighed down, if we put 'em in the Scale with
the Privileges of Heaven, to which our Faith prompts us to aspire; they often
slay away in spite of all our jealous Care to retain 'em, and a Man of sound
Understanding slights 'em, because by being Master of 'em he does not find that
he is vested in any solid Happiness he looks after; and although he could possess
'em without Dislike, or preserve 'em without Disturbance, the Thread of Life is
so suddenly cut off, that he must be proud of a very little matter, who will be
puffed up with the Conceit of all these Advantages, which in a few fleeting
Hours he must surrender; sooner or later Death seizes on 'em, it strips us (as
I may say) of our glittering, but borrowed Dress, and by that instructs us,
that when we have dived into the greatest perfection of Men, they are all
equally miserable; and there is no Fence against that Claim. I confess
sometimes we do a thing that a Commendation does not seem to be thrown away
upon it; but then consider that self-love is almost ever the Motive that spurs
us on to Action, we have more reason to mortify our Pride in doing it, than to
assume any Vainglory for the Performance. Persons, whose Piety is the most
resin'd, and unmixed, who only, it seems, should have some Right to value
themselves more than others, are removed at the greatest Distance from Pride,
being persuaded not only that it is the capital Enemy of all Virtues, and that
it poisons their very Fountain; but that besides it is always ill grounded. To
conclude, this Vico is unjust, because it makes a Man usurp that Glory to
himself, which in Propriety of Speech belongs only to God; it is odious, because
it induces us to despise every Body; and to sum up all in short, it stands in
direct opposition to the true Humility, for which Saints are Glorified, and
which influencerh us to love God, and and our Neighbor to the bell purpose.

XLI. To Regulate a Man's Expenses.
IT IS absolutely necessary for him that will carry his Figure high in the
World, to proportion his Laying out to his Revenue. How are they who squainter
away their Estates disregarded, and who are always besieged by their Creditors?
He is mistaken that would, be cried up for a bountiful Man that way, and who
thinks to rise at Court by being profuse; the Prince and his Ministers make a
natural Judgment presently, that he who cannot improve his own fortune, and
Regulate his Domestic Affairs, is very incapable to be the Guardian of a
State, to command an Army, or to take the best Course to establish the Peace of
Provinces; whence we see daily, that they who swell their Out-lets much beyond
their coming in, to cherish some prevailing Passion, as Hunting, Luxury,
Debauches and Play, never get any considerable Employment; so that let their
Parts be never so good, they signify nothing to 'em, because they have no
Opportunity to take off their rust. Covetousness is abominable, without doubt,
there is no Vice that more points out a mean-spirited Man than that; but if
Prodigality is less criminal in the beginning, its Sting is more to be dreaded
afterward; there are nevertheless some peculiar Occasions, where to he lavish
is commendable, as when it is for the sake of Religion, for Public Good, or the
eminent Service of a Friend; if these be excepted, keep always to a wise good
Husbandry, and retrench all unnecessary Expenses; this is the true way to be
continually supplied with what is necessary, to live honorably in his Station,
and for a Man to be altogether Independent.

XLII. To know how to Choose his Company.
MOST Men have an overweening Opinion of themselves, are conceited of their
Nobility, their Grandeur, their Knowledge, their Wit, and their other natural
and acquired Qualities; they are commonly humoursome, hot stubborn, deceitful,
full of Detraction, wedded to Interest, and Envy, and the like. I confess these
false Steps seldom meet together, but few persons can boast of their Exemption
from all o^ ^^^m: in a word, Vice is so rampant, and Virtue so much out of
Countenance, that a Man never so inclined to be sociable, durst not multiply
his Acquaintance; yet since we cannot live alone, or without some friendly
Intercourse, unless we bid adieu to the World all at once; A Man is obliged,
for the Ease of his own Life, to choose a small number of deserving Persons, and
to hold a Conversation with 'em, where Piety. mutual Confidence, Sincerity,
good Breeding, and if it be possible, Learning, may make one glorious
Constellation; the Pleasure and Convenience of such Company is inexpressible;
for there, as we unbend our Cares, we are recreated after a Fatigue; when
Disgraces stab us, here we are infallibly heai'd, that is the proper place to
pass an Act of Oblivion on all our Affronts; it is there we fill the Magazine of
our Minds with a thousand good Things, which we draw out for the several
Occasions of our Lives; to finish all, this is the way to make time slide
pleasantly, and with the greatest Stroke of Advantage to us.

XLIII. Of sharp Raillery, and Villifying.
THere is no such cruel Diversion as some People take in bitter Jests; what a
Stock of Malice must they have to set up with, who take ^ Satisfaction in
bespattering with this sort of Drollery the Understanding of those they fall
upon, and hug themselves with the Thought that they have run others to a Stand;
Therefore Religion, Civility and Prudence oblige us to banish from our
Conversation all venomous Discourses, which are not only ill in themselves, but
may have also very mischievous Consequences attend 'em; let Detraction be shut
out of all Company; for at the best it is perfidious to speak ill of our
Friends, it is downright Malice to calumniate them who are indifferent to us,
and it is errant Cowardliness to revile our Enemies; besides that discreet, Men
give very little Credit to Words ^^^t have so much of the Wormwood^^sh in 'em;
those who feel the Point (...) is Satyr, make him pay very dear (...) the fine
Things he said only to recreate the Guests: He that is foul-mouthed may
accidentally please, but every Body is shy of him; every one apprehends him his
particular Enemy, because it is well known, Obloquy spares no Body, and that the
most units blemished Virtue is not sheltered from its Darts. Reputation costs
so much in the purchase, that it is perfect Robbery to have but an Inclination
to destory it, or upon any pretense whatsoever to ruin a Work for whose
Acquisition so much Sweat and Pains has been expended.

XLIV. Of Sincerity.
THIS Virtue is so essential to Persons of Quality, and this Age is so little
acquainted with, that it will not be Labor thrown away to set down in this
place some Representation of it; for I cannot Imagine, that unless a Man's Mind
be corrupted by the false Maxims now in Vogue, he can know it, and not be
struck with admiration of it at the same time; we say therefore that a sincere
Man never makes use of Disguises, or Cheating to obtain his Ends, he cannot
endure any ambiguous and equivocal Terms, which Sharpers make use of to
surprise those who act freely: he never promises more than he will perform,
and he religiously observes his Word when he has once engaged it; if he finds
that more is expected from him than he can agree to, he explains his
Intentions, that he may entertain no Body with vain Hopes, he does not publish
every Truth he knows, nor disclose all his Thoughts, because very often Charity
and Prudence do forbid it; but when these license him to speak, he plainly
tells his Mind, and cloaks the Truth of nothing which concerns his friends, tho
they are kept in the dark for every thing besides; his Virtue shines so much
the brighter, the less pains he takes to publish it; and as he hates all
Affectation, his way is infinitely engaging, because it is plain, and natural;
it is not that he yields himself up to he cheated, he takes the best Method to
keep clean of the Snares that are laid for him; but it is always by necessary
Considerations, without showing the least suspicion; his admirable Candor
joined to his great Wisdom, gains him every Bodies Affection, and every Body
grows proud to be acquainted with a Man of this Character. Such Plain Dealing
is rare without doubt, and especially at Court. Yet I have seen Masters of this
sine Quality to that Degree, that it would be impossible for you to know 'em,
without having, I will not say, not only an Esteem, but even a Veneration for
'em. To conclude, Dissimulation, which has more Artifice, and Craft, than
Discretion, and true Policy, does a Man as much harm that would settle, and
advance his Reputation in the World, as the Plain-Dealing, I have spoke of,
does him good.

XLV. Of Reconciliations.
THey who stubbornly refuse to be reconciled to their Adversaries, discover but
very little Religion, and give us to understand, that their Temper borders upon
that of Wild Beasts, wh^^^ ^enseless Fury is never satiated, till they have
torn in pieces one of their own Species that was the Object of it; Hatred
seldom lodges in a Brave Mind, and if it ever happens that it does, it never
robs it of some lucky Seasons, which easily induce it to a reasonable
Accommodation; nevertheless I must confess, it is very difficult to pardon an
Assassin, or one who violates our Honor; but when this is done, the greater
our Struggle is to smother our Resentment, the more Glory waits upon our
Victory; and a Man in nothing more demonstrates the Largeness of his Soul. The
common People cannot carry up their Humanity so high; indeed there are persons
who have such an absolute Empire over their Passions, that they can forget the
Wrongs are done 'em, and be reconciled in good earnest; but there are others
who are only Friends outwardly, and out of Policy; they are afraid to be
branded with Impiety if they don't do it. or they dare not disoblige their
Friends, who press 'em to agree, and yet the Serpent is as dangerous as before,
and waits only an Opportunity to exert its Sting; to have nothing to do with
such People, the best way would be to offend no Body; but if the Hostility is
begun, and that we are convinced, that those we have provoked are not really
good Friends with us, let us behave our selves toward 'em with double
Civility; let us take off the Edge of their Hatred, by the Assiduity of our
Service, let us distrust 'em without letting 'em know so much; let us be as
jealous of 'em, as of Enemies who will feize upon every Occasion to do us harm
if they can come at it? For our parts, let us augment our Sincerity, let us set
all things to Rights like Honest Men, and fairly shut up all Differences
without criticizing on Formalities. Mean Souls are insupportable in this point,
it is difficult to compound any thing with such parties, they are never content,
till they have adjusted with the utmost Exactness, the place, the time, the
very Words that must be spoke, and even to the minutest Steps which each side
must pursue in such Affairs; but deserving Men who know in what true Honor
consists, never fall into this Fault, but compose Quarrels in a more noble
Fashion, where the Sparks of Generosity rekindle expiring Friendships.

XLVI. Not to be Fickle.
WHen once we have set about a Business, let us drive it up to the Hilts, and
not suffer our selves to be dazzled by the Splendor of any shining Advantage,
which is spread before our Eyes to impose on us, a subtle Competitor who sees
us just ready to grasp the place we aim at, and that he would also shap for
himself, endeavors to draw us off from the Chase, either by misrepresenting
it, to give us a Disrelish of it, or by putting us upon engaging a Friend to
deal the Cards again for a more considerable Employment for us. Let us not be
noos'd in this Snare, but ever prefer an Advantage in possession, tho
inconsiderable, to a transcendent Seat, but in the Clouds. Let us also forbear
imitating those persons, who by a peculiar Levity throw Obstacles in the way of
their own rising, and are the only Men who obstruct the Progress of their
Fortune, being inconstant in their Projects, they have no sooner embraced one
side, or adhered to one Profession, but as their Maggot bites, they sally out
to another; no Man can do any Feats in the World by such fantastical Conduct:
And after all these Shiftings and doublings the Spark is not a whit the more
satisfied, or in a higher Post than he was the first Day. A Man must fix some
time or other, and when he has taken upon him such a Course of Life, he is to
stick by it, and labor to make himself as accomplished, and happy in it as is
possible; this does not exclud c a Man neither, who has unluckily made a bad
Choice at first, from changing his Condition or Employment; but a wise Man will
never make that step without considering all the Consequences which may attend
it; and without being very sure, not only that nothing will be lost by the
Change, but also that there is something valuable to be got by it.

XLVII. The Character of a Cowardly, and Faint-hearted Man.
ONE Coward, who cunningly conceals his Hatred, is more to be feared than two
declared Enemies; for as he never dares attack a person barefaced, so be has
Recourse to Treachery and Artifice; and that which makes his shot the more
mortal, is, because as they are unexpected, we know not what Coast to guard to
prevent 'em. Fear, which makes him apprehend Danger where there is none,
persuades him at the same time to prevent it, and engages him to take
ridiculous Precautions against Chimerical Ills; his Fear arises from the
Weakness of his Mind, which makes him suspicious, and to live in perpetual
Diffidence; so that he looks upon most Men as his Enemies, tho for the most
part they don't think of him. He has but few Friends, or rather he has none at
all; for being always jealous of being deceived, he sticks to no Body, and is
loath to do a Civil Office, for fear he should hazatd something by the means; he
is so unmanageable in Business, that it would be impossible to settle any thing
with him, if you do not give him all sort of Security; which still he takes in
such a manner, as if it grated and bore hard upon him to take up with such an
Expedient. These are some of the ill Effects that Cowardliness and Fear pester
the World with; whence it is easy to conceive how necessary it is to shun the
Conversation of such dwarfish Souls, that being born with these Clogs, have
neglected to manumise 'em by the Succors of Reason, and the Principles of
unerring Virtue.

XLVIII. Of Gratitude.
THE most stigmatized Man that ever lived, cannot avoid having a secret
Veneration for Honest Men, and to admire in 'em what he will not practice
himself, whence it proceeds, that Men who are signally grateful, are esteemed
by all the World, even by the ungrateful; so that Gratitude of it self is a
natural Duty, and conesquently indispensable; a good Mind sensibly feels the
Force of this Law of Nature; and if there be any Body who knows truly to value
a good Turn, it is always a Noble and Generous Soul; spare therefore nothing in
acknowledging the good Offices Benefactors have done for you; and if either
Opportunity, or the Power of doing it be wanting, at least, give all the
Demonstration you can, that you are desirous to do it. Although Thankfullness were
none of our Duty, it is always fraught with Advantages; for he that has had the
Skill duly to acknowledge the first Favors he has received, infallibly invites
others to the old Heap: it is true, there are some, that for the sake of a small
Courtesy which they have done you, would double tax you for Repayment. Although
this is unreasonable, yet Generosity ought to engage you in such a Case to
gratify the Requests of those who have first obliged you, animated by this
fine Maxim, that in the Business of Gratitude a Man cannot go too far. If you
have obliged others, never put 'em in mind of it, nor fancy that they are
altogether indebted to you, if you can shun, it require nothing of 'em that owe
you Obligations; but if the ill posture of your Affairs necessitates you to
desire a Kindness of 'em, do it with so much Modesty and Reservedness, that it
may seem you have forgot the Services you have done for 'em. I shall not here
take upon me to rail against Ingratitude, every one knows, that it is as odious,
as its contrary is lovely, and that the ungrateful have always passed for Men
abandoned of Honor.

XLIX. To Avoid Contests.
NO Man ought to plunge himself into Disputes, but to bring Truth ashore with
him, whether it be to gratify his own Itch, or that he would, after finding
it, impart to others his own Discovery, now a Truth squabbl'd for, is either
indifferent in it self, or contrary to the Inclinations of those we converse
with, or opposite to their Prejudices; if this Truth he indifferent, why such a
Clutter about it? Why do we keep so much ado to no purpose to make it sink into
their Heads? Is it not more opportune to show 'em a reasonable Complaisance,
than to provoke 'em by thwarting, which can no ways be serviceable: If I would
have another swallow a disagreeable Truth, I must guild it, or at least put a
better Color upon it, and to succeed in it, Civility and Sweetness of Address
must by no means be wanting; for eager Clashing, and the Heat of Desputation
undoes all. A Heart maybe nicked to surrender, but must not be taken by storm.
Above all Places you must never enter there by the Breach. To conclude, if the
Truth in question runs counter to their Prejudices, the only way to undeceive
ceive 'em, is not to reject their Opinion with Contempt, and to dress up the
Authors in Fools Coats, nor to speak huffingly, and with a decisive Air, this
makes him you would convince revolt farther from you, and hinders him from
embracing rational Suggestions. Those whom we would drive from their
Prejudices, we must attack slily, and by the help of deep Reason demonstrate to
'em how groundless they are; and then void of Passion, and with a good share of
Modesty, a Man may go near the clinching of a contrary Sentiment. It Is thus,
that intelligent Men manage Disputes; and so Learned Branglings have some
Advantage, and Pleasure in 'em. If we meet with some restless Tempers, that are
still vexed, and upon the Fret, it is in vain to struggle with 'em, it will only
sour 'em the more: In such a Case a Man has no more to do, but to hug that
Truth he is Master of, and to lament the Obstinacy of those who will shut their
Eyes against the clearest Conviction.

L. To be Regular in his Conduct.
HE that would be Regular in his Conduct, and live suitably to the Rules of
Decency, ought to treat all Men according to their Quality, but without any
Encroachments on Civility. Respect he must pay to his Superiors, Allegiance to
his Lawful Masters, Fairness of Carriage to his Equals, and a favorable
Reception to his Inferiors; for Men that are under Vassalage, if they discharge
their Obligations with Fidelity, ought to be treated softly, and with
Generosity; but if they forfeit their Ties, Severity is necessary to chastise
'em. But it is not eno' to give Admonition of Duty where it is wanting, and to
correct those who undervalue the Counsel, unless he who prescribes it, makes
his own Actions bear the Test of the most Judicious Observer; for would it be
reasonable to condemn and punish with Severity, in another, those Faults which
a precedent Practice has at least countenanced, if not given License to.
Nothing is so moving to promote Virtue, in the World, as the unutterable Force
of a good Example. Every one is obliged to scatter this Light for his
Neighbor, but it sticks closer to Princes, and Great Men, because as every
Body is proud to imitate 'em, either Virtue flourishes, or Vice, as they see
their Degeneracy, or Probity, in the perpetual Circle of an active Life.

LI. How one may make a Judgment of Men.
IF it must be a fine Operator, who can handsomely take in pieces a human Body,
he must certainly be a great Master, who is capable to dissect the Mind, and
anatomize the Heart, by which, I mean the natural Inclinations of it. Self-Love
hides it self so artfully, that he must be very perspicacious, that can take a
View of it through the Appearances of Virtue, where it takes Covert; it is
therefore necessary to watch it strictly, if you would detect the Legerdemain;
in public it cheats the nicest Inquisition, so that there is no Judgment to be
made of a Man by what he acts on the open Stage; as he sees himself eyed, he
puts his Affections on the Tenters, and you can have no true Picture of the
real Man, especially in Actions of Note, where every Body labors to purchase
Reputation, and therefore industriously conceals any Peccadillo that might
cause a Flaw in his Title to it. It Is in the Tiring-Room that we must weigh him,
whose Manners we would unravel, and whose Inclinations we would scan; then his
Mind is unbent, he swims with the Current of his Senses, and whatsoever is good
or ill in him appears above board; and yet this is not eno' to judge of his
Desert, let us observe in the first place, if he be swayed by Interest; for if
he be not, that is a Demonstration that his Soul is above the common Level. Let
us examine in the next place, if he discharges well the Obligations of his
Station, and if we find he does, it is a plain Indication of a solid Wit; but if
we perceive, that he can prostrate himself before the Idol of Interest, that he
neglects to do the Duty of his Calling, let him have never so many other good
Qualities, he deserves to be blotted out of our Roll of Friends, and excluded
from our Esteem. It Is yet a good Means to know People, by considering how they
behave themselves, both when their Fortune is at high Tide, and when it is at
the lowest Ebb. Which is to be seen in the next Article.

LII. Of the Management of Prosperity and Adversity.
BY the Use a Gentleman makes of a swelling or a narrow Fortune, one may
shrewdly guess at his Disposition, and easily prompts what sort of Opinion we
are to have of him; if when his Sails are full he becomes fierce, and
insulting, or when the Storms of Adversity blow hard, he is extremely sunk in
his Courage, and dispirited; that Man, I Will warrant him, has a grovelling
Genius, and a mean Soul. But if he be unshaken and steady under the Torrent of
his Misfortunes, or that the Flatteries of Fortune are not strong eno' to abate
his Goodness, to take off his Moderation, or to cramp his Civility, and his
other Virtues, one may pronounce that Man has a Noble Resolution, and a Soul
that aspires to its Original. Indeed without these two topping Qualifications,
a Man cannot show in some Cases that we meet with, that Steadiness, and
Equality of Mind, which gives Evidence of the absolute Empire we have over our
Passions. To be able to follow, as Occasion offers, the few Examples are to be
found of such an imperishable Virtue, let us ofren make this Reflection, that
the Possessions of this Life are so inconsiderable, that they ought not to
encourage our Pride, and the Afflictions we endure in it are so short-lived,
that we have no Reason to be dejected under 'em. Let us consider also what an
inexhaustible Magazine of Happiness, and a Fund of Glory that can never be worn
out is designed us, if we make that Use of Transitory Ills, and Comforts, which
we ought; and now being convinced of these main Truths, let us look upon the
various Turns of Fortune like Christian Philosophers, whether it be in its
Declension, or its Zenith, let our Humor be equally poised, and let us
maintain a Conduct perpetually Uniform, and proclaim to the whole World, that
we are as capable to sustain the Weight of Greatness, as we we are to bear
evenly, and with Resolution, Court-Disgraces.

LIII. Of Credential Letters, signing Papers with Blanks.
IN the Age we live in, a Man had need have his Wits well about him, not to be
cully'd by Cheats, and Hypocrites; for even those in whom we repose an entire
Confidence, are sometimes in the Van of our Deceivers; wherefore a Gentleman
had need be very well assured of the Integrity of those to whom he gives
Letters of Credence; it is my Opinion also, that tho it is necessary to give such
sort of Letters, yet they ought always to be accompanied with Instructions that
shall be clear, special, and which shall also descend to minute particulars, to
the end, that they who are commissionated to manage an Affair, may not have any
Evasion to creep out at, if to serve their own private Ends they shall offer to
make a false step in the negotiating of their Business.

As for Letters with Blanks, to be filled up at the Discretion of a Party, I
would never trust any Body with such, and whosoever shall reflect, that thereby
he puts his Liberty, his Honor, his Life in the power of another, will surely
have a great Care how he exposes whatsoever is dear to him in the World, upon
a Bottom that is so liable to chouse him, and which an ill Man may so easily
employ to an ill Purpose, a Gentleman must also never give Certificates to any
Man living, of the Service, and good Conduct of another; when he has no Proofs
to authenticate what he advances; such Testimonials are unjust, when they are
given without knowing a warrantable ground for it, because by this means
Rewards come to be misplaced on those who don't deserve 'em. Besides, if it
happens afterward that such People abuse the Favors their Prince has conferred
on 'em, they are troubled, but too late; for having been the unhappy
Instruments to procure 'em that Preferment, when they had so slender an
Assurance of the Worth of the Persons Recommended.

LIVE. Of Curiosity.
TO be curious is commendable, when nothing is designed by it, but to be let
into the Knowledge of of what is Profitable and Honest; but it is of a
dangerous Consequence when it transports us too far, and that it puts us upon
Enquiries, which either contribute to our undoing, or at most can do us no
good; let us be busy in every thing that tends to give the last Hand to our
Condition; let us inform our selves thoroughly of every step of our Duty; let us
spur on our Understanding to the utmost to discern it well, and to have a great
Mastery in the Profession we have embraced; nothing is of greater Use than for
every Man to be accomplished in his Calling: It Is by this that Men now adays
are distinguished from the Crowd, and tho they are wrapped up in Gloominess, may
speedily hope for Shun-shine. He, that by a vain Curiosity, or to have the
Vogue of a Person of universal Acquirements, will dive into too many things,
will never rightly digest any, and reaps no other Fruit of his Labor, and
tedious Study, but a superficial Knowledge of several things, which often are
foreign to his Circumstances of Life. Will Men never be persuaded to acquiesee
in what is material? Here Is a Religious Man who ought incessantly to fathom the
Depths of the Holy Scriptures, thereby to enrich his Mind with Knowledge that
speaks its Divine Author, has infatuated himself with Judicial Astrology, has
thrown away whole Nights and Days in consulting Astronomical Tables, and to
look into the different Aspects of the Planets, from thence to calculate
Nativities; what Folly is it to presume to unriddle what shall happen by the
help of an Art that leans only on the trifling Imaginations of some whimsical
Dotards? The most famous Astrologers acknowledge no other Principle but
Experience, and which is the greater Jest, it is that very Experience which
condemns 'em; seeing that almost every Day exposes how monstrous such
Predictions are. Another Mathematician spends himself to find out the squaring
of the Circle, or the Whirl of perpetual Motion, when he should be busied in
perfecting those parts of the Mathematics, which help forward many Arts
necessary to accommodate human Life. Up starts a Chemist, who might serve the
Public, if he stuck only to what was useful in his Profession; but he
forsooth, must be all agog for the Philosopher's Stone, he dreams of nothing
else but to get this great Work, flattering himself that he shall quickly
change every thing into Gold, like Midas in the Fable. What a strange
Infatuation possesses Men, that they will toil so hard, and with so much
Passion to unlock those Mysteries, which the Almighty would have dill lodged in
their pre-ordain'd Secrecy? Certainly it is a very criminal Curiosity, that can
bewitch 'em to dissolve their Estate in their Furnaces, to overpass their real
Duties, and to consume to no purpose a Life, that has so many precious Minutes
to be guarded, and improved with the most Jealous Care.

LV. To shun the Conversation of Libertines and Cowards.
DIscourse, backed with Example, is so very prevalent, that it is almost
impossible to resist the Impressions which it makes; wherefore it is of great
use to avoid the Company of Loose-Livers, and who publicly set up for Atheism;
for besides, that every such Intercourse would ruin our own Reputation; their
lewd Speeches, their Sets of false Maxims, and the Contagion of their Examples,
would at first Dash deprave our best Inclinations, and insensibly corrupt our
Souls, and after the Advances of a few Steps would precipitate us into the
common Shore of Misfortunes, where commonly such sort of People sink
themselves; it is moreover one of the Rules of Prudence, never to hold
Conversation with Cowards, and the Henbearted, who are generally overrun with
Scruples, and Superstition; as their Distemper is infectious, they casily shed
down to their Associates their own anxious Fears, and Thorny Doubts, which
diffract the Mind, and stave it off from taking an adequate Dimension of
Things. These Quandaries, and Fits of Irresolution, excite frivolous Suspicions
in us, which, as weak as they are, do yet discompose us, divest us of the
Liberty of our Minds, and rob us of the Tranquillity of our Souls, without a
Conjunction of which we can neither know how to make the belt Choice, nor to
embrace what we have chosen with an entire Confidence.

LVI. Not to use Reserves, but in Cases of Necessity.
WHen there is no firm Reason to give Birth to our Dissimulation, it ought to
stand for an undeniable Law, that we should act with Openness; to what purpose
is it always to put on the Foxes Skin, to affect to speak in the Clouds, to
talk like the Oracles of Delphos, when there there is no occasion to justify
such a mysterious Cant; this only serves to spirit on others to suspect you;
whence it happens, that tho Subtilty might sometimes be necessary, yet it will
do him no Service, who wears it out with continual Practice, because every Body
is ready armed against his Craft; the Designs of a Man who is currently stamped
for sliness, are the most easy to untwist; for as every Body suspects him, and
watches him narrowly, it seldom falls out, but that all his Measures are
broken. I do not intend here those Wiles which are only used with Design to
surprise, and cheat, every one throws something into the Scale to condemn 'em;
I would be understood of that tricking, which nakedly in it self is no ill; and
I say, as innocent, as it is; it is but seldom to be employed, and that too by
the Urgency of Necessity; The general Rule to be given in this Case is this,
that Tricks are never to be used to impose upon any Body, but only to
countermine those who make a fraudulent Attack.

LVII. Of the Death of a Friend.
NO Grief stabs in so sensible a part, as that which a Gentleman feels when he
loses a deserving Person, betwixt whom, and himself, Love was wrought up to
the highest Pitch of Sincerity; Such a Loss wounds the deeper, forasmuch as
it is irreparable; and a Man had need of the Constancy, or rather the
Insensibility of a Stoic, if he be not touched to the quick with it. Although
such a Sorrow might seem defensible, yet it is good to call in the Succors of
Faith, and the Beams of Reason, to dart Comfort into our Shades, and to sweeten
the Bitterness which we then most exquisitely taste, and to take this along
with us, that in such a doleful Scene, shedding of Tears is not eno' to
discharge the Trust of a true friendship; there ought to be besides, some
sacred Repository dearly to lodge the Remembrance of his Friend; and as the
best Badge, that his Memory is honored, to see the faithful Execution of his
last Will, to assist his Family, if it is distressed, and above all, to implore
the Almighty, that his Happiness of the next Life may even be double to his
Hopes.

LVIII. At the Court, Diffidence is necessary.
HE that steps into a Court, ought to look upon himself in an Enemies Country,
where a thousand Ambuscades are laid to ensnare him; it is there where Gentlemen
are most Civil, and least Sincere; let us suspect their artificial Caresses,
and that they wheedle us to confide more in 'em than we have reason to do; and
let us remember, that it is their common Course to give us the Picture of their
Minds quite different from the Original, such a one smiles on you, and makes
all the Overtures of your humble Servant, when at the same time he waits only
for the Opportunity effectually to undo you. Not to be cully'd by these
treacherous Friends, a dextrous Courtier equally conceals his Designs, and his
Thoughts, particularly in what relates to the Conduct of Great Men, he cloaks
his Designs, that his Rivals may not prevent, the Execution of (...) and
smothers his Sentiments, lest his Enemies should make a wrong Construction of
'em, and give him Trouble amongst those who are in a Post to do him a Mischief.
You will say, doubtless, that it is irksome to be always upon your Guard, and to
be shy of Persons whom you are obliged to converse with every day; I agree it,
but at Court such Precautions ate not to be avoided, And after all, it is
preferable to be circumspect, and reserved both in Words and Actions, tho it is
at the Expense of a little Uneasiness, than to lay himself liable to be
betrayed by unbosoming himself to those whose Fidelity has not passed the Test.
Nevertheless, I do not encourage such a general suspicion, as shall admit of no
Exception; I own that a discreet Friend, of an approved Virtue is to be relied
on; but till a Courtier can be so happy to find one such, the sur^^t way not to
be choused, is to trust no Body.

LIX. Of Passions in those who are well in Years.
EVery Gentleman is so much the more taking, as his Way corresponds with his
Age, and the Rank which he holds in the World; so we are pleased with a Big and
Majestic Air in a Monarch, with Gravity upon the Bench, with a lofty and
fierce Mien in the General of an Army: Thus we love to see Sprightliness in a
Child, Activity in a young Man, but expect an old Man to be serious: But
contrary wise, a Person is so much the more nauseous, as he departs from his
proper Character; wherefore we abhor to see youthful Passions tempered with
aged Snow, but Love, especially at that time aday makes a Man (...); indeed
what (...), th^^ (...) ^^ll^nt* And who can forbear Laughing, when they see a
Man act a part that is all strained It Is a great Unhappiness for a Man to
cancel in a few Minutes all those Acquisitions of Glory and Honor, which he had
beeen tugging for all his Life long; yet this is the Practice of old Pops, who
would, spark it as they did when they were blooming, and who are no wiser, nor
have any more Command of themseves at Sixty, than they had at Eighteen.

LX. Of Counsel.
IT stands them much in stead, who move in a high Orb, to stoop to the Advices
that are given 'em, and to suspend their Determination till Truth can be sifted
out; for as this Method often ^^rs things in a Right Light; it is the Prudence
of a Prime Minister, of a General of an Army, of a Governor of a Place, to
entertain Counsellor^ and to reward 'em liberally, if they make good what they
propose^ but if to create a good Opinion of their Wit, and Skill to unriddle an
Intrigue, they give false Accounts of Things, and shall even dare, out of
Hatred or Envy, to fasten Crimes on Men of Honor, and Worth, they deserve to be
lashed severely as Make-Bates, whose Jugglings may be of dangerous Consequence,
both for the State, and for those who are overreach'd by 'em.

LXI. The Duties of Persons advanced to a High Post.
THey who stand on the upper Ground, are begirt with so many Cares, are
fatigued with so much Labor, and are obliged to summon so much Vigilance, and
Application to their Aid, that they are rather illustrious Slaves, who are
mounted to be wracked by State-Hurricanes, than such as can enjoy the
undisturbed Repose of their Desires; but Great Men struggle hard against any
Rhetoric that would persuade 'em of the Force of this Truth; he that should
tell 'em, that the more they are raised above the Level, the more in some sense
they have impaired their Freedom; the more Business they have upon their Hands,
the move wary Steps to tread, and the more strict Measures to adhere to, would
bespeak 'em in a barbarous Language, whence they never dreamed of being
attacked; they look only on the Gaudy Part, the Honors they receive by great
Employments, and the Power they afford to Crush, without ever turning the
Perspective, and attending to the Obligations, and Toils which are inseparably
annexed to 'em; There are very few would have the Hardiness to venture on those
Bulky Charges, if they considered how difficult it is to keep their Character
untainted in the Execution of 'em; it is not eno' for him that is got into the
Saddle, to have the finest Embellishments of Understanding, if the noblest
Inclinations of the Mind do not bear 'em company, and steer 'em to the most
creditable Advantage. Moreover, he can scarce be without any one Virtue,
particularly Piety, Prudence, and Moderation, are as necessary as his Cloths,
he is bound to keep the Reins straight upon his Manners, not to permit any
Slips in his Behavior, to countenance his baffled Virtue, zealously to promote
his Countries Good, to set forward the Interests of Religion, to contribute all
he can to the Removal of public and private Miseries, to punish Vice with
Severity, and to give ample Compensation to the Deserving; to let Equity run
through all his Actions, to be intent, watchful, and unwearied. In a word, to
sacrifice his own Quiet, for his King's Service, and his Countrey's Peace. They
who are to administer a Prince's Justice to his People, to command his Armies,
or to be his Lord Lieutenants, are indispensably obliged to do all these; for
without it it is not possible for 'em to avoid Disgraces, to adorn their
Station, or to possess the People, that they have deserved solid Glory.

LXII. Not to give hasty Answers in weighty Matters.
IT IS a Rashness of dangerous Consequence to reply upon the Spot in Matters of
Moment, without a wide Capacity, assisted by a long Experience; and tho a Man
were Master of these two great Advantages, I believe, if Opportunity can allow
it, 'twere better to take time to meditate what Answer is fit to be returned to
the Proposal. Let no Man, to indulge a guilty Pride, strut that he does then
give Evidence of the Greatness, and Facility of his Mind, in dispatching too
hastily, that which deserves to be examined at leisure, in such Cases great
Miscarriages arise, especially when the Interest of the Public depends on 'em.

LXIII. Not to Protect the Wicked.
NOthing looks so fine, as to do good to all the World, not excepting our
greatest Enemies; it is the wicked alone that a Man must never defend; this
would be, to declare himself a Supporter of Vice, and consequently to renounce
the Quality of a Man of Honor; a Minister, who furnishes the Impious with
Credit* and Authority, by preferring 'em to Offices, makes himself responsible
for all the Excursions they may be guilty of in the Abuse of their Power; and
besides, that God will scourge such an unjust and faithless Minister, the
Prince has reason to frown on that Traitor, that scatters his Authority amongst
Subjects that are so unworthy, that in all Appearance they are the likeliest
Instruments to unhinge the Realm.

LXIV. How a Man is to carry himself toward the Ungrateful.
NEver let our Resentment of unthankful Returns, transport us to tax 'em for
that lewd Indulgence, Reproaches and Contumelies are improper Engines to work
'em into an Acknowledgment of their Fault: On the contrary, if they find us
running 'em down in company, the Indifference which they had for us, is
presently metamorphos'd into Hatred, and they immediately declare War against
us: the only way to make 'em look at home, is to treat 'em with the same
Civility as usual, without showing that you are touched by the Affront of their
Ingratitude. This mild Procedure does Wonders, this quickly melts 'em into
Repentance; for having disregarded those persons who have so repeatedly obliged
'em, and at last has wrought a thoro Reformation in their Conduct. Is it not
better to win over People by a Generosity which affects 'em so much the more,
as they are sensible that they don't deserve it, than to irritate 'em by our
Checks and Neglects of 'em, or by a disdainful Pride to compel 'em to be our
Enemies.

LXV. What must be observed in great Undertakings.
IN Great Designs we often throw at all, either for Loss, or Gain; as therefore
the Consequences are very dangerous, if the Cast does not prove successful;
great Precaution is to be used before we put it in the Power of a Die to decide
our Fate. It Is certain, that a Man never ought to form any important Design,
without he concludes himself capable to carry it on dexterously, and bring it to
a happy Period. Wherefore a quick Genius will not do the Work, Constancy and
Diligence in the executive Part are also necessary; moreover, it is requisite,
that those we make choice of to be assisted in great Enterprises have a Stock
of Judgment, and Courage; for if they know not to apply the Wheels of Business
to one another, the least Obstacle stops 'em, any Difficulties in their way
perplex 'em, and blunt their Pursuit, and if they flag in their Resolution, the
sight of Danger astonishes 'em, they turn tail; and a Man has the
Dissatisfaction, that he is shipwrack'd by their Cowardice. Those who accompany
us in such Matters, ought to be Men of Honor; for I know there is nothing to
fear from persons of that Character, and that there needs no other Engagement
to 'em when they have given their Parole. Nevertheless, when any Matter of
mighty Moment is to be transacted, by reason of the Inconstancy of Men, in the
choice of whom we are so easily imposed upon, and the interfering of so many
cross Accidents, I think it is necessary for common safety, to set down in
writing the Terms of our Agreement, and the several Resolutions concerted, and
also to express 'em in such plain Terms, that there may be no Room left for
Equivocation. If things miscarry, and (it happens) that a Man be betrayed or
deserted, the producing of such Writings will clear his Reputation, they will
testify, that such a one was not a Party in the Faults of others, and that the
Unsuccessfulness of Affairs is only imputable to themselves, either for want of
Presence of Mind in Difficulties, or because delivering themselves over to
their own Whimsies, they have staggered in the executing what they had
resolved; Secrecy is of no less Weight in great Designs, than what I have been
speaking of, which I shall make appear in the following Maxim.

LXVI. Of a Secret.
THE Greatest Politicians would sit brooding on their Intrigues to no purpose,
if the Avenues to their Counsel were not well guarded. Indeed Designs the best
laid do not commonly come to Maturity, when those are capable to unrip 'em,
whose Interest it is to oppose 'em: let a Man concert his Measures never so
justly, such will be sure to break through 'em all, and obviate every Artifice
that is contrived against 'em. It Is chiefly at Court that a Man ought to be in
some sort impenetrable; Wits are there so subtle, that they will decypher by a
Motion, by a Word, by a Look, what you would have remain in Pot-hook Hand; how
many Projects do we see abortive, merely because they who ought to dissemble
their Intentions, most artfully suffer themselves to be founded beforehand by
the Sharpers? others there are, who for want of Judgment or Experience lay
themselves open at first Dash, without considering to what Hazards such an
Ingenuity does expose 'em. To be plain, there is such a sorry Remnant of Plain
Dealing amongst Men, that a Man cannot be too much upon his Guard; and one had
need try 'em exactly before he unlocks the Cabinet of his Breast to 'em. Yet
all agree, that every one is bound to retain the Secret he is made a Confident
of, and that it is a sacred Depositum by no means to be rudely blab'd; but
where is the Man who does not encroach on this Law, or rather that does not make
Inroads upon it, if he can be a Gainer by such a barbarous Infidelity? When I
say, that a Secret is an inviolable and sacred Thing, I do not pretend
nevertheless, that this Proposition is universally true, and is a Rule to be
laid down without Exception; for Example, if after having enjoined me Secrecy,
one has imparted to me some criminal Matter which he is taking in Hand, I
ought, it is true, to do all I am able to divert him from it; but if I cannot
succeed, and that I have no other way to defeat him of accomplishing such a
pernicious Resolution, then I become licensed to reveal the Secret: The Reason
of it lies here, because when I assured him that I would communicate to no Body
what he committed to my keeping, I believed him incapable of doing any thing
unbecoming an Honest Man, so that I did not tie my self up to be silent, but
upon supposition that he would not defile my Understanding, by making me the
Trustee of a scandalous Purpose. Besides, every Promise, made contrary to a
precedent Obligation, is void in it self; now if I have engaged to stifle some
monstrous Birth, such an Engagement runs counter to one of my first
Obligations, seeing it is contrary to that Law of Nature so profitable, and so
well grounded, which commands all Men with might and main to oppose the
Progress of Evil, and to nip budding Vice, this Promise then is null, and I am
dispensed from observing it. One may see by this, and by the Examples which
occur in History, that it is dangerous to be the Confident of another Secrets,
and especially of those of Great Men, where it is ten to one if it be not
intermingled with State-Interests; wherefore every wise Man ought to get clear
o^ this Trust as much as he is able, not that we must reject that Confidence
which a true Friend shows he has in us, by turning the Inside of his Heart
outward; for, as I take it for granted, that this Friend of mine is both
discreet, and virtuous, so I may conclude, that he will never impart any thing
so heinous to me, that by a Priority of Obligation I am to reveal; then the Law
of a Secret stands in full force; and a Man must sooner sacrifice every thing
that is dear to him, than once violate so religious a Sanction.

LXVII. Of Hope, and Despair.
MEN who should only put themselves under the Conduct of refined Reason,
commonly pass such a Judgment on things, as most corresponds with their Humor
and Temper; so the presumptuous, who are used to flatter themselves, grow
strongly persuaded, that they shall obtain every thing they desire; and the
fearful, who distrust their own shadow, and with suspicion combat the Imaginary
Attacks of others, almost ever despair of having their Designs crowned with
Success. Let us diligently avoid these dangerous Extremes, for Desperation, and
an extravagant Reliance, do equally prompt Men to neglect the Means that may
bring their Affairs to a happy Issue. Does not Experience every day inform us,
that by this steerage it happens, that often a Man's Imagination is balk'd by a
quite contrary Event? whence it follows, that many persons gulled by vain
Hopes, or depressed by unreasonable Fears, are either suddenly on the High
Ropes, or vexed to the Guts by an impertinent Anticipation: These Reasons,
methinks, should persuade us, that when we have laid out all our stock of
Prudence, in order to accomplish our Aims, we are obliged to remain as much as
is possible in a profound Tranquillity, without ever being under the Hatches of
a slavish Fear, an empty Hope, or a tormenting Despair: But so, that tho we
neglect nothing that may bring about our Ends, yet at the same time we may
buckle on our necessary Armor, to prevent any untoward Afterclaps, upon
supposition, that they are not attended with Success. If we would be thus
fore-arm'd, any Advantage we should gain would have double Charms, in as much
as we least of all expected it, and the Mischief would both be less, and we
should not be half so sensible of it, because we had been beforehand in our
Preparations to encounter it.

LXVIII. To take Virtue's Part.
Oppressed Virtue is an Object which sensibly touches a Generous Man, and makes
him employ all his own Credit to buoy up the Interests of the Impotent, which
are pushed at with so much Injustice, in order to be run down: But that
Generosity is thin sown in this Age. With what Unconcernedness do Men see Vice
triumphant; and are tame Spectators, when by an artificial Management it erects
its lofty Head upon the Ruins of humble Virtue? And even such as might easily
interpose to hinder the innocent Sacrifice, durst not pull back the Hand of the
unjust Ruffian that is the Executioner. Nevertheless, let what will happen,
methinks we are obliged privately to advertize those who have the Sword of
Authority, of the Frauds that are made use of to discourage Innocence, or at
least our selves to set up for its Champions, if we have but any thing tutelar
about us to produce; doubtless an Action so mettlesome will set Obloquy on our
Backs, but it signifies nothing; for Men of Honor in this Instance will he on
our side; But after all, put case that there were a great deal to be risqu'd by
the Attempt, can we suffer for a better Cause than to put Virtue in the Throne.

LXIX. Of Irresolution.
THose who level at no six'd Mark, and are always fluctuating in what they are
to go about, strole about in the World, as Travelers who straggle in a Wood,
where they know not which way to turn; we must strive betimes to know well the
different Conditions of Civil Society, and then embrace that which we shall
judge suits us best; sometimes we have seen People that have worn out their
Lives, before they have ever thought of determining 'em to an-Employment: Yet
the Thread of Life is so short, and the Time we have to spin it, so valueable,
that it is perfect Theft to steal away any part of it, to hover in the
uncertainty of choosing a Profession. There is another sort of Unsteadiness, or
rather Irresolution, which is not altogether so prejudicial, but which does a
great deal of Harm; it consists in not knowing what to resolve upon Business,
and to answer Emergencies as they arise; to be then in suspense when we are
hurried; and that we are pressed to give a quick Result of our Thoughts. I
allow it to be very useful to examine things, before we undertake 'em; but when
you may endanger the Success of your Business, by Licensing an Opportunity to
slide by, (and many hopeful Projects have proved addle, for want of timely
Diligence to ripen 'em) it is an unpardonable Omission to be drawling out Time
in tedious Debates, what you are to do, to show you have Honey like a Drone,
but cannot recover your Sting; Cowards and Half-witted People have this Fault,
so that of all Men living, you are to choose 'em last for the Execution of great
Affairs, which are often lost by delay, and which require a Man that has Nerves
for Application, as well as Bones for Fatigue, that has an exalted Courage
founded upon a peremptory, and clear Judgment.

LXX. Not to be Rash in Judging.
HOW come Men to suck in such Variety of Errors, what is the Reason so many
deliver up themselves to the Conduct of False Principles; it is because they
will not be at the Expense of diving for Truth in things purely speculative,
nor weigh which side is most eligible in practical Matters? Justice and Truth
are not to be understood at the first Glance; the Clouds which Passions throw
over our Minds, and a Load of Prejudices block up our way to a distinct
Perception of what is both true and just: So that often it is only an exact and
tedious Enquiry that can usher us into the satisfaction of setting up for
Discoverers. Men of the greatest Abilities are sometimes put upon, in spite of
all their Reflections; what will become then of those Wits below Standard, who
sound nothing to the Bottom, and do only ramble (as I may so say) over the
Surface of things? It Is of the utmost of Importance to us to shun Precipitation
in our Judgments; for from hence Heresies and Plots have their Rise, it springs
Quarrels, and breeds Factions, which perplex Men's Understandings, and break in
upon their Repose; it is this overhastiness, joined with the latent Malignity of
our Minds, which sways us to put a mischievous Interpretation on the Actions of
others, tho it be to overthrow a Maxim grounded upon the Law of Nature, which
commands us to take every thing by the best Handle we can find. Besides,
Self-conceitedness, and Crossness, Vices equally dangerous in Morality, and
Civil Matters, are the ordinary Concomitants of that Rashness I have been
speaking of, wherefore let us carefully avoid it. And since bounteous Heaven
has vouchsaf^d Reason for our Guide, let us judge of nothing without its
assistance, and never let us be carried down stream by the impetuous Torrent of
our Passions, which engaging us Hand over Head to make a Choice, reduce us to
that wretched Necessity, either to forfeit our Word, or our Duty. A First-Rate
Wit falls into this Error, if he presses on too forwardly; whereas one of the
middle Form, who surveys things nearly, and with leisure, perceives that which
had escaped the Observation of the most clear-sighted, but who were less
heedful to detect it.

LXXI. How we ought to treat them who have any way been assistant to us.
WHen two, or more, have concerted an Undertaking, and that all have
contributed to its Success, he who shall monopolize the Advantage, and Glory pf
it, has very little Honor, and Equity in him; and well, is it not just, that
they who have born a part in the Fatigue, and have waded through the thickest of
the Dangers, should be sharers also in what is to be got by an Undertaking.
Whosoever in these Cases dares falsely brag, that all the Glory of a happy
Success is owing to him, loses by his Vanity much more than he will get; for
besides that by praising himself, he purchases much more Contempt, than
Esteem; the Complaints which they vent of his Pride, and Breach of Faith, who
have served him so faithfully, and whose Services in the mean time he takes
such Pains to undervalue, to make his own look with a better Grace, do so blast
his Credit in the World, that no Body will venture to back him in his Designs.
But on the other side, all satisfactorily vie with each other, to promote and
advance the Designs of such, who, without ever trumpeting what they have done
themselves, charge all the Success of their Enterprises oh the account of the
Worth or good Conduct of their Partners, and such an extreme Modesty is so far
from diminishing the Luster of their commendable Actions, that it enhaunces to
the best Advantage the Desert of 'em.

LXXII. Of Unforeseen Accidents.
SOmetimes it happens, that an Accident which we were not aware of, breaks the
Neck of the strictest Measures we can take, rand throws an Obstacle almost
insuperable, to baffle the Execution of Designs laid with the best Skill, it is
not possible to prescribe the precise Rules of what is to be done on these
Occasions; this depends on the Posture Men's Minds, and the Things to be
adjusted are in at that Time: I shall only say, that as long time of
Deliberation is to be taken, as the Affairs themselves can afford; and after
that, we must boldly go on with what carries the fairest Marks of Advantage,
and execute it with as much Assurance, as if every point had been under
scrutiny more maturely. It Is in such difficult Junctures that an exemplary
Courage is in season, it is then that we may make a clear judgment what sort of
Genius he has, who steers the Undertaking; Happy is that Man that has so much
Ability to pitch upon good Expedients, and if preserving a stanch temper in the
midst of Danger, and the Turmoil of Affairs, he distributes every where his
Orders with that admirable Presence of Mind, which ha^^ been (...) up so much
in the blazoning of Great Men.

LXXIII. Of Favors, of Recompenses, and of the Disposal of Offices.
WHen those who preside, turn the Stream of their Kindness, and canton their
Employments only where Favor ^^ays 'em; it is a growing Mischief ^o that Realm
where they have the Administration: This disheartens Gentlemen of Merit, who
see plainly, that what is thus scattered amongst others, is in some sort
ravished from 'em; and as the principal Employments are exrcis'd by those who
have no reasonable Title to' em, particular Men suffer by the Bargain; and the
main Body of the Kingdom receives a very notable Blow by it: But when by the
Methods of true Policy Rewards are only granted to 'em, who claim 'em by their
unwearied Services, and that you cannot point at an Employment disposed of, or
a Post filled up, but at the same time you must tacitly own the Justice of the
Election to (...), every one is stimulated to mend his Worth being per^^aded
that his Fortune wi^^ m^^e (...), as his Virtue is triumphant* Besides, it
makes the public Wheels turn more glibly; Peace and Joy reign throughout, and
Order is maintained in all things; because those with whom the Pr^^ce has
lodged his Authority, being honest Men, acquit themselves of their Duty with
Exactness, and apply themselves wholly to make the People happy. We see now in
France the Effect of this discreet Policy; the King gives every thing where
Merit calls for it, but nothing on the score of m^re Favor. And this is the way
that makes him so well served, to the Envy of the World; and one may say, that
the extraordinary Care which he has always took to make a wise Choice of his
Ministers, of the Generals of his Army, and his other Officers, has not a
little contributed to the Happiness of his Subjects, and to advance himself to
that high P^^ch of Glory and Power, where we now with Astonishment see him
elevated.

LXXIV. Of the Way to Grant, or Refuse Kindnesses.
THere are some who bestow what is required of 'em, but it is always either too
late, or upon certain Conditions, or with so ill a Grace, that the Receivers
con 'em but very little Thanks for the Gift; if you have a Design to be a
Benefactor, and that you would at the same time chain the Affection of the
obliged to you, possess him with a Belief, that' it is in good earnest you design
to be his Friend; the discomposed Air, and the Contraint with which some
Gentlemen communicate their Favors, lessens more than half the Price of the
Benefit received; whereas he who has the Art of gaining Votaries, the very
manner of making it, is more agreeable than the Present it self; and is more
deeply impressive on a Mind that is sensible of any either thing besides
Interest. It Is of no less Advantage to know decently how to refuse a
Peti^^^ner; that is to say, to sw^^^^^ by the Softness of Expression, and by
civil and obliging Methods, whatsoever is disgustful, and grating in a Refusal;
a civil Gentleman is so grieved that he cannot content every Supplicant, he
deals so well with persons that make application to him, that he plants a
Veneration of himself even in those, whom he sends away not gratified in their
Demands, and they go off persuaded, that it is none of his Fault that they have
not an entire satisfaction in what they came for; so that they show themselves
not less obliged for being denied with Regret, than for being treated with
Satisfaction.

LXXV. Of a Retired, and a Court-Life.
HOW sweet is the Life of a Recluse, how calm and inviting is it? a Man who
lives in Retirement, estranged from Objects which might kindle his Passions,
enjoys a profound Tranquillity; which both gives him an opportunity to pursue
Truth, and at the same time an easy Conquest of it; it is in Solitude that a
Man is used to make a sound Judgment of every thing that passes under the File;
his Mind there takes a freer Range, and his Understanding is at full stretch,
he takes in a thousand Things by Reading, and Meditation, and is never weary
with contemplating the Divine Perfections, which shine so wonderfully both in
the Order of Nature, and in the superinduced Bounty of his Grace. On the
contrary, it seems that he who possesses a considerable Charge has Reason to
lament: How many Cares, say they, how many Fatigues, what Agitations of Mind
haunt the Men in great Offices? I grant it, yet I believe that the greatest
Favorite of Fortune, who has the necessary Qualifications worthily to
discharge the Duties of his Employment, tastes even in that Condition
Pleasures, which much balance the Degree of his Sufferings. For if he executes
faithfully that Power he is invested with (as I suppose him to do) what
Pleasure does not he reap by serving his King, and Country to good purposes,
by defending the weak, by taking the Innocent under his Protection, by
assisting the Poor, by advancing Gentlemen of Merit. In a word, by employing
his Wealth and Credit, to do good to an infinite number of distressed
Gentlemen, who want the comfortable Influences of 'em. They who have Souls
noble and generous eno' to make so good an Use of the Advantages of a full
Fortune, and who besides this have a vast Reach, and a long Head, wherewith to
penetrate into Intrigues, are without doubt called to the Management of great
Undertakings, and they ought to improve the rare Endowments indulgent Heaven
has given 'em for their Country's Good: Inferior Employments, and a private
Life are no ways suited to these Great Men, that can presently discuss a great
Mass of Business; and therefore seem to be created on purpose to Govern others,
but for those who have only a common sort of Virtue, and an Understanding of a
mean Scantling, they may live in the Shades, and the Public will be no Loser
by it; and if they are not summoned out of the Crowd, they ought not to step up
to a Condition disproportioned to the Strength, and Capacity of their Heads.

LXXVI. What Sentiments the Use of the Creatures should inspire us with.
IT IS odd to imagine, that those Creatures which contribute so much to our
Ruin, might not, if we had the skill to manage 'em aright, do more for our
Preservation? and if we confined our selves to a just Use of 'em, whatsoever we
found valuable and inviting in 'em would naturally engage our Affection to that
Treasury whence all are enriched; but where an imperfect or a worse Scene
opened, this would abate our Esteem, and wean us from a close pursuit of 'em.
The Beauty of the Universe, and particularly the Charms of reasonable Creatures
would administer to us some Idea of the Sovereign Beauty of God, and would
forcibly carry us to desire a perpetual Union with him. Wit, Power, Goodness,
Discretion, Equity, and the other other celebrated Qualities of Men, would
irresistably sway us to admire the Divine Perfections, which are the Source of
all our Virtues, and the Principle from whence every Good we possess, is
derived. The mixed Pleasures which we taste on Earth, and which we woo with so
much Importunity, tho they have a great deal of Bitterness in 'em, put us upon
thinking how double refined those are which glorified Saints enjoy; and might
engage us to labor to be added to that Celestial Quire. On the other side the
Disorders which pester the World, might exstinguish our Desire of adhering to
'em; the Miseries of this Life, and its short Duration, might make us fully
sensible, that Happiness in good earnest is not in it. To conclude, the
Frailties, and Enormities of those amongst whom we live, might stave us often
from loving any Body upon any other Consideration, than merely for the sake of
pure Charity; and thus the most unbridl'd Passions would never run away with
our Quiet, the dazzling Splendor of this sensible Frame of Things would make
little Impression on our Minds; and the same Objects which most commonly
undermine our Happiness, might be the proper Instruments to establish it.

LXXVII. Of Banishment.
EXile, to speak properly, is no more than Change of Air, which ought to create
no Disturbance to a Man of an irreproachable Conduct, all Countries are equally
good to Honest Men; wherever they go, they find what is necessary to keep 'em
alive, and this the Command of their Passions allows to be sufficient; when
therefore by some Reverse of Fortune a Man is obliged to withdraw into a sort
of Wilderness, after having always lived amidst Court-Ceremony and Noise, he
ought not to be in the murmuring Key, and bemoan a Remediless Fate; this only
alarms the Standers by with the Complainer's Weakness. A Man ought rather to go
off that Stage Gentilely, which he is no longer able to tread without
struggling against a High Tide. Great Men indeed, are so disengaged in their
Affections, that they can quit principal Employments with more ease than accept
'em; they know that they are so circumstantiated, that it is difficult to
perform the Trust of 'em well, and as they did enjoy 'em with Indifference,
they leave 'em sedately, and with Cheerfulness. The Accidents which despoi'ld
'em of 'em, and which commonly pass under the Name of Misfortunes, and
Disgraces, they regard as the first Inlet of their Happiness; for when they
look back on the Entanglements of a thousand distracting Cares that had
detained 'em, and see themselves set free from the Agitations that are
inseparable from great Places, they begin to relish the Blessings of Liberty,
and to enjoy the happy Calm of a Life refreshed with Peace and Innocence.

LXXVIII. Of Imprisonment.
THE Case is much the same betwixt Imprisonment, and Exile; for those Prisons
where Men are furnished with Necessaries for the Body, and where also a
suitable Entertainment for the Mind is provided, can be reckoned only as
Solitudes, where a Man may have no Interruption of his Quiet, if he will but
temporize, but where he will be miserable, if he will let Vexation or Sadness
put him in a Ferment. When a Man has a clear Conscience, it is a Mistake for him
to persuade himself that he is unfortunate, because he cannot take so free a
Range as he could when he was at large: A Carthusian is well satisfied in his
Cell, tho he is prohibited to make any Excursion; How comes that about? Because
he has adopted that for a sweet Course of Life, which others look upon as a
Slavery not to be endured; but he who is in Prison has Empire eno' over himself
to do the same thing, he shall not be more restrained, nor less free than the
Religious Man; this would be to act like a reasonable Agent; but the best
Choice would be to do the Office of a Christian, and to have no other Opinion
of the Lives of Persons of Quality, but what should be reconcilable with our
Religion. If I were not afraid, that I should be apprehended for invading the
Preachers Office, I would introduce a remarkable Passage of Tertullian's, who,
speaking to the Christians shut up in terrible Dungeons, for the sake of their
Faith, has these Words: Do not afflict your selves, says he, because you are
excluded from the World; for if you were convinced, as you ought to be, that
the World is a real Prison, you would be much more free in your Prisons, than
you would be in the World. Yet there are Prisoners, who innocently afflict
themselves in their Confinement, because they look upon the Condition wherein
they are, not more a Punishment, inflicted on 'em, than as the Triumph of their
Persecutors; but if any Grief springs from hence, it is only the Effect of their
disturbed Imagination; it is to be considered, whether Imprisonment in it self
is any great Ill, and if it does not lie in our Power to make a good Use of it,
without ever disquieting our Brains for what others think of it, whose Opinion
can add nothing to our unhappy Load. It Is thus, that a Judicious Man puts
things in the Scales, he always takes 'em on the Right Side, and by so doing,
he becomes happy to his Wishes, in that state, where the undiscerning Crowd by
a corrupt Calendar compute him miserable.

LXXIX. Of the Love, and Imitation of Jesus Christ.
JEsus Christ knowing the Corruption of Men, and that his Word was not sharp
eno' to Lance the Tumor of their Pride, nor sufficiently impressive to purge
their Minds so full of Prejudices, was not contented to indulge them a Law, all
Divine like himself, to keep their Manners in a due Regulation; but fell upon
the Practice like a bright Example, beckoning them to follow that Holy Life: To
the Power of that Exemplar he has given us, he has superadded the Assistance
of his Grace, without which we could never get our Weather-beaten Vessels into
that Port of Happiness he has promised us; and that which ought particularly to
touch us to the quick, is, that a pure and disinterested Charity was the
Foundation of all that he did for us, that God who found in himself the never
flowing Fountain of his own Felicity, needed none of the impotent Company of
his Revolted Creatures; yet he with God-like Mercy was willing to unite himself
to our Nature, and to suffer Death for Sinners worthy of the deepest Lashes;
what Tenderness, what Love was visible in that God who did in some sort humble
himself to save us? How proper is this Motive to affect generous Minds, and how
difficult is it when we think seriously of the Benefits we have received from
our Lord, how difficult is it, I say, to refuse him a Heart to which his Title
is so antecedently Just? Ah! if we are so sensible of the good Offices which
are done us, where commonly the Actors look asquint on their own Interest, what
Acknowledgment ought we not to pay for so many Gratuitous Bounties as Jesus
Christ has conferred on us, only because he loved us? This adorable Savior has
given us in his Life and Death a perfect Model of all the Virtues which can
lead us up to that Immortal Crown he designs us, and he is desirous, that we
should not deviate from his Steps; but yet surveying our Weakness, he has
promised us a Reinforcement of his own Succors, with which we need not decline
to combat those formidable Enemies that have vowed our Destruction. Let us
charge then with Confidence under so great a Leader, we may well be undaunted
under so good a Master, let us inviolably imitate the Brightness of his
Example, and that our Wills may not be biased by the public Obliquity of the
(...), let us judge of things as he judged of 'em, let us pronounce that those
Riches, Pleasures, and Honors which he despised, do not deserve our constant
Attendance on 'em; let us believe also, that the Sufferings, which he loved to
that height as to die upon a Cross, are less to be feared than wished for; and
let us remember, that the way which he marched to his Glory, that is now
Triumphant, is not surcharged with the Gaiety of Flowers, but yet looks
Graceful, tho 'twas died with Blood, and watered with Tears.

LXXX. Of Death.
AFter having proposed my Thoughts about what we are to do, and what we are to
avoid whilst we wander in this Lower Region; methinks it is pat to the purpose,
to say something of Death, which gives the finishing Stroke, and is the most
important Moment of fleeting Life; I know very well, that the Separation of the
Soul from the Body can be no Friendly Parting; and that the most resolute Minds
cannot behold it without some Discomposure that borders upon Fear;
nevertheless, I do not think it is so hard a Task, as some fearful Souls who
multiply their Terrors imagine it is, to bid the World adieu with the same
Generosity with which we lived in it; indeed why should we dread the Passage
through this Straight that has been opened by other Columbus's so many Ages ago?
Is it not better with Bravery to stand the Shock of that Danger which we know
beforehand is unavoidable, and from which not the subtlest of all Mankind, by
any evasive Tricks can bolt; the Hope of Happiness, which is assured to us, if
we die with holy Dispositions to be capable of it, ought sooner to quicken us
to search for Death, than to increase our Fear of losing Life. If we are
jealous that we shall be racked with some painful Agony, let us reflect that
often it is light eno', or at least, that it is quickly adjourned; and if the
Severity of God's Judgments frights us, the Blood of Jesus Christ shed for our
Salvation, and the infinite Love which he has for Souls that have cost him so
dear, ought to still our Fears, and inspire us with much Confidence of
Reconcilement. If we are just (which yet a Man ought not to persuade himself
that he is) let us hope he will breath immortal Love on us, and crown those
Works which are the Results of his own Grace; and if we are Sinners, let us not
despair of his Mercy, seeing that knows no Bounds, and that the Scripture tells
us, that a broken and a contrite Heart he will not despise: The Grace of such a
happy Repentance which we ought to ask with Faith, Humility, and Perseverance,
is eno' to give us new Life after Death. Nevertheless, it must be owned, that
those who neglecting the Obligations of their Religion, degrade themselves by
immersing their Lives in sensual Fruitions, have reason to apprehend Death as a
King of Terrors; for besides, that their Ruin is certain, if they are caught
unawares by it, which God knows, is too often, as we are assured by our
Redeemer, put case a Distemper should leave such Men some Dregs of Time to
think upon their Salvation, either they flatter themselves, that it will not
prove mortal, and so stop short even in the Tendency to a Preparation for a
dying hour, or if seeing themselves at the last Gasp, they desire to receive
the Sacrament to huddle up a misspent Life, commonly it is more the Effect of a
slavish Fear, than any Fruit of a true Conversion, they do not sincerely
renounce the Pleasures of the World, nor abandon the Objects of their criminal
Passions, which they have always doted on with so much vehemence; for that Love
fortified by long Custom, has branched it self in their Hearts with such
stubborn Roots, that it must be only a Miracle of Grace that can divorce such a
cemented Acquaintance; and will God vouchsafe this extraordinary Grace to those
who for so many years have impudently violated, and contemned his holy Laws?
The surest Means then to be armed against the Fears of Death, is for Gentlemen
to prepare themselves by a pure and innocent Life, timely to draw off from that
which one day they must part withal for ever, to reflect often that in that
critical Moment where Eternity begins, the Pleasures of Sense expire; a Veil is
drawn over all human Greatness, every glistering temporal Advantage is
vanished. Lastly, they have no more to do but to persuade themselves
convincingly, that there is no other Bottom to stay their Consolation upon, but
the Remembrance that they have loved God, and that they have served him with an
invariable Stedfastness, in spite of the over-bearing Corruption of a
profligate Age.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
I. AN Honest Man. Page 4 II. Honoring of Parents. Page 10 III. The Importance
of Education. Page 12 IV. What a Young Gentleman ought to Learn. Page 15 V.
What ought to be the Scope of his Studies. Page 19 VI. To make a right Use of
Knowledge. Page 21 VII. What a Man is to do for his Relations. Page 23 VIII. To
be subject to the Laws of the Country. Page 24 IX. The Duty of Allegiance is
the Supreme Law. Page 28 X. Against those who dare censure the Government. Page
31 XI. Against the Fomenters of Plots and Disturbances. Page 34 XII. The true
Way to gain Esteem. Page 36 XIII. Of high Birth and Reputation. Page 39 XIV. Of
the Choice of a Station in the World. Page 43 XV. To be Vigilant, Intent, and
Laborious. Page 46 XVI. Of the First Undertakings. Page 48 XVII. Which is the
best Way to gain the Esteem of Princes and Great Men. Page 50 XVIII. Of the
Advantages of true Friendship. Page 53 XIX. Of the Choice of a Friend. Page 55
XX. Of the Good and Ill Use of Time. Page 58 XXI. To speak little, and hear
others. Page 61 XXII. Of Duels. Page 63 XXIII. To give Ministers of State the
Honors due to 'em. Page 67 XXIV. Of the Love of Pleasures. Page 69 XXV. To
Study Himself. Page 71 XXVI. To converse with Wise Men of great Abilities. Page
73 XXVII. To have Variety of Friends. Page 75 XXVIII. Of Great Designs. Page 77
XXIX. To Affect Nothing. Page 79 XXX. To know what will take with the Age. Page
82 XXXI. To know how to be well employed when we are alone. Page 84. XXXII. Not
to judge of Actions by the Event. Page 86 XXXIII. What a Man is to do for his
Friend. Page 89 XXXIV. Of a Gay Humor, and the Use of Jesting. Page 91 XXXV.
To neglect Nothing. Page 93 XXXVI. Of the Use is to be made of Great Men's
Favors. Page 94 XXXVII. Of Superfluity and Neatness. Page 97 XXXVIII. To have
as few Enemies as you can. Page 98 XXXIX. Not to be Discouraged. Page 100 XL.
Of Pride. Page 101 XLI. To Regulate a Man's Expenses. Page 104 XLII. To know
how to choose his Company. Page 106 XLIII. Of sharp Raillery and Villifying.
Page 108 XLIV. Of Sincerity. Page 110 XLV. Of Reconciliations. Page 112 XLVI.
Not to be Fickle. Page 115 XLVII. The Character af a Cowardly and Faint-hearted
Man. Page 117 XLVIII. Of Gratitude. Page 119 XLIX. To avoid Contests. Page 121
L. To be Regular in his Conduct. Page 124 LI. How one may make a Judgment of
Men. Page 125 LII. Of the Management of Prosperity and Adversity. Page 128
LIII. Of Credential Letters, signing Papers with Blanks. Page 130 LIVE. Of
Curiosity. Page 132 LV. To shun the Conversation of Libertines and Cowards.
Page 136 LVI. Not to use Reserves, but in Cases of Necessity. Page 138 LVII. Of
the Death of a Friend. Page 139 LVIII. At the Court Diffidence is necessary
Page 141 LIX. Of Passions in those who are well in Years. Page 143 LX. Of
Counsel Page 144 LXI. The Duties of Persons advanced to a high Post. Page 145
LXII. Not to give hasty Answers in Weighty Matters. Page 148 LXIII. Not to
protect the Wicked. Page 149 LXIV. How a Man is to carry himself toward the
Ungrateful. Page 150 LXV. What must be observed in great Undertakings. Page 152
LXVI. Of a Secret. Page 154 LXVII. Of Hope and Despair Page 158 LXVIII. To take
Virtues Part. Page 161 LXIX. Of Irresolution. Page 162 LXX. Not to be rash in
Judging. Page 164 LXXI. How we ought to treat them who have been any way
assistant to us. Page 167 LXXII. Of unforeseen Accidents. Page 168 LXXIII. Of
Favors, of Reconciliations, and of the Disposal of Offices. Page 170 LXXIV. Of
the Way to Grant or Refuse Kindnesses. Page 172 LXXV. Of a Retired, and a
Court-Life. Page 174 LXXVI. What Sentiments the Use of the Creatures should
inspire us with. Page 177 LXXVII. Of Banishment. Page 179 LXXVIII. Of
Imprisonment. Page 181 LXXIX. Of the Love and Imitation of Jesus Christ. Page
184 LXXX. Of Death. Page 187
ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 23. read on. Page 6. lin. 10. for withit read with it. p. 12. at
the top, for II. r. III. p. 29. l. 16. f. I that r. that I. p. 109. l. 6. put a
Comma at besides, instead of at discreet. p. 114. l. 18. a Colon instead of the
Interrogation Point. p. 121. l. 4. put the Comma after it, and not at shun. p.
125. l. 5. a point of Interrogation is to be put instead of ^ Colon. p, 128. l.
4. put it before easily, p. 134. l. 10. put a Comma after happen, p. 141. l.
13. f. such r. such. p. 131. l. ult. a point of Interrogation, p. 175. l. 24.
place a point of Interrogation. p. 177. l. 5. a Semi-Colon instead of an
Interrogation, p. 163. l. 16. for exstinguish r. extinguish. for Carier read
Career.


