No Parliament but the Old: OR, A NEVV-YEARS GIFT For the late Interrupted
PARLIAMENT, Now Restored to the Exercise of their Trust: Owned by the Army,
Expected by the People, and performed by God. Wherein is showed by diverse
Reasons, That the Commonwealth can receive at present no good, but much
detriment in the Fundamenral Liberties of the Nation, and the Good Old Cause,
if any other PARLIAMENT sit but the late interrupted PARLIAMENT.
1. NO men in the Nation are equally engaged, or so higly concerned to carry on
the Good Old Cause as the present Parliament, who were violently hindered from
sitting. They only are thoroughly engaged against Kingship, and the Stewarts
Family: and it is extreme weakness to think they can do ortherwise then
establish the Government so as to keep out the one and the other for ever, as
much as in them shall lie. Whereas we see the pretended Parliaments, formerly
called by these Officers of the Army were so little concerned in the Good Old
Cause, that they Voted a Single Person and House of Lords, and would have made
Mr. Oliver Crumwell King, if he had thought sit to accept of their kindness
that time.

2. This late interrupted Parliament, being the only true Parliament, and the
only true Authority of the Nation, no other Parliament can be called or chosen,
and if it be, it is de facto null and void, and all that they shall do is
invallid; for there can be but one Parliament in England: And the present
Parliament is that Parliament of England, which cannot be dissolved, but by its
own consent or Act.

3. This present Parliament, having been Legally called, and not by the
Swordmen, is only Legally above their reach, and which they cannot disturb
without high presumption; whereas a Parliament called by their lusts and
pleasures, will be necessarily subject to be turned out by their Lusts.

4. ^o choose a Parliament at the revolted Officers appointment, and to own
such a Parliament, is destructive to our Liberti^^; for in so doing, we
acknowledge the Swordmen to be Supreme, and to have Regal Authority to Call,
and consequently to dissolve Parliaments, which they will do King-like, as soon
as they have raised them Money, and served their ambitious ends, or refuse so
to do.

5. The sacred and to all Generations Venerable Authority of Parliaments, is so
weakened by the force put upon the present Parliament to hinder their sitting,
that Parliamentary Authority will be for ever invallid, and unable to secure
the Interest of the Nations; unless it be vindicated by Readmission of this
present Parliament to Exercise of their just Authority; For these or any other
strong party will be upon all occasions encouraged to endeavor to do the like.

6. All Legal and just Authority, being to be conveyed in a Legal way from
persons in Authority, there is no other way way to set any future Authority on
foot in this Nation, but by the present Parliament, which was Legally called,
and can legally give Order for the calling of future Parliaments. If the
revolted Officers should be allowed to call Parliaments the Nation falls from
the Government of the Laws, to be governed by the Sword, which how sad a
condition that must needs prove, let all sober men judge. Yea, let the present
ambitious Swordmen consider, what will become of their Posterity in such a
condition; for they have no assurance, that their Children and Childrens
Children, shall be Swordmen; but rather they are like to be vassals to the
Arbitrary Wills and Laws of Soldiers.

7. Let the revolted Officers, and all their adherents, lay their hands upon
their hearrs and seriously consider, that if they shall at last see their
error, and before they are compelled (which will be no thanks to them) permit
the Parliament to return to the exercise of their just Authority; thus accident
all and great good will redound to the Nation by their Miscarriages (as the
saving of Jacobs Family did arise from the selling of Joseph) that
Parliamentary Authority, will be thereby exceedingly established and
strengthened. For the Generaticusto come will the more admire, and honor the
sacred Dignity and Majesty of Parliamentary Assemblies; and all ambitious
persons how powerful soever, will fear and dread to violate their Authority,
when it shall be recorded and reported that a King of England, otherwise a
virtuous person, being seduced by evil Council to make War against a
Parliament, was vanquished with all his great Forces, and a General of their
Conquering Army, having through ambition, offered violence to the said
Parliament, he had no happiness after, it but shortened his days with cares,
fears, and sorrows; and his Son could not stand after him; and the Officers of
his Army were fain to recall the same Parliament; and when, being seduced, they
had again interrupted them, there was no way to satisfy the English Nation,
but to readmit them again to the exercie of their Authority, and to transmit
the same to succeeding Parliaments. This I say will be a great establishment of
Parlianentary Authority, and consequently a great good, accidentally flowing
from their Miscarriages, if they will be yet so wise before it be too late, to
lay it to heart, which God grant they may.

And let all true Englishmen that love the Liberty of this Commonwealth,
themselves and Posterity; take heed how they neddle to choose Parliament men to
sit by power of the Sword and consequently to be subject to the Lust of
Swordmen; and how they contribute to the weakening of all Parliamentary
Authority for the time to come, by hindering any ways the Restoration of this
present Parliament, without which, we must for ever be Governed by the Sword,
or reduced again under the Fimily of the Stewarts: and which will be the better
condition of the two, God all Wise only can tell-

By W. R. Doctor in Physic.
The Printer to the Reader.
CGurteous Reader, I thought it convenient to inform thee, that this Paper
should have been published the 22. of December. last, but was amongst other
Papers taken out of my hands when ready for the Press. This Paper was penned
upon the divulging that Paper for choosing a Mock-Parliament by Order of the
revolted Officers,

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, 1659.


