A Faithful Account Of the MANNER of the ELECTION OF Sir WILLIAM POVLTNEY, AND
Sir WILLIAM WALLER, Knights, To serve as Members of the ensuing Parliament at
Oxford, for the City of Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, upon Thursday
the 10th of February, 1680/1.
In Answer to a Letter from a Person of Quality in London.
Worthy Sir!
I Perceive your Curiosity will not acquiesce in the General report of the
issue of this days work, unless you receive also satisfaction in the lesser
circumstances, and more minute occurrences of the whole affair. I confess my
self no great Friend to the Curious Humor, and do choose commonly to disoblige,
rather than gratify a nice Inquisitiveness into the small punctilio's of great
Actions; and yet because your Importunity must needs proceed from some private
Reasons, wherewith I am not acquainted, which will justify your earnestness to
your self, I shall Interpret your Desires to be Commands; and Commands
according to the Modern Divinity, are to be obeyed, not disputed.

I have now beheld in no more than two years, no less than three Elections of
Burgesses for this place, to the great satisfaction no doubt of the people, who
delight in frequent, Parliaments; and it is scarce credible how much the temper
and Genius of the Electors here in this last, is altered from what it was in
the two former Elections. Then we had nothing but indecent Heats and
Animosities, now nothing appeared but Unanimity, and an Amicable concurrence
amongst us: Formerly the differences produced such bitter reflections, such
heart-burnings, as either flamed out in Revenge, or inwardly smothered in
secret grudgings against their Neighbors; but this day has healed, united, and
so composed those contentions, that the filthy dirt which each party threw in
the others face, was now wholly under our feet; and that fire which broke out
in open revilings, did now only serve to warm mutual affections; whereof I
shall need to give you no other Demonstration, than this, That whereas the last
Election cost us seven or eight days tedious attendance upon an irregular and
ill-governed Poll; this was now dispatched in less than half as many hours; so
facile are matters of the greatest difficulty to united counsel, and affections.

If you demand the visible Reasons of this happy change in the tempers and
dispositions of so vast and numerous a body; you must content your self with
the following account, and accept what I have here assigned, till you receive
fuller satisfaction.

And first I observe, and observe it with joy, as a good Indication and Crisis,
that the whole Body politic will recover its healthful constitution; that most
people have their eyes opened, and are made apprehensive, that there is no
expedient can secure us from the eminent danger which from our inveterate
Popish Enemies hangs over our heads, but by fixing upon such persons, as out of
principle and conscience will stand in the gap, and waving their private and
personal interests, neglecting their immediate dependences, espouse the public
welfare, and stand or fall with it. And indeed the late Parliament has so
abundantly convinced us, that there has been, and still is carried on a Horrid
and Devilish Plot both in England and Ireland against His Majesty's Royal
Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Established Government of the Realm,
that we cannot but see it high time for all Protestants to unite their strength
against the daring encroachments of the common enemy, who now pluck up the
Mask, and are ready to defy the Justice of the Nation. For we have seen the
Masterpiece of Romish policy to lie in this, to Divide us, that they may
destroy us; and whilst they are committing one part of Protestants to fight the
other, they wait the good hour (and the worst hour is always the best for a bad
design) when they may triumph over both; And the more discerning (I had almost
said the least discerning) part of mankind are now clearly satisfied, that it is
not the Protestant Religion as engrost and monopolized by any single party, but
as it is in its due latitude including all that are sober in their lives, loyal
in their behaviors, and sound in the fundamentals of faith, wherein we must
center, and arrive at a desired settlement; and accordingly our Interest lies
in choosing such persons as may secure the main, and indulge the rest, though
perhaps differing among themselves, and all of them coming short in some
notions and practices of what carries the public encouragement and reward: We
cannot but be sensible how the enemy, whilst we slept, has sown the Tares of
jealousies, suspicions, and mutual distrust amongst sincere, and otherwise
knowing Protestants; whereby as if they had been two distinct and separate
Interests, they have been myning and countermining each other, accounting
themselves to have gained what the other party lost, and to have made so much
addition to their own, as they could withdraw from the strength of the other:
Whereas Time, the Mother of Truth has taught them at last (I hope not too late)
that the strength of the Protestants lies in their uniting and associating
against the Declared public enemy: I may add, and I shall add no more, That
experience has taught us how much we may be deceived in Men; how we have been
too prone to censure some worthy persons as affected to the Popish, or not
zealously affected to the Protestant Cause, who yet upon trial have given us
cause to retract our former judgments of them with shame, and to entertain more
righteous thoughts of them for the future.

But, Sir! I shall no further pursue these speculations, but proceed to matter
of fact, and give you the Narrative of our Election at Westminster, with all
the circumstances that may deserve your notice, or answer your expectations.

Be pleased therefore to know, that Sir William Poultney, and Sir William
Waller, who in former Elections were the grand Competitors, and whose Interests
were most considerable amongst us, partly through their own generous
Inclinations and Propensions to union for the general good, and partly by the
Interposition of judicious and discreet persons, who plainly saw that the
former separation of two such Worthy Patriots, had begot much ill blood, were
induced to unite and join their Interests; which Union was no sooner known, and
known to be real and cordial, whereof our old Inveterate jealonsies would
hardly suffer us to be secure; but to the wonder of all, the envy and regret of
some, and the great joy of all considering persons, the hearts of all sober and
well-advised persons were knit together.

Upon Thursday therefore, the 10th of this instant February, several Gentlemen,
and other persons of good repute and quality in this City, and the Liberties,
attended these two Worthy Knights at their houses early in the morning, to
conduct them to the respective Stations; which they had agreed upon, there to
gather up their friends, who should be ready and willing to accompany them into
the Field. Sir William Poultney had designed St. James his Square, and Sir
William Waller, Covent Garden, to which places resorted to attend them, all
such whom either Neighborhood, or Relation, etc. particular affection, or some
other private Motives invited to adjoyn themselves to their Approved Friend. At
an assigned time, the former of these Gentlemen marching down the Pell-Mell, in
excellent order, fell in with Sir William Waller, and his Company, who came
down the Strand with like order and decency; and at Charing Cross both these
Candidates joined their Retinues: And to witness to all the spectators, who
from the Windows, Balconies, and other places of prospect, in great Numbers
waited to behold this happy Conjunction, the two Knights drawing near to each
other, gave and received such salutes, as expressed the mutual satisfaction of
each in other, seconded by the joyful Acclamations of their following friends,
who were now no longer separated, but one united body, as formerly they had
been in the same principles, the same zeal for the Protestant Interest.

Immediately after this Coalition they marched on; Sir William Poultney, as the
elder person, and Knight, having the right hand, it being indifferent to wise
persons who enjoyed that circumstantial priority, since both were equal in the
hearts of the people.

In this comely order they proceeded by Whitehall, and the Horse-guards,
without making any stay there, where they expected not to increase their
Numbers. From thence through King Street, and the Intermediate passes unto
Tuttle-Fields, the place appointed for the view; where notwithstanding the
coldness of the weather, the exceeding high winds, and the violent driving
rain, appeared a body of Men, judged by the most modest Compute to be between
Two and three thousand.

The two Knights at the Head of their Company, many whereof were on horseback,
but the far greater Number on foot, did there patiently attend the Coming of
the Deputy-Bailiff to do his Office; whose Province was very easy at this
time, and might soon make a judgment which was the greatest Party upon the
first view, when there was but one party, that my poor eyes could then discern
in the Field.

The Precept was no sooner openly read by the Bailiff at the Head of the
Company, when one Mr. Tuffton makes Application to him, and Demands the Poll on
his own behalf, and those that were with him; and indeed it was a claim both
too reasonable to be denied, and too rash to have been made; but the Bailiff
consulted the duty of his place, and his demand was immediately granted.

The great Discourse that employed all Tongues now was, upon what Motives and
Encouragemnets, with what hopes and expectations of success this Gentleman,
with his almost invisible party should demand a Poll against so many thousands
as appeared actually in the Field, and double that Number, whom the
unseasonable weather discouraged from appearing: for some are positive, that
half a dozen horse, and about half a score on foot were all that he could
Muster; though some, who consult his credit, do aver, that he had upon the
place half a score horse, and double the Number of foot followers: and some
will not stick to say, that one half of this body were Housekeepers, and such
as might have made the Majority of Electors at Old Sarum.

Whether it was that he was spurred on by the Heroic principles of
Knight-errantry, and presumed that with his select number of Fayrie Knights he
should Encounter a Legion of the Pagan-Infantry; or whether some
Magastrological, Magomantical Figure-flinger had assured him that all the Stars
unanimously would Vote for him, and that at least all those of our Hemisphere
would come down and abet his party; or that being in love with himself, he
conceived upon his first appearance the Majority of the Electors would tack
about and adhere to him; or whether some of his witty Associates had bubled him
into a conceit, that every one of his Company had the privilege of a hundred
Voices, as some boasted, that at the last Elections they had had more heads and
voices than Gorgon and Cerberus; whether it were these, or some of these, or
other more dormant Reasons that swayed with him, it is uncertain; yet certain it
is, he peremptorily insisteth upon his Right to have a free Poll, nor could the
most ingenuous applications of diverse worthy persons dissuade him; but though
it was represented to him as folly to contend with so great and
disproportionable a multitude; and as disingenuous to create a needless trouble
to his neighbors; and as a disparagement to himself to have it upon record
that he had no more friends; yet still he remained unmovable, and that
obstinacy in a bad cause might have the face of perseverance in a good one; he
asserted his right to have a fair and free Poll, and in short he had it: It was
considered that the Term not being ended, there could be no Vacation in
Westminster Hall, all the Courts being taken up by the Judges, every Bench
silled, except the King's Bench, where by the Absence of the Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs, there was a vacant place, but not room enough for a Poll; and
therefore the Bridewell for the Parish of St. Margarets was agreed on, not as a
place of choice and convenience, but such as the Inexorable law of Necessity
imposed on them.

The Poll had not continued long, but Mr. Tufftons adherents began to come in
very thin, till in a while his own ingenuity began to rebel against his former
resolution, and seeing his cause desperate, which it is a wonder he could not
see before, he threw it up as lost, and leaving about 20 Men upon Record for
having no more brains, he prudently sounded a retreat, and with three whole
horsemen quitted the service, being followed down the street with the
Valedictory shouts of the people at his heels, which he perhaps will interpret
to have been honorable applauses, but others upon better grounds judge were the
Marks of Derision.

The business being now so exceeding clear, the Poll soon sum'd up (for Mr.
Tufftons short Horses were soon curried), the Bailiff, with the two elected
Knights at the Head of their Triumphant party, marched fair and softly into the
New Palace Yard, where at Westminster Hall Gate (the Courts of Chancery,
King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, all sitting) open Proclamation was
made, that Sir William Poultney, and Sir William Waller were duly Elected for
Burgesses to serve in the Approaching Parliament for the City of Westminster,
and the Liberties thereof, which was followed with the loud Applauses and
Acclamations of the whole Company.

There was it seems a Paper handed in the Crowd from one to another, till at
last it came to the hands of Mr. Thomas Owen, a person of great worth; who
looking upon it, asked what was their pleasure he should do with it? who
signified by signs and expressions, that he would give himself the trouble to
read it: He consented, and finding it an Address of the Electors to their New
elected Representatives, demanded of the People whether he should, according to
the Tenor of the Paper, present it to those Honored persons, their present
Burgesses; which by lifting up their hands, and great shouts they approved of;
and in pursuance of their desires he presented it to them, in these following
words.

To the Honored Sir William Poultney, and Sir William Waller, Knights,
Unanimously Elected as Members of the ensuing Parliament, for the Ancient City
of Westminster.
WE the Inhabitants of this City, and the Liberties thereof here assembled,
retaining a most grateful and indelible sense of your prudent zeal in the late
Parliament, in searching into the depth of the horrid and hellish Plots of the
Papists, against his Majesty's Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of the Realm; and in bringing the Authors of the said wicked
counsels to condign punishment. And remembering also your faithful discharge of
that great trust reposed in you, in vindicating our undoubted Right of
Petitioning his Majesty, that Parliaments way sit for the Redress of our
Grievances; which hereditary Privilege, some bad men would have wrested out of
our hands, upon whom you have set such a just brand of Ignominy; as may deter
them from the like attempts for the time to come. And further reflecting
seriously upon your vigorous endeavors, to secure to us, and our posterity,
the profession of the true Religion, by those just, legal and necessary
expedients which the great Wisdom of the two last Parliaments fixed upon, and
adhered to; Do find our selves obliged to make our open ocknowledgment of, and
to return our hearty thanks for your eminent integrity and faithfulness, your
indefatigable labor and pains in the Premises: Not once questioning but you
will maintain the same good spirit and zeal to secure his Majesty's Royal
Person, and to preserve to us the Protestant Religion (wherein all good
Subjects have an interest) against the subtle and secret contrivances, and open
assaults of the Common enemy; as also our Civil Rights and Properties against
the encroachments of Arbitrary Power. In pursuance of which great and good
ends, we shall always be ready, as we are obliged, to adhere to you, our
Honored Representatives, with the utmost hazard of our Persons and Estates.


This Address being thus presented, and accepted, Sir William Poultney in his
own, and the Name of his Colleague, Sir William Waller, made a short, but pithy
Return, in these words.

Gentlemen!
IT may be expected We should say something to you in answer to your Paper,
which contains, first your Kindness, and secondly your Instructions to us.

As for your Kindness, give us leave to say, that we are very much obliged to
you for your good Opinion of our Endeavors to serve you in the last
Parliament, which is best testified by your Repeated Favor, in freely Choosing
us again to serve you in this ensuing one.

As for the Instructions which you have given us, they are many, great and
weighty, and which (as we conceive) may conduce very much to the preservation
of the Peace and Quiet of this Nation; but being of so high Importance, we can
at the present give no other answer to them, than that we shall duly consider
them, and all other such Instructions as we shall at any other time receive
from you, conduceable to the preservation of his Majesty's Person and
Government, the Security of the true Protestant Religion, and our Laws and
Liberties. To which end we do heartily wish, and we shall use our utmost
endeavors to maintain a happy Union betwixt the King and his Parliament, as
also a Union amongst all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, the best means to
secure our Religion, Laws and Liberties against the Encroachments of Popery and
Arbitrary Power, and we hope we shall never live to see a Popish Successor.


All this was accompanied with repeated Acclamations and Testimonies of great
satisfaction; the two New elected Burgesses were conducted to their several
habitations, when first the usual Indentures had been sealed; and Sir William
Waller at the departure of his friends expressed him to them, to the same
purport with the Speech of Sir William Poultney.

And now, Honored Sir, I hope I have satisfied, and I fear glutted your
curiosity in all the Niceties of this Election, and shall only observe to you,
that in the whole management of this affair the Inhabitants did not put their
designed Representatives to the least expense: the people did not here sell
their Votes and Souls for treats and wine; nor was there any here that would
have purchased such Votes, if there had any been found to expose them to sale;
for we know well, that they who buy our Votes, will sell their own; and
reimburse themselves upon our Estates, if we should put them to charge upon our
Carcasses. We hope also you will observe how unanimous this City and yours have
been in their zeal for the Kings Person and Protestant Religion; what remains,
but I beg your pardon for the length of this Narrative, whose truth needs no
Indulgence, and that I subscribe,

SIR, Yours to be Commanded, L. S.

LONDON, Printed for T. Davies. 1681.


