A REMONSTRANCE AND DECLARATION OF SEVERAL Counties, Cities, and Buroughs,
Against the Unfaithfulness, and late unwarrantable Proceedings of some of their
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses IN PARLIAMENT.

WITH Their Dissents thereunto, and Revocation and Resumption of their POWER
therein.

Imprinted at London, 1648.

A Remonstrance and Delaration Of several Counties, Cities, and Buroughs,
against the unfaithfulness, and late unwarrantable Proceedings of some of their
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in PARLIAMENT.
WE the Gentlemen and Freeholders of the respective Counties of Berks,
Huntingdon, Kent, Leicester, Monmouth, Northampton, Nottingham, Rutland, Salop,
Sussex, Wilts, and Worcester: and the respective Citizens and Freemen of the
Cities of Chester, Gloucester, London, Norwich, Winchester, Bristol, Salisbury,
and York; and the free Burgesses of the several Buroughs of Ailesbury,
Wendover, New-Windsor, Wallingford, Truro, Tregonis, Fowey, St. Iermins,
Cockermouth, Cambridge, Barnstaple, Dartmouth, Okeshampton, Dorchester,
Lyme-Regis, Bridport, Wareham, Shaftesbury, Quinborough, Leicester, Wigan,
Liverpool, Great-Yarmouth, Newcastle, Woodstock, Southwark, Rigate, Tamworth,
Bishops-castle, Yarmouth, Ipswich, Taunton, Bridgwater, Midhurst, Bramber,
East-Greenstead, Arundel, Appleby, Calice, Chippenham, Malmsbury, Bedwin,
Malburg, Warwick, Kingston upon Hull, Knarisburge, Rippon, Richmond,
Burroughbridge, Auldling, Pomfret, Rye and Cardiffe; do hereby respectively for
our said several Counties, Cities and Buroughs, declare, notify and protest
to all the Nobility, Gentry, Commons and Freemen of England, and Dominion of
Wales, and all others whom it does or may concern, That neither we our selves,
nor any other by our privity or assents did ever directly or indirectly,
implicitly or explicitly delegate, give, or intend to give unto Henry Martin,
Valentine Walton, Augustine Skinner, Henry Smith, Henry Herbert, Esquires; Sir
Gilbert Pickering, knight, John Hutchinson, Thomas Wait, Esquires; Sir James
Harrington, knight, Humphrey Edwards, Anthony Stapley, Edmond Ludlow, Humphrey
Saloway, or John Jones, serving in Parliament as knig^ts of our respective
Counties; or to William Edwards, Thomas Pury, John Lenthall, Isaac Pennington,
John Ven, Thomas Atkins, John Lisle, Nicholas Lane, Richard Aldworth, Luke
Hodges, Michael Oldsworth, John Dure, Esquires; Sir William Alanson, knight;
elected and returned Citizens to sit and vote in the Parliament for our
respective Cities. Or to Thomas Scot, Thomas Harrison, Cornelius Holland,
Edmond Bunch, Francis Rowse, John Carew, Nicholas Gold, Gregory Clement,
Benjamin Valentine, Francis Allen, Oliver Cromwell, Philip Skippon, Lawrence
Whitaker, Dennis Bond, Edmond Prideaux, Roger Hill, John Fry, John Trenchard,
Esquires: Sir Henry Mildmay, knight, Sir Michael Livesey baronet, Augustine
Garland, Thomas Lord Gray, Peter Temple, Alexander Rigby, John Moore, Miles
Corbet, John Blackstone, William Lenthall Speaker, George Thompson, George
Snelling, Esquires; William Lord Viscount Mounson, Sir Peter Wentworth knight
of the Bath, John Corbet Esquire Philip Lord Lisle, John Gourdon, George Serle,
Robert Blake, Esquires, Sir Thomas Wroth knight, Gregory Norton baronet,
William Cowley, James Temple, John Downs, Henry Ireton, Richard Salway,
Rowland Wilson, Esquires; Sir Edward Bainton, Sir John Danvers, knights, Edmond
Harvie, Philip Smith, William Purefoy, Godfrey Bosvile, Peregrine Pelham,
Esquires; William Constable baronet, Sir John Bourchier knight, Thomas
Chaloner, Francis Thorpe, Esquires; Thomas Mal^vorer Baronet, Brian Stapleton,
James Chaloner, William White, William Hay, Thomas Westraw, Algernoon Sidney
Esquires, Burgesses for our respective Boroughs, or to any one of them, any
Authority, Power, Commission, Instruction or Deputation whatsoever, to consent,
vote, or agree for us, or any of us, or in our Names, Rights and Behalfs, as
our Representatives, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament, to any
Vote, Ordinance, Order, Bill, Act, Articles, or other Instrument whatsoever in
the Commons House, or elsewhere, for or concerning the Deposing or Executing
the King, the Dis-inheriting of the Prince or Duke of York: The breaking off
and laying aside the Personal Treaty with the King, for the happy settlement of
that blessed Peace we have so long desired, expected and prayed for: Or
rejecting the Kings large Grants for our future security, freedom and
tranquillity, the like whereunto we have no hopes to expect hereafter, if now
rejected by you on our behalfs, who shall be fully satisfied therewith, when
ratified by his royal assent to Bills, and an Oath inviolably to observe them:
Or the altering or subverting the ancient Hereditary Monarchical Government of
this Kingdom: Or the Constitution of the Parliaments of England, consisting of
King, Lords and Commons: The tolerating of all kinds of Religions, Heresies and
Errors: The taking away of our Ministers Tithes and usual Maintenance; or the
disorderly intruding into their sacred Functions without any lawsull calling or
Ordination thereunto. Much less did we or any of us actually or intentionally
authorize or empower them, or any of them, to subvert the very foundations of
this and all other Parliaments, and betray our ancient Liberties, Rights and
Charters, contrary to their trust and duty, by condescending or agreeing to
give away our unquestionable rights of Electing our Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and Customs, Usages
and Charters of our respective Counties, Cities and Buroughs, or to set up any
new Representative for us or the Kingdom, which neither we nor our Ancestors
ever heard of nor desired: Or to undermine the Honor, Freedom, Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, by sitting and voting in the House, whiles under the
visible, detestable force and sword of a rebellious and mutinous Army, who have
imprisoned, excluded, and forced away most of their Fellow Members, who ought
to join with them both in their Debates and Votes: Or to usurp such an
arbitrary and exorbitant power to themselves alone, being few in number, and
not one fifth part of the House, to repeal, null, and make void what Votes,
Orders, Ordinances and Proceedings they please, made in a free and complete
House, when there were five times more Members present: Or to suspend or cast
out their Fellow Members, who are their Peers and Equals, and sit there by the
same and as good authority as themselves, or to continue or impose any further
Taxes on us, to maintain an imperious, lawless Army to devour and tyrannize
over King, Parliament, Lords, Commons, City, Country, and the whole Kingdom, as
our only Sovereign Lords and Masters, without improving their utmost authority
to suppress and reclaim them from their present insolences, and destructive
treasonable practices; or else to declare them public Enemies, and Rebels, and
proceed against the Ringleaders of them, and bring them unto speedy justice and
exemplary punishment. And therefore we do here by these presents absolutely
disclaim and renounce whatever they or any of them have fraudulently and
indirectly acted, voted, ordered, ordained, or consented to, or shall hereafter
vote, order, ordain or consent to in the House of Commons, or elsewhere, in,
or concerning all, or any of the premises, contrary to their trusts and
duties, and against our consent, authority, wills and instructions, to the
prejudice or destruction of our Religion, Laws, Liberties, King, Kingdom, the
Rights, Privileges and Freedom of Parliaments, or their Fellow Members, and
hindrance of the speedy Peace and settlement of this Realm, or obstructing the
relief of despairing Ireland, or support of any new usurped, Arbitrary or
Tyrannical Power in any Party or Faction whatsoever, to the inthralling of the
Kingdom to their vassallage and lawless wills; and declare the same to be void,
null, and no ways binding unto us, or any of us; who do hereby demand public
justice against them from their Fellow Members in a free and full Parliament,
for all the misdemeanors and offenses in and against the House, its Privileges
and Members, or any the Premises: and likewise revoke and resume all that
trust, power and authority we formerly delegated and committed to them and
every of them, so far as they have abused and perverted it in any of the
aforesaid particulars, contrary to our minds and commissions, who by the Armies
late Remonstrance, may and ought to call them to account for all their unjust
Votes, Orders, Proceedings, and abuses of their trust, and to resume their
power into our own hands, from whom they received it, only as our Deputies,
when we discern them palpably to abuse both it and us, from whom they are to
receive their wages. All which we held it our bounden duties in these times of
imminent danger and ruin to us and our Posterity, King, Parliament and
Kingdom, to remonstrate to the world, and these our Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, our Representatives in the House, that they might take timely notice
thereof.

Dated from our respective Counties, Cities and Boroughs, the 23 of December.
1648.
FINIS.

