C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
An ACT acknowledging and asserting the Right of Succession to the Imperial
Crown of SCOTLAND.
C2 R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of arms

THe Estates of Parliament considering that the Kings of this Realm (deriving
their Royal Power from God Almighty alone) do succeed Lineally thereto,
according to the known degrees of Proximity in Blood, which cannot be
interrupted, suspended, or diverted by any Act or Statute whatsoever; And that
none can attempt to alter or divert the said Succession, without involving the
Subjects of this Kingdom in Perjury and Rebellion, and without exposing of them
to all Fatal and Dreadful Consequences of a Civil War: Do therefore, from a
hearty and sincere sense of their Duty, recognize, acknowledge and declare,
That the Right to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, is (by the inherent Right,
and the Nature of the Monarchy, as well as by the fundamental and unalterable
Laws of this Realm) transmitted and devolved by a Lineal Succession, according
to the Proximity of Blood; And that upon the Death of the King or Queen who
actually Reigns, the Subjects of this Kingdom are bound by Law, Duty and
Allegiance to obey the next immediate and lawful heir, either Male or Female,
upon whom the Right and Administration of Government is immediately devolved;
And that no difference in Religion, nor no Law, nor Act of Parliament, made, or
to be made, can alter or divert the Right of Succession and Lineal Descent of
the Crown, to the nearest and lawful Heir, according to the degrees aforesaid;
nor can stop or hinder them in the full, fry and actual Administration of the
Government, according to the Laws of the Kingdom. Like as, Our Sovereign Lord,
with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, do declare, That it
is High. Treason in any of the Subjects of this Kingdom, by Writing, Speaking
or any other manner of way, to endeavor the alteration, suspension or
diversion of the said Right of Succession, or the debarring the next lawful
Successor from the immediate, actual full, and free Administration of the
Government, conform to the Laws of the Kingdom; And that all such Attempts or
Designs, shall infer against them the pain o Creason.

An ACT ratifying all former Laws for the Security of the PROTESTANT RELIGION.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
ratifies and approves all and whatsoever Laws, Acts and Statutes, made by His
Royal Grandfather and Father of Blessed Memory, or made and past in any of His
Majesty's former Parliaments, for settling and securing the Liberty and Freedom
of the true Kirk of God, and the Protestant Religion presently professed within
this Realm, and all Acts made against Popery, and ordains the same to stand in
full Force and Effect, and to be put in Execution conformable to the tenor and
purport of these Acts, as if they were specially mentioned and set down herein.

LONDON: Printed by N. Thompson, 1681.


