Prophulaktikn OR, Some Consideration OF A Notable Expedient To root out the
FRENCH POX From the English Nation. With Excellent Defensive Remedies TO
Preserve Mankind from the Infection of POCKY Women.

Also an Advertisement, wherein is discovered the dangerous Practices of
Ignorant Pretenders to the Cure of this Disease.

By L. S. Dr. of Physic.

(...).

Demost. ad Laidem. London, Printed in the Year. 1673.

The Printer to the Reader.
Gentlemen,
BE pleased to take notice, that the Doctor has lately left his former
Habitation, and for the more private reception of his Patients, lives now in
Hyde-Street near Bloomsbury-Market; the House he lives in is near the Sign of
the Clock, and has a Porch with Rails before the door.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To all Persons concerned in the POX.
Gentlemen,
I Have spent some years in studying to help you in this important Affair. And
surely I may (without any breach of Modesty) pretend to some skill in this
Business as well as my Neighbors. For I have perused no less than three
hundred sixty and eight Authors, who have learnedly treated of this Disease. I
have traveled also, and consulted some prime Physicians abroad, and carefully
remarqu'd the Secrets of their Practice. I have had plentiful Experience upon
the worst of Patients, i. e. those who have been spoiled by Mountebanks and
unskilful Surgeons, and also forlorn, despaired of, and quite given over by
learned Physicians. Many of these unfortun^ate Persons by my Care have been in
a short time restored to perfect health; but some have perished: and indeed (if
Miracles are not to be expected) how could it be otherwise? the Natural parts
were so corrupted, the Bones so carious and rotten, and the whole Compages of
the Body so ruinous and desperate, that none but an Apollo could promise either
to himself or the Patient any real performance upon a Disease in those
desperate Circumstances.

I have diligently compared what I read in Authors with what I daily observed
in my own Patients, and remarqu'd in the Practice of others: out of all which I
have compiled a Treatise of the Pox, fully showing its Fssence, Origin, Causes,
Disserences, Symptoms, Signs, and Prognostics, with all the several Ways of
Care now in Use. This Treatise I have finished, and keep by me ready for the
Press, expecting only some spare time for the setting out a Work of that high
Concern. But, as Suctonius relates of the furious Caligula, who being wearied
in butchering Mankind by Parcels, wished all the people of Rome had but one
neck, that he might dispatch them at a Blow: So in my Treatise of the Pox, my
endeavors were against the Pox in particular persons only, but in this ensuing
Tractate I have laid the Ax to the root, and given it such a fatal Blow, that
in a short time this Nation may be secured from any Attaques of that Filthy
Disease.

Gentlemen, I well foresee that a Treatise of this Nature will not be well
resented by All. For some formal Persons will endeavor to mis-represent the
Charitable Design of this Work, and allege, that the Pox is a beastly Disease,
which few or none have, but such as well deserve it; and that the Obscenity of
it is the cause why Eminent Physicians meddle not with it, but have hitherto
left the business wholly to Surgeons, Barbers, Tooth-drawers, and Mountebanks.

Answ. It Is confessed, that the Pox is a nasty Disease. But, does it therefore
follow, that the Cure is to be managed only by Tooth-drawers, Mountebanks, and
Empiriques? Or, that it is below the Concern of an Eminent Physician to meddle
in this Case? For my part I never yet understood, that 'twas any Crime in a
Physician to help Mankind in filthy Diseases, but rather that 'twas an
Undertaking which ought to be cherished and countenanced by all good Men. The
more loathsome the Disease, the more Commiseration is required, and the
Physician is obliged to a more tender Care. I will assure you, that my
Intentions in compiling this Tractate, were Modest and Good; not to countenance
Debauchery, but to root out this Exotic Plant, and defend Innocent Persons from
the Fury of a Cruel Disease. I will faithfully promise you, that the ensuing
Discourse shall be managed with all the Modesty and Civility of Expression
imaginable, so that the oculi emissitii (as Plautus phrases it) of Envy it self
shall not be able to find any Offense in that kind.

This foul Disease is a complicate Evil, and as it were a Combination of the
worst of Diseases, advanced to a strange degree of Malignity. And as its
Effects are most dreadful and terrible, so also is the Cure abstruse, arduous,
and difficult, and not to be attempted by that Illiterate Rabble of
Mountebanks, Tooth-drawers, and Ignoramusses, who in three days may do you
more hurt, than you shall ever claw off while you breath, You are therefore
carefully to avoid those Persons as Enemies to Mankind, Men full of Words and
Promises, but without any Performance at all. We daily see and lament the
signal Miscarriages of these Men; how Thousands every Year lose their Lives,
and Ten thousands their Noses. And whereas in one Month the Malignity might be
carried off, and the Disease perfectly cured, these men by their preposterous
handling the Disease do so affix it to the Patient, and so root it in his
bones, that it is afterward impossible to be removed. Be wary therefore, and
keep out of the Talons of these Harpyies, who use many Artifices and
Insinuations to draw you in. You are to address to learned Physicians and
expert Chirurg. for help in this Case. For let me tell you, There Is scarce one
among a hundred of those who profess this Cure that thoroughly understand the
Nature of the Disease, the Cause of its Symptoms, or any ready or certain Way
of Cure. And this is the reason so many perish of the Pox, who might easily
have been cured had they fallen into the hands of skilful Physicians.

Gentlemen, I have one thing more to acquaint you with, and it is this, several
Doctors in this Town seeing the admirable Effects of my Antidotes and
Bezoartiques upon the worst and most profound Poxes, have with some importunity
solicited me to a Discovery. But I have not as yet discovered them to any.
Not, that I should be backward in any thing which might in the least promote or
advance the Public Good: but this Expedite way of Curing the Pox (which was
not wholly of my own Invention, but in part communicated by those excellent
Physicians Monsieur de Bode and Monsieur Balon of Paris, the most skilful, not
only of France, but of all Christendom, in the Expedite and happy Cure of this
Disease) I am unwilling to put into the hands of some few to be monopoliz'd,
and made use of for their Interest only, because I have designed a Discovery to
all, and to print them for the benefit of the whole Nation.

This little Tractate therefore is but a forerunner of a greater and more
Elaborate Work. For I do intend (if God spare my Life, and prosper my
Endeavors) very suddenly to acquaint the World with some remarkable
Observations and Secrets in this Disease; and also put the Physicians and
Surgeons of this Age in a New Way of Curing the Pox, far more Expedite,
Certain, and Safe than any bitherto known to the World. But in the mean time I
conjure and charge you once again to beware of Mountebanks, and the Illiterate
Rabble of Pretenders to this Cure. Farewell.

L. S.

A Notable Expedient to root out the POX.
CHAP. I. A Summary Account of the Pox. Its Names. Which most proper. French
Pox and Lues Venerea disallowed. Aloys. Luisinas noted. Anti-venereal
Medicaments what. The Pox not an Epidemic Disease, against Leonicenus,
Fracastorius and Massa. Not a New and Extraordinary Disease. Shown to be
Sporadic here, and Endemial in the W. Indies.
THis Calamitous Disease has many Names, some whereof we pass by, as being
phantastic and affected; or barbarous and blasphemous. The most apt Names are
Morbus Indicus, Hispanicus vel Neapolitanus: but the most usual is the French
Pox. For most Nations in Europe commonly use that Appellation. And Leo
Africanus ( Descrip. Afric. lib. 1.) assures us, it is so called in many parts
of Africa, as at Tunis in Barbary, and in Egypt, as also in Syria in Asia: and
that the Mahometans usual. Imprecation is, Te Morbus male perdat Gallicus. But
methinks, it is pity to affix the Title on the French and rob the Italians of
that Honor; because 'twas first brought from the Indies by Columbus an
Italian, and at Naples first showed it self to Christendom, and at this day is
more common in Italy than in any other Country in Europe, as is generally
attested by Italian Physicians themselves. But especially because some Italians
seem to glory in it. HierMercurialis an Italian Physician ( cap. 2. de Morbo
Gallico) says, Ideo laus est Italorum ut abundent hoe morbo, quia indulgent
Veneri and utuntur passim mulieribus infectis, ut non mirum sit esse peculiarem
morbum nostrarum plagarum. And they tell us, That since the Pox has been so
familiar with them, it has done them a double Kindness; for,

1. It has in good part freed them from the Plague, for since the Pox came
among them, they are seldom troubled with the Test, whereas in former Ages
'twas far more fierce and frequent than it has been since.

2. They observe that since they had the Pox, the Leprosy has almost left them,
so that now every Lazaretto in Italy is filled with Neapolitans.

Some others in complement to the French forbear the Vulgar Name, and call it
Lues Venerea. But though their Civility deserves Commendation, yet this
Denomination cannot be allowed. For Lues, as Isidorus observes ( Orig. lib. 4.
cap. 6.) is the Plague or a Pestilential and Epidemic Disease. And as Festus
says, Lues est diluens usque ad nihil, tractum a Graeco (...). So in the
judgment of all who understand the Propriety of Words, Lues denotes an Epidemic
or Pestilential Disease, proceeding from a Common Cause, and killing the
greater part of those who receive Infection. But the Pox is not an Epidemic but
Sporadic Disease; it is not received from any common Infection in the Air, but
by Contact of infected Bodies. Again, Lues, or the Pest, destroys the greater
part of the Infected: but most of those who have the Pox live, and may be
cured. And lastly, Lues is an Acute Disease, but the Pox is Chronic. 2. Nor can
it properly be termed Venerea. For that signifies a Disease received by the use
of Venery. But this Disease is not always got by Venus: for Children get it by
sucking Infectious Nurses; and Nurses often receive it from infected Infants.
And most Physicians tell us it is to be got by profuse kissing of women who have
Pockie Ulcers in their Mouths: as also by lying in the sheets wherein
Neapolitans have sweat. That therefore's an unsufferable Caprichio in Aloysius
Luisinus, who calls his Collection of Authors who have writ of the Pox (...),
as if (...) or Venus and the Pox were one and the same Identic thing. I wish
Dr. H. would consider the Title of his Book, Venus unmaskt. Those also fall
into the same Error, who call their Medicines against the Pox Anti-venereal
Remedies. For an Antivenereal Medicine, according to the true import of the
word, is that which is given to luxurious persons to repress the furious
desires of Venus: as those Aque Castitatis so often mentioned in Authors, but
especially when they treat of Furor Vterinus. Also Anti-venereal may signify
those Magic Compositions used by Sorcerers to disable married Persons from
Venus.

Physicians differ about the Origin of the Pox: for, 1. Some hold it to be an
Epidemic Disease, and by consequence to proceed from a Common cause: and of
this Opinion is Leonicenus, Fracastorius, Nic. Massa and some others. But yet
these men differ about this Common Cause; for some hold it to be a malign
Influence derived from a Conjunction of Saturn, Mars and Venus, etc. And this
is the Opinion of Massa in his Book of the Pox. But Leonicenus will have it to
be a great Inundation of Tyber in P. Alexanders time, which drowned the
greatest part of Rome, and corrupted the Air: from whence he imagines the Pox
to have had its first Beginning. And this he endeavors to confirm by telling
us, that in P. Pelagius's time Tyber overflowed his banks, and upon that
Inundation presently ensued the Pest and a strange ill-natured Scab or
Manginess, which the Physicians of that age could not cure. And he says the
like happened in P. Bonif. 4th's days also.

Here two things are to be remarqu'd: 1. That it is probable the Favorers of
this Opinion first called the Pox Lues Ven. supposing it a General Epidemic
Disease proceeding from a Common Cause. 2. That these men were of opinion it
would in time senescere, decay, and be quite antiquated, as other Epidemic
Distempers are.

But the Reasons offered by Fracast. and his Partisans have not at all
satisfied the world, or convinced us that it is Epidemic, or, that it will in
future Ages abandon these parts of the World. For, 1. We have no Reason to
believe it Epidemic, or, to proceed from a Common Cause, as the pernicious
Influence of Stars, or Corruption of Air; because Diseases proceeding from such
Causes never continue long, but when the bad Influence is at an End, and the
Air freed from that adventitious venomous quality, they end also: But the Pox
has continued some Ages, and with as much fierceness as ever. Nor, 2. have we
any Grounds to believe (as some endeavor to persuade us) that the Pox does
decline, and by degrees abate of its former Fury: for our daily Observation
tells us the contrary, and that it is to the full as fierce and formidable as
ever.

2. Some others affirm the Pox to be a New and Extraordinary Disease, sent by
Heaven as a punishment to the extravagant Lusts of Mankind. And these men are
so far from believing as the others, viz. That it does decline and abate of its
former fury, and will in time abandon these parts, that on the contrary they
think it advanced to a higher Degree of Malignity, and attended with crueller
Symptoms than 'twas in the beginning. Rudius not only thinks it will continue
to the end of the world, but fears that in a matter of 80 years 'twill infect
all Mankind. Et forsitan, quod Deus avertat, 80. aut paulo plurium annorum
spacio omnem humanam progeniem invasura. (de Morb. occ. and ven. lib. 5. cap.
11.) And a certain London Physician has asserted that all this Nation has a
Touch of the Pox and Scurvy.

3. The Third Opinion is of those woe affirm the Pox with us to be a Sporadic
Disease received only by contact of infectious bodies: but in some part of the
West Indies it is Topic and Endemial engendered by bad diet, bad water and
unwholesom Air, as the Leprosy in Egypt, Great Spleens and the Scurvy in
Holland. This Opinion of all others seems truest, as I have fully demonstrated
in my Treatise of the Pox. The first Opinion is already confuted, the Second is
also false: for the Pox is not a New and Extraordinary Disease sent by Divine
Justice; for 'twas brought into Christendom from the West Indies by Columbus
and the Spaniards, and propagated by Contagion and Infection, as is notoriously
known and attested by all. Nor is it now more fierce than 'twas in the
beginning, but continues still the very same. The Ground of this Mistake I
conceive to be this: These men did not take a full and comprehensive view of
the Pox, as it is in the several parts of the World, but only considered it as
it now shows it self in some Northern cold Country. For the Pox does notably
differ according to the temper and quality of the Country. In the Torrid Zone
it is mild and gentle, so also in Barbary, Egypt, and among the Asiatique Turks
it is not outrageous. But in Spain and Italy it is more cruel. So the farther
Northward you go, the more fierce you will find it: for in Germany, Holland and
Great Britain it handles the Patient more roughly than in Italy, Spain or
France. And the Danes, the Swedes and the Russians will inform you that it
deals more rudely with them than with us or the Hollander. The Disease in it
self without doubt is just as it was in the beginnnig, but if the Hollander
finds his Pox not accompanied with such mild Symptoms as the Spanish or Italian
Physicians mention, let him not think there is any Alteration made in the
Disease; but let him impute it wholly to the difference of Climates, and to the
cold, foggy Air of that humid Region. In like manner those who embrace the
first opinion, viz. that it does decline and abate of its former fury, ought to
consider, that now Physicians have found out an Expedite Way to cure it, and
abate its Symptoms; but at first they had no certain Remedies, but let it run
on to its height. And, besides, the French Army before Naples feeding upon
unwholesome diet, the Infection met with Bodies full of ill humors and
strangely disordered: All which might increase the Disease, and raise its
malignity to an higher degree in that Army at that time, than 'twas in other
places where their Bodies were not so disposed. So that still the Disease is
the same, and as furious as ever: but now it is checked and kept under, and
formerly 'twas not.

CHAP. II. The Author commiserates the condition of Incontinent Persons, and
resolves to help them to the utmost. He declares his modest Intentions, his
Charity, and the Causes of publishing this Treatise.
THE very name POX, sounds terrible to English Ears, and makes an Impression of
Horror upon us. For this aggregative Evil is like (...)'s Box, out of which
all other Diseases and Mischiefs issue. When a man is attaqu'd with the Pox, he
has not one single Disease alone, but a Legion of Maladies presently after
seize his miserable Body; viz. Gonorrhoeas, Buboes, Chancres, Caruncles,
Stranguries, stoppages of Urine, Chironian and Telephian Ulcers, Fistulas,
ill-natured Scabs, Tetters, Erosion and Rottenness of Bones, Loss of hair,
Falling of Noses, consuming of the Palate of the Mouth, Loss of Speech,
Deafness, Blindness, terrible racking Night-pains, Invincible Headache, loss of
Sculls, Falling-sicknesses, Convulsions, Apoplexies, dangerous Catarrhs and
Defluxions of Rheum, whence ensue perilous Asthmas, spitting of Blood,
Consumptions. Hectic Fevers, wonderful Extenuation of Body, Gummosities,
Nodes, and Tophaceous Excrescencies. These, and an hundred more are the dire
Companions of the Pox. And who can but wonder, that miserable man should be so
desperately hardy, and so absorpt in Sensuality, as for one moment of vanishing
pleasure, to involve himself in such an Abyss of lasting Miseries? But, when I
consider the Imperious and charming Power of a Good Face, the bewitching
Artifices of Women, and Man's natural Propension to Venus, the (...) and rapid
violence of his Passion, it draws me from Admiration to Commiseration. For we
are all (...), subject to the same Passions, to the same Propensions and
Inclinations of Nature. That man said excellent well in the Comedy, Homo sum,
humani a me nihil alienum puto. For though some have that Fortitude not to be
hurried along with this brutish Passion; yet are they not to insult over
others, who have more of Passion, and less of Prudence than themselves. For
Greenness of years, and Vehemence of the Temptation, though before God they
avail the Delinquent nothing at all; yet ought they to merit Compassion from
us, who have been our selves too often assaulted by these impetuous Motions
tumultuantis Nature. It was therefore Commiseration that caused me to spend so
many good hours and years in studying to holp these miserable Persons. Formerly
I did believe that all those, who had once felt the fury of this Disease, would
afterward be more wary; but I was deceived, and my constant Observations have
now satisfied me to the contrary. For many do so indulge this brutish Passion,
that as soon as they are out of the Physician's Hands, they run presently into
the Arms and Embraces of infected Courtizans. Nay, too frequently we find, that
whilst they are under Cure, they secretly continue the same Courses.

Deum contestor, I call the Eternal and Immortal God to witness, whem I door
and serve, and who is conscious to all my Thoughts and Secrets, that I have not
published this Treatise with any design or desire to indulge or countenance
incontinent persons in their Lusts and detestable Lives; but merely for the
Good of their Persons, for the Safety and Security of the Sober part of
Mankind, and for the Honor of the English Nation.

1. I have published this Defensive Method for the Good of the Debanchee
himself. His Vices and his Incontinency I hate, but his Person I pity and love.
Nor can this Expedient justly be thought any Encouragement to him, to go on in
his Debauchery; for we see with our eyes, that notwithstanding the Pox is such
a fierce and formidable Evil, and the very Endemial and Topique disease of
Bawdy-Houses, yet the Greatness of the Danger, and the Commonness of the
Disease do not at all deter men from such Courses and Company, but still they
rush into most manifest danger, brutishly preferring one hours Contentment
before Health, Life and Heaven it self. Moreover, if we reflect upon former
Ages (before Columbus's Voyages to the Indies) when this Discase was unknown to
these parts of the world, we shall find that men were then far more continent
than now; then Debauchery was not at such height. But since the Pox has invaded
Europe, and attaqu'd Bawdy-Houses, and been the familiar Companion of
Courtizans, they are wonderfully increased, and far more frequented than
formerly; Nitimur in vetitum. The more we are restrained, the more impetuously
we rush on. This Hurricane by its rapid violence, drives miserable Mortals into
these Fornices and Cryptae, where they are sure to be stung by these (...), i.
e. Courtizans ten times more venomous than the Serpents of Lybia. What shall we
do in this case? you will say, Let 'em go on and perish in their wickedness. This
is indeed a most compendious way of reforming Mankind, to cut off the
Offenders. But we find not that God, or any good Prince ever made use of this
rough way. Apage Carnifices! Away with these uncharitable Persons! and let us
discharge our Duty, and endeavor to preserve their Bodies from the Fury of
this Pest, leaving their better part to the Care and Prudence of Good Divines.

2. This Treatise is designed for the Safety and Security of the Sober Part of
Mankind. How many chaste Matrous, tender Infants, innocent Nurses, are ruined by
this Disease? When I sadly reflect upon the miserable Condition of some
virtuous Women: how profoundly debauched some Husbands are: and, how frequently
the Pox is made use of as a ready Expedient to dispatch Wives, and send 'em to
another World; I lament the Misery of those Women, and detest the execrable
Villainy of those Husbands. It is therefore for the Safezy of these sober
Persons, and to prevent those Hellish Practices that I have set forth this
(...). These innocent Matrons, conversing only with sober company, are utterly
unacquainted with the Signs and Symptoms of the Pox. Hence when unkind Husbands
give them the Running of the Reins, they innocently believe it nothing but the
Whites, and so let the Disease run on. So also they imagine those racking
Night-pains of the Pox, to be the Effects of the Scurvy only, (so apt is this
Nation and Age to reduce all Diseases to the Scurvy.) This Ignorance of the
Disease, as also the ingenit and natural Modesty of that Sex, are too often the
Causes why the business is deferred, and the Disease concealed, until it is so
rooted in the Body beyond a possibility of Cure. And so these miserable persons
are hurried out or this World by a filthy Disease. I dare confidently avouch
it, that one half of Infected Persints are Innoce^t^: and further; that where
one debauched person dies of the Pox, five of the sober part of Mankind die of
the some Disease: and the Reason is, because the Debanchee is confident, and
discovers his Disease, and in time gets help. But the other not being skilled
in the business, let it run to its height, before they understand what it is:
and when they do understand it, such is their invincible Shamefae' dness, that
they choose rather to endure its utmost Fury, than to discover themselves
attainted with so scandalous a Malady. Add also those miserable Infants, who
bring a Congenit or Connatural Pox into the World with them; and also those
Innocent Babes who get it from wicked Nurses, whose Cries, Tears, and piteous
Moans, deserve some regard. All which, I say, being duly considered, are
enough to move any heart (unless flinty) to commiseration and pity. This
Treatise therefore is chiefly designed for the benefit of sober Mankind, viz.
chaste Matrons, tender Infants, and innocent Nurses, and not for Bawds and
Courtizans. For I heartily wish such damned Prostitutes, who make Leachery a
Trade, may either perish of the Pox, or be so just to themselves, and kind to
Mankind, to end their cursed lives with an Halter. The End therefore and Scope
of this present Undertaking, is, not to remove the Pox from Bawdy-houses and
Courtizans, but from Marriage-beds and Cradies, from innocent and undeserving
Persons.

3. I have published this Defensive Method for the Good and Hontour of this
Nation. The Pox is a Reproach to Mankind it self, and infected Persons may
justly be ranked among the (...), or Venomous Animals. For, what Serpents in:
the Deserts of Africa ejaculate more filthy Venom than Pocky Men and Women?
This dire Venom of the Pox transcends that of Vipers and Adders, and is far
more extensive of its malice. That kills Creatures of a different kind only,
this poisons those of its own species; and when Men and Women by the Impulse of
Venus come together, they poison one another. In some hot Countries, almost the
moiety of Mankind is infected with this disgraceful Malady. And who can but be
mightily concerned to see one half of Mankind come in the number of pernicious
Animals, and Creatures that ejaculate poison? If you enter into a serious (I am
sure 'twill be a sad) Consideration, and attentively remarque what footing the
French Pox has got upon English Ground: what huge Multitudes of Pocky Patients
come every year under Healing Hands; you will quickly grant that this Expedient is
very seasonable, and that there is an absolute Necessity of proposing some
Defensives to repress the Fury and farther spreading of this diffusive Evil. A
multitude of Lawyers is an Argument of many Lawsuits. And if we argue from
this Topic, we may easily conclude the Pox to be prodigiously spread in this
City. For, setting learned Physicians aside; you will find an incredible multitude
of Persons who live (and some very splendidly too) chiefly upon the Cure of
this Disease. The numerous multitudes of Surgeons, Chemists, Practicing
Apothecaries, Mountebancks, Empiriques, Tooth-drawers and Ignoramusses who deal
in the Pox, upon a sober Inquiry have been found to amount to near one thousand
and five hundred. And if so many Persons live upon the Pox, judge how many
thousands suffer by the contagion of that spreading Disease. It will therefore
be a generous and Heroio Undertaking to endeavor by some bealing Advice to
help this Nation, and repress and check the enormous spreading of this popular
Distemper. And that person who shall well perform it, will truly merit to be
esteemed, a Benefactor to Mankind. I have broken the Ice, and made a good
Ouverture, let others follow my Example, facile est inventis addere.

CHAP. III. A Search into the Causes, why Physicians bitherto have not
endeavored the Prevention and Extinction of the Pox. Three Reasons assigned,
viz. Pride, Covetousness, and Ignorance. The Author remonstrates the great
Inconveniences and Hazards he voluntarily thrusts himself upon for the
public Good, and for the Honor and Safety of the English Nation.
It Is now almost two Hundred years, since the French Army at Naples was first
infected with the Pox. I cannot but greatly admire that all the Physicians in
the world have sat still; and let it run on thus long, and done nothing in the
Defensive Way, toward its Prevention or Extinction. They have indeed writ
whole Volums and Treatises how to cure it, but they have not set forth in
Vulgar Languages any Defensive Methods to prevent the Infection or farther
spreading of that abominable Disease. They have not proposed any Expedient to
root it out from the European part of Mankind. Certainly it is a far more
excellent piece of skill, to preserve Mankind from Diseases, than to cure him
when infected. And surely all Christian Physicians ought to have joined their
Forces, and bent their, best Endeavors to have quelled so formidable and
furious an Enemy, and, which so insolently menaces Mankind with Ruin and
Destruction. But, (...), not one word of this. None have yet instructed Mankind
in this weighty Affair. There is, I confess, a matter of a dozen among the many
Authors who have writ of this Disease, that have laid down Defensive Methods
against the Pox; but their Discourses are in Latin, and add rest to Physicians
only, so that the generality can receive no benefit by them, unless translated
and adapted to their Capacities. But what is the Cause of this Silence in a
matter of such important Concern? I have made search into the Business, and I
find the Reasons chiefly to be these.

1. Most of the Eminent Physicians of this City and Nation have always looked
upon this Difease as a thing below them; and so not at all concerned themselves
either with its Cure or Prevention, but wholly remitted the business to others
of an inferior Class.

2. Those others who have studied the Disease, have been so great Gainers by
it, that in stead of endeavoring its Prevention or Extinction, they have
with'd its increase and farther Propagation' so greedy is Mankind of Profit!
These men have carried it fair to the World, and craftily difguiz'd their
Avarice with the specious pretense of Conscience, alleging that the Discovery
of ways of Prevention might be an Incentive to Lust. Whereas they have been
Eyewitnesses of the contrary, and have daily seen, that the Greatness of the
Dunger, and Commonness of the Disease have not at all deterred men, or kept
them within the Bounds of Continency.

3. Illiterate Surgeons, Empiriques, and Mountebanks, who pretend to this Cure,
being persons ignorant in the very Rudiments of Physic, conceive the thing to
be impostible; and so never attempt any thing in the Prophylactique Way. These
poor Hearts consult Vulcan more than Apollo; they spend their time in
Laboratories among Furnaces and Crucibles, where they piteously torture
themselves, and the poor Minerals, to extort and draw forth Elixirs,
Quintessences, Spirits, etc. and vainly promise to themselves and others the
effecting of Wonders. But they are so far from performing any solid Cure, and
especially in the Pox, that they either murder the poor Patient with their
malignant Medicines of Antimony and Quicksilver; or so affix the disease to
him, that it is afterward impossible to be removed. That was a notable Saying
of a Gentleman, who had been guilty of this Imprudence, in addressing to
Illiterate Surgeons for help in this Case: I carried, says he, a Clap to the
Surgeon, and he gave me the Box for it. For these men have an Excellent Faculty
that way; for in driving in Buboes, and unwary suppressing Gonorrhoeas, they
usually bring a slight superficiary Clap to a Grand Pox. And when they meet
with a Confirmed Pox, by their dangerous Medicines and preposterous handling
the Patient, they commonly exasperate the Malady, weaken the sick person, and
in the end make his Disease desperate and incurable.

These therefore I conceive to be the Causes, why none have stood up to
vindicate Mankind from this reproachful Disease; why none have made it their
business to endeavor the Prevention and Extinction of this pernicious Evil.
The Physicians of prime Note have been too fine-finger'd to meddle with this
foul Disease. The others who have studied the Case, have forborne to set forth
any Prophylactique Method, because they have not studied the Public Good, but
their own private Interest. And lastly, the rabble of ignorant Surgeons,
Empiriques, and Mountebanks, have not helped Mankind in this important Affair,
because the Enterprise is too heavy for their weak shoulders.

I alone am the Singular Person that stand up, to help the unfortunate
Debauchee, to defend and secure the Sober part of Mankind, Venerable Matrons,
Innocent Nurses, and tender Infants from the fury of the Pox; to vindicate the
Honor of this Nation, and draw a considerable part thereof from among the
venemons and pernicious Beasts. Neither am I ignorant of the grand
Inconveniences and dangers which by this Charitable Design I shall voluntarily
draw upon my own head. For

1. Some peevish and restless Spirits will open their venomous mouths, and
endeavor to misrepresent the Causes and Ends of this present Undertaking.

2. In discovering this Prophylactique Method, I shall draw upon my self the
Envy of some Physicians; the high displeasure of Surgeous, and the Hatred of
Emperiques, and Mountebanks. And indeed not without some Cause: for in taking
the Pox away from this Nation, I shall rob these men of the best Flower in
their Garden. Hine ille lachrymae!

3. The setting forth this Expedient to root out the Pox, is such a strange
piece of Sulf-denyal, and so infinitely repugnant to my own Profit and
Interest, that many will condemn me for it, as much wanting to my own Good.
For, I, who for almost this twenty years, have had considerable Practice in the
Cure of this Disease, now to issue out a Treatise to prevent and root out the
Pox, what is it but to lay the Ax to the root of the Tree, and cut off all
hopes of any further Profit? It is so, I confess: but herein I have had regard
only to the public Good, to the honor and fifety of Mankind, and not at all
to my own Interest. Gentlemen, I have ever looked upon the Practice of Physic,
not as a Sordid, but Sacred thing; and have always hated those base Spirits,
who prefer the heaping up of Riches, before the welfare of Mankind. Those
pedantique Reservs and Concealments of Knowledge become Empiriques and not
rational Physicians, who ought generously to mind the public Concern of a
Nation, and not their own Interest only.

Gentlemen, these are the Inconveniences I shall voluntarily draw upon my own
head, by my charitable design to contribute to the public Good, and to help
you in this Affair.

CHAP. IV. The Author demonstrates the Possibility and Facility of his
Defensive Method from Reason and Experience, and also from the Practice,
Authority and Testimonies of diverse great and renowned Physicians.
BEcause for almost 200 years the World has sat still, and not attempted any
thing in the Prophylactique Way, nor any ways endeavored to root out the Pox;
the greatest part of Mankind have therefore concluded the thing Impossible, and
do now crroneously believe that the Pox cannot be prevented by any Art
whatsoever. But, for the Honor and Safety of Mankind, I shall in this presont
Discourse undeceive these misbelieving persons, and fully demonstrate from
Reason and Experience, and also from the Practice, Authority and Testimonies of
some great Physicians, that it is possible to prevent the Pox, and that this way
of Prevention is Easy, Effectual, and Cerstain.

I prove the Possibility of this Defensive Method thus. All Physicians in
treating of the Prophylactique way to secure the Body from Poisons, and cure
(...), the dangerous Bites and Wounds of Serpents and other venomous Animals,
commonly propose two things, 1. To fortify the whole body, or that part only
which is most obnoxious to danger, and make it impassible. Or, 2. by Topique
Remedies to draw forth the Venom, before it has made any considerable
impression upon the body. Now Reason and Experience tell us, that this is to be
performed in the venomous Bites, Wounds, and Impresses of the greatest and
fiercest of Poisons. For example, the Bite of a mad Dog is easily cared, and
the great impendent danger of Hydrophobia most certainly prevented. The Bite
also and Wound of the Viper, Asp, Seps, Dryinus, etc. may, and have frequently
been cured, and all danger prevented by Topique, and Internal Remedies. Hence
then I argue; If the fierce venom of these Beasts (some whereof kill in few
hours) may be prevented by Internal Theriacal Medicines fortifying Nature, and
thrusting forth the Poison, and also by apt Topique Applications, drawing the
Venom from the part affected: then certainly the Pox also may be prevented by
Proper Remedies and Applications. For, 1. the above mentioned Poisons are far
more fierce and quick in operation than that the Pox. And 2. they bring more
dangerous Symptoms, because they direct their malice chiefly against the Heart,
and so quickly destroy the whole Economy of Nature. But the Venom of the Pox
is more dull and sluggish, and at first seizes the Glans only, and continues
there some hours, before it makes any farther Progress, or diffuses its
malignity to any other part. 3. Why may not the Pox be prevented, or removed
when it is superficiary, and in the Genital parts only? For the Remedies
prescribed in the following Chapters, are the very same that are used to an
Inward Pox, when it is fixed and rooted in the body, and certainly any Rational
man will grant, that those Remedies which are able to overcome an old confirmed
Pox, where the Venom has taken deep rooting in the body, and is as it were
naturalized; the same may also with greater facility remove a superficiary
Impress of Venom and Malignity. The Decoction of Guaiacum is a known Antidote
against the Pox; so also is a Suffiment of Cinnabaris. And if Guaiaoum,
Cinnabaris, etc. can cure an Inveterate Pox, who can deny that the first
Rudiments and Primordia of the Pox may be removed by the same?

Let then these Sophisters, who envy Man's Honor, Safety and Security, either
give us some solid and satisfactory Reason, why this Venom of the Pox, when
it is seated in the outward parts only, may not be expelled by internal
Antidotes, and drawn forth by Topique Applications, as well as other Poisons,
which are of a far more fierce and malignant nature. Or, in case they cannot
give any such Reason as I am sure they cannot) then let 'em yield up the Cause,
and confess the Possibility of this Defensive Method.

But that this Defensive Method may be more fully confirmed and established, I
shall in the next place show, that it has been also the Sentiment of several
learned Physicians of this and the last Ages; who have in Latin published
Defensives, and showed how to prevent the Pox. 1. Gabriel Falloppius, that
learned Physician, in his Book de Morbo Gall. cap. 89. sets down at large how
to prevent the Pox, and attests upon Oath the Certainty and Infallibility of
his Defensive Prescription. 2. Eustachius Rudius de morbis occultis and venen.
lib. 5. cap 13. has excellently performed the same Undertaking. 3. Hercules
Saxonia has done the like in his Treatise de Lue Venerea, cap. 16. 4. Rodericus
a Fonseca, Tom. 1. Consultat. 35. out of Falloppius and Petronius, has
discussed the Question, and seems propense to the Affirmative. 5. Julius
Palmarius de Lue venlib. 1. c. 8. believed also that it was possible to fortify
the body, and prevent the Pox. 6. Joannes Varandaeus was of the same mind also,
as is manifest from the method he sets down in 's Book de Lue Venerea, and from
those words, mirum est eos qui de Lue Venerea hactenus scripserunt, nihil de
Prophylaxi ejus attigisse, sed omnes soli Therapiae incumbere. 7. Panarolus, a
Roman Physician in 's book of Observations, has set down a Prophylacticon, to
preserve Women from the Pox. These are all Physicians of prime Note, and they
did firmly believe the Possibility of the Thing, and have set forth Ways of
Prevention. But in this one thing they failed, and were wanting to the Public
Good, viz. they did not publish their Defensives in Vulgar Languages, (as I
have done) but addressed their Discourses to Physicians only. But in the
ensuing Chapters I shall teach them to speak English, and, to their utmost,
instruct you in this. Important Affair.

CHAP. V. Some Practique Observations concerning the manner of receiving
Infection. What Persons are most apt to give and receive the Pox. The Author
proposes his Expedient, and Defensives; and shen's how to prevent the Pox by
Bandage and Ligature, by Lotions, Decoctions and Suffiments.
HAving in the precedent Chapters declared the Causes and Reasons of this
Undertaking, and demonstrated the Possibility of the thing; and also made a
Search into the Causes why Physicians hitherto have not endeavored to root out
this filthy Disease: I come now to the Grand Business, to discover this
Prophylactique, and lay down this Expedient to root out the Pox. This Expedient
consists of two things, the first whereof is, a laying down some Defensive
Remedies to secure particular persons from receiving Infection from Pockie
Women. The second is a Seclusion of infected Courtizans from Public Converse,
but yet so as this Seclusion may be commodious to this Nation, and also a
design of Charity to the Prostitutes themselves. We shall discourse of this
Seclusion toward the end of this Treatise. But in the first place we will
enquire after the Defensives, and lay them down in a plain, familiar, and
intelligible Method; and also call in a dozen of the learned Physicians in
Christendom, to give their Sentiments in the Case; whose Judgments and
Prescriptions will farther explicate, confirm, and enlarge the whole business.

But first we are to consider three things: First, what kind of Pocky Women are
most dangerous and infectious, and when? Secondly, what men are most apt to
receive Infection? and Thirdly, the Way or Manner how the Pox is imparted to
the body.

1. What kind of Pockie Women are most dangerous? I answer, that young Women
are more infectious than Ancient: so also those who are of a spare, thin,
cholerique Constitution of body, and also such as are of a sanguin, hot, and
moist complexion; and lastly, those who have the Pox complicate with the
Scurvy. The Reason is manifest: for young women are more hot and moist than
old, and by consequence, the Venom in such bodies must needs be more diffusive
of it self, than it is in an old, dry, and cold body. The Pox is very malignant
in a cholerique, hot, and dry Constitution; because by the great heat of the
Body the Venom is calcined and advanced to a high degree of Malignity. In
bodies which are sanguin, hot and moist, the Venom is active, spirituous, and
quick, because Heat and Moisture increase Putrefaction and Corruption of
Humors; and being diffusive qualities, soon communicate and spread the Venom.
And lastly, the Scurvy, in the judgment of all who have writ of it, is a
venomous contagious Disease, and something of kin to the Pox; so according to
the Proverb, Vis unita fortion, a combination of Venoms is most forcible. But
of all Women, she who is dull, sluggish, and of a phlegmatique, gross, cold
Constitution is the least infectious: for such a woman, if she have no
Gonorrhoea, nor Ulcers in the uterin Passage, does not very quickly communicate
the Pox, but many times the first that converses with her, receives no damage
at all; but the second, who comes upon her when her body is heated, and the
Venom agitated and stirred, receives the Pox. A Gonorrhoea and Ulcers in the
Vterin Passage may be guessed at by the Lubricity and Moisture of those parts.

The other part of the Question is, When are Pockie Women most infectious?
Answ. When the Venom and Humors are most agitated and heated with Wine,
Hearing Drinks, and burning Lust. For all these things heat the body, agitate
the infectious Humors, and diffuse the Venom. But above all the most dangerous
time to meddle with such women, is, when they have their Courses. For at that
time Nature mightily endeavors to discharge all the Venom and impurities of
the whole Body that way, so that of necessity they must be exceeding pernicious
at such times.

2. The second Thing to be considered, is, what men are most apt to receive
Infection? I Answer, Young people receive it far sooner than Ancient, so also
those who are of a sanguin, hot, and moist constitution of body, but especially
when they are (...) under the greatest (...) and most rapid Commotion of Lust.
And lastly, those who have the Glans covered with the Praepuce. Now that this
is so, is manifest from Observation: and it is also attested and confirmed by
that learned Physician Gabriel Falloppius, in's Book de morbo Gallico, cap. 22.
who gives this Reason of it, viz. the Glans, by reason it is constantly covered
with the Praepuce, is most tender, soft, and susceptive of the (...) and
venomous Impresses of the Pox: but on the contrary, when that part is bare and
uncovered, it becomes more firm, compact and hardened, and does not so easily
admit the Venom. Hercules Saxonia; de Lue Venerea, cap. 4. grants the thing to
be true, but he thinks Falloppius mistaken in the cause: for he is of opinion,
that it is not because the part is more soft and tender, but because the Venom
does insinuate between the Glans and Praepuce, and afterward impart its
malignity to the whole body. For my part, I believe these learned men are both
in the right: for without doubt, as Fallappius asserts, when the Glans is
perpetually covered, the skin must of necessity be more loose, thin and warm,
and much easier admit the Venom than when it is otherwise. So also, according to
Saxonia, the Venom does insinuate between the Glans and Praepuce, and more
closely attaque the Patient. But of this we have discoursed more largely in our
Treatise of the Pox.

3. The Way or Manner how the Infection of the Pox is communicated to the Body,
is thus: when a Woman gets the Pox from a Man, the Infection is sometimes
received from the Chancres on the Genital, but most commonly from his
infectious Sperm. When a Man receives it from a Woman, the Contagion insinuates
into the Glans from the Vterin Passage, which commonly is full of Pockie
Ulcers, or besmer'd with the virulent matter of a Gonorrhoea. These Ulcers emit
a venomous sanies, which infects that tender part called the glans. These
impressions of Venom remain some time upon the Glans only, and afterward (if
let alone) insinuate into the humors and spirits, and so infect the whole
body. You are also to understand, that a Woman may in Coition give the Pox to
her Gallant, notwithstanding she has no Gonorrhoea, nor Ulcers in the Vterin
Passage.

This being premised, we come now to the Defensive Method. And here it would be
vain and fruitless to think to secure the body by Internal Antidotes only, and
wholly neglect Topique Applications, seeing that the inward parts at first are
entire and free, and the Venom lies only in the glans. We therefore (...) this
Defensive Method are to propose two things. 1. To make the Genital part or
member (...), firm and as it were impassible. This has been attempted by
Falloppius, and since by others, who to this purpose prescribe Stiptic Lotions,
and Linen Rags impregnated with such decoctions, and apply them to the Glans
in men, and to the Vterin Passage in women, both before and after Coition, as
you shall see in the ensuing Chapters. 2. By Lotions, Fomentations,
Attractives, Suffiments, etc. to draw forth the Venom whilst it is in the
genital part only, before it get to the internal parts. For this Venom, if
compared with that of other venomous beasts, is somewhat dull and sluggish, and
for some hours moves not, but afterward (if let alone) it gets into the blood,
and by a continuity of parts soon infects the whole body. You are therefore
presently after Coition to make water, for that cleanses the inward part of the
genital. Then use Bandage or strict ligature to that part of the Genital next
the belly: for this Ligature compresses the Vessels, and hinders the
circulation of the Blood and Humors, and cousequently it hinders the Venom
from insinuating with the blood into the inward parts. Then foment it with warm
Urine, or (which is much better) with white Wine as hot as can be endured. Wash
all the members, but especially the Glans. Do so several times in the day, for
two or three days together. Or, this Decoction: boil Guaiacum, Chamaepitys,
Germander, Horehound, Scordium, Ash-leaves and Keys, Dictamnus Creticus,
Gentian, etc. in white Wine, (if you add a little Praecipitate 'twill be far
more efficacious) and foment the Glans and whole Part with it often in a day.
After the first day, take off the Ligature. The Ligature is to be loosened when
the Patient makes water, or when the Part erects it self and swells. After
every bathing apply Pigeons or Whelps newly dissected and hot. Some commend a
Liniment of Mithridate or Venice Treacle. For these things have great virtue to
draw forth Venom. You may also sweat four mornings together with an Apozeme of
Guaiacum.

Here I conjure and charge all persons concerned, not to be wanting to their
own good, nor to neglect these Remedies, or defer the time, but immediately
after Venus to wash and mundify the parts with the aforesaid Lotions: and they
may be confident of the Cure. But if they defer the time, and let the Venom get
head, and take rooting in the body, the fault is their own, I have given them
fair warning. Note also that none is to converse a whole night with an
infectious woman, for in twelve hours time the venom may do much hurt, and
insinuate into the inward parts beyond a possibility of Extraction by Topique
Applications. Mundifie therefore the part, and wash off the poisonous matter
with warm Urine presently after the Act, then get the aforesaid Remedies.
Principiis obsta --

Sometimes after meddling with infected Women, the Patient will feel an Itching
in the Genital. In this case I advise you to use Falloppius's Suffiment
described in the next Chapter, or that of Varandaeus, set down in the eleventh
Chapter of this Treatise. Take a little earthen Pot with some live coals in it,
and put some of the Powder upon the coals, and place an artificial Funnel over
it, so as you may admit the smoke to the glans, or whole Part: be sure you do
it dexterously, that you admit not the cold Air to the part, nor the Smoke to
the Patients Nose or Mouth, and when you have done, wrap it in warm Cotton. Do
so three mornings together. This Suffiment is a potent Medicine, and to be
administered with discretion: put not too much powder upon the coals; neither
are you to continue the Operation too long. These Suffiments, if prudently
used, are of admirable virtue to prevent the Pox.

What has been already said is sufficient to prevent the Pox, and secure any
person whatsoever. Yet that our Defensive Method may be complete and full, I
shall annex the Prescriptions of a dozen of the greatest Physicians of this and
the last Ages.

CHAP. VI. Falloppius his Defensives to prevent the Pox. Of the Use and Way of
preparing his Medicinal Linen. His two Suffiments of excellent virtue in this
case.
FAlloppius de Morbo Gallico, cap. 89. lays down this Defensive Method, to
preserve the body from Chancres and the Pox. Ego nihil fecisse videor, etc. I
might seem, says be, to have done just nothing, unless also I teach you a way,
how, any person seeing a beautiful Siren, and conversing with her, although she
be infected, may yet be secured from the Pox. I was always of Opinion, that
there was some way to be used, to prevent Chancres and the Pox. But what is
this way? I told you formerly, that these Chancres (or Ulcers on the Genital)
were caused by little venomous bodies, imparted from the infectious woman, and
being received into the porosities of the glans, cause an Eruption of Ulcers:
therefore it is necessary, that after Venus we forthwith cleanse away this
venomous matter from the Glans. But if it has insinuated into the Pores,
notwithstanding we wash the parts with Wine, Urine or Water, yet we cannot wash
off the matter. And this frequently falls out in those, who have the glans
tender, and covered with the praepuce. How therefore must we proceed? I ever
believed that we might lay down some Remedy, which has power of its own nature
to penetrate the skin, and disperse the malignant matter, or else to draw it
forth, or dry it up, and overcome it. Therefore I have invented this ensuing
Remedy. But because we must court these Courtizans, and win their Affections,
it is not convenient to carry Ointments and Salves along with us; therefore I
have found out the use of a fine linen Rag, imbued and impregnated with a
Medicinal virtue, which may conveniently be carried with us. -- As often
therefore as any shall pollute himself with these Strumpets, let him (if
possibly he can) wash the Genital part: afterward let him apply the Medicinal
Rag, being cut and exactly proportioned to cover the whole glans: let him, I
say, after coition apply it to the glans, and cover it with the Praepuce. If
you fear Ulcers in the Vrinary passage, put this Praeservative Linen into that
passage. I have experimented this Remedy in a thousand; and, I call the
Immortal God to witness, that not one was infected. Observe also that any clean
linen has a great preservative virtue: also new soft Cotton, wrapped about the
naked glans, after you have mundify'd it with detersive Washes, wonderfully
preserves; when the Patient takes off this Lint, let him look upon it, for he
shall see it sanious, and discolored with a yellowish, pale, or blackish
color. Let the person always wrap this Linen upon the Glans for four or five
hours. The way of preparing this defensive Linen is excellent, and is as
follows.

Take Gentian, all three sorts of Birthwort of each a dram, white and red
Sanders, Wood of Aloes, of each two Scruples; red Coral, Spodium of Ivory,
burnt Hearts horn, of each half a dram, Scordium, Sowthistle, Betony,
Seabious, Tormentil, of each one handful; Rose-leaves a handful and half,
Guaiacum two ounces, Squama Aeris two drachms, Praecipitate prepared a dram
and of the best Muscadel of Creet one pint and half, waters of Sow-thistle and
Scabious two pints. Take the Wine and the Water, and infuse the Guaiacum
therein 24 hours: then add the other things, and let them boil 'till half be
consumed. Then strain forth the Decoction. In this Decoction a pure linen
cloth is steeped all night, and afterward dried in the shade: this is
performed three times; for we macerate it thrice, and dry it thrice. After that
we cut it inpieces of a just proportion to involve the glans, and they are
always to be kept in readiness. -- The same Author gives us another Description
of this Preservative Linen; and also further prosecutes the business.

Take round Birthworth, Gentian, white Dittany, of each two drachms, Scordium,
Sow-thistle, Rue, of each an ounce and half; Wood of Aloes, all three sorts of
Sanders, seeds of Citron, of each a dram, Rhubarb, Tormentil, St. John's Wort,
of each half a dram, Mithridate two drachms, Guaiacum two: ounces, the best
Muscadel, water of Sow-thistle, of each one pint and half. Let the wood be
first steeped a whole day in the water and wine: afterward boil it until the
third part be wasted; then put in the other things, and let them be macerated a
day; after that boil them until half be consumed: then strain it out. Be
careful that the vessel, wherein your Medicaments boil, be well closed. It
would be best if it were done in B. M. This being done, take the Linen, and
steep it in the Decoction three days: then dry it in the shade in a hot place;
wet it and dry it again: do so three times, or oftener, if you please. This
Linen being well dried, keep it for use, wrapped up in paper, or in Linen. I
might commend this Remedy much, but do you try it, your selves shall be
witnesses of its virtue. But, if you are fearful, and desire a more potent
remedy, and begin to feel an Itching in the Genital, go home, and suffumigate
the Praepuce with the ensuing Suffiment.

Take am carthen pot, in which put a live coal or two, sprinkle upon the coals
this powder, and by degrees hold the genital part over the Smoke; afterward
take the prepared Linen or clean Cotton and put it upon the glans, and the
venomous matter will be drawn from the Liver. The Powder is this.

Take powder of red Roses, Wormwood, red Sanders, of each one scruple and a
half, Benjamin, Camphire, Frankincense, Aloes, Myrrh, of each two Scruples,
Cinnabaris one dram and a half, Praecipitate one dram. Mix them, and reduce
them to a gross powder, With this we suffumigate the part, and prevent Ulcers
in the glans. -- If the Courtizan be so deeply infected that a stronger Remedy
is required when you come home you shall take off the Preservative linen, and
take an earthen Pot with a live Coal or two, then fold a sheet of paper round,
in form of a Horn and artificially place it over the Pot: put a little Powder
upon the fire, and three or four times suffumigate the Glans and Praepuce,
having been first cleans'd and dried: and tutissimi eritis. The Powder is this.

Take powder of red Roses, Wormwood, Sandaracha rubra, of each a scruple and
half, Benjamin, Camphire, Frankincense, of each two scruples, Cinnabaris 2
scruples. Mix them and reduce them to powder. Thus Falloppius.

CHAP. VII. Rudius's Prophylactique Method to prevent the Pox.
EVstachius Rudius de morb. occ. and venen. lib. 5. cap. 13. proposes this
Method. It is to be observed (says he) that when any has lately conversed with
an infected woman, though as yet there appear no signs of infection; yet before
the Venom insinuate too far in the body, it ought to be revell'd from that part
wherein 'twas first received, not by Erictions only, but by other Attractives
which the part affected can admit and endure. Wherefore as in Contagious
Diseases by the Bite of Venomous Animals, a strict Ligature is applied a little
above the part affected; and then the Venom with apt Remedies is drawn forth.
So after converse with an infected Woman, it is not improper forthwith to take
a Linen Band of the breadth of ones finger, and strictly bind the root of the
Genital: which Band is to be relaxed when the Patient makes water, and the part
distends it self. Then foment the whole part with a new sponge dipped in a Lie
made of twigs of Vines or Fig Tree, or in Posea wherein has been boiled some
Guaiacum, or sharp Pickles Brine, Seawater, or the like Attractive Medicamem.
-- If the band wherewith the root of the genital is bound, be spread with a
Defensive of Bole Armeny, Mastic, Sarcocol, fine flower and the white of an
Egg, it will be far more Excellent. If, after binding the part, the whole
Genital be involved in this following Remedy, it will be most powerful to draw
the Venom from the inward parts, and to secure the Patient.

Take Guaiac 6 ounces, water 4 quarts, Boil them until two third parts of the
water be consumed: then add roots of wild Cucumbers, roots of Mallows, roots of
Marsh mallows of each an ounce, Iberis, Thapsia of each a handful. Let the
roots be bruised and put in; and after it has boiled a little, let it be
removed from the fire, and strained. Macerate fine linen in this Decoction and
dry it in the shade. After Venus having bound the root of the genital apply
this defensive linen to the whole part: keep it bound on 2 days or more: but
the Ligature at the bottom or root after the first day is to be taken off.
Likewise if before Venus we use those medicines which bind and strengthen the
Genital, the Venom may be kept out. Take yellow Myrobalans and Chebul Myrob. of
each half an ounce, Cypres Nuts 15. Pine Nuts 4. red Rose leaves a small
handful, Pontic Wormwood a handful, Galls, Myrtel berries, seeds of Sumach, of
each an ounce. Let them all be bruised and steeped in black austere Wine and
the water of Pine-nuts, and be destill'd in a Bath. Let Linen Rags dipped in
this water warmed be applied between the glans and praepuce: also herewith let
the part be washed. For it is an excellent Antidote and has often been
experimentally approved. Thus Rudius.

CHAP. VIII. Saxonia's Way of Prevention.
HErcules Saxonia has also set forth a Preservative Method to prevent the Pox,
cap. 16. De Due Venorea.

First, let them wash the parts with styptic austere Wine, wherein has been
boiled Guaiac, Roses, Myr tel-berries, Balanstia, Acacia, Hypocistis: and after
Lotion let 'em take Linen impregnated with Falloppius's Decoction, and dried;
and keep it on the glans. Notwithstanding I much esteem Falloppius's Decoction,
yet perhaps it may be more infirm than the following one.

Take Gentian, round and long Birthwort, Calamint, Dittany, Scandium of Creet,
Tormentil, Angelica, Masterwort, of each one ounce, Scabious, Fumitary, Betony,
Wormwood, of each a handful, Wood of Aloes, 2 drachms, all three sorts of
Sanders, Raspings of Ivory, Hartshorn burnt, of each a dram and half, Acacia,
Hypocistis, Balaustia, Roses, of each half an handful, Guaiacum a pound, true
Muscadel of Creet two pints, waters of Scabious, Fumitary and Roses of each a
pint, Water of Plantain 3 pints, the best Praecipitate 2 drachms. Infuse the
wood in the waters and wine, and let it boil until half be wasted; toward the
end let the rest of the Ingredients be put in; when they have boiled a little,
let them stand in infusion 24 hours, then boil them until the third part be
wasted: when you have pressed forth the Decoction, take Linen proportioned to
the bigness of the glans or vulva, steep them in the Decoction, and dry them in
the shade, do so the second and third time. This Linen applied before Venus
hardens the parts, dries up superfluous moistures, hinders putrefaction, so
that Falloppius has attested that of 1000 to whom he gave this Antidote, not
one was infected. Nor are those things to be omitted, which after Venus may
conduce to the preservation of the party: those are Washing the Privity with
Urine or Hot water; but warm or hot Lie is better than that; and White Wine hot
excells all. With this wash not the glans only, but the whole part, as also the
Testicles, not once or twice, but often, and at least two days. But, if after
Venus any have heat in their Urin, or excoriation in the glans, then stronger
Remedies are to be used; the Venom is to be drawn forth, the Passages are to be
intercepted that the contagion may not have passage to the inward parts. We
must use internal Antidotes to subdue the Venom, and Topique Applications to
draw forth the Malignity; as Decoctions of Dictamnus, Calamint, Scordium,
Gentian, Guaiacum, made in Wine: as also Suffiments of Cinnabaris,
Frankincense, Myrrh, Wood of Aloes, Saffron. The same also is done with
exenterate Animals, as Pigeons, Chickens or the Lungs of Whelps applied hot to
the Privities. -- If there appear no Chancre, Vlceration or Inflammation, then
foment it with Aqua vitae, or apply a Liniment of Venice Treacle, Mithridate,
or an Ointment of Figs, Nuts and juice of Rue -- To intercept the passage of
the Venom apply a Defensive Ointment to that part of the member next the belly
-- As concerning internal Antidotes use Venice Treacle, Mithridate,
Diascordium: and generally those Antidotes which are Praeservatives against the
Pest are very good in this case -- But if the Patient has the glans ulcerated
or inflamed, we are not presently to judge it requires the grand Diet-drink;
for many times this accident happens immediately after impure Venus, and
without damage in any other part whatsoever. -- In this case Praecipitate is
an excellent Remedy, if duly used. Take of Praecipitate a dram, of Unguent.
Ros. or frest: butter an ounce, mix them. Use this not continually, but between
times use a warm and emollient Lotion, est the Praecipitate cause a callosity
upon the part. Therefore after 24 hours take it off, and wash the part with a
decoction of Mallows, Linseed and a little Guaiacum: and if need require, apply
the Praecipitate again. -- If the body be full, purge gently with some
Lenitive, lest strong Purges draw the Venom (which is in the outward part only)
to the inward. Forbear Bleeding, unless the Chancre has an Inflammation
connex'd with it: if there is Inflammation, bleed in the foot rather than in
the arm. Thus Hercules Saxonia.

CHAP. IX. Minadous his Prophylacticore.
AVrelius Minadous de Virulentia Venerea cap. 33. lays it down thus: -- I
return, says he, to the principal Design, proposing the Opinion of those, who
believe that if after Venus the genitals were all covered with warm Horse-dung,
it would be a sovereign Remedy to prevent Infection; or rather of notable force
to draw forth and disperse the venom. For they believe that in that Dung
there is a certain innate faculty of drawing forth and dispersing Pockie venom.
And Joan. Costaeus affirms that it is discovered by the Experiment of some
modern Physicians, that if one who has the Pox, cover his whole Body in Horse
dung, permitting himself only the liberty of breathing, it will perfectly cure
him. But if this Medicine can cure the body when it is thoroughly infected, how
much more is it to be commended, if applied to the Genital only [by way of
Prevention.] Thus Minadous.

CHAP. X. The Defensives of Panarolus, Fracastorius, Torrella, Cataneus,
Fonseca, Petronius, Sylvius, etc.
PAnarolus in 's Book of Observations proposes a Way of preventing the Pox for
Women with new Sponges; and he says it is infallible.

Fracastorius bids after the Combat, Wash the endangered part with Aq. Ros. and
then foment it decocto aluminis and aerug. aeris, and anoint that and the
vicine parts with a certain Theriac Unguent* As for Internals he bids, give
Theriaca or Mithrid.

Torrella, and out of him Cataneus advise to take an equal proportion of
Bole-Armeny and Sang^ draconis, and with juice of Plantain and Vinegar to be
tempered and spread on a linen cloth and bound about the root of the Genital,
to compress the Veins; and intercept the passage of the Venom. Then to draw
forth the Poison, he scarifies the lips of the Chancre, or applies Soap with
Chalk: or Mithridate; or the deplum'd Fundament of a live Pigeon to the Ulcer.
And lastly, for a Bezoartique to expel the Infection by sweat, he gives a
dram of Theriaca in Sorrelwater.

Fonseca ( Tom. 1. Cons. 35.) lays down the Defensives of Falloppius, Rudius,
Saxonia, etc. all which you may see in the Precedent Chapters.

Petronius derides Falloppius's Defensives, and advises after Venus to wash the
parts with warm Urine, Wine, or the Decoction of Guaiuc; and after washing to
apply clean Linen or a fine Sponge, for that extracts the Venom and infections
Moisture.

Joan. Sylvius (de Morbo Gallico Declam.) bids them presently after the Act
wash the parts with warm Water, or white Wine, which is much better.

CHAP. XI. Palmarius's Defensive Method summarily laid down. Varandous his
Prophylacticon.
PAlmarius tells us that as K. Mithridates with his Autidate fortified his
body, and made it impassible; so he, desiring the Safety of Mankind, and the
Extinction of this Disease, has invented an Amulet, by the due use whereof
Man's Body may be secured, and made impregnable. But withal he conjures
Physicians not to discover it to luxurious persons. I have omitted this Amulet,
because of its length and my intended brevity; and also because it is much such
another Composition as Theriaca Andromachi or Mithridatium.

If I may be permitted to give my Opinion of Palmarius's Prophylacticon, I judge
it a potent Sudorific to cure the Pox, but not at all proper as a Defensive to
prevent the danger of this Disease. For, in our Case, the Blood, Humors,
Inward parts, and whole Habit of the Body are all sound and entire; the
Privities only are attaqu'd: in those parts there is a superficiary Impress of
Venom. And certainly Internal Medicines alone can never reach the Venom when
it is in a remote part, and extrinsic ouly; but it must be thrust out by
Bezoartique, and drawn forth by Topique or Local Medicines. But Palmarius's
Defensive Method is a tedious Prescription of Internal Remedies continued many
days together, and in my opinion, ineffectual to this purpose, because no
regard is had to the part affected.

In the last place comes Varandaeus. This learned man in 's Book de Lue Ven.
praescribes a Decoction, much after the manner of those of Falloppius and
Saxonia, and appoints Linen to be macorated in it, and afterward dried in the
shade, and applied to the parts before and after Venus's Exercise. He bids also
to make water, and wash the parts with white Wine, and to apply the Medicate
Linen or Cotton: impregnated with the same Decoction: as also to thrust into
the Urinary Passage the said Cotton in form of a Tent. For if the Scort be
infectious, the Cotton in an hour or two will appear sanious and discolored,
the filth which was in those passages being attracted and drawn to it. -- He
tells us that Empiriques esteem the following Suffiment a most approved thing.

Take red Roses, Wormwood, Scordium, Dittany, red Sanders, of each a dram,
Styrax Calamita, Cinnabaris, and Praecipitate well prepared, of each a Scruple
Reduce them to a gross powder, whereof let a little be cast on the coals, and
the smoke, by a sunnel artificially placed on the Coals, be admitted to the
genital: let the part afterward be carefully covered and kept warm. Do so 3
mornings together. Thus Joan. Varandaeus.

Gentlemen, I have now dispatched the first part of the Expedient, concerning
the Defensives: which I have carefully selected out of the learned Works of the
greatest Physicians in Christendom. I have communicated them chiefly for the
use of those whom the Greeks call (...), i. e. Persons so furiously transported
with brutish Desires that they are resolved to run the greatest hazard
imaginable rather than deny themselves any Satisfaction in that kind. But, I
hope sober persons' will still be wary, and not repose too much Confidence in
any Defensives whatsoever, but still believe the POX a most perilous Disease,
and in some Women most desperately contagious. Rudius ( de Morb. venen. lib. 5.
c. 10.) tells us that some Scorts are so profoundly poxt, that all who meddle
with them are incurably clapped, and soon after dispatched to another World. And (
lib. 5. c. 8.) he tells a remarkable Story of a wanton young fellow, who by
kissing a Courtizan got such a desperate Pox upon his Tongue, that the best
Physicians and Chirurgeous in the City could not cure it, but he soon after
miserably expired.

I do really believe and avouch it that among all the Common Prostitutes in
this Town there is scarce one but has the Pox.

And me thinks the very thoughs of that nasty Disease should be a potent (...)
to repress any man's desires though never so impetuous.

CHAP. XII. An Expedient for rooting the Pox out of England, Transportation of
incurable Prostitutes propes'd, commended, and urged from Divine Laws, and the
Institutes of Christian Nations.
GEntlemen, I have faithfully discovered the Secrets of this Disease: I have
instructed you in its Cure: I have furnished you with Defensives. You are now
your own Doctors; you have Excellent Medicines both to prevent and cure the
Pox. It only remains now that we consider of some Expedient to root out this
Disease, that Englishmen hereafter may never hear more of it. The only way to
effect this, will be to remove from this City those pernicious Animals, Common
Pockie, and Incurable Prostitutes. But you will reply, they are so numerous, what
shall we do with them all? I will propose an Expedient, which may be Commodious
to this City: Advantageous to his Majesty's Interest in his Plantations: and a
Design of Charity to the Wretches themselves: which is, to transport them to
Jamaica and Barbados. The Transportation of these Common and Incurable
Courtizans, 1. Will be Commodious to this City; For, will it not be a
mavelous Contentment to all, to see this huge City cleared of these pestilent
Creatures, and to have your beds secured from the Pox? I am sure as the case
stands now, many substantial Citizens are daily ruined by these women, and that
not always by their own extravagancies, but too often by the debauchery of
their Prentices, who usually caress these Courtizans out of their Masters
Coffers. 2. It will be Advantageous to his Majesty's Plantations, which want
people, and may be mightily supplied and enlarged by the Access of so numerous
a Party, which here are wholly unprofitable. And 3. It will be a Work of Signal
Charity to the Prostitutes themselves, to remit them and the Pox to the Indies
from whence it came. For 1. It will be a work of Charity to them in respect of
their Bodies: for this is the only way for them to attain a Speedy and Perfect
Cure. Here in this cold Climate all the Art of Man is not able ever to cure
them, the Pox is so profoundly rooted in their bones. But in those hot
Countries the Pox, which here could not possibly be overcome, has often in a
fortnight been thoroughly cured, as has been experimentally attested by several.
2. It will be a Design of Charity to their Souls, to remove them from their
cursed Company, and transport them to places of better Employment and Society.
And 3. the very thoughts of Transportation will hereafter be such a (...) and
Terror to luxurious women, that 'twill fright them into better manners; and
probably may have greater influence upon that numerous party than any other
Menaces or Restrictive Laws whatsoever.

Moreover I urge this Transportation of Incurable Courtizans; 1. From the Laws
of God, which command that Lepers and infected persons should be separated from
the rest of Mankind. 2. From the Institutes and Customs of all Civil Nations,
who have ever used to seclude from Public Converse those who have the Pest,
Leprosy, or other contagious Diseases. Why then should Pockie Strumpets be
permitted the freedom of Public Converse, or liberty to infect Mankind? I am
sure Rudius and Sennertus lament the partial and uneven hand of Public
Justice, which so severely punishes Felons, and yet permits these Common Scorts
(so profoundly poxt, and beyond a possibility of Cure) to ruin thousands, and
infect whole Families, Cities and Kingdoms.

I conjure and beseech all Good Divines, that, as I have taken Care of the
Body, they would take Charge of the Soul, and by their Good Doctrine and
Exemplary Lives institute these Extravagants in the Ways of Continence and
Temperance.

TELOS.

