AN Act for securing of the Protestant Religion, As it was past in the
PARLIAMENT of Scotland, on Saturday August 13. 1681.
OUR Sovereign Lord considering how necessary it is for securing the Protestant
Religion, and that all his good Subjects may be fully assured that the Popish
Religion shall never be introduced or tolerat in this Kingdom; and that the
many excellent Laws made in favors of his Protestant Subjects are of the
Protestant Religion against Popery, may attain the affected execution: That
none but true and sencere Protestants exercise any public Trust within this
Kingdom; and that no Jesuit, Priest, nor trafiquing Papist, who may withdraw or
withold his Subjects from the Protestant Religion, be suffered to be or abyd in
this Kingdom. And seeing the Acts for Excluding Papists from public Trust have
no special Penalties adjected thereto, and that there may be a clear Test to
discover Papists; Therefore his Majesty, with Advice and Consent of his Estates
of Parliament, statutes and declares, That whosoever being required by any
Minister of the Church or Magistrate of the Kingdom, do not subscribe the
Confession of Faith subjoyned to the third Act of the first Parliament of King
James 6. shall be holden and reputed Papists; or who shall refuse to swear the
Oath subjoyned to the said Confession, and sign the same in this form: I -- or
-- we do declare and swear by the Eternal God, whom we call to be Judge and
Witness of our Sincerity herein, That we assent to the said Confession of Faith
according to the ordinary meaning of the word, without equivocation, mental
reservation, and without accepting any dispensation, that we shall never
endeavor or consent to any alteration of the foresaid Confession of Faith. And
his Majesty, with consent and advice foresaid, statutes and ordains, That all
who now are in any public Trust, shall betwixt and the day of next to come,
take the said Test in some of the places wherein they serve, and report the
same to his Majesty's Privy Council, And that all who shall hereafter at any
time be admitted to any Place, Office, Commission, or Employment,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, shall at their entry thereto take the said
Test, and renew the same when required, under the pain of Confiscation of
their Lands, which his Majesty now as then annexes to the Crown; and shall
confiscat all sums of money heretable or movable, and all movable Goods, for
the use underwritten. Like as his Majesty with consent foresaid, ordains all
the Ministers who are or shall be in this Church, to declare upon Oath to their
Ordinary at each Diocesion meeting, whom they know or suspect within their
several Parichons to be in Orders or Monastic Vows of the Church of Rome, or
other trafiquing Papists whom they know or suspect to be the ressetters or
hearers of them say Mass or preach, and where their Residence or Haunts are;
and whom they know or suspect to be Papists in their several Paroches: And that
the Bishops call before them the persons so delated, and use their best
endeavors to convince them of their Error, and unite them to this Protestant
Church, and offer to them the foresaid Test; and in case of their absence and
obstinacy, that they proceed to Excommunication: And that they yearly send an
Account of their diligence to his Majesty's Privy Council, in the Month of
November; and that they give a List of the persons delated to all the Judges
ordinary in Burghs or Landwards within their respective Diocies; who are hereby
ordained to take all other trial for the discovery of those in Orders or
Monastic Vows of the Church of Rome, and other trafiquing Papists, or other
Papists: And that they take the Oaths of all Members of the Kirck-session,
except the Minister, within the several Jurisdictions, for making of the like
Declaration once at least every year; and that they use all diligence to put
the Laws in execution against the persons discovered or delated, as afforesaid:
And that they return account of their diligence to his Majesty's Privy Council
once every year in the Month of November, beginning in November next, with
Certification that whosoever shall fail in their respective diligences
above-written, shall omit their years Benefice or Stipend, and the said
Magistrates that years Rent, in which they shall happen to fail to diligences,
as afforesaid. Likeas his Majesty, with Consent foresaid, declares, That all
Escheats, Life-rents, and other Penalties that shall befall by the execution of
this Statute, or any of the former Statutes against Papists, except the Lands
to which they have redeemable right, shall belong and be divided in manner
following; viz. One third part of the sums whereon Infeftment have not
followed, to the Poor of the Paroch where the party transgresses and resides,
and the movable Goods to the Poor of the Paroches when they are found; and the
sums whereupon Infeftment or other affectable diligence lies followed, to the
Poor of the Paroch where such Lands lie respective, except of the Life-rent of
such Papists who are not amongst the Trafiquers before innumerat, which may be
gifted as his Majesty shall see fit: An^ another third part of the said
Confiscations, to belong to the Universities and Colleges, viz. All within the
University of St. Andrews, to the University of St. Andrews; except the Diocies
of Esr. to the Colleges of Esr. and the Diocies of Aberdeen and Morray, to the
Colleges of Aberdeen; and all within the Province of Glasgow, to the College
of Glasgow: And the other third part of the foresaids Confiscationes, to belong
to public Works of the several Shires, to ^e applied and managed by the Judges
Ordinary, as Justices of Peace, or Commissioners of Excise, when there are no
Justices of the Peace: And ordains all persons who are entrusted for the said
Societies Pensions and Uses, to be liable for diligence to make the same
effectual. And further his Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, statutes
and ordains and declares, That all Kings and Queens who shall succeed to the
Imperial Crown of this Kingdom in time coming, at the entry to their
Government, and also at their Coronation, shall promise and swear in presence
of the Eternal God, whom they call as Judge and Witness of their sincere
meaning and intention, To observe, without dispensation from any creature, the
Oath contained in the eighth Act of the first Parliament of King James 6. And
shall also swear, That they shall not endeavor or consent to the alteration or
change of the Protestant Religion, nor to the abrogation or derogation of the
Laws made for the same: That they preserve and defend this Protestant Church in
the just Rights and Privileges thereof, as now by Law established: That they
shall give no Grant of any Trust, Office, or Employment within this Church or
Kingdom, but whom they believe to be of the true Protestant Religion: And that
they shall always allow and never hinder the standing and executing of the Laws
for removing of Priests or others in Orders or Monastic Vows to the Church of
Rome, out of any Office, Place, or Trust, or Employment Eclesiastick, Civil, or
Military, within this Kingdom; and shall invincibly preserve the Liberty and
Property of the Subjects of this Kingdom, as the Lord and Father of Mercy shall
be merciful to them: And ordains, That any Regent, Tutor, or Governor, that
shall be named to and King or Queen in this Kingdom, shall take the foresaid
Oath at their entry to their Government; which Oaths shall be written and
subscribed at the times of taking thereof above-written, and shall be registered
and recorded in the Books of Parliament, Privy Council, and Sessions. And
likewise his Majesty, with Consent foresaid, statutes and ordains, That the
nearest person to himself of the Royal Family, shall solemnly swear that he
shall never endeavor or consent to the alteration of the Protestant Religion
in this Kingdom, or to the abrogation of the Laws made for the same, and shall
never hinder the standing and executing of the Laws made for removing out of
this Kingdom all Priests and others in Orders and Monastical Vows of the Church
of Rome, and other trafiquing Papists who shall endeavor to withdraw the
Subjects of this Kingdom from the Protestant Religion; or the Laws made for
removing from all places of Trust in this Kingdom in Church, State, or Armies,
any person whatsoever that shall not subscribe the Confession of Faith and Oath
subjoyned thereto; which is hereby declared sufficient in place of any other
Test for exercising and injoyning any Place or Office Civil or Military within
this Kingdom. And that whenever any other who shall hereafter become nearest
to the King in the Blood Royal for the time being Major, or attaining that age,
he shall then immediately swear and subscribe the foresaid Oath; which Oath
shall be recorded in the Books of Parliament, Council, and Session.

Printed at London for Andrew Forrester, in Kings street, Westminster. 1681.


