ACT OF PARLIAMENT FOR Erecting a Bank in SCOTLAND.
EDINBURGH, July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD considering, how useful a public Bank may be in this
Kingdom, according to the Custom of other Kingdoms and States; and that the
same can only be best set up and managed, by Persons in Company, with a joint
Stock, sufficiently endued with these Powers and Authorities, and Liberties,
necessary and usual in such Cases; Has therefore allowed, and with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Allows a joint Stock, amounting to the
Sum of Twelve hundred thousand Pounds Money, to be raised by the Company hereby
established, for the carrying on and managing of a public Bank. And further
Statutes and Ordains, with Advice foresaid, That the Persons under-named, viz.
Mr. William Areskine, Son to the Lord Cardross, Sir John Swinton of that Ilk,
Sir Robert Dickson of Sornebeg, Mr. George Clark Junior, and Mr. John Watson,
Merchants in Edinburgh, Mr. James Fowlls, Mr. John Holland, Mr. David Nairn,
Mr. Walter Stewart, Mr. Hugh Frazer, Mr. Thomas Couts, and Mr. Thomas Deans,
Merchants in London, or any Three of them: And in case of the Decease of any of
them, the Persons to be chosen by the Survivers, shall have Power to appoint a
Book, for Subscriptions of Persons, either Natives or Foreigners, who shall be
willing to subscribe and pay in to the said joint Stock; which Subscriptions,
the foresaids Persons, or their Quorum, are hereby authorized to receive in the
foresaid Book, which shall ly open every Tuesday or Friday, from Nine to Twelve
in the Forenoon, and from Three to Six in the Afternoon, betwixt the first Day
of November next, and the first Day of January next following, in the public
Hall or Chamber to be appointed in the City of Edinburgh; and therein all
Persons shall have Liberty to subscribe, for such Sums of Money, as they shall
think fit to adventure in the said joint Stock, one thousand Pounds Scots being
the lowest Sum, and twenty thousand Pounds Scots the highest; and the two third
Parts of the said Stocks, belonging always to Persons residing in Scotland.
Likeas, each and every Person, at the Time of his subscribing, shall pay into
the Hands of the forenamed Persons, or any Three of them, Ten of the Hundred,
of the Sums set down in their respective Subscriptions, toward the carrying on
the Bank. And all and every the Persons subscribing, and paying to the said
Stock, as aforesaid, shall be, and hereby declared, to be one Body corporate
and politic, by the Name of The Governor and Company of the Bank of Scotland;
under which Name, they shall have perpetual Succession, and shall have a common
Seal: And their Successors, by the Name foresaid, shall be able and capable to
purchase and enjoy; as also to give, grant, alienate, and dispose of Lands,
Tenements, and all other Heritage; as likewise of all Sums of Money, and other
moveable Goods and Gear whatsoever: And further, to do and execute all other
Things, which any other Company or Body corporate, can or may lawfully do or
execute; and that as amply and fully, as if the several Matters and Things,
were particularly set down in this Act. And for the better ordering and
managing of the Affairs of the said Bank, it is hereby further Statute and
Ordained, That there shall be for ever a Governor, Deputy Governor, and Twenty
four Directors, to be elected and chosen, as hereafter is appointed, who, or
any seven of them, (hereby declared to be their Quorum,) shall have the
Management and Direction of the said Bank; which Persons, viz. Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Twenty four Directors, are to be chosen in this Manner,
viz. That within the three Months after the foresaid Subscriptions are ended,
the Person particularly abovenamed, or any Two of them, shall appoint a
certain Day, and make due Intimation of the same, that such and so many of the
Adventurers, and none other, as shall each of them have subscribed for one
thousand Pounds Money or upwards, in the said Book of the joint Stock, may
elect and choose by Majority of Votes, which are to be given, one Vote for
every thousand Pounds Share in the Stock, a fit Person of the Subscribers, who
has subscribed for himself, at least for eight thousand Pounds, to be Governor
of the said Bank; and another fit Person of the Subscribers, who shall have
subscribed for himself, at least for six thousand Pounds, to be Deputy Governor
of the said Bank; and also twenty four others, fit Persons, who shall have
subscribed each of them for himself, at least for three thousand Pounds in the
said joint Stock, to be Directors of the said Bank; which Governor,
Deputy Governor and Directors, are to continue in their respective Offices,
until the next Election of their Successors; which next Election shall be made
within thirty Days, after the Expiration of a whole Year from the former
Election, by the Majority of the Votes of the Members, who are to be qualified,
and their Votes reckoned in Manner abovementioned: And so forth the said
Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, to be chosen from Year to Year. And
if any of them happen to decease before the Expiration of his Time, then the
Members and the Company, qualified as aforesaid, shall elect in Manner
abovementioned, another fit Person, in the Room, and to the Office of the
Deceased, who is to officiate for the Remainder of his Time. And further, the
Governor or his Deputy, and any Three of the Directors, or any Five of the
Directors, without the Governor or his Deputy, may, as often as they see Cause,
summon a Meeting of the Adventurers, qualified as said is; at which Meeting, by
Majority of Votes to be given, as said is, the Governor or his Deputy, or any
of the Directors for the Time, not exceeding Two Directors at one Meeting, may
be displaced and removed, for any Miscarriage or Insufficiency in his Office.
To which Sentence, the Person removed is absolutely to acquiesce, without
Gainsaying, and another to be chosen in his Room and Place, as aforesaid, to
continue till the next general Election; and the Governor, Deputy Governor,
Directors, or any seven of them, their Quorum foresaid, may meet together at
any convenient Place, for the Management of the Affairs of the said Bank; and
the said Adventurers, at any General Meeting that shall happen to be
appointed, shall have Power to require the Payment of any further Part of the
Subscriptions, than the Ten per Cent. abovementioned, at such Time as they
shall think fit. And in case any of the Adventurers shall refuse, or neglect to
pay in their Proportion appointed by the said General Meeting, then he shall
forfeit, to the Use and Behoof of the said joint Stock, whatever he had before
paid in to the said Company; and no Governor, Deputy Governor, or Director,
shall be capable of, or continue in their said respective Offices, unless they
have the respective Sums abovementioned in their own Right, and so long as
they have the same, and no longer; but upon the Diminution of the said Sums,
their Offices are to determine, and others to be chosen at a General Meeting,
as aforesaid, in their Places: And the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and
Directors, are to swear at their Entry to their respective Offices, the Oath
following. I A. B. Do swear, that the Sum of (...) of the Stock of the
Governor, and Company of the Bank of Scotland, does at this Time, belong to me
in my own Right, and not in Trust: And that in the Office of (...) I will be
equal to all Persons, and give my best Advice, for the Support of the Bank of
Scotland; and in the said Office, honestly demean myself to the best of my
Skill. And this Oath, the first Governor shall take before the Lord Chancellor,
or any other of the Officers of State, and then shall have Power to
administrate the same to his Deputy and Directors. And the next Governor and
Directors shall swear the same at their Entry, as said is, before a General
Meeting of the Company, certifying any who shall neglect to swear at his Entry,
or within Twenty Days thereafter, his Place shall be void, and another shall be
elected to it: And the Governor, or Deputy Governor; with the Directors or
their Quorum, may choose a Thesaurer, Secretary, and other Officers, for the
Affairs of the said Company, who are to give their Oaths de fideli before the
Governor, or his Deputy, or any Two of the Directors; and may be removed from
the said Offices, at the Pleasure of a General Meeting: Providing always, That
neither the Governor, Deputy Governor, or any of the Directors, may be chosen
to any of the said inferior Offices. And it is further hereby Statute and
Ordained, That it shall be lawful for the said Governor and Company, to lend
upon real or personal Security, any Sum or Sums, and to receive Annual rent for
the same at Six per cent. as shall be ordinary for the Time: As also, That if
the Person borrowing, as said is, shall not make Payment at the Term agreed
upon with the Company, then it shall be lawful for the Governor and Company, to
sell and dispose of the Security or Pledge, by a public Roup, for the most
that can be got, for Payment to them of the Principal, Annual rents and
reasonable Charges, and returning the Overplus to the Person who gave the said
Security or Pledge. And it is further hereby Enacted, That the foresaid
Company, and Members, thereof, or major Part of them, assembled at any General
Meeting, may make and constitute such Bylaws and Ordinances, as to them shall
seem necessary and convenient, for the Good of the Company, and under such
Penalties, as shall be therein contained; providing that the said Bylaws and
Ordinances, be not contrary to, (but consistent with the Laws of the Kingdom.)
And for ascertaining how the said joint Stock and Shares thereof, with all the
Lands, Houses, or other Estate thereto belonging, may be assigned or
transferred: It is hereby Statute and Ordained, That there be constantly kept a
Book or Register, by the said Governor and Directors, where all the foresaid
Assignments shall be entered, and subscribed by both the Party assigning, and
the Party to whom the Assignment is made, in Token of his Acceptance; and that
such Assignments so subscribed, shall make full, complete, and absolute Rights,
and no other shall be good, excepting that any Person having Interest in the
said Company, may dispose of the same by latter Will or Testament, which shall
be a valid and complete Transmission, in Favors of the Person to whom the
Disposition is made, upon the entering and recording so much of the said latter
Will, as relates to the said Stock in the Books of the said Company, without
Necessity of Confirmation or further Formality whatsoever. And it is hereby
further Statute, That no Dividend shall be made, save out of the Interest or
Product arising out of the joint Stock, and by the Consent of the Adventurers
in a General Meeting. And for the better Encouragement of the said Company and
Adventurers; it is hereby Statute, That the joint Stock of the said Bank
continuing in Money, shall be free from all public Burden to be imposed upon
Money, for the Space of Twenty one Years after the Date hereof: And that during
this Space, it shall not be leisome to any other Persons to enter into, and set
up a distinct Company of Bank within this Kingdom, besides these Persons
allenarly, in whose Favors this Act is granted. And sicklike, it is hereby
Declared, That summar Execution by Horning, shall proceed upon Bills or
Tickets, drawn upon, or granted by, or to, and in Favors of this Bank, and the
Managers and Administrators thereof for the Time, and Protests thereon, in the
same Manner, as is appointed to pass upon Protests of foreign Bills, by the
20th Act, Parl. 1681. K. Chapter II. And sicklike, That no Suspension pass of any
Charge, (for Sums lent by this Bank or to the same,) but upon Discharge or
Consignation of the Sums charged for allenaaly. And further, for preventing the
breaking of the said joint Stock and Company, contrary to the Design thereof:
It is hereby Declared, That the Sums of the foresaid Subscriptions and Shares,
may only be conveyed and transmitted by the Owners to others, who shall become
Partners of the Company in their Place, in Manner abovementioned, or by
Adjudication, or other legal Conveyance, in Favors of one Person allenarly,
who in like Manner shall succeed to be a Partner in his Predecessor's Place, so
that the foresaids Sums of Subscriptions may neither be taken out of the Stock,
nor parcelled amongst more Persons by legal Diligence in any Sort, to the
diminishing or disturbing the Stock of the said Company, and good Order
thereof. And sicklike, for the greater Security, and more convenient managing
of the said Bank or joint Stock, it is hereby Statute and Ordained, That in
case it shall happen any of the Members, Partners or Subscribers, or other
Proprietors of any Part of the said Stock, to be Registrate at the Horn, or to
commit any Crime punishable by Confiscation, or Forfeiture of his said Share
and Proportion of the said joint Stock and Profit thereof due at the Time; then
and in that Case it shall be lawful for the Governor, Deputy Governor, and
Directors, or their Quorum foresaid, to expose, by public Roup, such Shares
and Profit thereof to any other Person who shall bid the highest Price
therefore, after such legal Intimations to be made for that Effect by the said
Governor, Deputy Governor, Directors or their Quorum, as is prescribed by the
Act of Parliament for the Sale of Bankrupts Lands; and the Price arising by the
said Roup, to be made forthcoming by the said Company to the Creditors, Heirs,
or others succeeding in the Right of the Party so denounced or forfeit.
Providing always, as it is hereby expressly Enacted, Provided and Declared, That
it shall not be lawful nor allowable for the said Company, Governor,
Deputy Governor, Directors, or Managers thereof, upon any Ground or pretense
whatsoever, directly or indirectly, to use, exerce, or follow any other
Commerce, Traffic, or Trade with the joint Stock to be employed in the said
Bank, or any Part thereof, or Profits arising therefrae, excepting the Trade of
lending and borrowing Money upon Interest, and negotiating Bills of Exchange
allenarly and no other. Providing also, Likeas it is hereby expressly Provided,
Enacted and Declared, That in case the Governor, Deputy Governor, Directors or
other Managers of the said Company, shall at any Time happen to purchase for
the Use and Behoof of the said Company any Lands, Rents, or other Heritage
belonging to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, or shall advance or lend to
His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, any Sums of Money in borrowing or by Way
of Anticipation upon any Part, Branch or Fund of the ordinar Rent or Casualites
of the Crown, or of any Supply, Cess, Excise, Custom, Pole-Tax, or any other
Supply or Taxation already granted, or which shall happen to be granted at any
Time hereafter to His Majesty and his foresaids, any Manner of Way whatsoever,
excepting these Parts, Branches, or Funds of the said Rents, Casualities, or
Impositions foresaids, upon which a Credit of Loan shall happen to be granted
by Act of Parliament allenarly; then and in that Case, the said Governor,
Deputy Governor, Directors, or other Managers, one or more of the said Company
who shall consent, agree to, or approve of the said Purchase, Advance or
Lending to His Majesty and his foresaids, and ilk ane of them so agreeing and
approving, and being found guilty thereof according to Law, shall be liable for
every such Fault, in the Triple of the Value of the Purchase so made, or the
Sums so lent, whereof a fifth Part shall belong to the Informer, and the
Remainder to be disposed of toward such public Uses, as shall be appointed by
Parliament and not otherwise. And it is likewise hereby Provided, That all
Foreigners who shall join as Partners of this Bank, shall thereby be and become
naturalized Scots-men, to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament by TARBAT Cl. Registri.

