REMARKS upon a late PAPER, ENTITLED, A True Relation of the Cursed Designs
and Intrigues, which have been lately carried on, both in England and France,
to Restore the late King JAMES, etc.
Discovered by some Gentlemen lately Arrived from St. Germans.
IT is agreed by most Men that there are several degrees and sorts of Li^s,
which as far (as they concern this True Relation) we shall divide into these
Two: One when a Man repeats that for Truth which he certainly knows to be
false; the other when he reports that for Truth which he does not know to be
true, or in his Conscience believes to be false; the latter is but a small
Extenuation of the first: But both of them, if they may prejudice a third
Person, are malicious and damnable.

I will not determine how far the Author of the True Relation is guilty in
either, or any Case; but shall leave the Censure of him ^o the Judgment of
every Impartial Reader, when the Matter of Fact shall be examined: We shall
divide the Relation into two Parts, First, We shall consider the Matter of
Fact, and then the Application and use made of it.

The Birth of this Wonderful Paper justly claims our first Remark, not that we
know any thing of its Noble Descent, or of those Gentlemen of very good Note,
who (it seems) club'd in its Generation; but it is of great Importance to
acquaint the Reader, That the Body of this Paper, with the very Numerical Words
contained in it, first appeared to the World in a certain Pamphlet which had in
its Title, A Sh^rt and True Relation of Intrigues transacted both at Home and
Abroad to Restore the late King James: It was publicly dandled about the
Streets with great Noise, for one Day, and then vanished; not one to be had for
Love or Money: The Reasons might probably be these, The first part of that
Pamphlet is an Invective against King James, particularly for his Ingratitude
to his Friends, and of those it makes special mention, of the Irish Catholics
and Protestant Dissenters, both which (it says) he has made an Oblation to the
Passive-Obedience-men, meaning I suppose the Church of England-men; who (it
further says) are now the late King's Creatures, and the only Persons that
would Abdicate the Gospel rather than their Church Livings: And next it highly
Censures K. James for his great Mercy to his Enemies, and concludes that part
of it with a Curse, viz. Seeing now King James 's Favors are only reserved to
promote his Enemies, let his Enemies grow potent every where, and numerous
withal, and let him be so lost, that he may never be found here at Home.

I suppose it will be easily granted me that these were not proper Topics to
insist upon, especially at that Juncture of Affairs; for every young Statesman
would soon conclude that if this Learned Pamphlet, together with K. James's
late Declaration, could convince his Enemies of their Security and His Favor
toward them, the Passive-Obedience-men (as he calls them) would easily concur
with his Enemies (notwithstanding King James's Ingratitude) toward his
Restoration, which would make it unavoidable.

Now the Wiser Government seeing the ill Consequence of so foolish a
Suggestion, had very good reason to recall betimes this ill-digested and
worse-concluding Pamphlet; besides it insinuates strongly to the Church of
England (for whose Preservation King Charles the First suffered Martyrdom, and
for fear of whose falsely and maliciously-pretended Destruction, his Son King
James the Second is turned out of his three Kingdoms); that K. James is so
truly and sincerely their Friend, that he scruples not to make an Oblation of
the Roman Catholics themselves to the Church of England 's Interest. Now
whatsoever the Government may intend hereafter, it is certain that during this
Session of Parliament, it would have been a surprising Indiscretion to have
given, or permitted so just an Occasion to be given, to the Church of England
established by Law (and for whose pretended Preservation so many thousands of
English Lives have been vainly cast away) to adhere to the Interest of King
James, through the hasty Zeal and Phanatical Itch of this foolish Pamphleteer:
For the Church of England have found by Experience, and at present (without the
additional help of this Pamphlet) are sensible enough, that whatsoever has
been, or may be, pretended for her Security; she can never be so happy under
any unjust Revolution, or Usurpation, as under a Lawful Rightful Prince, who is
not only bound by the Law, but by Royal Promise, to protect and defend her.

But notwithstanding these plain and broad Hints already given, this Man is so
fond of his Project that he anticipates the Privy Council, and forces the
Cabinet it self to give vent to his Folly; he tells us then to^ards the
Conclusion of his Pamphlet, that he has found a long Snake in the Grass, which
it seems is no other than some Church of England-men, with whom the major part
of our Councils and places of Trust are filled; and ends that excellent
Paragraph with News from the Court at St. Germains, viz. That it dreads nothing
more than such an alteration of the Leiutenancy and Justices of the Peace over
all England, as it has pleased their Majesty's of late to cause in London. It
must be acknowledged that about this Time, a Discourse was spread about, that
the Leiutenancy and Government of all England, as well as London, would be
settled in the Hands of the Presbyterians, and some of the Dissenting Party, in
Exclusion of the Church of England-men; whether the Government intended any
such Alteration, I know not: But I think it sufficiently evident, that it would
have been a gross Bevei^ and Oversight to have suffered this Scribler so much
to overrun their own Councils, as publicly to insinuate a Change so
ungrateful to a Parliament, which was to grant a Supply for the Support of this
Government, and of which the most considerablest part is looked upon to be firm
to the Doctrine and Interest of the Church of England.

By this time I think it is visible enough, that the Government had very good
Reason to suppress, betimes, this foolish Contradictory Pamphlet; which as it
blows hot and cold with a Breath, so it would probably have done much more harm
than good, to that very Cause which it pretends so affectionately to support.

But however, though this Pamphlet was suppressed for these sufficient Reasons
beforementioned, yet there was not the same Cause to stifle the True Relation;
for since its chief Design is to set forth King James's Ingratitude and
Inconstancy to his Friends, without touching upon his Royal Mercy and Favor to
his Enemies, it was to be hoped that it might cool and moderate at least the
Zeal and Affection of his Friends, especially, since the Truth will want no
Confirmation, and that further Enquiry into Foreign Affairs will remove all
Doubts and leave no room for Contradiction, without inflaming the good Will of
his Enemies, whom his Favors are only reserved to promote.

It was agreed upon then, that this Paper should receive a new Caesarian Birth,
and accordingly she was ripped out of the Bowels, and became the fatal Daughter
of her unhappy Sister Pamphlet: Abroad she appears the second time, altered
only in her outward Dress, saving that a new Head, or Title, was given to her,
carrying a Cause in her Mouth, and her Tail tied up by Authority, with a
Licensed according to Order. Being thus set forth and recommended to us, we
shall treat her with the respect due to: her Cha^acter; but at the same time we
think it a piece ^f Justice due to the Nation, and conducing much to her own
Honor, that the Matter of fact may be strictly, but Impartially, ex^mined.

The Preamble informs us, that the following ^elation was had from Gentlemen of
very good ^ote, who have seen most of the Transactions at St. Germains, etc.
That some Notorious Gen^lemen may possibly have contributed something ^owards
the setting forth this True Relation, I will ^ot deny: But as for the Gentlemen
of very good Note (especially such as have seen most of the Trans^ctions at St.
Germains for about four Years last past) ^here is not a Man of them, of what
Nation or Religion soever he be, but is Personally known ^o us; nor are we
ignorant which, and how many of them (to a Man) have during these ^our Years
arrived in England: And we do posi^ively affirm, that no such Gentleman of very
good Note, either has or ever will affirm any one material part of this True
Relation to be really ^rue; notwithstanding therefore, that the Au^hor of this
True Relation tells us, That the Truth if it will want no Confirmation, etc. We
must desire the Reader to suspend his belief, till Mat^er of Fact be more
strictly examined, into which we shall now make an Impartial Enquiry.

The Paper tells us in the first Paragraph, That abont two Years since, the
late King fed himself with the Thoughts of being an Absolute Monarch, from the
great Encouragement at that Time received from the Pope and the French King;
but meeting with unexpected Disappointments, he consulted some of his
Protestant Council, and told them he was resolved to ^reat with his late
Subjects, and to give them any Conditions, and reconcile himself to them. It Is
an ill Omen (they say) when a Man stumbles at the Threshold; but this Fellow
stumbles throughout, he stumbles upon all Four: And having already obtained a
License, he may in good time procure a Patent to stumble all the Days of his
Life.

He tells us, That about Two Years, since the King had Thoughts of being an
Absolute Monarch, by the great Encouragement received at that Time from the
French King and the Pope, etc. Now about two years since must fall in with the
Spring 1692; and this Pope was chosen about the latter end of August
immediately preceding that Spring; and in that Interval of Time he was so
little settled in his Geers, that the Complemental Civilities had scarce past
between Rome and Versailes, in which Time this True Relation, nevertheless,
fixes the Encouragement given by that Pope to King James: And can any Man
believe that a Neopolitan Pope, so lately a Subject to the King of Spain, would
whip and spur to St. Germains on purpose to set up an Absolute Monarch, against
the Interest of his late Master, and without the Desires, and contrary to the
Intentions and public Declaration, of that very pretended Absolute Monarch
himself. Certainly this Man imagins that we have lost our Memories and our
Understandings, as well as our Honor and Loyalty; or he would never presume to
impose such incredible Stuff upon Men who had any of their Senses left them.

A great many Considerations might be offered to show also how improbable it is
that the K. of France should engage in such a Design; but above all what
Intimation has King James given by his first Declaration, of the 20th of April
92, that he himself desired any thing more than the Fe-establishment of the
Greatness of the English Monarchy upon its Old and True Foundation, the united
Interest and Affection of the People? And what other Means does he propose to
do this by, than by the Advice and Assistance of his Parliament? which I
suppose to Man believes would voluntarily present him with an Absolute Power.

He tells us further. That K. James consulted his Protestant Council; certainly
these Gentlemen of very good Note were altogether asleep at St. Germans,
during the Transactions there for four Years last past, or they could never
have dreamt of any such thing as a Protestant Council; since it is notoriously
known that for above two Years last past the King has had no Council at all,
^therwise than as extraordinary Occasions or Emergencies might happen; he may
have consulted some Persons of Quality about him: And there is no doubt but
these Gentlemen of very good Note, could easily have informed us how many
Protestants of that Rank were to be found at St. Germans, when he fixes the
Date of this Protestant Council. So that the Story which he makes the King tell
to them, or him, or Nobody, must be a Story which Nobody but this Relator
could have told again. And yet if the Story had been true, viz. that the King
resolved to treat with, and reconcile himself to his late Protestant Subjects;
I see no reason this Man has to blame him for it, except he thought it might
conduce to his Happy Return.

This true Relator proceeds, and informs us, That my Lord Middleton drew a
Declaration (meaning the King's last Declaration) answerable to the Desires of
the Churchmen of England and Ireland, brought it to France about the beginning
of March 93. And after high Debates about it, (at which no doubt the Relator
was present.) The King to remove all Scruples of Conscience, consulted the
College of Sorbon, and the Irish College; The Faculty of Sorbon declared
against it, and the Irish College for it. Had we not seen many of such true
Narratives in our Days, it would be very surprising (especially under the
dispensation of a Government that has most signally secured the Church of
England, and the whole Nation, from the Danger of Popery and Arbitrary Power)
to read a True Relation, Licensed according to Order, which, nevertheless, has
scarce one word of Truth in it. We do affirm then, (and will leave no room for
Contradiction) that my Lord Middleton did not arrive at St. Germans till
after the Date of the King's last Declaration. Now, though this might be a
sufficient Answer, and Confutation of a great part of this true Relation; yet
to give the Readers entire Satlsfaction, and disabuse the Credulous, who are
apt to take Grub-street News for a London Gazette, we shall follow this True
Relation through all the Particulars; and do further avert First, That the
College of Sorbon was never consulted in this Matter, and by consequence did
never give their Opinion concerning it; it is true the R^^ator has given us his
Opinion for them, which I perceive he thinks Just and Honorable: But it is
most likely that he would not have past this Complement upon a French Popish
College were it not to aggravate the Machiavillian Doctrine of the poor Irish,
whose Countrymen, nevertheless, he affectionately pities. But, Secondly, We
must take the Liberty to declar^ also, that there is no such College in Pari^
as the Irish College; true it is, that there is the College Lombard, in which
Lodgings are give^ gratis to some few poor Irih Priests, and non^ others, but
without Government, Collegiate Rules, Sallaries, Stipend or Maintenance
whatsoever; their Subsistence chiefly consisting an^ proceeding from Masses and
Priestly Function^ exercised in the Churches and Chapels of tha^ City: Those
Irish Priests (we affirm) were never consulted about this Declaration, nor
((...) they had been consulted) is it probable that the Irish Army would be
more Conscientious tha^ their supposed Natural College, or have murmured
against such an Admirable Salvo, which they had found out for the Security of
the King's Conscience, and Satisfaction of their Countreymen's.

I suppose nothing more need to be said concerning their Imaginary Reasons
which were never given, nor like to be given, if desired nor do they infer
rightly or conclude truly: I^ short they are the Relator's Reasons, and that
(...) enough.

But we cannot pass by the irreconcilable Differences between the Lord Melford
and my L. Middleton, about the Empire of the World, without remarking that this
is just as true, as i^ is politic and practicable, for a Convert under the
shadow of Religion to cloth himself i^^ Wolves dress, (the first A la mode
Suit of tha^ kind, which I am confident was ever put on by an Hypocrite) as he
would have my L. Melford to be; but however, the Learned Relator seems to
confirm this Miracle by a Tantum Religion which is as much to the purpose, in
this place, as Tytire tu patulae, etc.

In his next Paragraph the Relator is very busy about Expresses into Flanders
and England, from Flanders to St. Germans; Consternations Mutinies, New
Declarations; doing and undoing, booting and unbooting; till at last he leave^
England very well contented with this last Declaration, but the Irish still
continue in great Disorder about it, and being very unruly, and weary of King
James, would give any thing to be at Home. Never did Knight Errant of very good
Note, equip himself more formidably against the Whimsies of his own Adutled
Brain than this Man has done. We must again take the Liberty therefore as we
have done, to deny p^remprorily what our Relator most impuden^ly affi^m^ in
these ^wo Paragraphs; and accordingly we assure the Reader, First, That the
Declaration so Signed by the King, as is pretended, was not sent to the Irish
in Flanders, before it had been published in England. Secondly, That the said
Declaration was never afterward ordered to be sent to the Irish Army. Thirdly,
That the Irish Army never mutiny'd about it, nor had any Reason so to do.
Fourthly, That there was no such Thing as a Second Declaration.


To the First we do affirm, that the said Declaration was actually in England
before my L. Middleton arrived in France; but it is true that after my L.
Middleton came to St. Germans, in or about the Mon^h of May, the King
commanded Sir Richard Neagle to give the Irish Officers an Account of that part
of the said Declaration (and not the Declaration it self) which related to
them, which was to re-establish the Act of Settlement in Ireland, but withal to
take care to recompense those who followed him to the last, for the Loss^s they
might sustain by renewing the Act of Settlement; which Act (by the way) was
notoriously known to be broken, contrary to the Sense and Design of the King,
as also of many eminent Irish Catholics, who proportionable to their Estates
suffered more considerably by the Repeal than most of the Protestants had done:
And the King himself lost thereby Lands to the Yearly value of about 3000 l. In
an^wer to Sir Richard Neagle's Letter, the Irish Colonels, and Commanding
Officers, have unanimously, and under their Hands, declared themselves in^rely
and fully satisfied with what His Majesty had done, and were all well contented
to rely upon his Promises for such Recompenses, as His Majesty should hereafter
procure for such of them as might be Losers by the Re-establishment of the said
Act of Settlement. And it is also so true, that neither the Irish Officers, nor
the pretended Irish College, were acquainted with or consulted about this
Declaration; that neither they nor the Lord Prima^e of Ireland, nor the Bishop
of Dublin knew the Contents of the said Declaration, until His Majesty had
Advice of its publication in England: And that then, and nor till then, the
King discoursed with the said Primate and Archbishop, together with my Lord
Lucan, about what related to the Irish; and then and there they all of them
professed their Satisfaction in what His Majesty had done: This is Matter of
Fact, and will be attested in its proper time and place, not only by Gentlemen
of very good Note, but by Men of undoubted Honor and Conscience. By what has
been already said, it is sufficiently evident, I hope, That First the
Declaration was not sent to the Irish before published in England. Secondly,
That the Declaration was not sent by His Majesty's Command afterward, but only
that part of it which related to the Irish. And Thirdly, That the Irish did not
mutiny upon it; and we shall now make it appear that they had no reason so to
do.

We must then acquaint the Reader, That upon the Capitulations of the City of
Limerick, the Irish Officers who treated about it, as the Lord Lucan, Colonel
Garet Dillon, and others, neither desired nor agreed for more in that Article
relating to their real Estates, than that they should enjoy them according to
the Act of Settlement, which was consented to by the English; the Capitulations
were accordingly concluded, and Signed by those, and such other Officers of the
Irish as were concerned to treat and conclude about the same.

Thus then was the Articles agreed to, and Signed by the Irish Officers: Now
what says the King in his last Declaration? In that Parliament, says he,
(meaning the first Parliament to be assembled after his Return) "We will also
consent to every thing they shall think necessary to re-establish the late Act
of Settlement of Ireland, made in the Reign of our Dearest Brother; and will
advise with them how to recompense such of that Nation, as have followed us to
the last, and who may suffer by the Re-establishment, accordding to the degree
of their Sufferings thereby; (...) ^o, as the said Act of Settlement may always
remain in^ire.

It had been already observed that the Irish neither desired nor Capitulated
for more than than to be restored to their Estates, according to the Act of
Settlement, and so much the King promises for them; but to explain this Matter
more fully, and to leave no room for Cavil, we shall divide the Article-Men (as
they call them) into three Ranks. First, Those who lost by the Repeal of the
Act of Settlement. Secondly, Those who will lose by the Act of
Re-establishment. Thirdly, Those who had no real Estates at all, and by
Consequence will neither gain nor lose by it. Now to the first and second sort
of those who followed the King into France, after the Capitulation, it is most
certain that they amount not to the hundredth Man of those who followed him;
and as for those who stayed behind, they had the benefit of the Articles, and
were, or ought to have been admitted to their Estates, according to the Act,
after a Praevious Oath of Allegiance taken to K. William and Q. Mary; These
therefore, I suppose, neither are, nor intended to be concerned in the King's
Declaration, neither can those who lost by the Repeal of the Act of Settlement
he offended at the King's Resolution to re-establish it. In short it affects
those only who followed the King to the last, and will be Losers if the said
Act be re-established; these also must be distinguished into two sorts, those
who followed the King purely out of Lovalty, Zeal and Affection to his Person
and Cause; and those who for some Extravagancies and Misdemeanors, during the
War under K. James, did not think it safe to stay behind; for they had heard
and were well informed, that many vexatious Suits were car^^d^on against some
on this side the Shannon, who had taken Protection under K. W. for
Misdemeanors committed during the War, even to the undoing many of them.

But howeve^ (...) either of those sorts of Persons had any Reason to be
offended at any part of the King's Declaration, relating to them: For first,
had the King taken no Notice at all of them, they could never have justly
pretended to more than they themselves desired or agreed unto by their
Capitulations: Nor Secondly, had, they deserted K. James and gone over to K.W.
they could never have had any other Conditions than to be admitted to their
Estates, according to the Act of Settlement. But Thirdly, The King for their
Loyalty and good Services to Him; promises to recompense such as may suffer by
the Re-establ^shment, according to the degree of their Sufferings; and what
better and securer way could he have proposed to do this, than by the Advice
and Consent of his Parliament. And what greater Promises could he have made the
man relation to their Estates, and in his present c^rcumstances, than he has
done; especially (as has been already said) since the very Repeal of that Act
was, in a great measure, extorted from the King, contrary to his own Opinion
therein often declared, and contrary to the Interest of very many considerable
Catholic Irish. For it is well known that after the Act of Settlement, many
Conveyances and Purchases were made among themselves under that Title, which by
the Repeal are dest^oyed: And so univ^rsally were the Catholick-Irish Merchants
(more especial) in Galloway and thereabouts) conc^rned in this Repeal, that
their Loyalty was ^o a little suspected upon that Account, and many hard things
said of them, during the Siege, not nec^ssary now to be repeated. What more
then could these Men have desired of the King than to be restored to their
Estate, according to the Act of Se^^lement, and Promise to those who may suffer
by the Re-establishment of it, of a Recompense according to the degree of their
Suff^rings, which is much more than they had and Reason to hope for under this
present Government. By this Time (I ^ope) it is ^^iden beyond Con^radiction
First, That in France ^e Irish Army did never mutiny about the King's
Declara^ion; and Secondly, That they had no Reason so to do; I suppose there is
no need of ^aying any thing about a Second Declaration: For First we have and
do affirm, That there was no Declaration at all ^en^ by R. J Order to the (...)
Army; And next (by what has been already said) there cannot nor could be any
Occasion for a Second: Whatsoever relates therefore more to the ^^ish, is mere
fictitious Stuff, and the Man's own Imagination.

We must now take Notice (and thank the true Relator for it) That he has
offered one piece of Truth to us viz That the King caused the Declaration to be
put in the Paris Gazette. From whence we may observe these two Things, First.
That the King had well considered the Consents of his Declaration, which most
probably was communicated to, and approved of by the Court at Versailes; and
that by the Publication of it he intended no less, than the Christian Wo^ld
should be acquainted with his just and merciful Resolutions taken for the
Satisfaction of his Subjects and that he always would, and now actually does
stand by the same upon the Conditions therein offered.

The Second Remark is That had the Faculty of Sorbon declared against the said
Declaration (as this Man pretends) especially when formally consulted, and in a
Case of Conscience (...) it is most unlikely we should ever have found it in
the Paris Gazette; or that after it, the King should be so extremely much made
of in the Court of France, as this Man tell us he is; though in the same
Paragraph he has the Folly to say also, that he has lost thereby the
Affection of the French Nobility, which comes very near a direct Contradiction
(...) except he can make a Court subsist without Nobility, or extremely much
made of (as he words it) without Affect^on. In his next Paragraph, he tells us
of Articles and twelve Heads; God help his poor Head for we know (...) where
(...) any such Ar^^cles, except in tha^ (...).

Then he proceeds to acquain^ us, ^ha notwithstanding (...) King had lost the
Interest and Affection of the French Nobility and Clergy, and the high
Di^contents and Disatisfaction of the Irish, together with his own Ingratitude
and Inconstancy; yet now the court is elevated with Joy, at the Hopes of his
Return: But as Ill-Luck will have it, he tells (...) in the lame Breath, That
the great Joy was o^^ sudden tain'd (...) Sorrow, and a total Dissolution of
all hopes of a Second Restoration. Immediately after this dismal Dissolution,
The King is nevertheless so certainly assured that he could not said of being
received in England, without any Opposition, that he posts to Versailes to
demand Succors: But, Oh! the Inconstancy of Fortune, and Favor of Princes;
when all Things, just before, were ready Abroad as well as at Home* and no
doubt in the least but they would have answered Expectation, the French King
dashe^ all with a Speech, which King James taking in Sheet-Hand, and these
Gentlemen of very good Note, taking it also in short Hand; from the Mouth of
King James; the whole Court ever since has been in a Fit of the Choslic^^ (by
which they are so disfigured and altered that they are like so many People
going to die. It is impossible for me to give a satisfactory account of such
strange and violent Revolutions; but the French King it seems all along knows
all things better than we know our selves: And I should be heartily glad that
those Gentlemen of very good Note, which helped the Relator ^o that excellent
Speech, would have helped him also to have made some Answer to it, and not to
have expes'd the Nation in Print, by a Character given of us, from the Mouth of
so Wise and so great a Monarch, which by how much the more it carries with it a
great Appearance of Truth, by so much the more was it necessary for him to
confute it, if he could: But I shall leave the farther and more serious
Consideration of it to his own Conscience.

He concludes as he began, with St^ff unsupp^rally false and invidious; Most of
the decayed Gentlemen, as he calls them that have returned Home a^e come upon
the account of their particular and Family Concerns; and that the English,
Scotch and Irish Protestants wish themselves all at Home against (...) not* and
the R^man Catholics (...): Nor do we (...) find they despair of attending
their King and Royal Master in an Honorable and Happy Condition We hear
nothing of their being forbid the Court, except such of (...) are looked upon
as Spie^; and or those, who are with any Reason ^^spected to be such the King
of France takes other Measures with them, than for ^^dding^ them only the Court
of St. G^^maines.

THi^ last Paragraph is so full of irreconci^able Nonsense and Impertinence,
that I only wondered (...) should conclude, with a Licensed according to Order;
but upon better Consideration, I observe a Difference between Licensed
according to Order, and Licensed by Authority, which makes me conclude than a
Ballad would have obtained the same Honor; and I cannot but look upon this
true Relation to be much of the same Strain and Quality.

Thu^ have I followed this Rambling Relator through all his uneven and
intricate ways of Falsehood, Malice and Contradiction; and have given (I hope) a
full and plain account of the true Matter of Fact, which must prove his true
Relation to be totally false.

I shall only make a short Remark of a Passage or two that requires some
Explanation, and conclude with the Application and Use which he would make of
his false Premises.

He tells us in his Paper, That King Charles the Second took the Covenant in
Scotland, and after his Restoration burnt it at London, by the Hands of the
common Hangman: But it being most certainly true, that it was done by Order of
Parliament, as also the Exception of several of the Regicides from the Act of
Indemnity, notwithstanding King Charles in his Declaration from Breda, had
Pardoned all those who had been any ways concerned in the Rebellion against his
Royal Father, and himself. I suppose the Relator will need no further Arguments
to distinguish between the Action of the King and of Parliament, and the King
in Parliament, or together with the two Houses of Parliament, which together
includes not only the Supreme Authority and Wisdom, but the Justice also of the
Nation: And by Consequence the just Execution of the Covenant, cannot be looked
upon otherwise than the Act of the Nation, and not as the private or particular
Command of the King.

In his Pamphlet he reflects on King Charles the Second for his Ingratitude to
his Friends: But when it shall be considered, that the King was so
superabundantly grateful to those who were the Inst^^ments of his ^^^^^ration
and who (I suppose the Relator will: agree with me) were truly to be looked
upon as his Friends, that Gratitude to them has flown so strongly in his Face,
as to have made him and the whole Nation sensible, in his own Time, that not
only his Sacred Li^e^ as in Danger, by the Treacherous Designs of man ^f those
very Persons whom he had emi^^ntly advanced and honored; but it gave him also
so dismal a Prospect of those Miseri^^ which of late have fallen upon us, that
he applied himself seriously to the sinding out such proper Remedies, which
(had God granted him longer to us) he would not only have perfected, but in all
probability he would also have fecured to us, these Blessings, which (for our
Ingratitude and Sins) God Almighty has at present removed from us. The Relator
therefore (very foolishly and impertinently) puts us in Mind of Gratitude;
since to touch upon it at this time, can only serve as a Caution to Princes how
they dispense their Favors, or bestow their Pardons upon such an ungraceful
People as we have been. He further, tells us in his Paper, That my Lord Melford
and my Lord Middleton are to this Day Irreconcilable Enemies; insinnating
thereby, that the Circumstances of King James, in relation to his happy Return,
are so very ill, through the Differences of his two great Ministers, who it
seems do not contend for any Good to this Side or that, that it is in vain to
hope for any such R^essing, and by Consequence all is in Disorder, and his
Friends like so many People going to dye: But I would have this Rela^on know
(to his own Confosion, and all Honest Men to their great Comfort) That there is
no Strise between these two Honorable Lords, and Loyal, Faithful Subjects and
Servants, but who shall serve their Royal Master best, and secure a firm and
National Blessing to us, by a happy Union and perfect good Understanding be
ween the King and his much abused People, when God in his Providence shall
Restore him to as. I could enlarge much upon this Subject, i^ it were
necessary, and add Demonstration to what l^ffirm; but having some Reason to
believe, by this time, that the Reader, as well as my self, is weary of this
trifling Relator; I shall conclude with his Application.

The Relator has rak'^ up all this false matter of fact, only to set forth K.
James's Inconstancy and Ingratitude to his Friends: but having (I hope)
sufficiently and fully disproved his Fact, his Application and Use must fall to
the Ground. However, that mothing may, be wanting to the Performance of that
piece of Justice, which is true to all Mankind, and more particularly to an
Injured Prince, I shall briefly examine the (...) with all Plainness and
Sincerity. It is evident that K. James's Ingratitude is applicable only to K.
James's Friends, who may be divided into these four Classes or Ranks.

1. His Irish Roman Catholic Friends. 2. His poor Distendng Friends who never
did him any Wrong. 3. His Church of England Friends. 4. His English Roman
Catholic Friends.
As to the first Sort, I have already spoken so fully to the King's
Declaration, as far as it relates to the Irish, that there needs no) further
Repetition* I shall refer the Reader therefore to what has been already said
in their Case (...), and proceed to the poor Dissenters. And, First, It might
have been reasonably expected, that the Relator should have explained himself,
what sort of Dissenters he meant; for I suppose the word Dissenter includes all
sort of Persuasions or Religions which are not in the Communion of the Church
of England, or that differ in Doctrine or Discipline from the same: The Popish
Dissenters Timing me are not here included: And for the Protestand Dissenters,
it is very certain that there is a fort of them, which have hitherto been so
far from deserving any Reward or Thanks from the King, that his Mercy must be
very extensive, at his Return, if it comprehends them: But since the Man has
spoken in general Terms, I answer also* That in general the Protestant
Dissenters cannot desire more, than what the King has already offered and
declared in their behalf: To prove this, it is only to be considered, whether
the Protestant Dissenters can reasonably desire more of the King, than a
general Pardon and an impartial Liberty of Conscience, except he means a
Dissolution also of the Liberties of the Church of England, established by Law:
If he means the last, the King will be much obliged to them, for being to
modest as to ask only that very Thing, the vain and ill grounded Imagination
whereof, was made use of as one main, if not the chief Pretense, which has
brought these heavy Misfortunes both upon him and us; but if he means Pardon
and Liberty of Conscience, the King has then anticipated their Desires, and
prevented all Grounds of Dissatisfaction their part, by promising Solemoly in
his last Declaration, under the Great Seal, a free Pardon and Indemnity to all
his Loving Subjects, of what Degree or Quality soever, which shall not by Land
or Sea oppose him, etc. A Pardon so full and comprehensive, that no man is
excluded, who shall not wilfully and voluntarily reject it; and to such I
suppose the Relator himself has not Confidence to expect that his Majesty's
Gratitude should extend. And as for Liberty of Conscience the King has taken
Care also, in his said last Declaration, to give all Sorts and Degrees of
Protestant. Dissenters the greatest Security imaginable, by declaring, That he
will, with all Earnestness, recommend to his Parliament such an Impartial
Liberty of Conscience, as they shall think necessary for the Happiness of these
Nations. More, I think, cannot be desired by the one, nor granted by the other,
except the Dispincing Power be called again in Question, which already has
made so much Noise; and which the King declares, in the immediate following
Paragraph, he will leave to be explained and limited by his Parliament: And I
do affirm my self to have heard some of the most considerable, and it may be
the most prudent among the Dissenters Declare* That in Conscience they ought
not to ask more than the King is willing to procure for them.

But Thirdly, The Church of England, or Passive Obedience-Men (as the Relator
scornfully calls them) are of, all people the most secure from meeting any
ungrateful Return from the King; for he declares upon his Royal Word, That be
will protect and defend the Church of England* as (...) is na^^ established by
Law, and se^ar^ to the Members of its all the Churches, Universities. Col^iges
and Schools, together with their Immunities, Rights and Privileges. But not to
multiply Arguments in a Case that needs none, the Relator himself, in the
Pamph^er before mentioned, has saved us that Trouble: For he acknowledges
(with a sort of Spite and Indignation) That the King has made the Irish
Catholics and Protestant Diss^^ter an Oblation to the P^ssto^^ Obedienc^-Men,
who are now become the late King's Creatures. We will for once take his word,
as to this last part of it; and since we are agreed upon the Point, we come now
to the last Rank and Son of Persons who may suffer by the King's Ingratitude;
and those are his English Catholic Subjects.

Now to understand their Case aright, we must distinguish them into these two
Sorts; Those who are men of Estates: And those who are younger Brothers, and
men of Fortune; and these we must also subdivide into such as remain in the
same Circumstances (^bating the Misfortunes of this Revolution) that they were
in before K. James's Accession to the Throne, and such as have followed K.
James' Fortune since this Revolution, and have suffered Imprisonment, Losses
and many other Hardships, upon the Account of their Loyalty to him.

As for the first Sort, we dare almost affirm for them, that they neither
expect nor desire, no, nor need much more of K James's Favor, than to be freed
from the Bu^then of heavy and double Taxes, and some personal Severities, which
they sometimes lie under, or are at least exposed to, through the Malice of
their Enemies: And to speak plainly, they have general behaved themselves with
so much Indifferency and Coldness toward K. James, and toward his Friends,
during this their time of Trial, that they have but very small Pretenses to
deserve more.

The second sort who are supposed to be under the same Circumstances they were
in during the Reign of King Charles the Second; I know not how the King's
Gratitude is far her concerned with them, than to restore them to their former
Liberties, and dispense his Favors to them according to their Qualifications;
and he ^^^portion they bare with the rest of their (...) Subjects, as far forth
as the Law will permit: And I do not find the King ^^^th declared against this.

There remain then those of the la^^ so^ only, who have really ve^^o^ed and
suffi^^^d much, and who can very hardly subsist, except the King should be
pleased to make some honorable Provision for them in re^^mpence of their
saithful Services and Sufferings; which (...) imagine the ^e^ator believes he
either cannot or will not do, it he keep to his D^^lantion, That he will not
disp^ not with, nor value the Test: If the Case were so it were inde^^^^ hand
Dilemma upon the King, either to be justly accused of I^igrat^^nd^, or of
violating the Law, which is seems was made as a Bul^ark (...) scour the Church
of England from ^opish Invasion; but I do not find it (...) unanoidable
Consequence, that the King must needs be Guilty elther of the one or the other.
For First, If the King has declared he will not violate the Test, but will
defend and protect the Church of England, (and less he could not declares, if
he declared any thing;) and so much he declared in his first Declaration,
partly in express Terms, as to what relates to the Church of England, and the
other part sufficiently included in his last Paragraph: In which he refers the
healing of the late Distractions to the Advice and Assistance of his
Parliament. It is not impossible but the Wisdom and Justice of a Free and
Well-tempered Parliament, might find our some me^zi termini, or Medium, between
a violating of the Test and the Ingratitude of the King to to his deserving
Subjects: There are many Moderate and Wise Men (God be praised) still lest
among us; and the Nation is now taught by woeful Experience, to distinguish
between Laws extorted by Faction, to serve a particular Turn, and equal Laws
made for the Public Good and Union, nor the Destruction and Rui^e of the
Nation; but however (taking all Things in their extreme) I do not find the King
intends, or will be forced (if I may so say) to be ungrateful to such as
deserve his Favors.

For First, his poor Suffering Roman Catholic Subject here intended, are
reduced by the Violences of the War and n^tural Dissolutions to every small
Handful of Men; and it cannot be well supposed that the King's Hands will be
ever s^^bound up, by Twelve or Four and Twenty Articles, as nor to be able to
provide for these poor Remains of Suffering Loyalty, without violating the
Test, or Law of God or Man; and if he can, it is not to be doubted he will; but
whether he can or cannot, will or will not: We have some Reason to believe,
that Ingratitude will never be justly imputed to him, by those poor Gentlemen,
among whom their will be sound more than one Mephiloseth, who will be contented
to lose all, even that little All, that is left them, Provided they may live to
see their Lord and King return in Peace.

Thus I have Answered plainly and fully (I hope) to the Odious Accusation of
the King's Ingratitude, which I own to be a Crime so much unworthy of a Prince,
that it is scarce pardonable in the meanest of his Subjects: But God be
thanked, our most Gracious King and Royal Master is so free from the least Spot
or Tincture of it (who besides knows very well, that it often proves the
Punishment as well as Sin of the Ungrateful;) that I appeal to the whole
Nation, even to his Enemies, (if they will recollect themselves, and speak
impartially) whether King James Gratitude and Constancy to his Friends, or at
least to his pretended Friends, have not hi^herto been more prejudicial to him,
through the whole Course of his Life, then the practice of their contrary Vices
probably could have been. Let, therefore, every good and honest Man lay his
Hand on his Heart, and consider seriously with himself, as ^he expects Mercy
from the King, or from the King of Kings in a better World, Whether it becomes
a Christian, or a true Englishman, to treat a Royal Prince, the Son of our
Royal Martyr, and Father to our present Governors, unhear'd, uncondemn'd,
absent and unfortunate, with such opprobrious, villainous, false and odious
Crimes and Language, (and Litensed according to Order) as could be scarce
pardoned betwixt Man and Man.

But I shall conclude with this one Observation more, Let us suppose for once
that the whole Matter of Fact in this True Relation, were really as true as the
Relater f^lsly and impudently pretends: I must then make this Remark upon i^,
That its Application and Conclusion is directly opposite to what he pretends to
prove, and to the very Title of his Pamphlet and Paper; he tells us that the
Jacobites (for he can mean none else) together with the French, carried on a
Cursed Design to Restore the late King James; but would prove all along, that
the Measures which he has taken, together with his Declaration, have all ended
in a Dissolution of the Hopes of a Second Restoration. Now from whence did he
take his Measures, but from the Jacobites, and the French; who advised him to
publish this fatal Declaration, but the Jacobites; who were of his pretended
Protestant Council, but Jacobites; who mutiny'd and wished themselves at Home,
but the Irish Jacobites; who are dissatisfied and returning Home in a most
deplorable Condition, but the English Jacobites: In a Word, who but the
Jacobites, and the French, have reduced him to this desperate Condition. By
which it is most apparent, that if there has been any Design carried on,
(according to this Man's Notion) it was indeed a Cursed Design, not to Restore,
but as this Trifler proves, contrary to his Intention, entirely to ruin the
late King James. Let it therefore suffice to observe at last, That never did
Irish Evidence more naturally contradict himself than this Man has done.

FINIS.

