ACT, Ordaining some Horsemen to be Levied out of the several Shires of this
Kingdom.
Edinburgh, the eighteenth day of April, 1689.
THe Meeting of the Estates finding it necessary, that this Kingdom be put in a
posture of Defense, for Security thereof, alswel against the danger of Invasion
from Abroad, as any Intestine Trouble that may fall out therein; And for that
effect, that a competent number of Forces be raised, and kept up within the
same; Therefore they Ordain, the number of Horsemen aftermentioned, to be
Levied and Raised from the Shires of this Kingdom, which are liable, and have
been in use to Out-reik Horses, being the fourth part of their proportions,
contained in the 27 Act of the Parliament 1663. as follows, viz. From the
Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk thirty seven Horses; From the Shire of Berwick
eighteen Horses and the half of an Horse; From the Shire of Haddingtoun
eighteen and an half, From the Shire of Edinburgh eighteen and an half; From
the Shire of Peebles seven and the fourth part of an Horse; From the Shire of
Linlithgow ten, and the half of an Horse; From the Shire of Dumfreis twenty
two; From the Shire of VVigtoun and Stewattry of Kirkcudbright twenty two; From
the Shires of Air and Renfrew, forty four; From the Shire of Lanerk, thirty
seven; From the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, twenty two; From the Shires
of Fife and Kinross; forty four, From the Shire of Perth, forty four; From
the Shire of Forfar, twenty five Horses and three fourth parts of an Horse;
From the Shire of Kincardin and Marischals part of Aberdenes Shire, eighteen
Horse and an half; From the Shire of Bamff, and Errols part of the Shire of
Aberdene, forty four; From the Shires of Elgin, Nairn, and this side of Ness,
twenty two; From the Earl of Seaforth, and Lord Lovat their Division of
Inverness, twenty two; From the Shires of Sutherland and Caithness, and the
rest of Inverness, twenty two Horses. And the Estates Do Ordain and Require,
the Commissioners of the Militia, and the Leaders of the Militia Horses in the
said Shires, to meet at the Head-Burghs of the several Shires, viz. These on
this side of the North-Water-Bridge, upon the twenty fifth day of April
instant; And these benorth the said Bridge, upon the second day of May next:
And appoints the several Sheriff-Clerks to Conveen them to that effect: And
Ordains the said Commissioners and Leaders, being met, to Proportion, and
cause to be Outreiked, their respective numbers of Horses above-exprest,
according to the Rule of the Militia, with ten days Provision, and to appoint
the Fractions to be paid in to the Leaders within forty eight hours after the
Cast shall be made, and in case of refusal or delay, to appoint the Commanding
Officer to quarter upon the Deficients, and to cause deliver the Horsemen
Outreiked, to some of the Officers who shall be appointed to receive and
Command them, at the Head-Burgh of the Shire upon the days following, viz. For
these Shires on this side of the said North-Water-bridge, on the second day of
May next; And these be-north the said Bridge, upon the ninth day of May: And
the Estates do Nominat and Appoint Major Hugh Buntine, and such other persons
as shall be Deputed by him to Muster the said Horsemen, and to see that the
Horses be sufficient, each Horse worth at least ten Pound Sterling, and the
Ryders and Horses sufficiently provided with Arms and Furniture, to the value
of five Pound Sterling. And it is hereby Declared, That the said Horsemen shall
be taken into the Kings Pay, according to the Establishment of this Kingdom,
after expiring of the ten days, for which they are appointed to be provided by
the Outreikers, as said is. And Ordains these Presents to be Published at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh; and likewise appoints the Sheriff-Clerks of the
several Shires to cause Publish the same at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head
Burghs of the respective Shires, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Extracted out of the Records of the Meeting of he Estates, by me Al. GIBSON,
Cls.

Edinburgh, Prined in the Year, 1689.


