Remarks upon Remarques: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE CONVERSATIONS OF THE TOWN, In
another LETTER directed to the same Sir T. L.

Quare fremuerunt Gentes?

LONDON, Printed by A.C. for William Hensman, at the Kings Head in Westminster
Hall, 1673.

To the most vertuos Lady Madam R. C. Who requested this Vindication.
MADAM,
I Need not vindicate the Town to you:
You, being here, that Office better do.
The Virtues you possess, and All Adore,
Expiate for the Vice of Town, and more.
I Would set your Picture on my Book, but then,
It would fore stall the Market of my Pen:
And none would read; or some (perhaps) would swear
Town needs no vindication, while she is there.
But since some know you not, and some forget;
I Will let them know, I Have done the Task you set.
To the Well-bred GENTLEMEN of the TOWN.
GENTLEMEN,
I Lately met with a Linsey-woolsey Letter, as like what the Common-Lawyers
call a Libel as ever it could look; I read it over, and found a discontented
somebody, (who seems to know nothing of the Town, but what is not worth
knowing) laboring to Travest London into extreme deformities, by laying the
blemishes of some rude Acquaintance of his, upon the whole Town: like the
Countryman, who having found some Tares in his Dish, swore there was no Wheat
in his Frumity. Then to show himself a Writer, to humor some prejudiced
Party, or for some other ends, with openmouth, proclaims to the World, that our
Age, our Nation, and its great Metropolis, are wholly (for his Notions are
general) degenerate, vicious, and debauched

I thought it a bold Enterprise, and pregnant with dangerous Consequences: As
first, It discourages and disswades all Country Gentlemen from educating their
Sons in the ways of Arts, Arms, and Trade. It prophanes the most Learned and
Glorious City in the Christian World. And (which is worst of all, by defaming
that) it impeaches the Government thereof, and offers violence to the Conduct
of our Governors, who have always thought fit to make this renowned City the
Center of distributive Justice, and the seat of the Imperial Diadem.

On this last score, I confess, it seemed to my sense, to smell hot of a
Design, against which I have always had a just indignation; and that is, by
oblique means to possess the heads of the Ignorant, unstable Populace, with a
contempt of Magistracy and personal defects of Governors, such Arts have been
Comets portending future Evils, forerunners of Rebellion.

It was well said by the Lord Digby in Parliament in 1640. It is easy to make
People believe, what they are willing to believe, though the Arguments are
little inducing, that are used to engage that belief. As when the Petition in
that Year was drawn up, and presented to the Commons against Bishops, the
inconveniences therein supposed, were most personal, the other ridiculous: As
because Ovids De Art Amandi, was Translated into English, etc.

Gentlemen, (though I was moved to what I have done by Arguments of another
Nature, yet) these considerations prompted me to comply with the other desires;
And since I have done this, I send it to you (as an Essay only) who (being
equally concerned with me in the Cause) will, I hope, supply (on occasion) what
is omitted, and correct what is amiss, which will oblige

Gentlemen Your affectionate Friend and Townsman.

To the READER.
I Intend no reflections on any Country Gentlemen, but those of mere Country
built, void of Education.

I intend no vindication, but of the Sober and Virtuous in the Town.

SIR,
I Lately saw a Letter, said to be written to you, grown into a Book, and
called Remarques on the Humors and Conversations of the Town. I liked the
Name, and expected much from it: But when I found that its business was to
persuade you to a mere Country life, and to dissuade you wholly from London, I
wondered what a Gods name was in the man's mind: and when further I saw his
Arguments persuasive to be only some minute Considerations of Country Pastimes,
and Fools-Bables, and the diswasive Arguments, some rudenesses, and
extravagancies in London, I wondered more; especially, while he wishes you to
Arrive at the glory of your Ancestors, to stick fresh Laurels in their
Garlands, to become a Hero; and dis^wades you from the Regular Method of
accomplishing the design.

Sir, since he took upon him to be a Tutor to you, and advise you to become a
Hero, he should have let you know the ways to be such; to have read you
Lectures thereupon, to have insinuated the advantages of virtuous Courses, the
inconveniences of the ills, which his long Experience has prompted him to
remarque upon; to have informed you that in (the University of Education)
London, there are of both sorts, of the better sort, the better part; and
against the worser to have framed his Cautions to avoid intimacy, converse, and
indeed acquaintance with them. But in stead thereof he pointblank tells you,
you must not go to London. And why so? Truly, Sir, he uses you like a child,
and would scare you from London with the Buggers of the Country; and by Country
Logic, there are naughty People in London, therefore you must not come there.
There is in London Bridewel, Newgate, Bethlehem; Ergo all the People in London
are Whores, Thieves, or Mad.

Sir, Since the man was furnished with anger enough, and some words, why did he
not take his rise at the Universities, to argue you into a Hero? And instancing
in Cambridge for example, he might have held forth, and said, O dear, Sir,
Remember the Glories that attend the Ghosts of your renowned Ancestors, the
Excellencies of an Indulgent Mother, exceeding the Presidents of any Age, who
desires you should arrive at heroic achievements, to serve your King and
Country, and become a Hero. Do not go to Cambridge, Sir, there are Alehouses,
in which you will be drunk; and there are in those houses notable prinking
Wenches, that will captivate you into Marriage, or somewhat like it. There are
Tennis-Courts, and Bowling-Greens that will heat you to an excess, and then you
will drink cold small Beer and die. There is a River too, in which you will be
drowned; and you will study your self into a Consumption, or break your Brain;
and will you go to such a place? Next, Sir, for London; do not go thither, and
then tell the Book, etc. And as for Travel, Sir, never think on it; for there is
a great Sea to go over, there is in it a great beastly Fish called a Whale,
which (they say) turn over Ships, and drown the Folks therein; there are also
Rocks, and Shelves, and Sands, which will Shipwreck you; and remember, Sir, a
great Hurricane got away the Lord Willoughby. And lastly, as to this point,
there are strange People beyond Seas, not only the hateful French, whom we
over-ape, but Black People, who look like Devils, and will fright you out of
your Wits; and Wild People too, who will tear you in pieces limb from limb; and
another sort of People called Cannibals, who will eat up all those limbs and
pieces, even to the little Toe-nail, or the Gristle of your Rump. What think
you, Sir, of all this, will you now take such courses as these? No, I hope not,
Sir, keep in the Country, and use the manly Exercise of Riding after a Deer,
and I Will warrant you a Hero to some tune: but be sure come not at London, for
there are ill People.

Euge, brave Country Tutor! he has guessed at the Dimensions of Hercules by his
foot: but who taught him, by that foot, to know what manner of men were
Agamemnon and Achilles?

Sir, Finding the Advisers Letter to run after this manner, I began to guess
where he had been bred; I judged he was a Funambulo bred in the Town, for I
thought by his high jingo's, and mighty curvetts on high-lines, he must have
been acquainted with Jacob Hall, and Bartholomew Fair; and I perceive it was
his ill luck to keep very bad Company, and that a great while too, by the
knowledge he discovers in the Vices of his Companions. I profess, Sir, I have
known that woeful Town many years, and know very little of the Vices, but can
give great Instances of the virtuous Learning and Conversation of the place;
and though your Adviser, Sir, has told me so much news, I am not frighted from
educating a Son in London, rather than to leave my Estate to an ill hew'n
Logger-head, fit for nothing but to run after a Dog and a Cat; and must be kept
a Fool to become a Country Hero.

Sir, I mislike all undertakings that anatomize Vice in the presence of Youth,
and by that means tell them of the Vices whereof they never heard, and the way
to be Vicious which they never knew. Nitimur in vetitum, is become natural,
since Nature became depraved, and restrictions or prohibitions ought to be
imposed warily. The old Man (in Ariosto the Italian Poet) who had not gone out
of the Town for 40 years, hearing that he was confined to the Town, was mad to
see what was without the Gates.

But, Sir, It has pleased your Adviser, that mighty person of Conduct, next to
your Mother, to go another way to work, and a sure one too; infallible I
promise you: an approved remedy against the Vices of London; and that is, in
short, never to come there. And all this upon good Reason and sound, even the
Calvinistical Hypothesis, that the Energetical Decrees of Reprobation, will
catch you by the back, as soon as you set foot in London streets, O wicked
London streets! And long experience has taught him, that the fate attending the
Life of a young Gentleman in London, is to be vicious, fottish, and profane.

I condole with him his sad experience, and am glad he has changed his Company,
and has learned to be a Hero-maker, though such a one as it is; I confess it is
better to be a Fool than a Knave, if there be a necessity of being one of them:
but he has not used Arguments cogent enough to convince me of the necessity of
being one or the other. Sure this man, when he was a Raw Country Lad, was sent
to London, and there fell to the Boyish art of making Squibs and Crackers, and
so from one childish trick to another, till he improved to the idle and
impertinent courses he now swaggers at. And Truth is, if young innocent Country
Gentlemen be not well taught, and well-grounded before they come there, if they
be not grown men too, and perhaps be well appointed to these Designments and
Societies, they may be imposed upon, even by the very Boys of this place; who
by the help of the frequent and generous converse here, arrive to knowledge to
10 years of Age, in greater measure than a Country Bumpkin at 20.

Perhaps, Sir, this man of Idaea's had some aspiring thoughts to be
Bell-weather of the Wits, as he calls some Ainy, brisk Fellows of his
acquaintance, to out-go the Coffee-house smoke, to reach the Clouds, to be
Speaker of all the Noise that haunt idle places, and because he could not reach
the top of his aim, has taken it in dudgeon: or having felt the pains and
aches, which (they say) succeed a dissolute Youth, cries out, No London, no
London; and may be himself, for ought I know, is like an old Ape (as one says,
that has worn off his Tail, and would have all young Apes cut off their Tails
to be like him. And but for one, perhaps more, perhaps he belonged to the
Temple, afraid of being pumped for not paying Exceedings, frighted at the
Rebellion for that cause; for he says he was surprised, and his Letter was
voided about that time; or by miss of expected advantages he grew into wrath
and fell foul of all London, only was pleased to be a little kinder to some of
both Sexes, at the end of his Preface; but they are not very considerable
neither, they are retired Animals, live to themselves and their Consciences,
and are no companions for you, Sir. So in effect he concludes, that all who
will converse are bad; and all are bad who will not converse.

And now, Sir, we are fallen into the way of the Wilderness, and if you please
to tire your self a little, I Will go along with you through the Wood, and
(because you are advised to History) to encourage your steps, I Will tell you now
and then a story, as shall be occasioned by the Remarques in our Travel. And
now, for my Pebble and Sling, and have at the Philistim in Green, this Country
Zanzumim.

But, Sir, before we go further I must take notice whom I walk with, what
Company I keep; and it is a good rule for you, Sir, either in Town or Country,
noscitur ex socio, etc.

Sir, Upon this first view of you, I take you to be a Gentleman of good Family,
though the Gallantry of your Mother is the only Argument to make out the
Quality of your Ancestors, being the surest side, was thought the surest
demonstration also that you are dignified with the highest Order of Gentility,
of good Estate, and having a round sum of ready money; that you are come to the
Age of Consideration, that your Education has been agreeable to the ancient
Precepts of Nobleness, Generosity, and Virtue. So that you have passed all the
Illlucks of School and University safe and sound, and whether you are to go to
London with safety is the Question. In order to that you have a Letter sent,
which begins with Trouble and Surprise; and I verily believe the good man wrote
it quite through in that condition. But why Trouble, and why Surprise? Oh, a
young Gentleman, a young innocent Gentleman, who by an innocent, ignorant
Country life, who by riding after a Deer might become a Hero, and especially by
living under the Regiment and Conduct of an induigent Mother might be so; is
now going to London, vile London! where are nothing but Mouse-traps, and
Fireworks, Bears and Lions, Skip-Jacks and Jews-trumps, and nothing
contributary to the making of a Hero.

In this sad and doleful posture he laments the state of this present Age, in
comparison with former Ages, and cries out with the Poet, Aetas parentum pejor
avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem. Hor.


And every Age may say the same, and perhaps truly, yet while the Vices of Ages
are not recorded, and so are unknown to aftertimes, and present Ages have
personal view of themselves, they judge the present always worst; and out of
well wishes for amendment, it has been wisely designed to commend the former
and rebuke the present Age: and the same aetas parentum, etc. will be perhaps
used by our Children, though we have seen the horrid'st Times that have been
since our Saviors.

It is true, the present time in which we now live, does differ from the Times
on this side Hen. 8. and yet can compare with all before. The reason of the
difference may in some sort be, that after the Crown of England justified it
self Imperial, and the affair of Church Government Independent of either the
Eastern or Western Patriarchs; our Islands dividing from all claims of Foreign
Jurisdiction, and differing in some points of Religion, became estranged from
Confederacies with other Nations, and so had not the opportunities of training
up our Youth in Martial Activities (abating what little formal Artillery was in
the Netherlands) which brought our Nation into some effeminacy; and occasioned
the losing of much of those magnanimous Improvements, which used always to be
welcome to English minds. And this continued till the late Civil War, which
most influenced the conquering Rebels, made up of Mechanics of the lowest
Ranks, and Plebeians: The ancient Gentry under Sequestration and Plunder (the
glory of their loyalty) contenting themselves to suffer for that Cause, which
they could not retrive. And now lately opportunities have been ministered for
our Sovereign to join with the most Christian King, in order to the redeeming
of the of the ancient Gallantry, which used to attend the Subjects of Monarchy,
and has been a long time fettered, and almost stifled, yet may now Exert it
self in the rebukes of the Treacheries of an unsaithful Anarchy.

And a Liberty (like that of our Neighbors) being (for the present) assumed,
to uncage the mighty English souls, and to give them Elbow-room, in order to
the great and popular designs now abroad in the World; it may be true, that
some looseness perhaps may mix with that Liberty, and steal insensibly on some
of the narrowest and less wary Designers of popular Enterprizers.

Yet this (if so) hinders not, but the present Age, (all circumstances
considered) is in fairer way for improvement in all sorts of honorable Science
and heroic purposes, than any Age before us, some instances whereof may
(perhaps) occurr in our particular notice of the Remarques.

Sir, Methinks, your Adviser was somewhat out while he Courts you sometimes
with mighty Encomiums, and acknowledges you to understand as much of true sense
and good breeding as most; yet he insinuates the sweet and prudent conduct of
your Mother to overcome unpleasant obsequiousness; and the love of childish
Liberties, as arguments to you not to leave the Country life. So that
notwithstanding what he says well of you sometimes, at other times he says as
ill, or at least, would have the World believe worse of you; telling what mean
Opinion your Mother has of you, who would still have you under her Regiment,
fearing, yea, perplexed, that you will be debauched with the Vices of the Town:
which is as much as to say, Sir, you understand as much as any one, but yet it
is fit your Mother should govern you still, for you have not understanding
enough to protect you from vicious practices, Sir, you are beholding to him,
pray thank him for nothing; He and your Mother have consulted well together,
they are both willing you should pursue noble Enterprises, especially those of
serving King and Country; but it must not be at London, no, nor must you go
thither to see if you have a King to serve, nor to learn how to serve him, or
your Country.

These great Undertakings are to be accomplished under the Conduct and Regiment
of your Mother, and to be taught you by inspiration, and so upstart Mushrom-
Hero in one Moonlight night in the Country.

But, Sir, we had best have a care, we mistake not, honest Country meaning: the
Man says A life partly of Conversation, and partly of leisure and retiredness,
is most suitable to the affairs and interests of men: and well is it said too,
i. e. Reading, Meditation, and Converse, conduce much to make you a Hero, and
to serve King and Country. Well said in good sooth, have at Arts and Arms now;
Ah, but its Country Arts, and Country Arms, he means. Pish, then it is no more
but this; you are to send to London, I say send, for come not you here on pain
and peril that will fall thereon; therefore, once again, send for the Statute
Book, and the two famous Books of Daltons and Shepherds Justice of Peace
Office, especially that of Dalton, for there you will have all presidents of
Warrants, Mittimus's, and the whole Artillery of a learned Justice, there you
will be furnished with so much skill as will make you be counted a Hero. Judge
to punish Offenders against the Crown and Dignity of our Sovereign Lord the
King, against the dignity of your Office and Heroship, who shall wickedly
neglect to say Worshipful at every word, and to do what you command right or
wrong; by which means (abating the Regiment and Conduct of your more learned
Mother) you shall be absolute Commander of all men and things that fall under
the swing of the learned part of you. You will also strike such awe into the
minds of Tenants, Neighbors, and Dependants, that they shall admire to hear
you (over a Boull of Nogg) to tell News, like a little News-monger to arraign,
try, judge, and condemn the Consultations, Actions, and Designs of King,
Council, Parliament, and Ministers of State; and (by the help of your Advisers
Letter) to quarrel at all things you are to be ignorant of, and make them wring
their hands and wonder you are not made a Privy Counselor, they not dreaming
your Mother and her Secretary will not let you go to London.

And to conclude this Discourse of Arts, (for we are to suppose all Arts to be
in a Country Justice) be sure you get a good and well-grounded Clerk, for that
makes the Justice, and Justice the Hero.

Next, Sir, you are to serve your King and Country in way of Arms, which is the
latter part of your Hero-ship. In order to that, you are, in Country leisure
and retiredness, to read that excellent and profound Piece, called The Soldiers
Grammar; which Book in short time, with your Mothers Annotations, will make you
(as to Arms) fit to be (in your Advisers opinion) a Deputy-Lieutenant; then you
are to buy a great red Scarff with great gold Fringe, get your Clerk to put it
on, on the side contrary to your Sword, that it may not hide the gilt Handle:
summons your Company to appear before you on some convenient place on your
Manor, bid them stand to their Tackling, Face to the right, and then to the
left, which is right against the Alehouse (newly licensed by you to advance
your rent) give them a Barrel of Bear at a penny the Quart, receive their
thanks by a Volley of shot, and go home like a mighty Hero returned from the
Conquest of Granada, or the Siege of Rhodes. All this, I fancy, Sir, your
Adviser reserved for another Letter, after he had frighted you from London,
with the Snap-Dragons there, and (which Crowns all) the Converse in the
Country, with other such like Hero's skilled in Arts and Arms, as aforesaid,
will exceedingly improve your reading, and rivet these redoubted
accomplishments in your mind and memory: whereas in London, silly, rude,
villainous London, there are no men fit to converse with, only some few who are
retired, live to their own Consciences, and are not good Companions.

And this you may easily believe, Sir, if you believe what he says next, viz.
That Philosophy is out of credit in this Age, and if he should say otherwise,
he fears, you would despise him for a Pedant. Now whether he fears you (in
that) really, I know not, but to gratify his fear, let him fear me, who (for
so saying) do despise him as such, for he now speaks like one, that brute has
the gretest share of, and bewrays that ignorance that mere Country Tuscan is
condemned to.

How! Philosophy out of credit! what! That Philosophy which (as Seneca says)
found not Plato Noble, but made him so: now out of credit! That Philosophy out
of Credit which made the Great Emperor Aurelius declare, That though he had no
Reward among the Gods, nor honor among men, yet he was right glad to be a
Philosopher for the love of it self. Strange news! And where out of Credit? In
London be sure; ah, and every where else, in the whole Age: then Country it
seems has no Philosophy neither. Well rhym'd Tutor, God-a-mercy good Heromaker.
He persuades you, Sir, Philosophy is out of credit; no need of that: and so you
are to be a Hero without it. Sir, I must tell you, if you had so little Wit as
to believe this, you would never have Wit enough to be a Hero. But being
otherwise persuaded of you; I shall endeavor to undeceive you, and inform you
and your ignorant Adviser too, that the two Notions of Philosophy and Languages
comprise all humane Learnng. As to the last, never were those seize
arrived at, as are at this present the Glory of this Age, this Nation, this
great City. As for the Western Languages, especially the French, they are so
familiar to us, that it is cause of Quarrel to your Man of Language, that they
get place in our discourses. As to the Eastern Languages, I shall need to
instance in no more than the Polyglot Bible, with the Lexicons thereto; a
performance exceeding all Times, to the everlasting honor of those worthy
persons, whose names add Ornament to the Work, and are mentioned before it; and
in special to that incomparable Linguist, who was the first in the Enterprise,
and has survived the rest, the Reverend Dr. CASTLE, now Arabic Professor in
Cambridge, in whom the Age is highly credited by his indefatigable Labors; and
more highly discredited in that, that in slight to his Person and his Pains, in
discouragement to future learned Attempts, no recompense has reached him,
bearing any proportion with his merit, no, not with his charge in that single
invaluable Achievement.

Now, Sir, As to Philosophy, I fear the Man understands neither Name nor Thing.
Good man, he never learned, perhaps, further than Barbara, Celarent, and so
thought all Philosophy contained in Seton; and because Raudolph calls him
(unmannerly) Jack Seton, and Greasy Jack Seton, he like a wise Philosopher,
concludes that Philosophy is out of credit

It Is true, Sir, The mere notional and disputing part of Philosophy, the
Mumpsimus of the old Stagerite and his Dogmata, are no more in credit, then as
they contribute to practical knowledge and true Science, leading inquiries into
the most inward recesses of Learning, and thereby enlarging the soul of man
answerable to the design of such an immortal being; which is the aim and honor
of this present Age, having found the extreme inconveniences which have
bewitched the latter Ages, disturbed the peace of Church and State, and
prevented improvements in sound Learning, even that disputandi pruritus,
idolized by men, whose only accomplishments were, to be acute Disputants,
dextrous Wranglers, and such Philosophy as that, and such Philosophers as they,
I confess, are quite out of credit.

But, Sir, Had your Adviser spent some of his long Experience at Arundel house,
Gresham-Colledge, or any other of the many Societies of Learning now in London,
he would not have put off Philosophy, with an Out of Credit falsity. Nay, had
he but seen a Booksellers shop once a Term; he might have seen the Catalogue
of Books, products of the great and insuperable industry and prodigious
improvements of the Philosophers that are in Town; he might then have learned
to tell you of better business for Country divertisements then riding after a
Deer; that is, the improvements of Woods and Orchards, of cultivating,
impregnating, and improving of Lands by tillage and planting, with a multitude
more of inventions and branches of Philosophy, found out and enlarged by the
Philosophers here, in their several ways and Societies, who in truth are the
most real and generous Benefactors to the Learned World, that any Times have
produced; and they are persons (though of honor and renown, yet) of such free,
sociable, and communicative constitutions, as dispose them to distribute that
knowledge with unlimited freedom, which they acquired with unwearied pains.

And further, Sir, though your Friend willingly lays aside, the considerations
of Religion, whether out of ignorance, or what else, I know not, yet I can
assure you, that our Philosophers here do exceedingly contribute to the better
part of Man, with reference to the future state. And, Sir, were you at London,
and would not be frighted from Church with fear of a Pickpocket, you might hear
Philosophy from the Pulpit, and constant preaching, not bettered by any days
on this side the Apostles. And we here have leisure and retiredness enough to
read abundance of excellent Philosophy in the sacred Pages, though Solomon's
great Body of Natural Philosophy of Vegetables, from the Cedar to the Hysop, is
not yet come to light. Thus far, Sir, is Philosophy out of credit; thus far, is
your Tutor (upon his own challenge) to be despised as a Pedant.

Next, Sir, He advances to a Homespun Argument for a Country life; and that
is, you shall have opportunities of reading History. Alas poor London! have
thou lost all thy History? Hue and Cry, pray, after History: Country Hero has
robbed London of History. Well it cannot be helped, History must be read, and
we must go into the Country to read it. Then, pray Sir, where do you dwell?
that we Londoners may come and Hero-fie our selves with History at your house.
On my word, Sir, we have Philosophy'd well indeed; we have raised a Spirit,
which the out of Credit Folk call by the name of Dilemma. And thus he plagues
us, either trouble and surprise must have you by the bones, or your Tutor. If
all we Londoners come down to your House to read History, this will be trouble
and surprise to you: if you bring History up to London, then there is trouble
and surprise to Tutor.

Again, Either you must bring it up, or send it up: if you bring it up, you
will be you know what: if you send it up, you will lose the means of being a
Hero; and Tutor loses his prime Argument. Lo, what a spirit is here now? he
could go further too, if he were let alone. What work would this Fiend make
among a Herd of Country Hero's? shrewd Work indeed!

But, Sir, We Londoners and out of Credit Philosophers, make no bones of such
spirits as these; Nay, they can conjure down with three words, the veriest
Hobgoblin that ever scared poor Country Hero.

Come, Sir, Be not troubled nor surprised, this was no spirit, it was merely a
delusion. We will not come to your House for History, nor any thing else, we
have more plenty of all things here; in particular, more History, more leisure,
more retiredness to read it, more and better converse to improve it; we do
think it great pleasure to see former Ages in the Glasses of History. It is a
part of Philosophy, it contributes to the making of a Hero, provided you rest
not in the Idea's of Things, but improve them into action, and confine them not
to the site of your Manor.

And therefore, whereas your Adviser prefers History to performance, because,
as he says, he that stands on high takes a more perfect account of an agreeable
show, then he that makes one of the Train. I doubt he wants some of the Town
Wit, for the Alderman that stood on a Steeple, saw more of the fierce Battle
at Colchester, then any one in it; yet, I take it, (with submission to better
Judgments) that Sir Charles Lucas was likelier to prove the greater Hero.

In ancient time, it was Ulysses praise; quod mores hominum multorum vidit and
urbes. But now I perceive, by a newfound Country Doctrine, in order to make a
Hero. It is better to read Heylins Geography, or Oglebie's Atlas, then to
travel, to read Lucan's Pharsalia, Fisher's York fight, or perhaps, the
admirable piece before mentioned, the Soldiers Grammar, then to be an
experienced Soldier.

Oh brave Country-Justice-Captain-Hero. But to proceed, Our Man of Argument
having told the ill luck of meeting an idle Companion (and it seems he has met
with as much of that ill luck, as any of his Time, the more the pity, and then
having shaken off the Gentleman, as it seems he was, but of no breeding,
understanding nothing above the Breeches.) He mounts, and now baloo for the
Country, upon the ran-dan, hey for the Country, oh brave Country. Sir, there
you will have delight in the fierceness of Horse, pursuit of a Deer, variety of
sports, along the beautiful Foot-cloths of Nature, you will sleep quietly, and not
miss of Idaea's to form you glorious Dreams; and what then? then all this is
better then hunting a little Wench, (or a great one either) then beating the
Watch, or breaking Glass windows, losing a great quantity of Guinies, or
playing away a Lordship. Oh wonderful! and is it so indeed? what follows? what?
then by authentic consequences of Country Philosophy, Hunting, Walking,
Sleeping, and Dreaming in the Country, will make you a Hero, and going to
London will make you a Rogue.

Sure this man has burnt his shins at your Fire, and therefore you must remove
your Chimney.

But, Sir, since we are on the beautiful Foot-cloths of Nature, and places of
Sports, let us have a Verse of Discourse of Hunting. And as to that, (though
profane Eutopians think it unworthy to be used of Free men, and therefore
reject it to their Butchers, to which Office they design their Bondmen,
accounting Hunting the vilest and most abject part of Butchery, especially that
Hunting which is for pleasure only. Yet) we that are Philosopher-Historians, do
read of Xenophon (a better Philosopher then any in Eutopia, which place for
that, is worse then London, for my Lord Major here keeps Hounds) how he
commended Hunting to Cyrus, and called it a gift of the Gods, first bestowed on
Chiron for his doing Justice, and by him taught unto the old Hero's and
Princes; and we at this day take it for a lawful Pastime, befitting any man of
what degree soever, and we take it withal, that the skill of well ordering a
Pack of Hounds, may prefer a man to be my Lord Majors Dog-keeper, but never
make him a Hero; but I Will tell you one thing, Sir, which your Adviser never
told you, perhaps never knew, viz. that if (with the London Philosophers) you
shall inquire into the natural causes and grounds of Hunting, what manner of
effluviums or bodikins are left by the Hares foot on Natures Foot-cloth, how
retained there for a good space of time, how received into the sents of the
Hound, directed thereby, and by a natural impulse to pursue poor Wats to death;
you would outdo all the Country Hero's, and dream such glorious dreams, as
Artemidorous never heard of, formed of such Idaea's as attend London
Philosophers. And this (indeed lo) is far better then keeping such rude
Company, as Tutor, by long experience, has found out to reproach London with,
and whereof the Philosophers are wholly ignorant.

Advance we next to a necessarium, you must marry, ay, marry Sir, Ergo, you
must not go to London; why not to London? ay, and for that purpose too; where
so many Country heirs meet with Fortunes, who repair the Cracks of their
ancient Families, add to others more mean, and are acceptable to the best. Oh,
but Sir, if you go thither you will spoil your Instruments of Generation, and
never be able to continue posterity to succeed you in your Manors, and
Country-Heroship.

Sir, This man it seems knows you Intus and in cute; you are condemned to a sad
fate, and good Sir Nativity-caster has so decreed it, etc. But why marry just
now? he knows best, if he judges of you by himself.

But (in earnest Sir) I approve not too early marriages, as well for St. Paul's
reasons against all marriages, as for hindrance of Posterity: yet (in good
deed) if the case be so with you, that by traduction you inherit a constitution
big with inclination of that cogency, as you must marry, or do like it; (and to
the point he seems to speak as knowingly, as dogmatically.) Then Marry, only
get your Tutor (as preparative) to postil on the History of Piramus and Thisbe,
and lecture to you well thereon. But, Sir, how will this project conduce to the
making you a Hero? for Marriage (they say) is a hindrance to such ends. Come,
Sir, that is a mistake, as i will plainly make out by Philosophical History, as
clear as the Sun; and now I think on it, it is the only Country trick to make you
a Hero. One Vibius Rufus married Tullies Widow, and bought Caesar's Chair, to
get the eloquence of the one, and the Power of the other, and when he had done
all this, no doubt but he was a perfect Hero. Now, Sir, you being an
accomplished young Gentleman, and rich, may with your Advisers help, marry
thus, and be a Hero in a trice: if this will not do it, you must try some other
ways; only come not at London, wicked London, for Astrology sake: ay, and the
round sum of ready money sake; which is all condemned to the Cheats and
Pick-pockets, if you come at London. Was not your Adviser, pray Sir, one of the
Rump-Parliament? and argued Monarchy out of doors, on pretense that Kings have
some times ill Counselors? May I be so bold, Sir, Pray where do you dwell? I
hope not near Bansted-Downs, New Market, or Salisbury Plain, nor near a Market,
a Fair, a City, or Town-Corporate: for on my word, lewd People frequent such
places, and many round sums of ready money have been lost there, and many a
fair Manor morgaged. Well, Sir, if you were (indeed) born when all good Stars
turned their backs on you, as is reported, I should not advise you to use the
manly exercise of riding after a Deer, fot I knew one who broke a Horse neck
riding after Greyhounds, and I have heard many with as little a matter have
broke their own necks, therefore you must look to your Hits in the Country
also, unless the Regiment and Conduct of your Mother be there a Charm against
all Ill-lucks.

Then, Sir, After a Cross-Caper or two (by the help of fatal must) over the
heads of some airy Companions of his, (and he seems to have many of such
acquaintance, and if he can leap over all their heads so, he is a nimble
Gentleman.) He attacques the Poets of the Town with all his might: have at the
Poets, Heroic Poets, Dramatick Poets, and all this to make you a Hero. Sir,
you must not acquaint your self with Poets, nor read Poetry.

Sir, The man should have done well to have instanced in any Age of the World,
wherein Poetry was not in high esteem, as well Heroic as Dramatick, Scaliger
says that the reading of Virgil will make a man more honest then all the
Precepts of Philosophers, divine Mr. Herbert says, A verse may find him, who a
Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.


The Macedonian Amyntas gave to Cherilus (a mean Poet) the value of an Angel
for every Verse, and our K. H. 8. for a few Psalms turned into English Meter,
made Sternhold Groom of his Privy Chamber. Virgil, Homer, Lucan, Plautus,
Terence, Horace, and Casimire, (to name no more) for Heroic, Dramatick, and
Lyrick, have always been, and still are of great esteem in all Ages and places.
It pleased the holy Penmen to leave some Books of Holy Writ in Meter. And St.
Paul was well acquainted therewith, and made good use too of the Heathen Poets,
witness his Citations of Epimenides, 1 Tit. 12. Menander, 1 Cor 15.33. and
Aratus, Acts 17.28. and I fancy he designed a Verse of his own, James 1.17.
(...), for I refer to the Greek Testament, and on the former Citations Erasmus
says, Plures sine dubio legerat beatus Paulus poetas quam quos recitavit, and
recitando aliquos laudavit omnes. Sir, is not your Adviser all this while a
wise man to inveigh against Poetry, on behalf whereof a Volume might be
written; with as little ingenuity he falls foul on the Poet, and what is his
fault? The Poet reproves placing a praeposition at the end of a sentence, and
false Grammar; which is a fault unpardonable, for Hero's are not to speak with
such exactness; Silly man, the Poet spoke to Poets, not to Country Hero's. But
he had heard perhaps how King James rebuked Gundamore for speaking false
Latin, and how Gundamore answered, that he spoke Latin like a King, and the
King spoke Latin like a Schoolmaster, and from that excuse in jest, he has
raised an Argument in earnest, that an Hero is not to speak Grammar, and so
Poet Laureat is killed on the leg, and all Poets in him.

And why (good Sir Adviser) is any to be reviled for the exactness of his
skill? It is the first time sure, that any one was made culpable for being
without fault. Well, he will not leave Poet so, on he goes with another Thrust;
What does this (dramatick Poetry) signify to the practical virtue of a
Gentleman? Sure the man cannot be so ignorant, as he seems, no body (though but
easily skilled in Learning) but can give sufficient answer to the Question,
however, can say it signifies more then his manly exercise of riding after a
Deer. But (to wave common things) I can tell him, that I have been several
times at a Play of that excellent Poets framing, whom he would revile, and I
will maintain, there was more practical Divinity in it, then in several Country
Sermons I have heard.

Well, Sir, after a great deal of Billingsgatry against Poets, particularly
against one of the best that ever England bred; he grows weary of him in good
time, and fairly concludes, that the same man is of good life; his fault being
(as it should seem) he is a Poet; and Poets are guilty of several faults
besides, ergo, my Lord Majors Huntsman is an undoubted Hero. And now for damned
Poet, a full thrust shall strike him to the heart. Poets are guilty of Atheism.
I fear he mistook himself, and by Atheism meant Polytheism, for indeed, Modern
Poets use Dii in stead of Deus, following still the Dialect of the Heathen
roguish Poets, which must needs be an unpardonable Crime. But what if the
Heathen Poets in that followed the Idiom of the Writer of the Pentateuch, in
his Elohim, (and it is thought that Ovid had seen those Books) that Crime is
become none. Atheism still sticks by their rib; as for example, some of the old
Poets differed about the Creation of the World; Pray which of them did so? He
dubs Aristotle and Epicurus Poets, and then condemus them for Atheists; and
through them all Poets to this day are under that sentence.

It is to be feared there are in the World too many practical Atheists, God
bless the Adviser, for the Ignorant are Atheists, and it is the Fool said in his
heart you know what, etc. but indeed, I hardly believe that he can instance in
any one Modern Poet or other, that is in Judgment an Atheist, or that holds in
Judgment, the concourse of Atoms by an undesigning impetuous chance to make a
World; for if they believe not Moses, they will give credit to Ovid; well but
the Town Poets are Atheists, ay that they are, no matter why or wherefore. I
perceive Mr. Dryden has displeased your Tutor, Sir, and there is no more to be
said, and so much for Atheism in Poets. Another fault, like it, is at hand; and
that is a fault of Poets too, profane Poets, who believe mankind has suffered
in nothing more then in the restraints of Wedlock, and so it is deplorable that
the contempt of Wedlock is grown common; and the next great subject of their
Discourse is the dishonor of Women, and they believe there were never any
honest Women but those who lived solitarily, and were never attacqued by a
powerful Courtship.

What a great many ill qualities had the persons with whom this man was
acquainted? what, vilify Wedlock and dishonor Women? O grievous! I protest,
Sir, I take it to be a fault, not of the least magnitude; and now I think on it,
I have heard of some shallow-brain'd fellows (pretenders to Poetry) who have
thrown about Lampoons and Satyrs, to their followers, who at Coffee houses and
Taverns vent the Ware; this is done in the Country too, according to their
little Wit. But, Sir, These are not reckoned among the Poets, but Poetasters,
the true Poets being Philosophers, and frequent not such places, desiring their
Works should savor of the oil rather then the Wine: and they hold Marriage a
sacramental at least; and for Women, they think them the Glory of the present
Age, as far transcending the Mold and Materials of former Times, as the other
improvements of this Age exceeds former; and as much as any of that Beloved Sex
exceeds in virtuous Accomplishments, so much the more does she attract to her
self their Honor and Regard. Yet because it is so positively asserted that
Wedlock and Women are disrespected by some, I have been thinking who they are,
and how they came hither. It seems, they are naughty men who dis-esteem Women;
and I fear, it is naughty Women gives the occasion; but both are in London, and
how came they there? were it not, Sir, for your Advisers Atheism it might be
thought that Epicurus sent them hither by an impetuous chance; but I am not of
that mind I assure you. And now, Sir, we are discoursing of Wedlock, Women, and
Breeding, etc. there comes a Story into my head, which, perhaps, you nor your
Tutor never met in the course of your reading History; It has something in it
of all those matters, and though it be somewhat long, you may bear with it, for
it was bred and born in the Country, and in the Country resolves to die.

There was a man, who was an old man, his name was Prosper Richman, and he was
a rich man, had a plentiful number of Acres, and a goodly Manor-house, and a
round sum of ready money. He was of an ancient Family, as old as Meum and Tuum;
his Wife was the daughter of one Mr. Scrape, of Family equal, if not before the
other; and a good Houswife she was, though not one of ten of that breed proves
so. And these two by a slight they had used, had seven Sons and three
Daughters; the eldest Daughter was crooked, witty, but ill-natured; the second
was hansome straight, but consumptive; the third was very hansome, very young,
but somewhat silly.

These three Daughters (with the help of round sums of ready money, and the
reputation of thriving Parents, were disposed of in marriage to three rich
Country heirs, who were appointed to their marriages at the second interview,
their Parents having before made the Matches.

The Husband of the eldest, after some repititions of Loves Encounters had
allayed his Passion, began to entertain mean thoughts of his Spouse; and she
being by day froward and perverse, he accounted her the latter part of the
night to be but a parcel of Bones crowdeed together into a Poke, and set upon
two stilts, and so thought he was in Bed with a Skeleton: thence took a
distaste at her, and grew desirous to be acquainted with the perfections of
that Sex. In order to that, following his eyes, he fixes his fancy with some
earnestness on Mal. the daughter of Mr. Boniface, Parson of the Parish; and at
last obtained opportunity to bestow on her some Country Innocence. Afterward on
some Tenants daughters, and by and by on his Maids one after another; insomuch
that Aprons growing short among them, he sends them toties quoties to London,
to some grave Woman, who in a Months time can make any Apron as long as it was
before, and you cannot see where it was mended. And (would you think it) by
this doing between his Age of 20 years when he married, and 30, he sent to
London on that errand a score of Women with their Appurtenances.

As to the second Daughter, her husband liked her pretty well by day, but by
night, being continually disturbed of his rest with her coughing, and in his
stomach, with the unsavory odors which arose from her breathing, and the great
lumps of rotten Lungs which she belched forth on the spitting sheet, and some
time on the Chamber: Troth, he in short time, loathed her, took such Courses as
the other had done, and then did, and furnished this Town of London; O unhappy
London! with more then the other had done by five.

He that married the third, (which was for symetry of body, and excellent
features very beautiful) promised himself great felicity in the enjoyment of
her: but it fell out, that (by reason of her tender years) that which in riper
persons makes a pleasureable Impression, and begets (besides what else) an
endeared affection to her, signified the clear contrary; and indeed, to him,
seemed punishment for marrying one not yet 15 years of Age: so she wanting Wit
and natural courage, and fancying that conjugal Rites would never be performed
at easier rates, either refused, or refused to assist those embraces which are
the life of married state: wanting also knowledge in household affairs,
carriage, and discourse, she became as little entertainment for her Husband by
day as by night. Whereupon he takes Pet, espouses other societies, grows
informed of the others vices, and by corrupt Nature is prompted to the lewd
courses of other Brethren in Law; and sends the same way on the same errand, no
less then nine in two years; and how many after that I heard not, nor have I
heard of the sum total of the rest: but we may guess them to be a jolly number
on a Judgment pro rata.

And (which is remarkable on this third Daughters part, beyond the rest) she
became jealous of her Husband, and her Husband careless of her. And this news
flying into the neighboring Villages, the Country, sturdy young Fellows
resorted to her; and what out of spite to her Husband, what out of itch, made,
and clawed, by others not husband, she admitted offers, received them into her
Embraces, and I know not what, fansied the motions, became affecter of Game, a
lover of any but her Husband, and in fine, was in fair to make as many Rogues,
as he did Whores.

These Daughters of this mighty Family being thus (by the aid of great
Portions) provided for, the good old Gentleman prides himself in the Companies
of his goodly number of Sons, fancying every one to be a seventh, a Conjurer, a
Fortune Tellers, Magician, Cunning-man, or (at least) no Fool. He kept a House
like the Old Courtier of the Queens, or the Queens old Courtier. He had all his
sons set about his Table, with their Hats on their heads, as they did at all
times in Fathers presence, though two of them were under 20. years of Age.
These Sons could scarce read, or write their names well; And that happened thus;
when the eldest was very young, and intended for School, a Puritan came to the
good old Father, and told him of a pious Book called the Confessions of good
Austin, which he had often read, and found that one of the first great offenses
that Holy man repented of after his Conversion, was robbing of an Orchard,
which he was enticed to by the wicked solicitations of his Fellow-Scholars at a
Grammar School; therefore, worthy Sir, (quoth he) send not your Son to School,
for he will learn to rob Orchards, and then be forced to do Penance in old Age,
and that before the uncircumcised Formalist of his Parish, according to the
Idolatrous Rubric. At which discourse there happened to be present a Paedagogue,
who took up the Cudgels in defense of School-Education, using many Arguments to
that purpose: and for answer to the Orchard business, told of one of great
Natural Wit, who bewailed his not going to a Free School, for many reasons; in
particular, for that he missed the opportunities, of Robbing Orchards, whereby
he might have learned the Arts of Scaling of Walls, besieging of Towns,
Approaches, Retreats, etc. at which the old Gentleman stopped him, saying, Hold
Sir, I like not you, nor your Man of Natural Wit neither; who seems to me to be
a man void of Grace, especially in comparison of this Godly man, whose
directions I will follow; who has informed me from the same Austin, that Grace
is enough, without the profane Learning of the Heathens. And from that time he
resolved against Learning, and provided for his Sons (according to the Country
Education) a Huntsman, with a Kennel of Bloodhounds, Foxhounds, Beagles, and
Tarriers. A Falkoner with Sparrowhawks, Lanners, Tassels, and Goss-hawks. A
Warrener with Tumblers and Lurkers, besides other implements of his Art.
Another Servant who attended the Greyhounds, and Setting-Dogs: an Archer for
the Long-Bow, Cross-Bow; and had the skill of Gun and Stalking-Horse too, and
all his Materials and Instrnments of Game, were kept always at hand. A
Fisherman used his time well about the Ponds, Dams, and Meers, in furnishing
the Table with most sorts of Fresh Water Fish, and made it pleasant in the
taking them, with Angles, Trolls, Snares, Nets, and other Engines. There was
also a Billiard-Table, Shovel-board, Chess-board, Cards, Dice, Nine-Pins, and
they that would might also play at Nine holes, or Span Counter. There was
designed a Tennis Court to be built, but one (like your Adviser, Sir) came and
told, that it was used at London, and that naughty people used to come thither,
and to go from thence to naughty places, which spoiled the project, So strange
a thing is a prejudiced mind, as if a Tennis Court were not less noxious then
Cards and Dice, yet such is the foolish admiration of persons, That Errors are
espoused, for the Authors sake, and some such weighty reason, pulled down the
Tennis Court at New Market.

But to our business again, Sir, i. e. to the Story of the seven Sons, who you
see were provided for to make Country Hero's, far beyond what your Adviser has
mentioned to you.

Sir, These young Gentlemen every day made use of some of these divertisements,
and doubtless became good proficients therein; only George, one of the
youngest, often staid at home, pretending to break his Fast with Curds and
Cream, Fresh Butter, and New brown Bread, Buttermilk, or Whey; and doing often
so, the eldest Brother Ezekiel, fansied the Dairy afforded something more
pleasant than what he knew, and so watched George on a time, and through a
Creviss perceived that George had found out a Recreation not provided for by
the Old man; and that was, to help Tydy the Dairy Maid to Churn; which Churning
was done after such a manner, as made Ezekiels Teeth to water, as if Buttermilk
or Whey had a Spring in his mouth. All this Ezekiel kept to himself, and when
George was a Hunting then he helped to Churn with Tydy; which privilege he
obtained, to keep Counsel and (on the same score) every one of the Brothers had
their turns, and I think she was well helped to Churn; insomuch that by
over-labouring, or by one thing or another, the poor Wench grew sick a
mornings, and you might see her red Stockings half way up her legs, which made
her ask leave to go home to her Friends; and being granted, was conveyed to
London, at the charge of the Eldest Brother only; for he stood on his
reputation, as heir of the Family, and in hopes of preferment courted secrefie:
but George and the rest, as they had no more then younger Brothers
expectancies, so expected no disparagement by a younger Brothers Frolic.

And from that time ('it is strange such a thing should happen in Innocent
Country) there was not a Maidservant could stay in that Family above six
Months, what became of them I know not; but it is said that a great many Women
Folk went from that house to London.

Well, Sir, By this time Age gave the old Gentleman an intimation of removing
to the other World: so he sent for the Parson whose name was Lionel Drinkwell,
who made his Will; by which his wife was made Executrix, and all his Manors,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, was bequeathed to Ezekiel, his eldest Son;
he gave to his second, third, and fourth Son 100 l per annum a piece, during
life; and to the other three younger Sons he gave 1000 Marks a piece, and made
the said Parson, and one Mr. Getmore, a Neighbor, Supervisors, desiring them
in all love to be aiding and assisting to his said Sons, with friendly advice,
and so he died, was buried, and forgotten: After whose death, the heir grew
Housekeeper, the old Gentlewoman doing all the Offices of a Wife (excepting
what Tydy used to do.) The Brothers also (paying for their Boards) continued
their former Courses, went to Bed early, slept quietly, by the help of Idaea's
had glorious dreams, rose before the Sun, sported on the beautiful Foot-cloths
of Nature; and twenty things more, besides wasting their Portions. Soon after
it happened, one Thomas Lender of London a Pawn-Broker, died of the Plague
intestate, leaving a Widow of about 35 years of Age, after whose death, she
caused her husbands Goods to be Inventoried and Appraised; in which Inventory
was mentioned in Bonds 5000 l. in the Shop, in Jewels, Plate, Watches, Books,
and other Goods 5000 l. in toto 10000 l. she being afrighted at the Disease,
which had taken away her Husband, removed into Country for a time, and happened
into this Mr. Richman's Town; and growing acquainted with this Family, by
discourse was discovered, that her late Husbands Mother was of the Family of
the Scrapes, and so a kind of affinity was started between her and them; and
improved so far, as she was desired to reside (during her stay in the Country)
at that House, where she had not long been, ere the Widow imparted the value of
her Estate, which took presently with the old Woman, who could not rest till
she had engaged a Treaty between her and her Son Ezekiel for a Marriage; and
though the Widow had nothing to commend her to his acceptance, but her wealth,
yet that Argument improved by an indulgent Mothers descants, prevailed for a
Match, which was soon dispatched; and the joy that the hopes of this round sum
of money brought, occasioned open Housekeeping for a month, and public
Entertainment for all comers, which cost at least 1000 l. soon after which
Jollities ended, the Bride and Bridegroom went to London with purpose to remove
the Treasure into the Country; but when they came there, consulting some wiser
than the former Apprisers, it was found that the Jewels, Plate, and other
Goods, were indeed of the value of 5000 l. but they were pawned but for 1500 l.
and the sums mentioned in the Bonds, were indeed of the value, but by the
conditions of those Bonds, it appeared that the Bonds were given only for
further security, for the same Moneys lent on the Goods; so she was worth in
truth but 1500 l. whereof 1000 l. was spent on the Weddingsolemnities.

This angered good Ezekiel to the heart, and his old Mother too, who cursed
London Widows, and advised the younger Sons to stay in the Country still, lest
they also should be cheated; not considering this Trick was in the Country, and
lay at their own door, through want of Wit and Consideration, which the Wit of
the Town would have obviated.

The new married man wanting the Whetstones of his Love, Beauty, and Money,
neglected his Wife, even to hatred, returned to the ways his Brother George had
taught him, and followed that course, till he and his Brothers had almost
emptied the Country of Maids. His Wife not being in his debt, received as good
Visits as he made; and between them both, the Government of the House seemed
dissolved: a mixed concourse of Visitants constantly filling the Beds, emptying
the Bottles (for they were used also to drive away discontent) the Buttery, and
Treasury; so that the name of Richman began to seem improper for person and
place.

The younger Sons following the way of their Education, (notwithstanding grave
Supervisors advice) became so clear-sighted as to see to the furthest end of
their Portions, without the help of a Teloscope; the Annuities being deeply
dipped to Mr. Getmore one of the Supervisors, by the procurement of his
Partner, the trusty Parson, on whom, and at whose House, much of the money was
spent; and the Portions of money, in like manner was three parts spent.

Whereupon they considered, that they were of good extraction, having pure and
uncommon blood leaping in their veins, that they had been educated in the way
of Country Hero's, that universal expectation claimed from them things generous
and heroic, and how to carry on noble Enterprises, and to arrive at great and
honorable ends, with a remnant of Estate, in the Deserts of the World (for so
they now call the Country) by the trifling vanities of sports (so now they
called the Country divertisements) must be thought on: and without much ado,
labor, or study, it was concluded, (and so soon as one would think it was
dictate of Nature) to London they must go, and try their fortunes; and to
London they went, and not having fortune enough, or good enough, to purchase
the friendship of Court nor Learning enough to join with the Societies of
Learning, nor money enough left to fall into Commerce, nor courage enough to
take up Arms; they furnish themselves with Peruches and Pantaloons, and find
out the Wastcoateers formerly sent from the Country for the better shaping of
their Bodies, who had improved themselves by this time into the exactness of
some eminent Vices, especially of that which they brought from the Manor of
Richman, and now were become able to instruct their Country Gallants, and to
bring them acquainted with others, such as your grave Adviser, Sir, has by long
experience known, and has elaborately told you of, and so we leave them
together, and there is an end of the Story.

Sir, As soon as this Story was told me, I was thinking, that if it were duly
considered in all its branches, and well weighed, it would be an answer to your
Advisers Letter, without more ado; but it coming but now to my hands, I here
insert it.

Sir, As for a Story where the Sons of Country Gentlemen have by good and
proper Education, become true Hero's, Patriots of their Country, and possessing
eminent ranks of Authority and Dignity; I take it needless, referring you to
Beloved History, either in City or Country, from which may be collected Volumes
of such Hero's, exceeding Fox's Book of Martyrs, and truer too. And (though the
obliquities of the late Times have discouraged Learning to a great degree, and
laid shackles on Gentlemen's Parts and Estates, yet) since our Sovereigns
return, it is obvious, that greater improvements have been made by the Scyons of
Nobility and Gentry in all Arts, in 12 Years, than in an hundred before.

But, Sir, to the Letter again, and let us see more of the Town faults, and a
great one rises next; and that is, a Language (diverse from the times of our
Ancestors) is in London used. Language said he? Marry till now I took London to
speak the best Language of all England, and England to speak the best Language
except the universal one: but I am told otherwise now, this Age, this Nation is
corrupt in its Language. A bold charge is it on the wisest Age, and wisest
Nation, and where is the fault? in using French words; vile French, even vile
French words, unworthy of the manly Language of English to use French words.

Sure, this Man, Sir, has been stung with a Be, and now loves no Honey. He
has, perhaps, suffered under some distemper called French -- and so will
starve, rather than eat Fricacie or Ragoo.

But a serious word, Sir, Our Language of England is that of those Germans
called Saxons, who possessed themselves thereof, next preceding the Normans;
and that Language was mostly Monosyllables, of which Radixes have since been
made Compounds; and though it has been thought that from such various Roots
might arise Compound-words answerable, and so no need of what is Foreign; yet
in that Age, and that People, Knowledge was stinted, and few words would
express few things, and so no need was there of enlarging the Lingua, or
opportunity for it. Historians tell us, that when the Normans expulsed the
English, among the Clerks in Holy Orders, if one had learned the Grammar, every
one wondered at him as a mighty Scholar.

After that time Learning began to increase, and by the Normans, came the
French Tongue hither, and though they could not introduce their Laws, yet their
Language they did, and put our Laws into it; by reading of which, and
conversing with them, grew a mixture of Tongues with the French, which has been
improved by a commerce more familiar with that Nation than with any other.

And it is true, that in this last Age, wherein our Nation has out done all
others in the super-structures of true Science, several terms of Art have mixed
with our ordinary discourses, which by reason of their easiness to
intelligence, can hardly be avoided.

And it is remarkable, that what words soever our Nation has adopted, they are
most significant of the things they express, and so occasion a succinct and
comprehensive style in our Conversation and Writing.

And as for the old Dotage of keeping to our first Language, which was
Teutonick; I would ask your Adviser, Sir, to give me one instance of any People
that does it. Let him look into Verstegan for the Monosyllables, and acquaint
with the High and Low Dutch, Normay, Sweden, and Denmark, and see if any of
them retain the old Teutonick, and how much, and how they differ from it, and
among themselves, and he shall soon find that every one of them, as well as we,
do differ from the serious manly Language of our common Ancestors, as they are
severally situated in the several parts of their respective Nations; so do we
in England. An instance whereof you may have in Verstegan, who thereby answers
himself in the whimsie your Adviser borrowed from him.

As one woul say at London,

I would eat more Cheese if I had it.

The Northern man says,

Ay sud eat mare Cheese gin ay hadet.

And the Western man says,

Chud eat more Cheese an chad it.

Be you Judge now, Sir, who speaks best English, London or Country. And I
challenge all his Country Hero's, who were never educated in London, to caress
you with an Harangue like that of his Remarques, which (as the matter is
Romantic, so the style Rhodomontade, sufficiently laced with Foreign words,
rude French and all) does amply turn upon himself, and silence the impertinent
complaint. And so much shall suffice to have been delivered concerning the old,
serious, manly, English Language. Only I must not forget, that after his
invectives against French, he kindly says, That Language is highly necessary to
all that frequent Courts, and that have to do in the important affairs of the
World. This startled me, when he says, French Tongue is necessary to Courtiers,
and those concerned in important affairs, and yet not to you, whom he designed
and advised to be a Hero. It made me recollect my self, and consider what a
Hero is. I find the word is not Teutonick no more than Idaea, Chimera, Conduct,
Regiment, with many others, which are for this time deigned worthy to be the
embroidery of his Lines, and the Livery of his Pages. But I found out what
usually English men understand by this Remarqueable word Hero, and it happens
to be the very same, that the Greek word imports, viz. one who has attained to
great Renown, by great Parts, Knowledge, and generous Archievements, in the
ways of Arts, Arms, or other the important affairs of the World; to such a one
as this the French Tongue (it seems) is highly necessary.

Then, Sir, while he inveighs against the French Tongue to you, judge you what
manner of Hero he would have you to be; you are to be a Hero, but the
necessariums to it you must avoid.

Mahomet told his Prosylites that he should be like a great Ram with a great
Fleece, and they should be like little Fleas shrouding themselves in his
Fleece, and then he would give a jump into Paradise, and carry them with him.
Just so, your Adviser Sir, is to jump you into a Hero. You must abhor the
French Tongue, not have to do in the important affairs of the World, nor
frequent Courts, nor so much as see wicked London; but you must be a Hero, ay
that you must; you must live in Ignorance, and become like an useless Country
Vermin, and King Oberon, at a lucky chance, shall ipso facto Metamorphose you
into a Hero: A chance indeed, like that the Pro-Consul spoke of to St. Austin,
in the Discourse of Judicial Astrology, viz. the force of chance diffused about
in the nature of things, brings to pass as foretold, etc.

Sir, I must tell you it must be a chance, and a very lucky one too, that will
make you a Hero, without means or endeavors. A Privy Counselor, Lord
Lieutenant, a General, are not Hero's as such, but as they are qualified to be
such.

Advance we two or three steps further, and there we shall meet your Remarquer,
Sir, at the turn of a Corner, ready to scare you, as he scares Children in the
Country, and cries don't go to London, for Tom Poker will get you and put you
into his Pocket. You must write a Play. Sir, his design being to keep you in
ignorance, and fright you with Learning, he might rather have said, if you go
to London, you must plead Causes, Anatomize humane Bodies, pass Fiery Trials
with Prince Robert and Mr. Boil, in the Laboratories, etc. this had been a
noise able to scare a good chubbed Country Fellow; or like Tays the Moving
Clod, that scared the Tuscan Ploughmen.

But, Sir, notwithstanding this Country Chancellors Decretal Musts, I do assure
you (on my credit) you are no more obliged to write a Flay, than your Marksman
was to write his Letter; either of which may be accounted a bold undertaking,
the success being so hazardous.

And since we are speaking of writing Plays and Books, I must observe to you,
that about the time your Letter was published, there was a Comedy acted at
London: in which (to see how good Wits may jump) was all the wit of the Letter,
and a thousand times more.

There was a Country Hero among a company of poor, ignorant, brutish Boors
(that word is Teutonick) drinking, sotting, telling news, and particularly
concerning that great City called Ditto in the Gazette, and the miserable
estate of Poland: railing at London, charging all the Blunderbusses and
Grenades of his Office, in defiance of all that should laugh at an
Ignorant-Justice-Captain of 2000 l. per annum, and hoped to be
Deputy-Lieutenant: and, in short, one, who by the help of a fierce Dapple-grey
Mare, and an obsequious Setting Dog, judged himself a greater Hero than London
ever saw.

This Hero's name, Sir, was Hugh Clodpate Esquire of an Ancient Family, known in
all the Counties of England, the Plays name was Epsom Wells. I advise you, Sir,
to send up to London, for a Copy of it, for it is not yet printed; lest it
should spoil the sale of the Remarques, there is an ingenious Gentleman, by
name Mr. Shadwel, who may help you to it, and then you may compare the one with
the other. I dare say the Author of one was not of the other, for the Play is a
thing of great ingenuity: and there is another difference between the Play and
the Book; for what the Poet did in jest, this Epistler does in earnest; that is
to give a Reprimand to some absurdities of the Town, next, to render Townhaters
ridiculous.

Sir, If you come to Town, and the worst comes to the worst, if you cannot write
a Play, you may write a silly Book, and swagger against them who can write
Plays, and say, that this Fantastical necessity was imposed upon you, and you
were not obliged to bazard your abilities on such nicities of Fame and Humor:
and so winding your self up in a few wrathful sheets, they become Armor of
Proof against all London Foes, who will sufficiently feel the smart of your
fatal rap: as others (God wot) have done to their grief and sorrow. Witness (in
the next place) unhappy Inns of Court, unhappy, yea verily unhappy, in being
the objects of the ill will of this mighty Hero-maker.

Sir, As to these contemptible Bodies, he is pleased to cut them in three
Morsels, yet is able to devour them at one Bit.

The first are the Practisers of the Law, the Idaea of whose conversation (he
says) is very Pedantick, and unpollished, and in truth, not worthy of a
Gentleman; concealing Truth, tiring out the Votaries of Justice, forcing
Conscience to truckle under the love of money, and having nothing agreeable to
the Principle of nobleness. Pray, Sir, when you read this, did not you take
this man to be Non-Compos? to have spent his time in a College situate
between Bishopsgate and Moorfields, thinking no man, but one touched in his
Brain, could rave so formally, and render himself in such prodigious Untruths,
and profane scurrilities; he seems to borrow the humor from a Modern
Wrangler, who out of spite to the Royal Society, scolds at my Lord Bacon for
promoting of Practical Philosophy: and against all Common Lawyers, because
Oldenbarnevelt (a Civilian) was an Arminian in the Netherlands; so eager Wolves
bark at the Moon, so mad Dogs bite all but mad Men.

But, Sir, As for the Inns of Court, they have been and are at this day owned
by all Foreigners and Domestics to whom they are known, as the most renowned
Societies, as well for the Profession of the Law, as for the Law they profess,
that the World has. And as to the persons in highest Vogue, for their
excellency in that Science, (having by indefatigable industry subdued the
difficulties of their own Art, and by that made themselves Masters of the
greatest Reason and Judgment, which attends any other Body of Learning) can and
do entertain their Vacations with inquiries into other parts of Knowledge,
which with much easiness do readily fall under their comprehension. And being
so furnished, are also endued with a stock of Prudence, that capacitates them
for a deportment answerable to the Circumstances of Times, Places, and Persons;
whether it be in the more grave and reserved way, which their Profession, or
other Knowledge, or the Societies of strict men obliges them to: or in the
Paths that Men and Learning of lower Forms (called more generous and
delightsome) leads them to. And he must be a great stranger among us, who
cannot instance in great Sages of our Common Law, who have been eminent, even
in the retired Walks of other Learning, that have designed endeavors to the
perfecting of the Works of Nature; or rather improving Nature to the best
advantages of life, and the common benefit of mankind, as has been said of them
by some of sufficient prejudice against that Profession; and there are now
being persons of so general knowledge (not seasonable to mention) as no other
Society of single Learning can parallel.

Sure, Sir, This No-mans-friend, has had some ill luck at Law, he may have
dealt in some cracked Title, or engaged in some unwarrantable suit, that would
not hold Water; and because his Lawyers could not Buoy him up in his
undertakings, to it goes the Profession; or perhaps some less thing may
exasperate a waspish man, and make him buz. There was one Pawlet, who had vowed
never to come to London; and being Defendant to a suit in Chancery, had the
Court moved for a Commission to answer in the Country, alleging for Cause, his
Vow, of which affidavit was made. The Lord Chancellor Egerton said it was a
foolish Vow, and ordered an Attachment against him. But what ill hap has
touched our Author, as I know not, so I care not.

There is another sort of men (it seems) in the Inns of Court, with whom (I
perceive) he has had more in timate acquaintance, for he describes them
knowingly, and they are the vain, imperfect, and half-witted part. Sir, It has
been observed, that Venus had a Mole on her Cheek, Hellen a Scar on her Chin,
Aristippus a Wart, Lycurgus a Wen, and the Moon her Spots, and its probable
that Societies made up of thousands, may have among them some extravagants: and
what then? Then it follows, as he says, there is a third sort of men there of
great abilities and virtues; and to these he has nothing to say; but this I
must say, it was his unhappiness that his long experience, found them not out
to converse with; it is like they are part of the number of those mentioned in
his Preface, who are so retired.

Well, Sir, For a little Application. Is it so, that there are three sorts of
men in the Inns of Court, one too grave and morose, the other too light and
lewd, the third of Abilities and Virtues; then for Instruction, (according to
grave Adviser) go not to London, but stay in the Country, and learn of old
Mother Huggins, to lay Eggs under her Sow to hatch Collops and Eggs, which will
come to pass at the same time, when a mere Boorishlife makes any one a Hero

Come we now, Sir, to the last sort of vile People, that this Reprobate Town
suffers to reside within her Walls: and though he tells you, that he is sure
you will not spend your time with them, yet he is resolved Hit miss, or
Happego-luck, (according to the Country Teutonick) to have a blow at their
Jack: and these are a sort of inconsiderable Mushrooms, Grovelling in
Mechanics, and pinioning the minds of men with mean Arts. What a Pes^od does
this man mean? he still mistakes Terms and so understands not Arts. He took,
sure, Mechanic to be derived from the Town Mecha, which he met with in Beloved
History, and thence concluded that all Arts called echanick, were Infidel Arts,
and brought hither by Turks, and so had an assurance, that you would not keep
Company with such Artists. What else he should mean, is hard to conjecture; his
medly description putting us to a loss in discovering this dangerous Tribe,
this Sect of New Philosophers, for here is no New Philosophy in Town. Yet
(methinks) I should guess by his gaping what he means, may be the Epithet
Mechanic, being used (properly enough) to meanest Handicrafts, he thinks all
Arts and Artists mean to which it is applied: but there is his mistake and
ignorance, however some Coffee-house-Wags, and Sonnet-Mongers (who (he says)
have visited him in the Country) may have foolishly in their rode of idle Droll
thrown the notion into his Nodle; with some undue reflections.

For there are, Sir, in this Town Mechanic Philosophers in a Body compounded
of the Royal Blood, the Nobility in Church and State, the Prime of all the
Learned men in England, and some Foreigners; which Body has for its Head no
less than that which wears an imperial Crown. These are, Sir, the new Mecanick
Philosophers, whom your Remarker celebrates with the encomiums of grovelling in
Mechanics, and pinioning men's minds with mean Arts.

Now, Sir, out of respect to you, I Will tell you what Mechanic signifies; it
comes from the Greek word which signifies Artifice or Invention; and Mechanical
Arts are now taken to be such Arts in which the labor and use of the hand is
required and are called such in contradiction to Arts barely Speculative, and
Notional, and under that appellation, are contained, edicine, Military
Discipline, Agriculture, Clothing, Navigation, Architecture, and many others,
together (if you please) Hunting; in which last there is more Philosophy then
all your Country and Adviser too, understand.

These mean Arts, Sir, poor despicable London Philosophers are glad to busy
themselves withal, while Hugh Clodpate and his fellows (in the Country) can (as
he says in the Play) content themselves with good Ale, Beef, Mutton, which are
their own Manufactures, and with sleeping quietly, dreaming gloriously, and
sporting on Natures beautiful Foot-cloaths, become Hero's of the Country stamp,
and (by the help of a Remarker) rival the new Philosophers, who have stored the
World with such a Body of Natural practical Philosophy, and made it so
subservient to the Public Good, that neither the Imperious Stagarite, (as he
calls him) nor Theophrastus among the Ancients, nor Paracelsus, and the rest of
the Chemists of former Times, are very considerable, as was said to be the
hopes of the Lord Bacon, had he lived, and is now the effects of the generous
and noble Enterprises of those admirable persons known by the illustrious
Appellation of the Royal Society. And now again judge you, Sir, how sure this
Confident may be that you will not keep company with these persons, there being
scarce one single person among them, whose company is not acceptable to the
greatest Hero's.

On he goes, Sir, and meeting with the Merchant at half turn, gives him a
fillip on the finger, and tells him he is one whose business is Profit and
Interest, without any design upon the improvement of Arms, Letters, or
Conversation, nor worthy your Company, Sir, and so farewell him. In good time,
the man seems to come to his Wits, and is now for Arms, Letters, and
Conversation, which the Merchant, (by which, I suppose, he means all Traders)
he says, is not for. Even as much (say I) as the mere Country Sir Simon, unless
the Buff coat, Leading-Staff, the A, B, C, and Tub of Ale be Arms, Letters, and
Conversation. And, Sir, as slight as he makes of Merchandise, all Ages have
shown men of Commerce as like Hero's as ever he saw, who have been Governors of
Towns of War, and Counselors of State: and though there is reported an Age
(long since) to have been, in which it was accounted disparagement to marry
with a Merchants Daughter; if that were true, it is now otherwise, and Country
Hero's find by Experience, that if Tradesmens daughters become not Mistresses,
the Tradesmen themselves become Masters of many great Manors in spite of
Country Hero-ship.

And as for the Citizens of London themselves in general, what by reason of the
aforesaid occasions of Giving, and Lending moneys, and Daughters and
Intermarriages: the converse and acquaintance thereby gained with persons of
highest Rank, together with the help of inherent qualities derived from their
Parents, being mostly the Sons of Gentlemen, and the general improvement of the
Knowledge and Manners of this Town. They are (at this day) become men of such
outward Parade, and inward accomplishments, that the better sort of them are
received by the best Gentry, and an ordinary London Mechanic outdoes Justice
Clodpate and his 2000 l. per annum.

Well, farewell Merchant, on goes Tarlton, and having danced two or three Jiggs
with his Jews-trump and Tongs to make you merry; he falls himself into O
exclamantis. Oh, sweet Sir, what will your Mother say, if you miscarry? She has
set you in the Cluster of Hero's, but she must now see you growing dim and
sullied in the Circle of so bright a Race. What, Must again! Pray, Sir, for my
satisfaction, if not for your own, when you see this man of Art next, ask him,
supposing such lewd People to be in London, (as it is to be feared there are
too many there, and in the Country too) why must you be a Reprobate? what
damned Fate hangs over your head, that (of all men living) you must not come to
London? and if you do, you that are set by your Mother in the cluster of
Hero's, will by the Lawyers, New Philosophers, and Poets, be set in the cluster
of Hell Hounds? ay, and you will dote so much on the Town, as you will be a
stranger in your Country; ay, and (like Justice) you must be a stranger in your
Country. How, is Justice a stranger in your Country? I am sorry to hear of so
barbarous a Country; and believe it, I think it high time for you to remove,
you are like to have precious Conversation, where is no Justice, and brave
Country Hero's too, and good Justicers: I fear your Man of Wrangle has railed
the Lawyers out of your Country, and Justice with them; the Statute banishing
the two Spencers, Father and Son, has this Article against them, that they made
Justices who were not conversant in the Laws of the Land; they having in stead
thereof, put ignorant men into those Offices, whom they could easily impose
upon, and warp to unjust attempts. Sir, if this be the Case of your Country,
and the Cause that Justice is a stranger there, I think you must go to London,
either to become a Lawyer, to converse and acquaint with those morose men of
Justice, or to procure one or more to go inhabit your Country, that Justice may
be no longer a Stranger there; else (methinks) you hazard your self among a
Herd of Tories. This is (pardon me Sir) if the Remarker says true; and who
knows, but he sometimes do so? I verily believe him, when he says, Sir, We that
have hither to been honored with your Frindship, shall not know after what
manner to receive you, when you return from the Town; we know you will
sufficiently despise not only our capacities, but our courage, whilst we can
neither talk nor act at your admirable rate: nor, I believe, will you ever be
able to inspire us with your gallantry of mind.

Sir, Whether this man be skilled in Figures as well as Letters, and so how he
intended these words, I know not, for men to whom Justice is a stranger, may
say one thing and mean another. But (in plain English) after you have with
sobriety and industry imbibed the harmless and virtuous improvements of the
Town, and made your self candidate for a true Hero-ship, the Ignorantees and
Clodpates of the Country will not know how to receive you at your return, and
perhaps, you may look with a despising Brow, or the capacities and courage of
despicable Wretches, who live strangers to Justice, and cannot talk nor act at
your admirable rate. And (which I believe will trouble you) you will not be
able to inspire them with your gallantry of mind, they being so addicted to a
sleeping, dreaming life, destitute of the improvements you will be then Master
of.

And since, Sir, this Country Philosopher has concluded so luckily for Truth;
some few lines of his own, having answered all his Book; since (after some few
Traverses on the Stage with three or four Papers of the Powder of Experience in
his hand) he has bequeathed them to you as the last Legacy of a dying
Remarker, and so taken his leave of you. I shall only say to him, that as to
some of his Letter; had it been well appointed to proper Objects, it is not
without its weight, and I wish it might obtain good ends; but, as to what is
pointed toward you, with the many unaccountable musts, I take it wholly
insignificant and idle, and shall tell him one story more, and take leave of
him.

A French Mill-Wright, who was excellent, in his own conceit, because he could
make a Mill well, thought he could make an Engine of Wheels that should grind
all sorts of Corn, and with Edge-tools to turn Spits, and give the hour of the
Day as a Clock: but having spent his brains and his pains about it, he was (at
last) sain to content himself with a Nut-cracker of it, and glad he escaped so
too.

Now, Sir, as to you, after a hearty desire tendered, to see a man of your
growing hopefulness, Qualifications, and Circumstances, to be (by the help of
due advantages and proper methods) improved into an undoubted true English
Hero; and to see you at London for that end, and with that resolution; and with
assurance of unfeigned purposes to serve you in that design, I take leave, and
remain,

Sir, Your most affectionate humble Servant.

FINIS.

