REMARKS Upon the most Eminent of our Antimonarchical Authors AND THEIR
WRITINGS.

VIZ.

1. The brief History of Succession.

2. Plato Redevivus.

3. Mr. Hunt's Postscript.

4. Mr. Johnson's Julian.

5. Mr. Sidney's Papers.

6. Upon the Consequences of them, Conspiracies and Rebellions.

Published long since; and what may serve for Answer to Mr. Sidney's late
publication of Government, etc.

Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1699.

The Contents.
INtroductory Remarks. Page 1 CHAP. I. Historical Remarks on the brief History
of Succession. 20 CHAP. II. Remarks upon their Plato Redevivus. 145 CHAP. III.
Remarks upon Mr. Hunt's Postscript. 350 CHAP. IV. Remarks upon Mr. Johnson's
Julian. 445 CHAP. V. Remarks upon Mr. Sidney's Papers. 449 CHAP. VI. Remarks
upon their Plots and Conspiracles. 672
Introductory Remarks.
FEW Persons amongst the mighty numbers that have writ, shall condemn more the
Vanity of Writing; though I hope as few have used it less in Vain: The first
Design of my putting Pen to Paper, was only to correct the Licentiousness of
Paper and Pen, and to supply with a timely animadversion, the Expiration of a
temporary Act; 'twas Time sure, 'twas high Time for every Loyal Heart to use
his Ink, when they had almost scribled us all into Blood; and to weeld his Pen
in the defense of the Government, when the Knife was at our Throats, and their
Swords drawn: I know the weakness of the dint of Argument against the power of
Steel: And the Impertinence of persuasion where the Law can Compel; but since
the Pen has the power of provoking a Rebellion, and that experienced, it is as
warrantable an experiment to turn its Point; and make the same Wand to lay the
Devil that it raises; and since the Laws were almost silenced only with their
threatening Arms: 'Twas time to animate the dead Letter: To make it know its
force and exert its power; and to strengthen a Government: That seemed but too
weak for its self, and unhappily distrusted its own security; And that to this
purpose the power of the Pen has not been ineffectual, will appear from these
subsequent Observations; Which the comfortable success will better justify,
than their prosperous Rebellion could have been made again Just; and which I Will
assure you now it is some Comfort to observe: Especially to those that were so
bold as to be concerned, that dared to stem the torrent of Schism and Sedition,
when 'twas but a dangerous Duty; and embarked with the Government, in a storm;
when the Waves rose and raged horribly, and the gathering of the People, was
like the noise of many Waters.

It is observable that upon the first dissolution of the Westminster
Parliament, that which might be as well called the healing one; whose sober
debates had superseded the sullen unadvisedness of the subsequent: closed the
wounds of an Intestine War, cemented the Government of Church and State;
Compact, and firm; for about twenty years; beyond what the force of Rebellion
could devide; or Plot and Treachery undermine; That Parliament which they
Libelled, Published for Pensionary; only because it would not take pay of the
People, where perhaps, they would have been truly paid. That Parliament which
with regret they call the long: And all honest Hearts resent as too short;
whose unhappy dissolution rivall'd almost the fatality of the late perpetual
sitting; whose Prudent Progress gave some probability of sounding a Plot: which
others inconsiderate rashness has left without a bottom; if not beyond belief
or Foundation, by proceedings unwarantable and bold. It Is observable, I say,
that then the Serpent of Sedition, that like the Primitive one was cursed in the
Restoration, forced to creep on its Belly, and crawle upon the Dust, began
first to raise its Venomed head; and with audacious Libels, spit its Poison in
the very face of Majesty: We know we had Plots before, and that Oats his too;
not as a Discoverer, but as prime Rebel, and Conspirator; not as an informer of
Popish ones but a Ringleader of a Republican: we know we had then too our
Tongues that were hanged for Treason; as well as those that could since get
Traitors Hanged: yet still midst all those unsuccessful attempts to Rebel,
Sedition never grew fo much and succeeded, that blessed Interval of near twenty
years quiet, tho often endeavored to be interrupted, never afforded so much
Treason from the Press, as for the last five years has been Published in their
Prints; Libels looked as if they had been Licensed for a Lustrum; and as if the
temporary Printing Act had expired seasonably, 'twas never resolved amongst all
their Orders to be revived; 'twas opposed even when moved, unanimously, that
Treason too might be Published with a Nemine contradicente; 'twas presumed, I
suppose, the better Penmen were their own; and I grant them the more
pestilent; that could spread their Contagion as fast as the Plague, and to the
Monarchy as mortal; for almost five years the Distemper was Epidemick; and the
State Empericks had poisoned the body Politic almost beyond the Antidote of
true Medicine and Art, it Sympathis'd with Pestilence in the Natural, almost
incurable; reigned most populously in Towns and Cities; and turned every
Corporation into a politic Pesthouse: Appeals, vox Patriae, Liberties of
England; Fundamental Rights, were exposed in Capital Letters upon every Stall;
and that dedicated to Representatives; and some Penned by them too; for the
Information of the People; or in a less prepostorous Phrase for their
Confusion; Sedition seemed to be countenanced with suffrages, and seconded, as
they thought, with the supreme power of the Nation. They expected Treason
should have been enacted for Law; and Laws repealed that had declared High
Treason. It Is almost preposterous and incredible, though unhappily too true, that
more Sedition was fomented from the discovery of this Popish Plot, than all the
Jesuits in Hell could have raised, while yet undiscovered, we forged out one
another ruin from the very deliverance; and to fall with harder fate the less
to be lamented; by our selves, and just escapt the storm we strove to perish
more miserably in the Port. Such was the state of affairs, when some of our
Loyal Hearts first ventured to stem the Tide, the fierce influx of an Impetuous
Rebellion; that like a true torrent came rolling on with noise and clamor; and
threatened ruin from afar: The first that opposed the Great Goliahs of their
Cause, that defied too even the Armies of the living God; and the strength of
his Anointed; was he who from his Youth had served the Crown, with his Pen as
well as his Sword; and before him too did their Dagon fall; one whom they had
designed formerly for a Victim, when they sacrificed, their Prince; whom
Providence reserved for their Scourge, and for which since some of them have
publicly cursed its dispensation, Libelled him in their Emblematical
Representations, (in which, I consess, they neither spared their King) breaking
his Halter like a Dog, and running for his Life and Neck; and that by the very
same hands of Villains that had forfeited their own to the Government, and were
afterward faster noosed.

How Zealous were our Popular Patriots against the least animadversion that was
made on the most audacious Libel, and even Judges themselves arraigned, for
dering to execute those Laws, the meanest villain, could daily dare to violate:
How curious to enquire for the least accusation against the worthy Person above
described, and only because he dared to do his duty; when (...) dangerous to do
so: It was a pretty sort of expedient, tho the most absurd Politics, for the
countenancing of the Popish-Plot, to bring every one concerned in it, that
would not swallow the whole Mass of it raw, crude and undigested; and that
before they had cooked it up with Nartative too; while their Protestant
rashness at the same time precipitated them but into a Romish Doctrine, of
Resignation to their Senate instead of a Church, and believing their house of
Commons with a Faith implicit; yet this was all done too, and this Gentleman
whose Writings only declared him a little (...) in matters of belief; (when
even by the most (...) in all Ages, it has been allowed to doubt; and by the
Great Des Carts the wisest Philosopher as a step to the knowledge of the
Truth.) Him 'twas expedient to Metamorphose, with the power of an Oath; which
was then Omnipotent, from an avowd Protestant, into a professed Papist: I use
that poetical Expression, because they might as well have sworn him through all
the transformations of Ovid, into Bull, Bear; or Dragon, born a prosest Son of
the Church, conformed through all his Life, to all its Ceremonies; a Champion
for her with his Pen, and with it a published Enemy to Rome, even in his own
Works; having about him Eyes, Nose, Ears: And from Head to Foot all the true
shapes of a Protestant Humane Creature; but the Spell of Affidavit beyond that
of Circe, turned Him all into the Beast of Babylon; all his Hair vanished into a
shaven Crown; The Whore came riding on his very back, and the fleecy Cowl of
Priests came tumbling over his Shoulders; and the Common Prayer he held in his
Hand, ran all into red Letters, and the Mass Book: His being a Papist, and a
Priest, was as much credited as the Plot it self; and might have had the
Resolution of the House of Commons to the point of his Religion as well as the
truth of the Conspiracy; not a Member but was well satisfied of his Apostasy,
and could Menace him in Public with a Topham or a Tyburn. And he the first
Instance, that under a Government yet established, a Religion then Labored for
with Zeal, who for Writing in the defense of both, was fore't to fly for his
security and Preservation, tho as publicly cleared from the perjured
Accusation, before his King, before his Council, as good Judges at least as the
Credulous Commons; these careful Patriots being often abused by their
Countrymen, for whom they were so Zealous; Oaths, Assidavits, and that Cloud
of Witnesses, had almost obscured the light of Reason and Understanding.

Another Worthy Person, though unknown, that at the same time blessed our Land with
the Benefit of his Pen, while with the bounteous river he hid his head; whose
Ingenious Dialogues only Corrected their sawey Libels; with a smile and with a
pleasant reproof of their Falsehoods made them feel the smartness of his Truth:
Him they Libelled too for Popish, Mercenary, Pensioner to the Party: So Zealous
were they for the subverting of the Government, that they could damn all that
did but dare to assert it; Break the very Laws of society in their Censures;
and what they could not prove with their Affidavits condemn upon Presumption.

With what saucy; Petulant Animadversions did they treat the Dean of Paul's
Sermon of Separation; A piece penned with that Judgment and Moderation, that it
was only envyed for being so; commended and applauded by the Pen, even of one
of their most virulent Scriblers, that had engaged Himself for the vilifying of
the Church, in which he was Christened; and fighting against the Banner of his
Christ, for which he had vowed himself a Soldier; * And Vid. Hunts Postscript.
with the subtle Insinuation of righting of her Prelates, wronged and abused
her whole Hierachy; yet such an one could allow that peaceable and pious piece,
to be without exception; but what Reason could not resist, must be baffled by a
Baffoon, and a Pen employed to Burlesque the very Bible, rather than want an
answer to the Text; and Vid. Mischief of Imposition.
the sacred service of the Church, profaned with the tropes of Trinkets, and
the Metaphor of an Hobbyhorse; tho upon other Occasions she can be transformed
into the more terrible beast of the Revelations: The Author was Anonymous, and
so escaped the thanks of the House; but what ever were the scurrilous
Animadversions on the foresaid, and the like Ingenious, Loyal, and elaborate
pieces; it is observable they had so much Influence on some of our blindest
Zealots as to open their eyes, brought some of their Villainies to light, that
had been so long transacted in the dark, and drove the Faction to stand a
little at bay, that had ran the Nation almost out of her Wits; coold their
brutal Zeal down into Humane Sense, acquainted them with what was truly
Religious, and heartily Loyal, instead of a devout Phrensy and a mistaken
Loyalty.

All that I can arrogate to my self, is but what I shall always be proud of, of
having done my Duty, and that to my Soveraing, as well as his Subjects, in a
seasonable Animadversion on as damnable a piece of Treason, as ever was brooded
by the most perjured heads that ever; hatched a Rebellion: That specious pretext
of an Association, That Covenant to Rebel against the Life and Honor of their
Prince, with Scripture warranty; and in the fear of God; though the very Text
tells them, touch not mine Anointed; And next to fearing their God, follows
honoring their King. I cannot say I was Instrumental in the following
Abhorrences; but hope the God of Heaven, blessed my poor endeavors so far as to
encourage but an Abomination of the draught of Hell, which I hope too, I there
represented as black as the Devil that contrived it, or to give it its true
Color, almost in its own blackness; my foreboding thought showed me in it like
a Glass, all the Villainies and Treasons that have since succeeded, though not
prospered; The very Scheam and Embryo of this teeming Plot; The very Metaphor
of the Trojan horse that carried Fire and Sword in its Belly, brought within
the Walls of our House of Commons, as they themselves assure us; I am sure as
unhappily Vid. Proceedings at the Old-Bayly.
as that within those of Troy by almost pulling them down, and exposing the
whole Kingdom to the flame; and that too by the treachery of as false a Sinon
of our Age; as great a Renegado to Prince and People; and whom they too had
saved from being Justly sacrificed, only for their ruin, and destruction; And
that I have done in spite of those Censures, I have labored under of having
been Mercenary and set a Work Vid. Postscript to the History of the Association.
of having been more Zealous than Wise: As an Anonimous Scribbler has been
pleased to represent to the World; but I thank my Stars that have envolved me
with the fate of the Government, and when ever that cannot stand, I desire to
fall; but the puny pedantick Soul shall know, I can give him a prefatory
Animadversion for his Postscript Reflection. As to my being Mercenary, whoever
condemn me for that, are as Ignorant in their Censures, as unreasonable; for I
did for the Prevention even of that very Callumny decline the taking of a
single Penny; the least sort of gratuity, for any Copy, or single Letter; that
in the plain, Litteral Sense, I might be said to serve the Government for
naught; I thank my God that has allowed me that Competency, that I can write
with pure Affection, and not for Bread, with the sense of my Soul; not of my
Belly: Though it has appeared on Evidence, that the great Patron of their Cause
kept open entertainment for the pampering Sedition; and feeding the flames of
Rebellion with the very sops of his Table; discommending Vid. Settles
Recantation.
there the most virulent Satyrs, only because not bold enough in expressive
Treason; but too little favoring Rebellion. And as for the Presumption of my
being set a work, of which they have accused me too in their Prints, that is
more false than it is truly malicious; the villains thought none bold enough of
himself to defend the Government, when they could with so much Impudence invade
it, I was so far from being instigated by Persuasion, that even my own
acquaintance, my most familiar Friends, were unconsulted; and my Person at this
very time unknown to any single Person of that Court Party they would have me
to serve, I urgd this to let them know the falseness of their sordid
Suggestions, and the real truths of their most malicious falsehoods, and
moreover and above, all, the goodness and equity of that Cause, I shall ever
defend, and that more willingly with all my dearest blood, than one drop of
Ink; that Persons resusing profit or, emolument, without application for
interest or preferment, discouraged, disgusted, and hardly dealt with, even by
some of those seats of Literature, where they say the Doctrine is nothing but
absolute Dominion; and the best of teaching Tyrany, tho indeed, nothing but the
solid Seminaries of true learning and Loyalty.

But to satisfy such; themselves, and their Treasons, set me a work, both black
anough to have exasperated the dullest Soul; And even a Dumb Son would break
into Speech, to see the Father of his Country ready to be slain.

But besides one whose age will scarce permit him to be prejudiced with much
reading, or Authority, having had but little time to Consult much; so that
whatever my sentiments are, they must proceed from the agreeableness of so good
a Government, to pure, natural; and unprejudiced; Reason; to the Principles and
Instinct of uncorrupted Nature it self, and the very well Being of an Humane
and Civil Society.

But for this Gentleman, or rather that spattering Scavenger, who for
Expressions of an unfeighned and hearty Loyalty, only for a specimen of his
profession, would return to his throwing of Dirt; and stamped my Character, as
they did then themselves and their Treasons in Print, I shall scarce retort his
calumnies for fear of wearing the badg of his Office in a filthy style and foul
Fingers; it is enough to repeat them; and his own strokes will return best in
the rebound.

I were more Zealous than Wise to turmoyl in a thing never owned by any Person,
and calls it a hard shift to beg a Question.

As for my Zeal I will even acknowledge to Him, for my Wisdom shall submit to
better Judges; but if the Sot had not been so silly, as to be beyond the sense
of Impudence; his Countenance of hardened Brass, could never have called that
begged which was sworn upon the Bible, and openly produced; and that not by
Beggars, raked out of their own Dunghils, their dirty Bogs of Irish Affidavit,
fitter to be carried out with our night Weddings, than woed as they were to
come over for the drudgery, for sending a poor Priest, and a Plunket to our
Tyburn; But when at last they were like to stick in their own Mudd, then their
own Mercenaries, with an Ingenious Malice were fob'd off for our Hirelings, tho
they knew they were shipped over by their Patron, the Noble Peer, wretches that
were tied up afterward to their own Gallows in Ireland; I am not tender of the
poor Priests Person, tho his case was hard; the Kindness I have for my
Protestant Religion may make me less compassionate for Men of different
persuasions; but the profession of any Law, will make a man concerned for
Common equity, that a criminal cleared by his own Natives, the best Judges of
Circumstantial Truths, and Humane Probability, should be found guilty by
Foreigners, exposed to the delusions of a Probable Lie: But if the wretch has
the Considence, to survive his Conviction; can he call it now Begged, when the
Gentleman at whose door 'twas laid, there powerful Patriot, their deifyed
darling, has appeared since the very Devil of Rebellion, double dyed in
Treasons, designed Murders of the Royal Line, and intended Massacre of the best
of People; and that beyond the Contradiction of Impudence it self; Having
transcribed all that Rebellious Scheam into the graphical Plan of his
Conspiracy; raised upon its Foundations, an Insurrection as sure as Plot and
Treachery could contrive; the train laid, the match ready, and only because his
Fauxes were not so forward to give Fire, burns with indignation at the dullness
of his own miscreants, that unlike the true Machival Assassin, did not dare to
dispatch quickly, but tamely sufferd villainies to miscarry for want of Courage,
and his being failed, Conscious of his undiscovered guilt, and bigg with acted
Treason, seeks for safety where 'twas only left, in flight, flies to a
foreign, what he designed to set up at home, A Rebellious Republic; seals his
hatred to the Government there with his latest breath, and his last Will; and
leaves for a Legacy the success of his Conspiracy; that is Blood, and Slavery,
to his kind Countrymen for creating him a Patriot.

Vid. Truly the Gentleman is very Postscript.
sharp, and his sharpness had been Commendable, had any been found guilty, of
framing or abetting the Paper.

I thank him kindly for his Bit and Knock, which had their Villainies succeeded
the one would scarce have been a Morsel of Bread, the other a good thump with a
Stone, or their sanctified Flayle; but there was none found guilty of framing
it; nor indeed like to be, when the Jury themselves were associated against the
Government, and transcribed the very Crime of their Criminal into practice;
That Jury who by an early Anticipation of his Guilt, might perhaps have saved
the blood of some, their own Darlings, before it had been so deeply tainted
with the Venom of that old Serpent; whom now his fallen Angels Cursed too for
Concomitancy: and in their dying words, as the Author of their Ruin, That Jury
that might have prevented the danger of the Kings Life, only by exposing that
of a Traitors, and of whose Royal Blood they must have been guilty by
Consequence, had the villainy not been blasted by Providence, and are now only
Innocent by a miracle, and without Repentance still guilty. And I have that
Charity to believe that the subsequent discoveries, have given some of them a
sight and sense too, of their error; that they were only blinded with an
Ignoramus, because in the Dark; and that they are satisfied the God of Heaven
has brought now the Contrivance of Hell to Light: And yet for a little
Animadversion on these, amongst whom some I hope are ready to condemn
themselves, the Reflecter represents me as furious, ignorant, uncharitable; but
with what face can he urge that none abetted the Paper, unless with such an one
as his own Conscience must fly in, who himself abetts it as far (as the popular
Pedant is pleased to call it) the Peccant part, that is, the cunning Knave
would adhere to Treason, as far he could without Hanging; But was not the Paper
abetted at the very Bar, and that by Bernadiston; that shamm'd off that Treason
on the Parliament, as he would have done since the Plot it self on the
Abhorrers: And for which we have Reason to thank him, and not his House of
Commons, It could not have been believed that such a thing could have been
offerea in such an Houorable Assembly, had it not been kindly insinuated by
their Civil Interrogatories; but then the Gentleman would have us believe for
the sake of his Innocent Jury. They never heard of or saw the thing, till
Printed by the Loyal Stationers with the Covenant, Jigg by Joul, (as his clumsy
Phrases have it) but did ever a more malicious Vid. Proceedings at the
Old-Bayly. p. 14, 15.
Ass forge such falsehood in the face of the Sun, against Evidence as clear as
the Lamp of Heaven it self: When the same to a syllable was all read to them in
open Court, the same that himself insists to be Printed in Collums with the
Covenant?

I have but one thing more to observe upon him; (if any thing he has said can
be worth Observation) not so much in my own defense, as of that which I shall
ever be ready to defend with my last Breath, and my latest Blood; The Church
whose Ministerial, and sacred Officers, I am sorry should suffer through the
Ignorance of such a Sot, and for the sake of one so little related to their
Function, and so much their Friend, whom the Wretch Libels thus: Why he should
Hyperbolize in such an hot headed Style, etc. no Reason can be given, unless it
were some young Crape-Gown Levite, that had a mind to be dabling in Gall, and
Ink; of those there are two, for among that sort of People there are many for
want of Education, very malapart to others, and for want of what in them should
be most Conspicuous, good Example, and out of a Cruel and Bonner-like
Disposition, most Remarkably, uncharitable: And then in the next Paragraph,
calls it Pulpit-Rhetorick, and Crape-Gown Ecstasy.

The Warmness of the Style, which he the more furious Fool is pleased to call
hot, certainly was warrantable. When their Zeal was burning, the Fire kindled;
and they had already put the Nation in a Flame: When they were ready to turn
our flourishing Sion again into a perfect Babylon, a Land of Confusion and
Captivity; When in the very Literal Words they cried down with her even to the
Ground; Would they have us verify the Desolation of it too, by hanging our
Harps upon the Willows, having only recourse to sadness for our assistance, and
only quench their aspiring Flames in our humble Tears? They cannot have recourse
to Moderation, and prayer; to avert those Foolish Fears of an easy Government;
but Burlesque the very Bible, traduce the Doctrines of all Primitive
Christianity, for to warrant an immoderate Rebellion; and can such unreasonable
Souls tax us for want of Moderation in the Defense of an Established Government,
that most immoderately blaspheme God and their King for the undermining it?

The fixing of his pitiful and pedantick Terms on the Venerable Gown explains
sufficiently the Veneration he has for the Church, the dullness of his Sense and
Style betrays his very dissenting from it, and his Ignorance the best Evidence
of his Nonconformity; it is the best Argument of his absurdity to talk of their
want of being well Educated, who have such Seminaries, so well endowed, for a
learned and liberal Education.

Though I confess, they want your Lobbs, Ferguson and Casteers for their Tutors,
and are not trained up into Treason from their youth, and pampered into Faction
with their Food.

But for their Disposition to Cruelty, so far from Truth, that it is only an
elaborate task he takes to give himself the Lie. With what Mildness and
Moderation have some of our Divines of late controverted the debates, enough to
have melted He Tigers, while their own Party had no more Commiseration than
those Milk; Saw like so many sharp sighted Linces, the Depredations of the
Wolf, the worrying of the Sheep; while still their attempts were on the true
Guardians of the Flock: His Bonner-like dispositions affirms now in plain
English our Church to be Popish, and is but the Counterpart of Oats his
Affidavit, that there is not a Protestant Bishop in the Kingdom. But if he will
have true Specimens of a devout Cruelty, and bloody Patterns of uncharitable
Divines, let him Consult the Dissenters sayings, and only the single Instance
of Baxter's inhumanity, to a mangled Carcass, when he helped to Murder the Major
for the Medal of his Majesty, and wiped his Mouth in Blood, to commit
Sacriledg: Vid. vernon in the Life of Dr. Heylin.
I have done, and that with a Fellow, as full of folly as Faction, and for the
prefixing to his Impertinence, the Parliament Speeches, he shall hardly receive
the thanks of the House; when in some of them, I shall show he has published
Principles of a Republic, open Sedition, and an employed Plot.

THE TRIUMPH OF OUR MONARCHY, etc.
IT IS not so long since the poor Nation, was tortured with an intestine War,
that she should forget her torment; when such too as reduced her to her last
Convulsions, and her latest gasp. When also the Symptoms of a Relapse has
gripped her ever since, and Sedition grumbled in her Bowels: Her Body Politic
so far sympathizing with the Natural, that it will find another such a fit
Mortal; it is but Charity to a languishing State, to give the truest Judgment of
her Distemper, to prevent its return: It has the Proverbial Authority of an
undoubted Aphorism, That the knowledge of a Disease beyond Hypocrates.
is the nearest step, if not equivalent to the Cure; and I know the Professors
of that Art, and its best Judges to rely most upon a true Crisis; and are only
successful in the Events of their happy Diagnosticks: I have parallelled one of
those Remedies, our State-Mountebanks would have used for the restoring of this
Politic Body with a Medecin with which our former Empericks had perfectly
poisoned her, and proved their gentle Dose of an Association as dangerous
altogether as their Covenant and death it self.

The design of this ensuing Treatise is to examine all those sophisticated
drugs of false Opinions; and how they have been continually rectifyed and
amended with right Reason and Truth; the Treasonable positions of Buchanan,
Napthali, Dolman and Milton, those Epidemick and most damnable Quacks of the
Kingdom; have been by many, and that by most elaborate pieces consuted beyond
answer and reply, unless from such as are as much beyond Conviction: The Latter
of which, in spite of all his smooth Tropology, the gaudy grinding of his
words, had his damnable Doctrines for Domestic Rebellion, as Ingenuously
refuted by a foreign Pen; and what ever Kindness his Country can have for the
Dust of her Native Milton, I am sure, it is more obliged to Vid. also History of
English and Scotch Presbytery by a French Divine.
the Ashes of an Alien; and tho some are so much for building him his Monument,
I shall still much more reverence the Memory of Salmasius.

It Is a little Prodigious that Persons not so much as allied to the Clime,
should have such Kindness for a Government, to which they are no way subjected:
while those that are born to obey it, and have pawned their souls for Alciatus
a foreign Civilian too, write against the Deposition of Edward the 2d. and
Richard the 2d.
their Obedience, should break the Laws of Nature, and Nations for its ruin and
subversion; certainly it can proceed from nothing but the agreeableness of the
one, to the solid Foundations of Eternal Reason; The other only from the Malice
and Venom of those Vipers, that for the production of every novel, and
unnatural Opinion, must force their way with Blood, and Wounds, and that too
through the very Bowels of their Damn.

But these forementioned Miscreants have been lately too as learnedly refuted
by the Judicious Pen of his Majesty's advocate in Scotland; those that will
chiefly fall under the Animadversion of mine, shall be such as within this five
years, too long a Lustrum for allowed Treason, have retrived those Doctrines
for Truth in so little time, and with Impunity, that will remain false to all
Eternity, and have been Condemned by all ages. I shall take them in their Order
as they have Printed, Published and Practiced Treason: They shall take their
turn with me as they ought, at Tyburn, when by Justice overtaken, where they
ought to have the aim of their Ambition in their end; where every ones more
forward Rebellion, should have given him his more timely preferment, and by his
vilany be entitled to precedence.

Though the Title insinuates, their Plots should be first treated on, and the
Rebels come first upon the Stage, that serves rather for the runnings of the
words than the Reason of the Work, and though the Style of the first Page may
seem to promise the rest shall be proposterous, I shall take Care the method
shall be more Natural, and (...) we shall begin with the Principles of our late
Republicans as the productions of the Plots of Rebels, the result of which has
been verifyed beyond the Reason of Philosophy, and the Effects of necessary
Agents do not more naturally follow the Cause; and will all along Demonstrate,
as clear as Euclid, how the one has been always baffled by Reason, the other
continually blasted by Providence.

The number of all our most Licentious, and Libellous Authors, who can pretend
to merit Animadversion, (for the rest are innumerable) whose Pestilent Pens do
most provoke it, whose Papers deserve the fate of the Noble Peers, and their
Persons at least the Pillory, I shall reduce to five, the Quinque-primi, as the
Romans reckoned them amongst their Senators, whose more virulent Essays shall
give these the preeminence too, amongst our Republicaus, who have been absolute
Monarchs of their Pens for the last Quinqennium, and exercised that Tyranny
over men's minds, beyond what they could fear even from the worst of Government
over their Bodies. These five chosen Gamesters at the Pen exercised themselves
like those in the Olympicks; each had his Portion in the Quinquatria, and his
prevaling part allotted him in their first Feast of Faction.

The first was their bold Author of the brief History of Succession; and the
first, I dare swear, that under a Government beyond dispute for 600 years
Hereditary, dared to controvert the Succession of its Heir; and truly 'twas a
prudent sort of Expedient in their Politics, to raze the Foundations of
Monarchy, before they would offer to build up a Republic: The prime
Introducers of the Bill of Exclusion, were bound in prudence to get Pens to
justify their Proceedings in Parliament; which otherwise might not have been so
well relisht by the People, by being barely Parliamentary, as well as it is
since evident, they set a work some of their Chaplains to eradicate the very
Notions of Passive Obedience, till Rebellion took so deep a root in some of the
Patrons, that it anticipated worse sufferings then what they feared, and from
the vain dread of dying Smithfield Martyrs, made them truly suffer for Plot,
for Treason, in Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

The second prize they played was for a Commonwealth; which was naturally the
next blow, when they had so' fairly struck at the Monarchy: and then rises up
the Ghost of old Plato, an Image or Appearance as much unlike the Divines, as
the Spectrum of old Hector was like himself when soiled with Dust and Dirt; the
living original was the sublimed Essence of exalted Love it self, and this copy
of this degenerate Ghost, the dull extract of deadly malice, the true Devil of
a Republic: the English of it was, they knew they had formerly usurpt upon our
Crown, and brought it to the Commonwealth of England. They had made it an
Ilium of Fire and Confusion, though to their dire thoughts a pleasant sort of an
Interregnum, they still take that Epoche of their Slavery for the date of their
Deliverance; and then it was no way preposterous for the retrieving of a sad
Platonic year, to raise up a Plato redivivus.

Their third Combatant of their Cause, and who in his own rank will fall under
my reflection; is a Creature of another Complexion, and that Hunt in his
Postscript, upon whom I shall observe all, what is pertinent to this purpose,
whose cunning Insinuations have all the palliated Knavery of the Ballad, of the
Cloak, and with the pretty defense of its Praelates, Libels the whole Church it
self, and this very piece as naturally succeeded the preceding; for when the
state was to be turned into a Protestant Republic, 'twas time to make the
Clergy, Papists; when the Common Prayer was to be abolisht, 'twas time to
vilify those that were ordained to read it; when the sign of the Cross, was
become as offenfive as a Crucifix, 'twas time to traduce those that waited on
the Altar; and to plead slily for a Directory, though penned in blood, when all
our Litany was run down into red-Letters, and a Massbook.

After all this, lest the Devil of delusion should have been unsuccessful
against the Doctrine of the Gospel, lest some might still honor their King for
the fear of God, and Christians be obliged by the blood of a Crucified Savior,
and the badg of their Profession the Cross; a devout Incendiary a Divine Rebel
Apostatizes from his Faith, only to give the better Character of an Apostate,
and fairly suffers himselfto renounce his Christianity; only to confute the
Doctrine of sufferance. This damnable position of Resistance, did most
naturally follow those Principles of Rebellion they had published before, when
they had proved that their Interest did most infallibly oblige them to Rebel,
and that they had certainly the Devil on their side; they knew they should soon
be secure of Peoples Purses, when they had mastered their Consciences, and made
a party of God and Religion. This made them back the Lawyers Arguments, with
that of the Divine; out comes this Johnson upon Hunt, or Hunt upon Julian,
sworn Associates for the perverting of Divinity and Law, both designed, without
doubt, for the best and highest Preferment in their new Government of Church
and State; the one must have been our Metropolitan, the other after so many
disappointments, Chief Justice; and truly two such Instruments of Hell would
have been only fit to preside in such a State that would have looked like the
damned, full of Confusion, full of Contention, full only of Johnson's primitive
Rebellion; the Devils, They only past for two pieces, tho in truth, but one new
Dialogue, between the Doctor and Student; both agreed in their Divinity and
Law, superviz'd each others Sedition, and corrected Treason for the Press; lest
their Quotations for Authentic, Religious, and Statutable Rebellion, should
fail them from the Bible, or the Year-books; The Gospel that once (...) the Law
by these Jews is made to Confirm it, and the New Testament to warrant that
Rebellion, which the Old had damned for worse then Witchcraft, both these
Incendiaries the very Counterparts of two late (...), that lived, loved, were
Sentenced, and hanged together. The Judge has condescended to second Cook the
Solicitor, and in his squinting Reflections almost demanded Judgment on his
King. The spiritual Advocate makes up an Hugh Peter's the second, and tells us
Vid. Trial Regicid. p. 30.
nearly in the old Villains own Words, not in the passive: ( We have not yet
resisted unto Blood.) But if this Gentleman would be tried by the Word of God,
as his Predecessor, in his Trial desired to be, he would find the Bible the
best Confutation of his Book.

The fifth and last of these prime Senators in our designed Republic was the
mighty Sidney, whose seditious Pen was the last too that would have acted its
Tragic part on this Bloody Stage, which lay ready behind the Curtains, waiting
only for the success of the Plot; but they happened to be drawn, and he forced
to enter before his time, by its being blasted and unsuccessful; his final
Determinations had prepared to Crown all with the described happiness of a
Republic; and the experienced Holiness of a Commonwealth for fear lest after
the Butchering of the best of Kings, they should improvidently set up, but for
a resemblance of (...) Sovereignty, tho in the spurious issue of a (...)
Monarchy, and the arbitrary Management of an Illigitimate Prince. He would have
had no shadow of a Monarch to succeed our Matchless Charles, not as the
Athenians suffered that: Government to (...) with their Codrus, because his
goodness was unimitable: He had prepared the draught of Hell, and true Roman
hatred for its (...), and made a Tarquin, a Tyrant, and a mere Monster, of a
pure Miracle of Mercy: The whole Scheam of his Rebellious Principles, which he
still denied with his last Breath, and still owned with the same, with all the
Impudence of Jesuits, and their Equivocations too; he would not own it
absolutely, lest he should acknowledge the Justice of the Nation; he would not
deny it positively, because the Nation should know he could answer Filmer: The
whole we cannot animadvert on, because thought perhaps too dangerous to be
published; but what was taken at the Bar, and delivered on the Scaffold, was too
much the Truth of a Republican, too much Treason to be divulged, and what can
never be too much discountenanced, and refuted. And here you have the chain of
a parcel of rebellious Libellers linkt in an orderly Combination, for the
shackling of us into Slavery, and the binding our Kings and Nobles again, with
Fetters and Iron: I shall begin with the first factious Fellow in the Front,
and that is the Historian.

CHAP. I. Historical Remarks, on the brief History of Succession.
I Don't Design here a particular answer to each Paragraph of his Historical
Discourse; which probably has been as much falsify'd, as any thing the contrary
of which could be verified on Record, and perhaps cramb'd with as many lies as
ever could be Corrected with truth; it would be The Worthy Dr. Bradys.
a presumption and impertinence to pretend to answer that which has been
already done by some unanswerable Pens, the Knowledge of whose Persons, and
Worth would deter me from such an And the Learned Author of the Great Point of
Succession.
undertaking, as well as the satisfaction of their Papers supersedes it; mine
shall be but a few sober remarks, subsequent to their solid Confutation.

And truly in the first place all Historians agree that our English History was
uncertain before the coming of the Romans, and without doubt we had reason to
want the Tradition of it; when needs we must, when we had nothing of Learning
or Knowledge to deliver it down; unless we would imagine the silly simple Souls
could have left ustheir own Skins for a Chronicle; and transmitted the painted
Constitution of their Government in the Colors and Hieroglyphics of their
Bodies. But since that Author owns, and that from the good Authority he quotes,
that the Nature of it was uncertain; but that they Strabo, Tacitus, Caes. Com.
were subject to many Princes and States, which last Expression I fancy was his
own, to make it savor more of a Republic: which I am confident they were then
as Ignorant of as we, truly now, of Tyranny and Oppression, which I gather
partly from the Constitutions of all Nations at this time truly Barbarous:
Since both the East and West of the uncivilized World confirms the warrantable
Hypothesis, the most probable Conjecture, which is all at this present governed
by its (...) Monarchs, and puny Princes, though some greater Empires too than any
of ours in Europe, no small Argument for the Divine Right of Monarchy, by its
being so generally embraced only by the light of Nature, whose Creation was,
whose Subsistence is the sole Care of Divinity it self. And besides Dr. Heylin
tells us, that at the entrance of the Romans the Isle was divided into several
Nations, governed by its several Kings, and particular Princes.

The Druids, as may be gathered out of Caesar's Commentaries, had in those
Ignorant days all the Learning, and the Law; But too little alas to let us
know whether their Princes were absolute So also Caesar, Bell. Gall. Lib. 6.
Monarchs or limited, Hereditary or Elective; though it is to be suspected they
were both unconfined in their power as well as succeeded by their blood, those
poor Embryo's of Knowledge, the very primitive Priests of Barbarous Heathens;
that in their highest felicity were no happier than the first asserters of the
Gospel, under Misery and Persecution; their reverend Hermitages, but the Woods,
the Dens, and Caves of the Earth, were far sure from disputing the right of
Sovereignty, when only capacitated to obey; far from transmitting to us the
frame of their Monarchy, unless they had known the Egyptian learning of writing
on the Barks of Trees, and made their Libraries of the Groves in which they
dwelt: The Princes and Monarchs of their Times were wont to frequent those
pious places for Worship and Adoration; and had a Veneration too without doubt,
for those reverend Bards that sacrificed; but were far I believe from
subjecting their Regal Authority to that Divinely Pagan, though then the sacred
Jurisdiction; though it is reported that upon Caesar's invading them, the very
power of Life, and Death, and the Punishment for all manner of offenses; was in
their sacred Breast, and such as would not stand to their award, were forbidden
their Sacrifices: which Interdiction then was the same, I believe, in effect,
with the modern power of our Church to Excommunicate; but besides another
reason, and the best too, why we have nothing delivered from those sacred
Oracles of Religion and Law; why the History of those times is still uncertain,
and was never transmitted, is because they were expressly forbidden to transfer
any thing to Posterity, or to commit it to Books and Letters, tho somewhat of
that sort of Communicating, must be supposed by that Inhibition to have been
Imparted to them from the Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, those Eastern Climes
through which Learning and Letters had their first Progress.

But whether their Ignorance, or such a prohibition were the Causes why nothing
descends to us of the Government of our old Britains, it is granted by all, and
by this Author himself, that it was Monarchical, that Kings Reigned here ab
origin, if not Jure divino; Though I look on their Antiquity no small Argument
of their Divine Right, and for the probability of their Haereditary Succession,
which I insinuated above, can, I confess, since we are so much in the dark, be
only guessed by the light of Reason, and that I shall make to warrant the
Conclusion, from the present Practice and Constitution of all barbarous
Nations, where the next of blood still mounts the Throne, unless interrupted by
Rebellion, and that is but the best Argument of our Author for the Power of his
Parliaments; and if only for this certain Reason, we have more Authority to
conclude it was then Haereditary, then he only from the uncertainty of the
Story, has to conclude it otherwise.

In the next place, I see no reason why his Sentiments should determine other
Peoples thoughts, and why we should not think that the following Heptarchy of
the Saxons, (tho they had their seven Kings) yet still might agree in one rule
of Succession, nay tho their Laws were so different too as he would insinuate,
which is not absolutely necessary to suspect neither; for they being all one
Nation, and then but just called from their home by our British King Vortiger
for his assistance: may probably be supposed to have retained for the Main the
general Rules and Laws of their own Country; tho when divided into those seven
Kingdoms they might also make a sort of private Bylaws according to the
different Emergences of particular affairs that occurred in their several
Governments. Can he prove that the Succession of the Saxons in their own
Country was not Hereditary, when they inhabited in their small Dukedom of
Holstein; and that consequently they retained the same sort of Election, in
their new acquired Government here, that they left in their own at home? this
he does not undertake to suggest, because not able to prove, there having been
a probable Monarchy all along Hereditary, if Paternal Right was wont to descend
so: for that is proved by most learned Pens, and these Saxons are believed to
have been the relict of the race of Cimbrians, that inhabited that Chersonese,
so called from its Inhabitants, of whom Gomer the Son of Japhet was the
Original Father or Prince.

But what ever was their Government before, he allows them to have set up seven
Monarchies here: only cannot think they agreed in one Rule of Succession,
because governed by different Laws, which tho granted, is so ridiculous an
Infinuation, that greater Differences, atpresent, between greater Kingdoms and
Nations, far more remote in Place, far more different in Religion, contradicts
the Suggestion; who for the most part, now over the whole World, agree in an
Hereditary Succession to the Crown; and the Argument would have been as strong,
and as apparently foolish (if he designed it for a Specimen of his folly,) that
since France, and Spain, Sweeden and Denmark, are governed by different Laws,
we cannot imagine them to have one sort of Succession: Which very Rebound of his
own Pen wounds his Cause, more than any direct stroke of his Adversaries, for
since we see those more different, more distant Nations agree in one Rule, it is
sure a Logical Inference a Majori, that those that were less different might.

And for the Changes and Consusions of those Times, which he urges as an
Argument of their uncertain Succession: that is in effect, his very Alpha and
Omega; and his praefatory Suggestion only proved through his whole History,
that in times of Confusions and Rebellions, Succession is uncertain; and so is
all Property, and Common Right, all meum, and tuum; all that the Law of God or
Man can make his own.

But as obscure as he makes our Succession before the Romans came, it is not so
dark and unintelligible, but that we may gather light enough from it to have
been Hereditary. We will not rely on the How in his Historical reface to Stow's
Annals, contends mightily for such a story citing all our ancient Authors, for
its Authority, and Cambden amongst the Modern.
Fable of Brute, and the Catalogue of near 68 Kings, that are said to have
Reigned Successively here before the coming of the Romans, yet allowing it an
entire Fable, we may draw from it this Moral, at least, that a Fabulous
Tradition sometimes has somewhat of reality for its ground, as the patching up
a Centaure, a Chymera with a thought, results from several Objects that are
simply real abstracting from the compounded Fiction: And tho we might not have
68 Kings successive before the Roman Conquest, yet that there were several
appears, and he owns; and I conclude Hereditary, from the common rule in all
Barbarous Nations, when ever discovered, in which the further back we run in
the History of the Old World, the more we are confirmed; as also the more
forward we go in discovering the New.

But tho from the Roman Invasion he leaps presently into the Saxon Heptarchy,
yet we may read too, there were many petty Kings that they suffered here after
their Conquest, it being the Roman Pride of having Kings their Subjects; and
why those might not still retain an Hereditary Succession, I cannot understand,
especially since Dr. Heylin reckons up 16 Kings that succeeded after the Roman
Forces had left them naked; as indeed they were without a Metaphor to the
incursion of the Pict; the first five or six of them lineally Vid. Heylin's,
Geograph. Britain.
succeeding one another from Father to Son, and the rest not known to have
succeeded so; only because there is nothing left us of them but their Names.

After the consolidating of that Heptarchy, into a single Monarchy, the learned
Man whom I before have cited, has shown this disingenuous Author unfortunately
to have stumbled in the very Threshold, and proved by Authentic Citation, that
his elected Egbert was the next of kin to the Royal Stock, that all the
following Succession of the Saxon and Danish Monarchs ran in the blood, or was
disposed of by the Will and Testament of the deceased Prince.

The renowned City of London, as he calls her, is obliged to him for his
Civilities, and I shall thank him too for his Complement, in letting her know
that her Approbation had heretofore no small Influence on the Succession: And
for the securing the Crown on the right head, it is recorded to their Glory; and
may that glorious act of their Ancestors be still perpetuated in our lasting
Annuals, and imitated too by the Posterity of her present Inhabitants; who then
adhered to King Edmond their Lineal and Lawful Prince, and that because they
knew he was so; A Prince Worthy of a better time, and who had he found more
faithful, and but better Subjects, might have been in Condition to have made it
so: His Citizens then clave to him, when his very Clergy (...) him; but their
Religion in those days was too little to expect their Loyalty much; whereas
ours now, as the best Argument of their being truly Religious, still show
themselves as eminently Loyal.

The Citizens then, (for I shall insist upon it for their Encouragement now)
would not concur with Canute's Election Vid. Daniel.
by the Priests and Nobility: And why? because a perfect Exclusion of the right
Heir, and the next Lawful Son and Successor to their late King: And the Fiction
that the Factious Author tells us, of a Child chosen in the Womb, proves but
the Story, the Fable of a Monk; for which he might as well have cited their
Legends M, Westminster, Paris, nor any other Authentic Historians ancient
enough, so much as mention it, and our modern Baker says expressly upon (...)
Death, his third Son, Edmund, called Iron-Side; but the Eldest living at his
Fathers Death succeeded, and was Crowned at Kingston upon Thames; That a great
part of the Nobility favored the Dane, because they feared him; but the
Londoners stood firm to Edmund, and (...) the Authors of his Election, and upon
his very using of the word here, I cannot but observe, what the worthy Dr. has
sufficiently proved too; how common among Historians that word Election is used
only for a Confirmation or acknowledgment of the Right, and how against Reason
he still misapplies it to Choice: why did he not undertake to prove from Baker
too, that this Prince was elected by the Londoners; only because he says, they
were the cause of his Election, which perhaps he would have done, but that he
found he must have made that Author contradict himself; (as I believe he has
done the rest,) who tells us just before, he was Crowned at Kingston, as the
eldest living at his Fathers Death.

And the Interest of that Metropolis for the right Line was such, and so
considerable, together with that Princes own Courage and Conduct, that he
remained Conqueror in three several Battles, and had been so in the fourth too,
the last I believe the Dane would have dared to offer, had not that false
Edric, the Traitor to his Father, acted over the same Treason to the Son, and
revolted in the fight, when the Forces of the Foe, where on the point of flying.

The taking but half his Kingdom at that Duel and Accommodation in the Isle of
Alney, was more (...) than fortunate, when still his trusty Citizens would have
fought for the whole, and spent their last blood for the right Line, they had
first espoused; the parting with some of his right was quickly succeeded with
the losing of all, and his Life to the Bargain, and England might well be too
weak for its self, when 'twas made half Denmark, so dangerous is it to Princes
to forgo the least of their right, which only introduces the loss of a greater
share, or to part with a piece of Prerogative, for the patching up some popular
divisions, whose twisted Interest like Cords that are a twining, if it catch
but the Skirts of the Purple, will soon wind away the whole robe; the
Observation is here verified upon our old Records, and been newly transcribed
in Blood, in our latter days; and the Son of our Royal Martyr treads the best
Politics for the Prevention, in that unfortunate Testimony of his Father; and
if Sovereignty be somewhat that is Divine, a Subjects robbing of the Crown must
be next to that of a Church, and a sin that savours as much of sacriledg.

But to let you know, in short, the design of this Historian's Complement, upon
which we have dwelt too long, the pretty Parenthesis was applied to another
purpose; 'twas published at a time when the City was Influencing an House of
Commons that were for altering Succession; and they as great an Influence with
the City: At a Banquet of Politics after their Parliament Feast; and His time
to let them know, the Approbation of that renowned City, had then Stow mentions
not one word of this Athelstan's Illegitimacy; and his own Author whom he cites
for the falsehood relates it but as a Fable, by which Daniel too was deceived.
no little Influence on the Succession. And besides in the very same Page he
had prepared for them the pretty President of the Saxons, preferring a brave
and deserving Bastard, before a cruel and Legitimate Prince: He means that
Athelstan, whom he resolves rather erroniously to suppose Illegitimate, than
Ingeniously to allow him, as he truly was, the Lawful Heir: But Baker and
others tell us the Truth; though he will not, and say this Athelstan was the
Eldest, and no way spurious: But the telling of the Truth, would have prevented
this malicious Authors Factious insinuation of the D. Temper; which to make the
more remarkable, he must mark out in Emphatical Italicks, only to save the
crying Monmouth and York. But the Card is turned there now, and the Loyal
Heart, Trump, instead of his Clubs; and to be hoped they will make good the best
part of the Observation, which he never designed they should, stand and fall
with their Loyal Progenitors, in the defense of the right Line and the Royal
Blood.

In short, upon the whole united, and happy union of the Monarchy of the
Saxons, give me leave to observe this great Even in the Heptarchy it self, if
you consult How you will find the next of Blood still succeeded.
Truth, That from their first King Egbert, to this Iron-side the last, no less
then 14 in number; besides, that Edward the first, Edmunds Brother, all
successively Reigned in Lineal discents of the immediate and next Heir of the
Royal Blood; and most of them too, the Successors of the next immediate
Brother; to their present Prince, no less than four several Brothers Sons to
Ethelwolf the second sole Sovereign of the Saxons, succeeding one another; and
then with what Face, unless with one more lasting, then I (...) his corrupted
History, by being all Brass, with what a Front, but such an one, can such a
Libel, and Parsons, Inglefield, Allen.
Imposture, a Legend fuller of Lies than ever was penned by Papist, ancient, or
modern Monk offer at such a part of our History, for the dispossessing the
present Brother of his King. But this Popish Plagiary, fetching most of the
Materials of his Monumental Treasons from a Club of Jesuits, the Triumvirate of
studious Traitors that forged for the subverting the Succession, their
damna-Doleman, no wonder if he be as full of falsehood as those copyed Ignatians
whom he transcribes, or the Founder of them the Devil.

All the shadow that he has of any thing of Election, was that of the first
Saxon King Egbert, whom he would have no way related to Brissicus the last King
of the West Saxons; but whom a more worthy Author proves from Westminster's own
words, that he was the sole surviving branch of the Royal Stemm; and that he
was banished into France; and that only for fear of his Right.

But granting then what he is resolved Vid. The great point of (...), and Dr.
B. cites the same out of Sim. Dunielm and (...).
to suppose; still right Reason will confute his Impertinence even in complying
in unreasonable Concession; the Question here is of the Succession of our
Established Monarchy: And he brings us an Instance before the Monarchy was
Established, owns that the History of that Heptarchy was uncertain; and yet very
certainly determins the point of his Election; and that we must take too upon
an ipse dixit of this Dogmatical Historians, for his being no way related, he
cites just no body, and while, for his near alliance, you have the Authority of
so many.

That other only broken Reed that in all these Reigns he has to rely on, and
that like AEgypts too is ready to run into his side, so false, so dangerous to
trust too; which is Edreds being crowned in the Minority of his Nephews; when
all the Historians say, it was only for their being Minors: And the diligent
Baker says he was not then made Protector: only because that Authority was not
then come into use; but crowned as King with purpose to resign, when the right
Heir should come of age.

But lest his Modern Authority may Flor, (...). Westminster. Houden. (...). and Stow,
(...) he was (...) on But as a (...).
be not sufficient with those that malign any thing, that makes for the
Monarchy; let them consult even the most of the Ancients, and they all agree
they were only set aside for their Nonage. But this Royal Protectorate soon
expired, as if Providence labored to prevent an Usurpation; and provided for
the right Heir, who succecded in his paternal Inheritance, before arrived even
to the Romans civil age of Puberty 14. And the malicious Perverter might as
well say as great a stress, as you will find afterward he truly does upon
Richard the thirds Butchery and Usurpation; the breaking of the Laws of God and
Man for a Crown: All the difference is. Here were only two Nephews for a while
debarred, there Butchered; and shall such bloody Miscreants pass upon the World
for credible Authors, who for robbing of a Divine-right, can cite you Murder;
and for the breaking of our Humane Laws, the blackest Crime in the Declogue.

And since this Antimonarchical Zealot, has shown himself thus elaborately
studious, to rake every musty Record of those Reigns for a Rebellious remark;
give me leave only from the same times to make this last and Loyal Observation;
where Providence seemed to show it self remarkably concerned for its crowned
Head; and that in the subsequent Judgment upon the Proto-Martyrdom of the Saxon
Edward; as well as what we suffered since for our Martyred Charles; tho there
'twas only for anticipating a right by blood; but ours a bloody Usurpation of
those that had no right at all.

Ethelred's passage to his Reign was but before his time, and the Almighty's;
yet the Government suffered for it as many Pangs, till it quite miscarried;
within fifty years the new Monarchy fell quite asunder, rent and torn by two
several Conquests: He himself meets with the Defection of all his Nobility,
forced to raise his Danegelt, and his Subjects into Rebellion by it; prepared
his Navies, only to be shattered with a tempest, or consumed with Fire; both
Elements But because he came to the Kingdom, by ill means arose (...) Wars p.
86.
and Heaven it self, seemed to conspite to make him Miserable: Famine and
Mortality were the dismal attendants of his Wars, the Depredations of Invaders
would not allow peace; the Reign that begun in a Murder, ended in a Massacre:
The incensed Danes soon invade him, the perjured Edric falsely forsakes him; he
languishes a long time, as well he might, under Guilt and Misfortune; and to
put the only period to Vid. (...). p. (...).
his days, Miseries and Kingdom together Dies.

You see how little success this Author met with among the Saxons Sovereigns
for altering Succession; how much of Imposture his Reader may there meet with
in him, and you shall as soon see, he deals as disingeniously with the Danes.

And here thorough his double diligence, this Parliament Historiographer has
not omitted an Argument for his purpose, much of the same strength as those
that he has used, viz. That Knute was no kin to Edmund, or Ethelred: And the
Dane no way related to the Line of the Saxon, that is, the poor conquered
England, was not Consin German to Denmark the Conqueror, and yet the Title of
the latter was preferred, and their King, acknowledged ours.

I cannot conceive what necessity of Relation an Invader needs to the poor
Prince he Invades; and whether that be not a pretty sort of an Argument for
altering Succession, to say the Kingdom was Conquered; Swayn had before cut out
a fine Title for his Son with the Sword: The North, West, and some of the South
part of England had submitted frightened with his revengeful Cruelties, which
their own had provoked: Canute himself after his Fathers Death, lands as soon
at Sandwich with a Navy of two hundred, gave our English a great overthrow,
possessed himself of what Swayn had before harassed; the West; and because the
Nobility favored only whom they feared, and set him up in Competition for the
Crown, whom they could not keep down from being a Competitor; ergo, therefore
the Succession must not run in the right Line, and why? because here it did
not; if more absurd Inferences, can be drawn from matter of Fact, or greater
Solecisms from Historical Observation, I Will forfeit all the little Right I have
to Reason; and with an Implicit Faith, believe the Legend, for a Bible, and his
History for the Revelations.

But yet this Prince, though by Conquest and Composition, he got half the
Kingdom, and upon Edmunds Death the whole, foresaw what Power the pleas of
Right, and Succession might have for animating an Interest in the defense of
the poor injured Heirs; and therefore took all the ways to ingratiate himself
with his wavering People; his young and unexperienced Subjects, and all manner
of means for preventing the Lawful Heirs, for attempting for their Right;
sticking at neither Murder, Malice, and Treachery; and in order to the first,
he made a show of governing, with more Justice, then he conquered, and took
mildness for the best means of his Establishment; and to let the Nation know he
designed only to subdue them, sends away his Mercenaries, ships away his Navy;
and for a popular Specimen of an Heroic Kindness, to the memory of the Saxons
he succeeded, as a Satisfaction to their injured Dust, prefers Edricks perjured
Head, to the highest place on the City Gate; and with that Expedient,
reconciled himself at once to his own promise, deserved Justice, and the
Peoples favor; and yet for securing himself from any danger, from the Lawsul
Heirs, so politickly Cruel, that all the Royal Blood felt of his Injustice;
sent the two Sons of his late Co-partner in the Kingdom, to be murdered abroad,
and got his Brother to be butchered at home; such an experienced truth is it,
that Powers usurpt, Successions altered, like the blackest Villainies can only
be Justified and defended by committing more.

At his Death it is true he disposed of his Crowns, by Testamentary Bequest, and
well he might, when there was so little known for Kingdoms of Feudatory Law,
and private Estates then far from being entailed; yet in that very Legacy you
can observe, what Power the Consideration had with him of Right and Blood; for
he leaves his own Paternal Dominions, Norway, to his Eldest son Swayn, and to
his Youngest Hardicanute his conquered England; considering his Mothers Blood,
which was Emma, Wife to the late King Ethelred, might (as indeed it did) give
him some precedence to his middle Brother Harold; the one having somewhat of
Saxon in him, the other all Dane; especially, if he was, as some say
Illegitimate, though Baker calls him an Elder Brother by a former Wife; so that
upon the whole, the Contest that rose about the Succession, was but whether he
had Right, and when at last Harald was preferred, 'twas upon the Resolution of
his being Legitimate; so that here his own Inference contradicts the end for
which 'twas brought; and instead of altering the descent, shows they
industriously contended to keep it in the right Channel; and allowing they were
mistaken in their Opinions of his Birth, the Lords to make amends for their
error, straight on his Death fetch home Hardicanute; who dying without Issue,
the Right of Blood prevailed again, and the Saxon entered in Edward the
Confessor, Edmunds Son only being past by because his very being was unknown;
and so they can only be blamed, for not seeking for the right Heir among the
supposed Dead: Yet when this Edward had found him out, he designed both him
Vid. Baker Vid. Stow says they did him wrong, and always it occasioned civil
War.
and his Son Atheling for successive Monarchs, whose very name imported
Hereditary, and next of kin, as much as our Prince of Wales, while the second
Harold, but usurpt upon him, against the sense of the Clergy, who even then
looked upon it as a Violation of the Right of the Heir, and also of their Holy
Rites: and tho Harald suggested that Edward had appointed him to be Crowned,
Historians say, that it was only to make him during the Minority of this Edgar;
a Regent, and not an absolute King, and Mat. Paris, speaking of Edgar Atheling
in the very first Leaf of his History, in these very words, says; that to him
belonged the Right to the Kingdom of England; and if Birth could then give a
Right, I don't see how then, or now, any Power can defraud a Prince justly of
his Birthright.

And now we will begin our Remarks on the Norman Line, upon which the very first
words of Baker are these, There were six Dukes of Normandy, in France, in a
direct Line, succeeding from Father to Son, and yet this Inquisitive
Monarch-maker, lays his mighty stress, his weighty Consideration on the single
Suggestion of Duke William's being a reputative Bastard; be it so, have we not
here the Majority of six to one, that succeeded, (...), Legitimately, and is
not these then, like all the rest of their Objections against the Government,
rather industrious Cavil, then real Argument? or allowing it still, is it not
most impertinently applied to his present purpose, to tell us that William the
Conqueror was himself Illegitimate, and yet succeeded his Father in the Duchy
of Normandy? And therefore must we have another Natural, and Illegitimate Duke
to wear the Crown of England? or was the Suggestion only made because they had
such a Duke in Readiness, that had already run the Popular Gantlet of Ambition;
and been soothed into the Prospect of a Scepter, with the false Tongues of
Flatterers and Sycophants? or else was the Nomination of the Normans to
supersede the Fundamental Laws of our Nation; And our England a Dependent, a
Tributary to that Crown before the Conquest? these Paradoxes must be reconciled
by Miracle before such a ridiculous Instance can pass for Reason, or Common
Sense, or vindicate the false suggester from Folly and Impertinence.

But even here too his very Assertion fails him, and this Pretender to Truth
both abuses his Reader with false Application, and telling a Lie: For this Duke
William, though a Bastard Born, was not illegitimated, so as to be barred the
Crown, and incapacitated for Inheritance; for it appears, as Baker says by many
Examples, that Bastardy was then no Bar to Succession, and by the Canon and the
Law of the Church that then obtained, the Children born before Wedlock, were de
facto truly legitimated, if he afterward espoused his Concubine; and this his
Factious Assistant, Hunt himself allows; when the Vid. Postscript. p. 53. 55.
Wretch endeavored to Bastardize the Progenitors of his Sovereign, and this
many Writers say was the very Case of our Duke William, whose Father took his
Mother Arlotte to Wife afterward.

The Donation to William Rufus was again clearly Testimentary; which might be
allowed sure to a Conqueror, whose will only gave what his Sword had gotten;
Westminster and Malembsbury. Stow. p. 124.
but however as I observed above in the Legatory Disposition of Canutus the
Dane, where he gave his conquered Kingdom to his Youngest, and Norway his
Paternal Right to Swayn his Eldest, to whom 'twas most due; so here this Third
Conqueror Daniel, says, he obtained it according to his Fathers will. page 44.
of Old Britain, observed the same sort of Bequest, and left Normandy his
Fathers Inheritance, and his own to Robert, to whom it appertained in Reason
and Right; both these Instances, no small Demonstration, showing how the
Precedence of Blood even in those days obtained; and with those too whom our
Factious Innovator, would have not to value it; for their giving to any Son
besides their Eldest what was theirs by Arms, is no more than what we our
selves do now by Laws; and tho the Fewds now obtain, and Entailments, yet still
what is our own by purchase is unconfined, and not tied to descend by
Primogeniture; but at an arbitrary Disposition of the Lord and Purchaser, and
which is commonly disposed of too by the Father to some of the Younger Sons;
and a Conqueror that purchases all by Blood, and Wounds, must needs be allowed
as much Liberty, as the Miser that obtains it by his Wealth, or a Land Peddler
that buys his purchase for a Penny.

But tho this might be a warrantable Donation, yet you may observe (as if the
donor had not been in it altogether Just) so it never at all prospered with the
Donee; the very Gist it self, like Pandora's Box, was most fatal to those that
received it; a Vice like Virtue is often a Punishment to it self as that other a
reward; the not suffering the Crown to descend by entail; entailed what was
worse a War, and both Brothers assault the Testamentary Usurper at once; as
looking upon it notwithstanding the specious pretext of a Will, but a plain
wrong; and where this prejudiced Historian, makes this Rufus to rely on the
consent of the Nobles, for the Confirmation of his Fathers Will, it is evident
he only called them together, that by Largesses and Corruptions, fair Words,
and Promises, he might win them from assisting his Brother Robert, whose Right
he feared, notwithstanding the advantage he had by his Fathers Will might make
the Game that he had to play more than even, or give Robert the better by their
deserting this Rufus.

And that notwithstanding all his Artifices they did; and Odo Bishop of Bayeux
leads the dance, and notwithstanding says Paris, that he was their Mat. Paris
An. 1088. last Edition London.
crowned King, their sworn King, and they must be perjured for it, they raised
a War against their King William, and set up Robert the Firstborn for their
King, all declaring the Right belonged to him, and this the Opinion of several
of the Nobility, Lords, Spiritual and Temporal; Persons always I fancy qualified
to recognize a Right, if Religious or Lay-Judges could decide it; and so well
assured were they of the goodness of the Cause that they Veruntamen postea
Nobiles fere omnes, etc.
conspired for it; rebelled, and were banished for it success; not always
attending a good Title, no more than it can Justify a bad. And at the last the
most unfortunate end of this Testamentary Prince, may serve somewhat at least
to discourage the Religious from invading of a Right, tho it may not the
Politician; and for the Injury he did all along to the Right-Blood, Providence
seemed to bring upon his head his own; and sent that sort of an Usurper too, to
the Grave with the fate of Tyrants, not with a common dry Death, but in his own
Gore; and he that had held the Scepter, but with a pretended Right by this
disastrous Death, gave an opportunity to a perfect Intruder, that had none at
all.

Henry the first, who being in new Forest when his Brother was killed, did not
stay long to consider the disaster, or to get the Carcass Coacht home, instead
of Carted, but rides to Winchester, seizes the Treasure; and that soon helped
him to put on the Crown: The Purple Robes soon followed those Golden Regalia,
and the Power absolutely Usurpt, will irresistibly force a Coronation; Florence
of Worst.
but tho Crowned he was, a good Author says, who lived and wrote then as great
men then sent for Robert, promised him his Right, and as resolutely stood by
him too, and well they might when he had been debarred his Birthright once
before; and besides the Right of Blood, had refused his Assignation, his early
Pension; and had compounded for his own Kingdom, which he had so much Title to
without the Composition; But Mat. Paris tells us in the first Lines of this
Kings Life, that the Nobility Magnates Angliae ignorabant quid actum esset de
Roberto duce Normannorum, An. 1100.
were utterly Ignorant what was become of this Robert Duke of Normandy; but
that when he sent privately to them in England, Letters alleging his being
first Born, and that for that very Reason he declared the Right of the Kingdom
belonged to him, as soon as they heard those Allegations of his unanswerable
Right, promised him their best advice, and to lend him their Assistance; which
they did too, and Robert came over, forced his Brother to a Composition for
3000 Marks yearly, and at least, made the Usurper but a Tributary King; and all
the Argument out of this Reign, that our Elector here fetches for his making
Ibid. p. 46. Fidele Consilium pariter and Auxilium promiserunt.
our English Monarch a King of Poland, is this Usurpers courting the great
Council to confirm it to his Son; but so would a Cromwell, the Parliament for
the Succession of his Son Richard, and sure such Creatures have need to
anticipate all sorts of security for their Sons Succession, that have gotten
all their Right by Anticipation of another, or absolute wrong; but the
parallel holds still between that ancient Usurper, and the more Modern I
mentioned; they both felt their Consciences pricked in their unjust obtaining of
a Mat. Paris 1106. sentiens Conscientiam Cauteriatam, Judicium Dei formidare,
etc.
Kingdom, they both feared the Judgments of the Almighty, both as unhappy in
their designed Heirs, one born to be Drowned, the other to be a Fool; and as
their Fame stunk above Ground, so did both their Bodies before they went under,
and Paris tells us the first committed Murder after he was Dead, and poisoned
his Doctor before they could get him down into the Dust; tho he smartly
observes this was the last Ultimus fuit ex illis quos Rex Henricus occidit An.
1136.
among the many this good King Henry had destroyed.

The last remark I shall make on this Man's Reign is, but what this malicious
Historian has made very Remarkable, and that is from an Author that he cites,
for saying that this Robert had discovered too much of the Cruelty of
Disposition, of his averseness to the English Nation, and his proneness to
revenge, and this Character must be most Emphatically marked out, that they
might not miss of his meaning another Duke; a Prince to whose Valor and
Conduct the Wretch ows his Freedom from a Foreign Yoke, and the Nation her
safety and security, and so far does his malice transport the Sot that he
falsisies for it the very Latin he translates, Perversus, contrarius et
Innaturalis: He makes cruelty Vid H. de Knight C, 8. 2374.
of Disposition, and for Proneness to revenge, not one Syllable in the whole
Citation, and then besides the words of the Author he cites are the same
verbatim, which this Henry the first used against his Brother, when he makes a
Speech to his Nobles, to make him odious, from whom this Author I believe
borrowed it, and his as mere revgene Vid Paris 1107.
full malice to the Duke of York, as that against Robert the Duke.

It is here evident that this Gentleman's Principles and Persuasions are clearly
Democratical, and writ with a perfect design to please the People, as plain as
if the rabble beast, the Monster Mobile were seen sawning upon this KEEPER of
their LIBERTIES, and you saw the Sycophant spitting in its mouth; his Papers
are the very Picture of this piece, and the Representation of Rebellion with a
Pen.

The next that Mounts the Throne is STEPHEN, and the little Right (tho some)
Relation he had to the Crown, to be sure will not be past by: when this Author for
the sake of his sinking Cause, has caught at every Plank to hold up her Head in
that desperate Condition, and where he could not meet the least solid
substantial Argument, graspt at every empty Shadow; And truly here he tells us,
that STEPHEN acknowledged his Election in the Page 4.
very Words of a Charter, from the People, and so would any man that had no
better Title; and tho I shall condemn his Usurpation, can allow of his
Politics, in letting them know how much he was beholden to them, and yet that
People were strong enough to pull off his Crown too, which his own hands rather
Stow says he was repulsed by them of Dover, shut out by them of Canterbury, and
unjustly took upon him the Crown of England.
had put on; for as Bradshaw told the King, The People of England had
constituted them a Court, when that unanswerable Martyr observed not half their
Consents did concur, or were asked; so also in this Case, many of the Nobility,
most of the Commonalty looked upon it, as a manifest Usurpation, and those whose
Concurrence he had, were but an handful of his Friends, and at his Coronation
had but three Bishops, few of the Nobility, and not one Abbot, and also, as
Historians observe, those very Malembs. Baker.
perjured Prelates, and Lords came many of them to an ill-end, or else to worse
Calamities before their life was ended.

And the revengeful Cruelties of the Scot looked somewhat like a Judgment for
their Perjury; when they spared neither the Gray-Hair, for whom Reverence might
plead, nor the Tender-Infant for whom its Innocence, but Butchered the one in
their Beds, the other on their Mothers Breasts, the Barbarity of Mat. Paris in
ultionem Imperatricis cui idem Rex Fidelitatem juraverat. An. 1138.
those avengers is as horribly described in Mat. Paris.

But again, I cannot see why he was not as much an Invader, as his Grandfather
the Conqueror, only that came from Normandy, this out of Boleign, that was
forct to fight, first with Harold an hardy Foe; this his Invasion facilitated
by the Weakness of a Woman; but as weak as she was, He knew her Title to be
strong, and as strong as this Author would have him with the People, yet he
found himself too weak, only with the pretense of his Election to defend his
Usurpation, found an Army of Flemmings would give him a better Title to the
Crown, than all this Power of Parliament to the Peopledom, and that a good
Garrison would hold out longer in his defense than our Authors House of
Commons; and in truth his being so good a Soldier would not suffer him to be
long a precarious King, an hundred thousand Pound of the good old Kings
Treasure, did him more good than all their suffrages; it brought Men and Arms
out of Britany and Flanders, and built so many Castles for those sort of
Monarch-makers, till the whole Kingdom seemed all over but one CITADEL, and all
its Government but an entire Garrison.

Yet as secure as he thought himself Exarserat namque rabies tanta contra eum,
ut pene ab omnibus quateretur. ibid. Paris.
both in Subjects and his Strength, the prevalency of Right and Justice soon
encompast him with as many Dangers: His Nobility begin to be incensed against
him, and that out of a sense of his having injured an Heir; The provoked
Empress Lands with a strong party, and her presence soon proclaimed the Justice
of her Cause, and made that Oath they had swallowed for her, without any
Operation or Effect, to work, now as strongly; a pitched Battle and a fierce one
too is fought; his Soldiers forsook him at last, as well as his People, and he
forced to sight so desperately, for a cause that was ever as desperate, till
himself is taken a Prisoner, by her from whom he took the Crown; and tho she
brought a War for her Right, was received peaceably, entered Her Capital City
in Triumph, and by her Loyal Londoners welcomed with Acclamation and Joy.

And pray what was the Consequence now of this debarred Right, but what always
attends it, BLOOD; the Scots had with a Savage sort of a Revenge shed some for
her before, she spilt a great deal before she came to this, and before the
ground which had drunk so much Gore could be said to be dry, at Winohester it is
moistened with a fresh supply, and that too with a War of Women; MATIL'D the
Queen invades Maud the Empress, the worst cause, as it is wont, (prevails best)
and here the Right Heir is again driven from the enjoyment of her Right, by
that which commonly does it, the SWORD; and Mat. Paris Justitia de Caelo
prospiciente.
then at last after all the various events of WAR, which whatever the Fortune
be, must still end in the loss of Lives; that Just Astrea which then too seemed
to have left the Earth, and upon it nothing Henrici jus Haereditarium
recognovit, Paris his own Words 1153.
but wrong looked down from Heaven; this fierce King in fuller Assembly than in
what he was chose, acknowledges that Hereditary Right against which he had
fought, and Henry in the Right of his Mother Maud to be the Lawful Successor.

And one would think now this succeeding Monarch's Right should have been
allowed Hereditary beyond dispute, beyond Contradiction, when so much Blood had
been spilt in the Defense of it; when acknowledged so by this Popular
Advocates, own People, and before them owned too by him that had interrupted
the Succession, and excluded the Right and Lawful Heir.

But what cannot Malice suggest, or Faction invent? till this transport against
Government; this rage of Rebellion suspends the calm Operations of the Soul,
and the dictates of common Sense, till it hurry these blind Pretenders to
verity into the greatest falsehoods, transports them into perfect Lies and
Absurdities, and to labor even against the Contradictions of Truth and Reason:
Here he still impudently tells us against plain matter of Fact, the Confessions
of his own Creatures the People, and the Acknowledgment of his own Favorite
the Usurper; That in all these Transactions there was no Consideration of any
Right, but what universal consent conferred.

And his Exception to our Henry the Second's Right must also now result from
his Mother Mawds Title before; I am glad we can get him to tolerate any such
thing, as Title at all; but I would ask this Gentleman (if he has any thing to
dispose of,) whether he might not cedere de bonis, as the Civilians in another
Case Phrase it, only for the letting his Successor and Heir Inherit it, or
whether upon such a Cession, or making it over, his Son should not succeed into
this Patrimony, till he had knocked his bountiful Father in the head, or he was
pleased to step aside into the next World, to let his Successor have more Room
in this. I fancy he would be glad such a Resignation might pass, without an
Attournment of his LIFE too.

Maud the Empress was sufficiently pleased only with the Succession of her Son,
and as Writers say, quitted her Title too, which was apparently acknowledged in
letting him succeed. Is the Mothers Right ever the less, when the Son does
succeed in her Right, and is there no Difference between altering a Succession,
and a refusing to succeed? Matt. Paris makes her live thirty years after
Stephen's Death; time enough to have resented her wrong, if she thought she had
sustein'd an Interruption of her Right, and she must be supposed to be willing
to consent to those Conditions of peace, being all concluded with her privity,
and she having suffered sufficiently with a troublesome War in England, went
over to Normandy for Peace.

This Henry knowing his Right to the Crown was resolved to secure the same
Right of Succession to his Son; and this Vid. (...) p. 48. Stow p. 146
very endeavor for a Lawful and a Lineal descent, does this perverse Author
turn into an Argument for Election, and because he only called his Barons
Bishops and Abbots to let them know he would have him to be secured his
Successor, by making him a Copartner in the Government, and to prevent his
being wronged after his Death, was resolved to see him enjoy part of his Right
in his Life; therefore from these fine Premises he draws this Illogical
Conclusion, that he was elected by their Consent, and when from Gervas himself
whom he Cites it appears, they were by the Kings express Command called to his
Coronation; and Paris says 'twas at his Summons they came to Crown his Son, and
by his Fathers own bidding; and if this Ad Mandatum Regis and Patre jubente.
Paris. 1170.
solemnity shall make our Crown Elective; since the Conquest we have had none
Hereditary, and our Kings must never suffer any Nobles or Commons at their
Coronation, for fear of such Perverters making it a Parliamentary choice.

But if any thing could be condemned Stow says the King expreslycaused him to
be Crowned by the Bishop of York, without mentioning any other. p. 132. And
Baker says the same. p. 55.
in this unhappy Solicitation for his Sons security to succeed, 'twas only in
making him a King before he came to be a Successor, by defrauding himself upon
a sollicitous distrust, of part of that Divine Right, when he was by God
entrusted with the whole, and making his Son to Anticipate that by his
forwardness, for which he should have waited the Almighty's leisure: The Nature
of Monarchy being inconsistent with a Duum-Virate, units may be as well
divided; And the very Etymon of the Word contends for the sole Sovereignty it
expresses.

And the very sad effects of this contradictory Nec Regna socium far possunt
nec tedae sciunt.
Coronation, were the best Evidence of its inconsistency, and verifies the
Latin Aphorism of the Tragedian; that the Crown cannot admit of a shareer or
competitor no more than the Bed, the making himself but half King, was like to
have lost him the whole Kingdom, Incongruum Regem quemlibet esse, and
Dominationem (...) in Regno non habere Mat. pvit. H. 2.
and almost made him none at all, they soon animated the young Monarch against
his Old Father, and let him know that 'twas absurd for any one to be called a
King, and to have nothing of Government that is essential to it in the Kingdom.

Daniel calls it the making the Commonwealth a Monster with two Heads (and what
then must it be with many;) but withal tells us 'twas only the effect of
jealousy that this King feared from his Mothers Example, and that some of his
false Subjects might also break all Oaths of Fealty to his Son, (as well as
this perjured Author has that of his Allegiance to his Sovereign,) and I
believe this alone made this King so carefully Praecipitous, as to prevent the
Expiration of his Reign, with an Anticipation of the Grave, and a Resignation
of his Rule, with a POLITICAL DEATH; for this Crowned Son was soon by LEWIS of
France emboldened to that insolency from having the half, that in plain Terms
he demanded the whole, and what the too bountiful Father had no Reason to grant
by fair means, the ungrateful Son resolves to obtain by foul, sides with the
King of France, and many of the divided Kingdom with Him, and are all in Arms
ready for Ruin and Destruction; neither did they lie down their Swords, till it
ended as all Alterations in a Monarchy, in BLOOD, and the Coparcenary King
shortly after, his Life; but a little before reconciled to his too provident
Father.

I am sure this shows even the Participation of the Royal Power dangerous, tho
by those that had Right to Succession; and if such an Alteration in the
Government can prove so fatal, much more then an altering the Succession it
self, and if a Crown cannot like a common Conveyance with fafety be made over in
trust; I dare say 'twill be less secure to cut off entail.

The next Reign that we have Reason to reply upon, is that of Richard the
First, and with that his irrational Inferences have dealt as unreasonably; for
he there by his own Confession has no other Authority for his Election (as his
own words R. de Daeto he quotes tho it should be de Diceto, who oficiated at
his Coronation, Haereditario jure promovendus, are his words (...) fore.
have it) but the words of his Historian, and yet this very Historian, whom he
there most impudently traduces and abuses, acknowledges his Hereditary Right to
the Crown; by which he was to be promoted; before ever he tells you of the
solemn Election of the People; which beyond contradiction confirms what the
Worthy Dr. B. has as significantly suggested, that the common acceptance of
Election amongst ancient Authors, implied nothing less than what our factious
insinuators apply it to, and that they meant nothing else but Confirmation or
Acknowledgment; for first, would such a Learned Authority as he cites, only
labor under a learned Contradiction, and tell you such an one was promoted for
his Hereditary Right, and then in the very subsequent words declare it was by
solemn Election: Certainly such Immortal Authors could never wage with Sense
and Reason a Mortal War; and he himself is so favorable to their pious Memory,
as to omit all the seeming Contradiction, because not reconc leable to his
prejudiced Interpretation: and when Historians tell you of any thing of
Election, (which he would have popular,) be sure he omits what ever they say of
Hereditary Succession before; so has he done here: so in most of the Citations
elsewhere.

And next also he tells us, that his Father had gotten the Succession confirmed
to him in his Life. Of which many of our modern Historians are totally silent,
and afterward that he was again Elected by the People, of which in his sense,
none truly speak: nether is it reconcilable how they should twice solemnly
choose him for their King, when even in Poland it self once will serve: but
besides, before his Solemn Coronation, (or as he would have it) his popular
Election, immediately after his Fathers Watson and Clarks Casse 1 Jacobi.
Funeral; without doubt upon the consideration of his Hereditary Right, he
exercised as he might well do, and as has been since resolved any King of ours
may, Vid. Daniel. exigit castella and Thesauros patrissuiquos habebat,
an absolute Power of a King before this Solemn Ceremony of Coronation; for
presently he seizes upon his Fathers Treasure in France, Imprisons, Fetters,
Manacles the late Kings Treasurer to extort the uttermost penny. I think Says
Paris, and has not one word of his Election, but only Coronation.
such a severe sort of absoluteness, as they would not now allow our Crowned
King: He is there girt by the Archbishop with a Sword; takes fealty both of
Clergy and Lay; makes a Truce with the King of France, and all this before ever
he came into England to be Crowned or Elected.

And should we yield to this perverse Imposture, the signification of his word
for which he has so long labored, yet all this while we find his very People
more willing to Elect him that had an Hereditary Right, than a spurious Invader
that had none at at all, and did actually Confirm him in his Succession: unless
the more powerful Usurper terrified them from their Loyal Intentions, and truly
the mistaken Gentleman might have as well proved that he was the third time
Elected too; when after his Imprisonment that he suffered from Henry the Sixth,
the German Emperor, after he came home, and had held a Parliament at
Nottingham, he was again recognis'd for their King, and Crowned at Winchester.

But what can be better Evidence of the precedence that was allowed to the
nearest of blood in a Lineal Descent, then Constituit Arthurum Haeredem suam
legitimum si sine haerede moreretur. Paris in vit. R.
this Princes Care he took in appointing his Nephew Arthur to Succeed him, tho
he had a Brother of his own, to whom he had shown a liberal largess of his Love
when he began to Reign, in bestowing on him no less than half a dozen Earldoms,
a good part of his Kingdom: Certainly this Earl John was nearer to him in Blood
and Affection, and then what could move him to this Testamentary Disposition,
but the more nearness of the other to the Kingdom and the Crown?

But in spite of all Adoption and Right, JOHN as great an Usurper as any, laid
hold of the Scepter and held it too, only as some of our Tenures in Law, by
primer occupancy; he had his Brothers Army in the field, and that was then
enough to have made a King of a Cromwell an Hewson, a Brewer or a Cobbler, Vid.
Dan. p. 108. Baker and Stow, say Arthur, actually did homage to France as King
of England.
powerful Arms that filence any Law. But still the Nobility were for
maintaining the Right of Succession in Arthur, and as they called it the usual
Custom of Inheritance; most of his Provinces in France stood firm to him, and
so did the King of it; and had Fortune favored him, upon whom for the most part
it frowns the Justest pretender, he had not been made a Prisoner to his Uncle,
to whom he was a King; and been murder`d by him after the Siege of Mirabel. But
the Barons rebellious Insurrection soon avenged the Barbarous Butchery, and but
bloody consequences here too attended the Debarred Right. He is forsaken of all
his People; and the French Kings Son a perfect Forreigner invited in for a
King; and his end at the last as unnatural, as the death he gave to his Nephew.

And here upon the Coronation of this intruding King John, the factious
Historian rehearses the Clause of Hubert the Bishop of Canterbury's Speech,
that declared the right to the Crown to consist only in the Election of the
People; but disingenuously omits the very reason of the self same Prelate; who
when he was pincht with the Interrogatory why he would preach up such
pernicious Principles, owned it more a Design of Policy, than the Sense of Vid.
Paris Edit. (...). vita John.
his Soul. But to give him a perfect Rowland for his Oliver, he will find in
the Life of Richard the Second, a better Bishop, making of a more Divine
Speech; and asserting the Right of Succession more (...) than ever this
designing Metropolitan was able to confute. But that worthy Prelates Doctrine
did no way countenance our Authors seditious Observations; and so directly
different from his Huberts Vid. Baker and Trussel. vita Rich. II. Bishop
Carlisle's Speech.
Harangue, that he might well pass it by without reading, and which must
certainly have (...) him into Blushes to have read.

Henry the Third, a Prince too young to know his Right, much less to be able
himself to take Possession of it; was presently upon his Fathers Death Crowned
King. Certainly upon the Consideration of his Hereditary Right, or the
Testamentary Donation of his Father, whom Paris says he appointed M. Paris vit.
Joha. ad finem: primogenitum suum regni constituens (...).
his Heir as his Firstborn; made the Kingdom swear Fidelity to him, sent his
Mandatory Letter under the Authority of his Great-Seal, to the Sheriff's of the
Counties, to the Keepers of his Castles, that they should all be intent upon
the Business; and upon his death they showed themselves as ready to perform it;
and what can the most factious Regnumque Angliae illi jurare fecit, Literas cum
sigillo suo munitas ad vice-comites and castellanos direxit ut smguli essent
intendentes, and idem M. P. princip. vit. Men. 3. (...) Defuncto Johanne
convenerunt ut Henricum exaltarent.
Pen make more of this than an Acknowledgment of Hereditary Right; especially
when the same Author in the beginning of the young Kings Reign says; they only
came together, to Exalt him to the Throne of his Father; and not one word of
their Suffrages or Election: therefore what could not be proved from matter of
Fact, must be suggested with an Innuendo; and because the good Earl Marshal in
a persuasive Speech exhorted them to adhere to their lawful Sovereign, it
implied the Consent of the People required: if such an Assent shall make the
Kingdom Elective, 'twill be hard to proveany Hereditary; for all people that do
not actually Rebel and Oppose, must in that sense be said to Consent and Elect;
and when ever our Kings are Crowned, it is so far with the Consent of the
people, that they do not interrupt the Coronation. But can he prove in any of
his pretended Elections, much less here, that ever in England they balloted for
the Crown, or drew Lots for the Kingdom; that they had ever any certain number
of Electors as in Germany, or carried it by Majority of suffrages as in Poland;
'tho I believe some of them would make no more of his Majesty than a Bourrought
Representative, or a County Knight, and (...) allow him the Freedom of a Pole.

But with what face can he urge it Stow says only he was (...) by Common
consent, p. 175.
here, when the whole drift of Pembrokes Oration was only to satisfy them the
Succession belonged to the Son, and that the French Usurper Lewis would be the
ruin of the Realm? which Speech was so effectual too; that several of the
Principal of the Barons not withstanding that open hatred to his Father, in
spite of Obligation of an Oath to Lewis, they still thought their Loyalty, and
Allegiance more obliging, and revolt from the Frenchman: till all at last,
deserted of all, he abjures his claim and the Kingdom together. After he had
been first routed by Land at Lncoln by Pembroke the Protector, and his fresh
supplys at Sea near Dover, by Hubert the Governor: Vid Matt. Paris, whotold
him that if his Master was dead he had left Sons and Daughters alive.
And the bold Speech of that stout Soldiers, to this powerful Prince, when he
demanded Dover on the Death of King John, was a better Evidence what sense the
people had of a Lawful (...), than he from the Marshals can evince that he
succeeded by Election and against the Laws of Descent; and all that he can
pertinently draw from the Protectors Oration, is, that an Infant King did not
speak for himself.

But if ought be a blot in his Succession, it is what this praejudiced Historian
I am sure does not care to Hit, and that is the weakness of his Fathers Title
that forced him to strenghten his Sons with a Donation: And Elenor the Sister
of his Cosen Arthur who had a Stronger right, did not Paris 1241. In clausura
Diuturna Carceris sub arcta Custodia reservata.
dye in five and twenty years after he came to the Crown, and was kept
continually to her dying day in a close Confinement; so strong a tide was the
proximity of Blood thought then, even by those that were the perverters of its
Channel; that it would bear all the force of its foes before it, unless Bay'd
back by as much force and violence; and we have found in some of our own
Reigns, even that too little, a well guarded Prison, too weak to hold a
Legitimate Prince, and that from thence too they have Mounted the Throne.

To the Succession of his Son Edward the first, one would have thought all his
diligent malice or the Devils could never have afforded an Objection; for it
seems he cannot find so much as his own old dear word Elected, here amongst his
abused Authors; but another False suggestion must supply the defect: And where
his Trope of Inversion cannot pervert the Truth, another part of Rhetoric must
serve the Turn; Invention, and a Lie: for so is that which he would have us
believe, that his Second Brother Edmund was the First; (And truly I believe he
could Invert the Course of Nature too as well as Blood, would it serve his
turn;) and this we must take for unquestioned Authority from the pretensions of
the House of Lancaster that descended from him, and say he was only rejected
for his Deformity; truly were there nothing to refute it but only their
pretentions, the prejudice and partiality of the Pretenders were sufficient to
render it suspected; which aspiring Line Labored as much in its Genealogy, as
ever any Welsh Gentleman in his Pedigree: But the best of it is, matter of Fact
contradicts it, Historians deny it, and none but himself would assert M. Paris
Edward natus. An. 1239. Ed. mund An. 1246.
it. It Appears from Paris that this primitive Lancastrian was no less than Six
years younger. And he an Author that Lived in the same Reign and resided in
Stow, says Edw. born 24 year of his Reign. Edm. in 29. So Daniel says and
Baker: Fecit Iurare Fidelitatem and Ligeantiam Edwardo primogenito, suo, Paris
An. 1240. Vid. Bisp. Carlisle speech, Rich. 2d. in Baker or Trussel, who says
he was neither Elder or deformed.
the very same Court, and says that the Londoners swore Allegiance to the
Firstborn Edward but a year old, and then before the Second was so much as
born. And for his deformity that he only gathers from the shallower Argument of
his Name being Crouch-back, which as Baker observes, was rather from his
wearing a Cross upon his Back, and this I look upon as better Authority then
Buck's in the accomplishment and polishing of Richard the third, and the
clearing of him from his crookedness; and yet I believe our good Natured
Historian will readily credit that, because spoken in commendation of a
Usurper, a Tyrant, and a Murderer; and one that came to the Crown, as he will
have it, by the consent of the People, tho this of ours must by no means be
believed, because it no way makes for his purpose.

The last was but little, and now the next Reign is as much for the Gentleman's
purpose, and that is a Rebellion of a Parliament, an actual Deposition of the
present King, and the Murdering of his Sovereign, and of that, he makes as good
use too, as if he designed not only to transmit it with his Papers to
posterity; but with his Pen for the present Age to transcribe it into Practice,
and what the Devil himself would have condemned in an History; has this Impious
Wretch made a damnable President: It must be his Design, from the Season of its
Publication, from the Proceedings of his Parliament, and from the subsequent
Discoveries, the whole piece was nothing else in every Paragraph, but a
Vindication of the Parliaments Power over Kings, and here in this he has made
the Deposition of his King, like their ordinary Proceedings warrantable by
President; why did he not tell them too, Painted Chamber Vid. Their own Journal
Book Fol. 116.
Monday the 29. ordered a warrant be drawn for Executing the King in the open
Street before White Hall. Sir Arthur Haslerig Reports from the Committee, ibid.
March. 1648
that Charles and James Stewart, Sons of the late King should dye without Mercy
wheresoever they should be found.

And he had certainly brought down his History to this too had the Times been
but black enough to bear it; for the subsequent sacrificing of Richard the
Second is as much his popular Theme; his Power of Parliaments, and his Election
of the People: He tells them their Ancestors were weary of this Kings Irregular
and Arbitrary Government, and the malicious Wretch found some of their present
Posterity, as uneasy under a mild, and merciful Reign; he tells them their
Parliament publicly read a Paper containing Instances of the Kings
Misgovernment, Vid. page 6: of the brief History of Succession.
and concluded that he was unworthy to Reign any longer, and ought to be
deposed, and sent to him to renounce his Crown and Dignity, otherwise they
would proceed, (that is, to do it for him;) but I think his piece was overseen,
that it did not Vid. Proceedings at the Old-Bayly.
tell them too of another Paper as Bernardiston told them at the Bar, that was
talked of in Parliament, about too, The Encroachments and Usurpation of
Arbitrary Power, of following such Orders as shall from Time to Time be
received from this present Parliament, or the Major part of the Members, when
it shall be Prorogued or Dissolved, and obey such Officers as they shall set
over us,

Certainly his making this unfortunate Edward's Deposition a Parliamentary
President has unmaskt our Treasons Historiographer, superseded even with men
but of common Sense his designed Impositions, registered himself an inveterate
Traitor with his own hand, and Chronicl'd his lasting Treason to Posterity,
which will blush at the reading of those Villainous Infinuations, which his most
Licentious Pen could Publish without; 'twas then in that Kings Reign too, as
appears in their Ordinances they made, the Tumultuous and Rebellious Vid. Dr.
B. History, Fol. 20.
Barons; (for the Commons were then not so considerable as to raise a
Rebellion,) upon the Pretense of Gods Honor and the Church; the Honor of the
King and his Realm; made (...) to remove evil Counselors, reform the Court,
and to force the King to let them name all the Judges of the Bench, and the
chief Officers of the Crown; how near they then agreed with some of our late
Transactions, and how well those have been copied since, I need not observe.
And that the Narrative the Author of this piece presents to the Parliament was
offered only for the Designs I have suggested, appears also from this Instance,
being no way pertinent, to what ought to be the right purport of his History,
whose Subject should have been but of Succession; But that he found was not to
be disputed here in this Reign, it being Hereditary beyond Contradiction, and
it is now an unanswerable Confirmation that those who are so much for altering
the descent of the Crown, are as much for the deposing of him that wears it;
it is now an attested Truth under their own hands, and they must give themselves
the Lie to confute it.

But whatever were the pardonable faults of this unhappy Prince, tho our 4 El.
246. Bracton Lib. 1. Chap. (...).
Law say, A King can have none, much less be punished for it, when he can do no
wrong: The greatest that Daniel condemns Daniel p. 184.
was his mighty favoring of his Minions, Gaveston and Spencer's, in Opposition
to his Barons, ( and must it be criminal to a King to have a Friend?) But
however in his History calls it the first Example of a deposed Prince, no less
dishonorable to the State than to him; (...) calls the Bishop of Hereford,
that Stow p. 225.
then was busied in the Resignation, but a Mischievous Ambassador; and pray
what was the Fate of those that were the first Leaders of the Rebellion, and
the most mutinous. The mighty Duke of Lancaster was by his own Peers condemned
to be Hanged and Quartered, and was only Beheaded, and several Barons besides,
and afterward Mortimer the Queens own Minion and Favorite, was impeached in
Parliament of Edward the Third, for making Dissension between the late King and
Queen; for murdering of his Sovereign, and accordingly was drawn, Hanged and
Quartered for it with several of his Adherents.

But as Unanimous and as Clamorous Vid. Rot. Parliament 50. cited p. Dr. B.
as they seemed for his Deposition, the greatest Contenders for it as some of
our Historians affirm, lamented it with regret when it was done, and Stow tells
us, that when the Queen understood Vid. Stow 224.
her Son was Elected, she seemed to be full of sorrow, as it were almost out of
her Wits, and the Son lamented too, and swore, that against his Fathers Will,
he would never take the Crown.

And after all, what succeeded this most unjust Deprivation and Imprisonment of
a King but what still is its immediate subsequent, the Barbarous Murder; this
was verified in the following fate of King Richard, this was the unfortunate
Consequence of our late confined Martyr; Mattrevers Iron soon followed the
firsts Imprisonment in Corse and Berkley Gastle; Exton`s Poll-ax as quickly
dispatched the Second at Pomsret, and the Block at White Hall too soon attended
the Confinements of the last Martyr in Carisbrook and Holmby, confirming even
with his last breath, and verifying in his latest Blood this too fatal
Aphorism; that a Death soon follows Vid. Eikon Basil:
the Deprivation of a King, and that there is, (in his own words) but a little
distance between the Prisons, and the Graves of Princes.

And now the next that enters this Theater Royal, is Edward the Third, a Son
too forward to accept of a Crown, before 'twas his due; But notwithstanding
this Rebellious Instance he has given, not so formally chosen, as to make the
Kingdom Elective, for their very choosing of his Son, and that the Eldest,
insinuates that in spite of their obstinate dissobedience, their resolute
Rebellion, they were still touched with a sense of right, and privilege of
Primogeniture, and the small remainders of Majesty, the bare Right they had,
left him, awd them so far, as to think it necessary to palliate their too open
villainies, with the formality of a Resignation, neither would the Son accept
it, neither was he proclaimed, or Crowned, till his (...) had resigned; and let
the bold audacious force they used for it; lie at their Door that vindicate it;
his resigning entitled his Son, and he had a sort of Right in Civil Law besides
Hereditary, pro derelicto.

Here it is pretty remarkable, the fine sort of Observation he makes on the
Bishop of Canterbury's Text; vox Populi, Brief History p. 6.
that it was the voice of the Almighty too, and impiously upbraids the sacred
Dust of their own Martyred Lawd; for placing a Divine Right in Kings, when some
of his Predecessors had so well lodged it in the People; but did not the
Impudence of his Brow almost exceed the villainy of his Heart, his Conscience as
hard as his Forehead, or both; he could never thus inhumanely reflect on him,
whom they butchered too, as barbarously, and that with such a Reflection, that
flies in his own Face, when the very Opposers of this pious Praelates Opinion,
verifyed afterward his Prophetic fear, and by the placing this Divine Right
in the People, sent as soon his sacred Majesty to follow the Praelate.

But can ever Wretches show more industrious Malice toward the Government,
when they shall close with the Doctrines of their worst of Enemies, and which
they would be thought so damnably to detest; to do it an Injury, cite you the
Authority of the most Zealous Catholics, when it will make against the
Monarchy, yet baffle, and burlesque the very Bible, when it makes for it; the
malicious Miscreant knows the Clergy then were all bound by their Oaths,
besides their Opinions, to be the Bigots of Rome: He knows the Popes supremacy,
then would not admit of the Kings: He knows the pleasing of the People, was
then the best Expedient for the promoting the Pope, that from them came all the
Penny's, that paid them for their Pater-nosters, and that this beast of
Babylon, (against which our Zealots pretend too as much Brutal rage) then only
trampled upon the Necks of Kings, not only had Her stirrops held by them; but
rid upon the very backs of Princes, and that only because the poor People were
so Priest-ridden; would he have had that Popish Prelate preach to them the
Kings Supremacy, told them he was not to be touched, because jure divino; when
themselves make it the Doctrine of their Church to dethrone them; certainly such
Sycophants dissemble when they cry up the Reformation, that rely so much upon
the Religion of those times before they were Reformed.

The Bishop, as he thinks, having now Principes Regni habito Concilio apud
Westminster. Pol. Virg. Lib. 5.
pretty well asserted the Peoples supremacy by making them Divine; he brings in
as prettily Polidore Virgil, proving them to be all Princes, so that we have
now but one Subject left, and that is the King; but by his leave the Governments
bark must be wrackt in a Rebellion and a storm, before they can come to Reign
like so many Trincaloes in the Tempest: The Gentleman sure read Shakespeare
instead of Virgil, and thinks our Isle enchanted too; but to be serious in
matters of Blood, and Right, and that when both Royal, could any Person of
sober sense be so simply sollicitous, as from an Author foreign, unknowing our
Constitutions, calling some of our Subjects Principes to suggest their
Supremacy, their Superiority; we know as well as he, what he means by it, or
what he must mean, that they were some of the chief of the Realm, and will that
make them Rulers too: the Latin Idiom sometimes applies the word Princeps, to
subordinate supremacy, as well as to those that are sole Supreme: But even the
Authority that he cites for this silly Suggestion, and others; P. Virgil
himself is sufficiently secluded In's Epistle to Queen Eliz.
from being Authentic by Sir Henry Savill.

The next Factious Insinuation that follows, is that John De Gaunt, this Edward
the Thirds fourth Son; but the Eldest surviving, disputed the Succession: But
this, as a Learned, and Loyal Author observes, so far from Truth, that he was
at the latter end of his Fathers Life, made Lieutenant of the Realm, and
Protector of it, during Richard his Minority; certainly had his Competition
come in Question, they would have been but dangerous Trusts, and against the
Laws of all Nations and our own; for the Civil takes sufficient Care for the
removing of all suspected Tutors, and our Common ordained upon Instit. Lib. 1.
Tit. 26. de suspectis Tutoribus. Cokes 1 Insti. sect. 108. Daniel p. 217.
the Lord's loosing his ward, for disparagement, that the wardship of the Heir
should never go to the nearest of kin, but to the next to whom the Inheritance
cannot descend: Daniel says King Edward, purposely to prevent the disorder, and
mischiefs that attend the disordering Succession, settled the same in Parliament
on Richard, lest John of Lancaster should supplant him as Earl John had done
his Nephew Arthur, and this disingenuous Creature perverts the fear of
Supplantation into a dispute of the Succession; and Stow tells us of nothing
but his being made Prince of Wales on his Brothers Death: But this Uncle proved
a better Keeper of the King in his Protectorate, than this John or Richard the
Third, had but the Poor Princes Subjects kept their Faith too, and not given
(...): perjured Author another Instance for the renouncing his Allegiance, and
a second president for the deposing of his King.

And here since this Historian has already cited two or three Popish
Archbishops, for the Countenancing of his Puritanism, and the Doctrine of
Bellarmin for the Counterpart of Buchanan, conspiring in a perfect Harmony for
the Deposition of their Kings, and their Murder; I Will tell him of another
Canterbury too, that blew the Trumpet to the dethroning of the next King, and
the sacrificing of his Sovereign upon that Altar of his Lips. For the first
thing that the first Usurper attempted, that aspiring Prince when he landed,
was the causing of Arundel, then the Metropolitan, to preach down King Richard;
the Prelate had ready a Bull procured from Rome, promising Remission of Sins to
all those that should aid the said Henry, and after their death to be placed in
Paradise; which preaching as our Author says, Stow p. 320.
moved many to cleave to the Duke: but this Popish Puritan knows our Bishops
and Divines since the Reformation have taught him better Doctrine; and he licks
up the very Poison of his deadly Foes, only to spit the venom, in the Face of
the Government.

But with what face can he tell us of a Parliament, here drawing up a Form of
Resignation; which was just as much a Parliament as their late Major part of
Members that were to be obeyed in their Association: An Invader, Usurper and a
banished Subject takes upon him in the name of his Sovereing to Summon it; and
so did our late Rebels, fight and fire at his Majesty: but still with his own
good Leave and Authority, this Convok't that Parliament, as Cromwell secluded
his, with an Army at his heels; only those had secured their King in the Tower,
these in the Isle of Wight; and shall these their Journals of Rebellion, make
up a Book of Presidents? Is such a fellow fit to breath under a mild
Government, that calls for Blood, where there is so much Mercy? that Recommends
to your reading an Impeachment of his King, and refers you to the Charge, and
Articles that were drawn up for his Deposition, as a Brief (...) page. 7.
worthy Subject and well deserving to be read: Why did he not tells us too? as
well deserving to be imitated, Jan. 20, 48. The Solicitor Cook presented the
Charge against CHARLES STEWART Engrost, ordered that it be returned to him to
be exhibited.

Preposterous Lump of Law and It is a Maxim in Law Rexest Principium Caput, and
Finis Parliamenti.
Logic reversed! that prints himself the Contradiction to common Equity and
Reason; can such a Body Politic justly convene it self, only to Rebel against
its head, and to take away that Breath from whence it needs must have its
being; Vid. Bracton Lib. 1. C. 2. Leges Anglicanae Regum Authoritate jubent.
and can those Laws be made to conspire his Death, from whom themselves
acknowledge they receive their Life?

But as to the matter of Fact it self, you shall see what Sense some of the
Times had of it: The King of France 22. E. 3.6. Resolved the King makes Laws by
the Assent of Lords and Commons.
was so sensible of this Injurious Proceeding, that it ran him into a fit of
Frenzy; Richard being related to him by the Marriage of his Daughter, he
acquaints his Lords with his Resolution of Revenge; and they showed themselves
as ready to take it too, but were prevented here in England, by their taking
away his Life; which made them desist, not able to serve him after his Death.
This is but an Evidence how the Villainy was resented abroad, and you may find
they were as much upbraided with it at home, and that to their very face, when
a Parliament was sitting, and their Usurper on the Throne, by the Loyal Prelate
of Carlisle; whose Memory may it live as long as Loyalty can flourish, or our
Annals last: so solid and (...) were the Suggestions, so significant the Sense
of this pious Vide Baker and Trussel agree in the same of the Bishops Speech.
Soul, that it silenced all the Senate that was sitting; and nothing but the
prospect of some private or public Favor and Preferment hindered their
Conviction: their King was cool enough in prosecuting of his bold Truths, being
scarce warm in his own Government; yet at last upon Debate, and Consultation;
they confined the bold Bishop for a while, for the Liberty that he took; and
could only condemn his bold Indiscretion for showing them so much the badness
of their Cause.

Hollinshed tells us this poor Prince was most unthankfully used of his
Subjects. In no Kings days were the Commons in 3d. Vol. Chron. f. 508.
greater Wealth, or the Nobility more cherisht: how near some of our pampered
Jesuruns that are satten'd to rebel; confirm the danger of too much Luxury and
ease; the present fears from their experienced Attempts can best attest. But
the fatality that befell that unhappy Prince, affords us the best politics for
the prevention of the like Fate.

And now for his Henry the Fourth, he is forced to (...) for his depending on
the Parliaments choice, when in 1. H. 4. 12. 52.
that was his least Relyance; for as little as he makes of his claim from Henry
the Vid. Dr. B. p. 25.
Third, it is apparent from some Rolls of Parliament, that he challenged the
Realm upon that account, and the Lords were interrogated what they thought of
that claim? upon which without delay they consented he should Reign, and as
another Evidence of his Right to Rule, showed them the Seal of King Richard as
a Signification of his Will that he should fucceed him; but that which for
ought I see he lay his greatest weight upon, was but what all Usurpers must
most rely on, the Sword, and he himself assures them just after the Sermon was
ended, at the time they consented to be his Subjects, that he would take no
advantage against any Man's Estate, as coming in by Conquest, and Conquest is
one of the first claims he puts in at his Coronation, and as Haward Haward p.
98. Baker p. 15 is.
relates it in his Life, not the least mention of his being elected is there
mingled with his Claim.

But neither did the success of a prosperous Wickedness Countenance this
Usurpation; for he was soon made sensible that a Crown seldom sits easy on
that Head, where it has so little Right to sit, and indeed before it could be
well settled, his Lords conspired against him at Westminster, set up Maudlin the
Counterfeit, send to the King of France for assistance; Glendour stirrs up the
Welsh to rebel; the Nobility fell from him, drew up the following Articles
against himself, viz. for having Articl'd himself against his Sovereign; for
having falsified his Oath in meddling with the Kingdom and the Crown, for taking
Arms against his King, Imprisoning, Murdering Him; that he unjustly kept the
Crown from the Earl of March, to whom of Right it belonged, and vowed the
Restoration of Him, and His Destruction; and our Author Vid. Baker 161.
now shall know these too are Articles as well deserving to be read, and one
thing more that deserves as much Observation; that this his good Peoples
Election, was the prime Principal Cause Notwithstanding all these claims Speed
says he at his Death owned he had no Right to the Crown, Speed Lib. 9. Chap.
14. Philip De. Comines which wrote then, says to his Remembrance 80. of Blood
Royal died. If they long for the draught of Slaughter and Blood that followed
this their Election of the Line of Lancaster, then look upon the lamentable
List at the end of Trussel.
of losing of Millions of Lives, and an Ocean of Blood; here entered that Line
of Lancaster that had almost left the Nation Childless; the Nobility and Gentry
that escaped the Sword, were still by the prevailing Party chopped off or
gibbited, and in the space of about thirty year and somewhat upwards, they
dreined more Blood in England, then e're was spent in the Conquest of France,
or would have been spilt had it been again attempted, and that too never have
been lost by their Henry the Sixth, had it not been for an altered Succession,
and an injured Heir, and the Bloody Consequences of a debarred Right.

And now at last, he is forced to allow an instance of a Prince, that succeeded
without the least shadow of Election; and that in Henry the Fifth, to whom
himself owns they swore Allegiance without staying for his being declared; we
are obliged to him for this fair Concession; but this Kindness is only because
he finds it as clear as a Postulatum in the Mathematics, beyond his own
Impudence to contradict; but however, he must maliciously observe that it was a
thing strange, and without President, and why so? because his Polidore tells
him, such an extraordinary Kindness was never shown to any King before; it is
strange that his Italian should understand more of our own Government, than all
our own English Authors; it is no wonder sure, if he that was a Stranger to our
Affairs, should Write as strangely of it, and make our Mighty Monarchs of
Britain, no more then some petty Prince of his own Italy, and as Elective as
their Duke of Venice: But this perverse Gentleman shall know it was not without
President, and that by several Instances.

And first Richard the First presently on his Fathers Death without staying for
their suffrages, seized on his Father's Treasure, was girt with the Sword of
the Duchy of Normandy, took fealty both of Clergy and Lay, and exercised all
the Authority that Sovereign power could allow before he came to be recognized
Vide Daniel.
by their Suffrages, or to his Coronation.

2. Hoveden's Account that he gives of King John's coming to the Crown, which
as some Writers say, is the extant, says they swore Fealty to him when he was
out of England, without mentioning any thing of Preceding Election; and he had
his better Title, his Brothers Army then in the field; by which he could have
made himself soon their King, had they not been so ready to receive him.

3. Upon the Death of Henry the 3d. the States Assembled at the New-Temple, and
proclaimed his Son Edward King: when they knew not Daniel.
whether he was living or dead; swear Fealty to him, and cause a New-Seal to be
made. Here sure are some presidents of Allegiance before their Election, unless
he will make Declaring or Proclaiming to be so; and then in Gods Name in that
sense, let them as he contends for be Elected; for I think all will allow they
are proclaimed. But suppose on the death of a Predecessor there was no
convention of any of the Nobility Vid 4 part In Stit. 46. and Jenkins Lex
Terrae. p. 7.
or Commonalty; for Parliaments they then can have no Existence when the Breath
is gone that gave them Being; as all other Communitys, are de facto dissolved.
If, I say, there were none met to Declare or Proclaim his Succes must the
common Maxim be contradicted and the King dye too, for want of their Popular
Breath to give him Life? or do our Laws admit that this interval between his
Predecessors expiration and the proclaiming or crowning his Successor shall be
called an Interregnum? they know the Constitutions of our Government admit no
more of this than an Exclusion. They know that immediately by Descent King
James was declared to be completely and absolutely 1 Jacobi Watson and Clark.
Vid, also Calvin's Case, Cokes Rept. part 7.
King, and that by all the Judges of the Kingdom. I know the Kings Successor is
always immediately proclaimed upon his death; and that perhaps is more for the
proceedings of judicial Processes; and that Writs may presently run in his
name: But were such a Proclamation obstructed, I am satisfied he commenced an
absolute King upon the very Minute of his Predecessors Expiration; and if the
Law Maxim will not allow an Haeres viventis; there can be no Heir at all, if he
begin not to be so presently upon his Predecessors Death; and for an Evidence
of Fact, as well as Reason, this very King of whom we now treat, caught at the
Crown, while his Father was catching at his last breath; seized it as his own,
as being his Vid. Baker 166. and Trussel. In fine vit. Hen. 4.
Right as soon as the gasping Monarch did but seem dead, who only revived to let
him know how little that Right was by which he claimed, and so sealed the wrong
he had done with his last breath, the Successor declaring his own Sword should
maintain what his Fathers had got.

Immediately upon this Henry the Fifths Death, his Son Henry the Sixth
succeeded: This Author himself can talk of nothing of Election here neither,
but that he succeeded as his Fathers Heir; but to make the power of Parliament
prevail in this Kings Reign, he is forced to fly to a President, that prevents
any other Confutation of his whole History; for whereas he has contended all
alone for a Parliamentary privilege for altering the Succession, here he has
brought upon the Stage one that condemns it self, for doing so; here we find a
Duke of York too, by the power (as this Gentleman would have it of a Hen. 6th.
Parliament, but rather a perfect Usurpation upon the Crown) for a long time
excluded from his Birthright, and to make way for one of their Usurpers that
was a Monmouth too: That Exclusion was begun but with a Rebellion, and it ended
in as much Blood; is our having been wretchedly miserable, an Argument for our
tempting the Almighty to make us once more so? shall we Plot against Heaven for
our Destruction, and defy Fate to make us happy; it is matter of Astonishment
to find the very Presidents of our Nations ruin, to be preferred as expedients
for its Preservation, unless they think a Prince, whose Just resentments
themselves fear, and call revengeful, should now more tamely forego his Right;
when for above two hundred Years agon, it was with so much Blood asserted, or
do they think now an excluded Prince will find fewer Friends? no, these
Political Suggestions do but give themselves the Lie; his Courage they know,
and for that they associated; his Adherents they feared, and for that they were
to be destroyed; and here we have now by this Author's own Confession, after a
thirty years bloody Vid. Rot. Par. 39. H. 6. no. 10. Stow P. 49.
War, what in our next Parliament, perhaps we may have without, as well as in
the late Loyal one in Scotland, a full Recognition of the Right of the Lawful
Heir, and that no foregoing Act is of any force to foreclude the Right
Inheritor of the Crown, and the Parliament approving of a Duke of York for
their Sovereign, as a Right Heir, by Lineal descent from King Richard the
Second.

And now the Succession of this next King Edward the Fourth, was the greatest
Confirmation of the descent of the Crown to be by Proximity of Blood, that the
most devout Heart the most zealous Contender for this undoubted right, could
wish or desire. Here we have the very Parliaments, those omnipotent Powers of
the People, the God Almighties of these Idolatrous Adorers themselves
acknowledging; that such a Succession is agreeable to the Laws of God; Nature,
and Nations; Human and Divine; and is this now as this factious Impostor would
insinuate, only the Doctrine of Lambeth? The position of our Lawds and the
Principle of our Prelate?

The first thing that was done, in the first of this Edward the Fourth, was the
repealing of all the proceedings against Richard the Second, and all the three
following Lines of Lancaster, declared absolute Usurpers: That Henry the Fourth
Vid. the Par. Roll. recited at length by Dr. B. in's History p. 30.
had rashly, against Right and Justice, by Force and Arms, against his Faith
and Allegiance, raised War against King Richard, usurpt and intruded on the
Royal Power, that the Tyrant Imprisoned, murdered his Anointed, Crowned,
Consecrated King, against Gods Law, and Man's Allegiance; and that there moving
of the last Usurper was according to the Laws and Custom of the Realm: Most of
the proceedings of Parliaments in there former Reigns were all nulled and
vacated; and the Intrusion of the first Lancaster into the Throne, declared an
Occasion of the ruin of the Realm; and the ground of all the Civil and
Intestine Wars that followed.

But refractory Rebels may reply, This was after he had obtained his Right
again with the Sword, and all the Kingdom then his own Creatures: But still
these prejudiced Souls cannot reflect that most if not all of those Elections,
Usurpations, that they cite on their side, were only then the Sense of their
Parliaments, when they did not dare to think otherwise, and when they were
fright'ned into Faction with the Terror of the Sword; and forced to comply for
the fear of Arms: and are not their Votes and Suffrages, their Resolves, and
Orders; as warrantble for the declaring of an undoubted Right, as for an
asserting of an absolute Wrong? But even such a suggestion is as really simple,
as it is truly false, and so fails them too; for their own Author tells us, that
the Duke of York did not Brief History fol. 8.
think it worth the contending for, till his Title was declared in Parliament,
and that was done when the last of the Usurpers was in a flourishing Condition,
at the head of his House of Peers, and in the hearts of his People. And the
rejecting 39. H. 6. Stow p. 409. To which they after diligent deliberation had
and approved. Rot. Parl. 39. H. 6.
of their Intruder, so far from being done by force, that they took all the
Care, Counsel and Deliberation imaginable: as soon as the Duke put in his
Claim, they replied 'twas an high matter, and not to be considered without
their Kings consent, to whom all their Lords present it, himself orders it to
be examined, his own Title as far as could be found out to be defended;
accordingly they send for all the Judges who declined (without doubt out of
distruct) the discussing it; then all the Sergeants are sent for, and they do
the same, till forced by their Superiors into these three or four extorted
Objections.

1. The Oath they had takento this King.

2. The Entails made to the Heirs of Henry the Fourth.

3. That he claimed as Inheritor to Henry the Third.

The Replies of the Duke.

That no Oath was obligatory for the suppressing of a Right.

That the Entails were made only to supply the defect of a better Title.

And that Records would contradict his descent, from Henry the Third:

So sufficiently satisfied that honorable Assembly, that they presently
recognize his Right, and that for eschewing the many In conveniences that might
ensue, upon an Exclusion. And for saving a little of their Kings Honor, as they
called it, let the poor Usurper turn a Tenant for his Life; and that proved but
afterward at the Courtesy of the Heir.

Does not this blind implicit Adorer of his deify'd Creatures, this idolatrous
Admirer of his own created Gods, see in these particulars, and even in his own
presidents that he cites the mutability of Men's minds, and the contradictory
Conclusions of this his infallible Council, while Right it self must still
remain the same, and the decrees of Heaven cannot be cancelled, since the very
Laws of the Persians could not: and still when our own in this point of
Succession were repealed, we find it turned all into Confusion and a Hell; and
for a more sudden alteration in this vein and humor of Parliament, observe but
this single Instance, and that in the very season of which we are discoursing.
In the 38 of this Henry the sixth, a Parliament vid. Stow 38. H. 6. p. 406.
was held at Coventry; by that the Duke of York too is attainted of Treason,
and all his Adherents. Their Heirs disinherited to the ninth degree, their
Tenants spoiled of their goods, maimed, slain; but in the very next year, of
his Reign, the very same Coventry Parliament declared by another, to be a
devilish Council, celebrated for the destruction of the Nobility; never
elected, unduly returned; desiring the destruction rather than the Advancement
of the Commonwealth.

And now can the most popular advocate of the Party, from the perusal of Stow
39. H. 6. p. 406.
these their inconsistent irregular proceedings, make them absolute Arbitrators
of Right? They must resolve themselves into this Absurdity for a reply; that
the supreme Power of the Nation for its own security, can justly do wrong.

We have seen several Subjects against all Reason ruined with an Act of
Parliament; and therefore shall we think it always to do Right? What Reason can
we give that our Courts of Equity are still the same, but that they cannot be
controlled by the mutability of their Statute Law; and granting this their Bill
of Exclusion had past into Statute, that it had been Enacted a Royal Heir must
be debarr d of his Birthright, I am sure the general Council of the world,
would quickly have given their Opinions against this great one of our Nation.
And tho their Codes and Digests don't obtain with us, yet I cannot see why a
Prince should be denied the privilege of a private Person; And the Brother of
our King, the claiming his Right in Equity, what is allowed the meanest Subject
when forecluded by the Law.

The next immediate Succession of the Crown descends as immediately to the Buck
whom he cites in R. 3d reign no good Authority, who contradicts his Murdering
of his Nephews' and makes him no way deformed, against the sense of all
Historians. But that prejudiced Author might well flatter the Tyrantwhen one of
his own name and family was the Monsiers minion and favorite by his own
Confession.
next of Blood, and as for the most part it has done since the time of the
Saxons, from Father to Son; the Fifth Edward, as hopeful as unfortunate, and
the more in affording our Factious fellow, another president for an Assembly of
Rebels, that preferred the very Murderer of their Sovereign, and a pretended
Parliament that placed the Butcher of his Brothers Children on the Throne: And
truly this Monster might be said to be Elected by the People, whom no God or
Nature designed for the Crown; and who was forced to break the Laws of both to
come at it; and a sort of Election it was like those we had of late in the
City, with Rout, and Riot, and that in the same place too at their Guild Hall,
where the Duke of Buckingham very solemnly convenes the Mayor and Aldermen, and
there propounds to them and the rabble, their new King Richard, and it was like
Vid Stow Baker.
to be a fine sort of National Choice, that was to be decided by the Freemen of
L. Bacon calls him a King in fact. only, but Tyrant in Title 1. p.
London. But whatever Influence, as this Gentleman observed, they had on the
Succession, nothing of their consents could be gathered but from their silence,
for suffrages they had none, they being all surpised with so strange a
Proposition. Their Buckingham Elector with his Aldermen and some of their
Retinue cry up a Richard, and so carried all with a House of Commons Nemine
contradicente: And now for his Bill in Parliament, made rather by a pack't
Convention of Buckinghams for the Bastardizing of his Sovereign's Issue, that
very Roll of Rebellion acknowledges his right by Lawful Inheritance, grounded
upon the Laws of Vid. 1. R. 3. the whole Record in the Exact Abridgment fol.
712.
Nature and Custom, and God himself; also this which was rather a Convocation
of Rebels than a Convention of States, acknowledgd what this inconsiderate
Author cites them to Contradict, the Lineal and Legal descent of the Crown by
Proximity of Blood, but in this acknowledging of an Usurper the good Bishop of
Ely then opposed and for it was Committed to Buckingham's Custody, and Stow
calls it all a Stow p. 460.
mere mock-Election.

And here enters all in blood, and that of the Blood Royal and Innocents, the
mere Monster of a man, that beyond her intention, seemed to crawl into the
World while nature lay asleep, with a distorted Body the proper receptacle for
as perverse a Soul; and in him the third great Example that our Impious Author
vouches for the Practicable Presidents, of a Parliaments abetting the plain
Usurpation of a Rebel to the Rebellious deposition of a King that Reigned; and
consequently, the subsequent Murders of those that had the right, and those
damnable Proceedings against Edw. 2d. and Richard 2d. and these poor Infants
has he more Elaborately handled than all the rest of his abominable Treatise;
and the Contradictory Wretch calls the Murder of the Nephews Barbarous, yet
pleads for the power of a Parliament that Introduced the Tyrant for their
Murder, for they were as much dispatched by their suffrages in the senate, as
by Tyrrel in the Tower; they were the Ministers of Injustice that sentenced
them out of their Right, and that other only an Executioner to dispatch them of
their Life; for the History of all Nations, and too sadly that of our own,
verifies it for an experienced truth, that the Destruction of those that have
right, certainly follows in all Monarchies, the bloody Usurpation or the
popular Election of him that has none, an Association will needs follow an
Exclusion, for whom they have expelled, they must destroy, for such Murders as
are grounded upon MAXIMS of State, must as necessarily follow the Foundations
upon which they are laid; for whatever Usurpers undermine an old frame of
Government, their Interest obliges them to remove as rubbish all that shall
obstruct the raising of the new; and the dangers and fears from excluded
deposed Princes, or the poor injured Heirs, soon makes it absolute necessity to
cement the Walls with their Blood.

The best remarks that can be gathered from the following Reign of Harry the
Seventh, are to be found in the Lord Bacon's History, the best account of that
King, and he tells us he had no less then three Titles to the Crown whatever
that Italian Statesman Commines could conceive to the contrary; first his
Title in (...) of the Lady Elizabeth whom he was resolved to marry; secondly
that of the Line of Lancasters long disputed both by Plea and Arms; thirdly,
the Conquest by his own: But the Learned Historian observes the first was
looked on the fairest, and Yorks line, been always liked as the best Plea in
the Crowns descent, and for Confirmation of it the Learned Lord tells us, that
this Henry knew the Title of Lancaster Condemned by Act of Parliament, Bacon
Hist. H. 7. p. 3. Ibid. page 12.
and prejudiced in the Common opinion of the Realm, and that the root of all
the Mischiefs that befell him was the discountenancing of the house of York,
whom the General body of the Kingdom still affected; and whatever stress and
reliance this Prince might place in the PARLIAMENT's power, this able statesman
observes there is still a great deal of difference 'twixt a King that holds by
civil Act of State, and him that holds Originally by the Law of NATURE, and
DESCENT of BLOOD, so that we have here a Person versed in our own Laws, an
excellent and allowed Scholar by the whole World, and not only Lauds, and
Bishops, as our bigoted Author would have it, allowing a Divine right by the
Laws of Nature, and (who I am sure was so good a Naturalist as best understood
her Laws,) and that Natural descent by blood to be much more preferable, than
any other Human title given by such Inferior powers of a Parliament, whom the
most zealou's adorerssure will not acknowledge more Omnipotent then the God of
Nature himself.

I shall observe another Historical Instance that a true lineal descent was
then taken for the best title, and even in those times had the greatest
Influence, which was the Lord Stanley's Case, who tho the very Person that
placed the Crown on this Princes head, yet suffered the loss of Vid Bacon Hist.
his own only for saying somewhat that savoured of his kindness to the
Succession; and that if he was sure the Children of Edward were alive he would
not bear Arms against them; so mightily did the sense of the right blood
prevail with him that he sacrified all his own for it, and rather than recant
what he so well resolved, seemed no way sollicitous for his Life.

But that which this Historian might have observed too, in this Reign as a
discouragement to the designs of some of their popular Patriots then afoot,
when he penned this his presumptuous piece, was the ill success that two several
impostures met with in their pretensions to a Crown to which they were not
(...), no great Inducement certainly for any one to bepersuaded to personate
the Royal Heir, to set up for a Lambert or a Perkin, only for their misfortune
and fate.

Lastly, I shall conclude my remarks upon this Kings Reign, with an
Animadversion upon a Paragraph or two that conclude his piece, very pertinent
to this place, since it relates to the times of which we treat; and that is the
resolution of the Judges, upon the Case of this their King; that the Descent of
the Crown, purged all his defects, and attainder. This their opinion he refutes
Brief Hist. p. 17.
as Frivolous, Extrajudicial, and here Impertinent; but I hope to show this
Point a most material one, the Resolution to be a good Judgment, and their
reply much to the present purpose.

First, sure it was a matter and that of a high Nature to know how he was
qualified to sit in the House, that was to preside in it as the head: And tho
he might in some sense be said to have won the Crown with Arms, yet he knew it
would wear much Better, sit much Easier, if settled, and established according
to Law; and tho a Conqueror that has the Sword in his hand, can soon capacitate
himself to sway the Scepter; yet he will soon find the most regular Proceedings
tend most to the Establishment of his Reign; this made Henry the Seventh who
had a Triple Plea for the Crown, and that one by descent from the Lancasters
consult his Oracles of the Law, how far an Attainder past in the Reign ofthe
Yorks, would still taint his Blood; and make it less Inheritable.

Secondly, their Resolution that all preceding defects were purged in the
descent, was a Judgment both equitable, and reasonable; for 'twas sure but
equal that an Heir to whom an Inheritance and that ofa Crown was allowed to
descend should be qualified to take too; for if he was a King, no Bill of
Attainder could touch him, that was past too when he was none: And if he was no
King, Vid Dyer H. 7. f. 59. The King is the head of the Parliament, Lords and
Commons but Members. So no more Parliament without a King, than a body without
a head. It is no Stat. if a King assent not to it. 12. H. 7.20.
all the concurrence of the Lords and Commons could never have made him an Act
for his being so; there being no Royal Authority, to pass it into Law, and
nothing by the very constitution of our Government can be made a Law without;
so that such a resolution certainly was highly reasonable, and unavoidable,
that that should purge its own defects which no power had perfection anough to
purge; would he have a King pass an Act with his two Houses for the reversal of
his own Attainder, or the two Houses reverse the Attainder of their King? If
the first, the allowing him to pass such an Act, supersedes the end for which
it should be past, and makes him de Facto capable whom they would capacitate,
if he allows the Latter then he must an Interregnum too; extinguish that
Monarchy for a while, of which the very Maxim says the Monarch cannot dye, and
place that Supreme power in the People, which all our Fundamental Laws have put
in the King.

Thirdly, this Resolution is very pertinent to the present purpose to which
it is commonly now applied; and that is the Bill of Exclusion: But his passion,
and prejudice; would not permit him to Examine the little difference there is
between them.

For certainly that ability that can discharge any attainder, is as efficacious
for the voiding and nulling any Bill that shall hinder the descent for a Bill
of Exclusion, would have been but a Bill or an Act of the House for disabling
the next Heir; And an Attainder can do the same; and is as much the Houses Act;
and to distinguish that in an Exclusion the Descent it self is prevented by a
Law, makes just no difference, for whoever is Attainted has his Descent
prevented by a Law too, and that antecedently also, before the Descent can come
to purge him; so that they only differ in this formal sort of Insignificancy,
In an Exclusion, the Discents prevention would be the sole Subject of the Bill,
in an Attainder it is by Consequence and Common Law prevented, and so the
disability being but the same in both, the defects by the same means may and
must be purged.

The president the Judges cite to justify 1. H. 7. f. 4. B. Town dit que le
Roy, H. 6. en son readeptiondel reign tant son Parlia. and il fuit atteint and
ne fuit Reverse. Al auter Justice dise que il ne fuit atteint, mes disable de
son Crown etc. and dise que eo facto que ill prist (...) luy le Royal dignity
que tout il suit Void.
this their Opinion, is not only applicable to their Case for which 'twas
cited, but much more so to the very project of Exclusion; which I Will prove too
from this Sophisters own reasoning: It is the Case of Henry the Sixth, who by
Act of Parliament was Disabl'd to hold the Crown; which was as particular an
Act for the depriving him of his presumed right, as this their Excluding Bill
would have been of an unquestionable one; Town, one of the Justices that
debated and argued this point, vouch't this H. 6. Case as an Attainder; but was
Corrected by the rest, and told that he was not attainted, but Disabled to hold
the Crown, but even that that was void as soon as he came again to wear it; and
seem to conclude that then a fortiori that an Attaindere would be purged away
by the Descent; and sure if this was then Law, and that even for the Line of
Lancaster, who had Defects of Title to be purged besides of tainted blood: It Is
strange to me why a York now, and such an one too; in whom both those so long
disputed Titles Terminate and Concenter, should be Disabl'd for ever by that
Expedient, which was resolved unable to prevent the Succession so long agon.

For Argument that an Attainder hinders the Crowns Descent, has this
presumptious Interpreter of the Law brought the most impertinent piece of
Application, that the defect of sense could suggest, and so has as little
reason, as Brief (...) page 7.
Truth, to tell us that this Judges Resolution on Attainder, is not to the
present purpose pertinent, for that a descent is insufficient to purge
attainted Blood, he cites the Sense of the King of France, and the Learned
advice that was given him to send his Son Lewis Because King John's Blood was
corrupted; but he might as well have told us because John is said to make over
his Kingdom to the Moor, we are all now Subjects to the King of Morocco; the
true reason of the French man's sending of his Son, is what will at any time
incapacitate the Crowns Descent, and that is the Rebellion of the Subjects, and
yet those very Barons that Rebelled never insisted on his corruption of Blood,
never made it so much as a Plea for their Rebellious Insurrection; nay
themselves thought him so far from being disabl'd by it, that they preferred him
even to the very right Blood, which was incorrupted in his Nephew Arthur; but
allowing it then Law, this resolution that such Corruption is purged, was made
long since, and must now be as Legal, tho the Contrary before had been never so
much Law, so that here he has only taken the pains to be impertinent and that
too for the telling of a Lie.

But as his Villainous heart, had falsely forged before that the Learned in King
John's time invited Lewis over only because they thought his Attainder had
incapacitated him to take the Crown: when all the while they made nothing but
their Magna Charta and their privileges the pretense for their Rebellion, and
would have been certainly glad of such a suggestion, when they were so well
Resolved to Rebel, (tho I look upon this Inviting in of the Frenchman rather
as a Retribution of a Remarkable Providence, that retaliated on his head the
same sufferance from his Rebel Subjects, which his Sovereign and own Father had
suffered from himself as Rebellious a Son, who sided against Henry the Second
with Philip of France the Successor of a Lewis, as these did with a Lewis a
Philips Successor.) With the same falsehood and forgery would he have the world
believe that the Line of Lancaster was so long approved, only because that of
Yorks was Attainted; which when purged in Parliament, he says, they then
presently forsook the Lancastrian: But if he pleases to Consult my Lord History
H. 7.
Bacon he will find that Learned Historian tell him another tale; and that the
Lancaster Line was always the less esteemed by the people, and how the
Parliament could purge the Duke of York only by declaring him Heir Apparent I
cannot apprehend; for whatever can be warrantably past by a Parliament to
warrant Obedience, must be what is past into an Act too; unless one of their
Ordered and Resolved shall resolve it self into a Law, for such a Statute must,
(tho it were for the declaring an Heir Apparent to the Crown,) have the Royal
Sanction of some Lawful King, which could never be Consistent here, with this
their most inconsistent Declaration; for the granting the Duke of York to be
their Heir Apparent, in the same Breath pronounced Henry the Sixth an Usurper;
and the very words that declared York an Apparent Heir, made him de facto their
Lawful King; for they must either allow that he was the Crowns Heir, and then
that had devolved to him long before by Blood and Inheritance from Lionel Duke
of Clarence, Elder Brother to John of Gaunt, from whom the Lancasters claimed,
or else they declared their Lineal, Lawful King, an Intruders, Usurpers Heir it
is an unavoidable Dilemma; if the first, then an acknowledgment, of an
irreparable wrong, done to their Lineal Sovereign that had an unquestionable
right, if the Latter, then most absurd and contradictory in making him an Heir
to the Crown from that Henry, that himself never had the least Title to the
wearing it.

From whence I conclude, that any such supposed Act (and it must be allowed
that if not an Act that then it signified nothing too,) that purged Richard
Duke of York from his Attainder, could never have the Royal Assent, unless most
absurdly from one that was no King; for either it must be past by Henry the
fixth, and then the thing he past un-King'd him; or else by the Duke the
declared Heir, and then but a supposed Subject in the very Declaration, or
rather a Lawful and allowed King in admitting him to pass a Bill, and so
superseded such a fuperfluous and Declaratory Act.

Lastly, even in this very point the Seditious Author supersedes the pains of
any Loyal pen for the Confutation of the false Position he would prove, and in
the very same Paragraph baffles himself to prevent an Answer, and tells us that
Richard Duke of York's Corruption Brief History p. 17.
was purged when declared Heir Apparent by the Parliament, and that therefore
the People forsook the Lancastrians, and set the House of York in the Throne;
shall the being declared but an Heir Apparent purge an Attainder? And shall not
an actual descent of the Crown take away the same defects? shall here be
thought the bare opinion of a Parliament sufficient to clear a Corrupted Blood?
And shall It was resolved so by all the Judges in the Cheques Chamber, 1. H. 7.
and so not extrajudicial, but that which troubles them is, that these the Kings
Judges should have the reresolution of what is law which when we come (...) Mr.
Sidney's paper that complains of it too we shall prove to be (...). Vid. Stows
Ann. page 409. 406.
not for the same the resolution of all the Judges suffice? But as this
contradicts all right and reason, so the very next Line all History and Truth;
for it appears from all the Chronicles that can be consulted, that the house of
York was rather owned by the Parliament, for fear of the People, then that the
People were prevailed upon by the Parliaments opinion: for this Parliament of
his had not above half a year before at Coventry declared the Duke and all his
Adherents Traitors, Disinherited, and Excluded him and his Heirs. Ludlow a Town
that belonged to him sacked to the bare Walls, and as a Member in the late
Houses moved for the (...) of Popish Women too; so did the Parliamentary rigor
of those Times extend also to that Sex; and the Duchess suffered then the same
severe Exile with the Duke, and as our Author says, was spoiled of all her
Goods, yet (...) rigorous as they showed themselves in (...) violent Votes
against him and all that was his, his Hereditary right was so rooted in the
Peoples Hearts, that it formed for him an Army, fought for him at Northampton;
and brought both the Usurper and his Parliament to a Composition for the Crown.

Thus much for the refuting of his little Reason, and his less Law upon the
Brief History fol. 18.
Case: And his Historical Inference that follows for its Justification, fails
him as much too, for he tells us the Tale of Richard the Thirds letting the
Children of his Brother Clarence live, because their Father was attained in
Edward the 17. Edw. 4.
Fourths time, and that it was the Resolution of his Parliament that his Issue
1. Rich. 3.
was thereby disabl'd to Challenge the Crown.

And truly the Case will admit of no better defense; the badness of his cause
can never be made good, but with such a Justification as is much worse. He
verifies that Aphorism of the Tragedian, that to secure your selfin your
Villainies, you must commit more, and it is the Politics too of a Matchiavel as
well as a Seneca, and Seneca in Traged.
this the practice now of our present Republican, who firstlays you down a
Position perhaps truly Treasonable, and then is forced to fly to the Resolution
of Traitors for the defense of the Treason; and proves that the Crowns Descent
does not purge Attainder, because this Parliament of an absolute Usurper,
rather a pack of Rebels then a convention of States, resolved it so. Could it
be imagined that those that had Bastardiz'd the Blood of their late Sovereign
for him already, would Boggle to Declare that of a Clarence, and but their
Kings Brother corrupt? would those that promoted the spilling of the Blood of
the two Nephews, stick to Resolve that of the rest attainted? the Malicious
Impostor knows, that they were then treating with a Tyrant, that they
themselves had advanced to the Throne; and would he have had those demurred
upon a point in Law, to have argued of his Crown again, which themselves knew
against all the Laws of the Land they had placed upon his head?

But this President if allowed, would still to the present purpose be as
Impertinent, as it is Treasonable; for the Question is what was Law since H. 7.
time, and he Labors to Confute it with what was said some three years before;
and to Bassle the Resolution of all the Judges of the Kingdom; with the
Suffrages of the Parliament, that even of their own Laws have no right to
Judge, much less by any Preceding determinations of their house to Bind all the
Succeeding Judges of the Realm; let him first prove a even Vsurper's
Parliaments opinion Law, and then proceed to refute the resolutions of the
Judges of a Lawful King. In short, nothing can be Law there but what is
Enacted, if Clarence his Attainder did not take away the Descent, the
resolution of the Judges since is certainly the more just; if it did then, yet
still their opinion never the less Justifiable now; for the opinion of that
Parliament neither was or could be made Law, for if they would have made it an
Act it must have been done before Richard was in the Throne, and then void for
want of Royal Assent, if after they had Crowned their Usurper, then sure too
late to be enacted, unless they would have made the Tyrant his own Judge: And
himself to have Attainted the second Pair of Nephews, as well as he Butchered
the First.

But as fearless as (he says) the Monster was from the pretensions of the D. of
Clarence his Children, whose Minority might well make the poor Infants not very
formidable, yet he did not think the Duke himself so Barred with his Attainder,
but that he might still have been a Bar against his Horrid Usurpation; that
truly sent the poor Prince to Vid Baker p. 215. An. 1477.
the Tower, and got the Brother of the Monstrous Assassin to be suffocated in
the Malmsey Butt.

The descent to Henry the 8 was both by Blood and Entail, and so beyond
contradiction, and with their own concession Hereditary; but where that
objection to the Birthright fails them, there to be sure some subsequent Act
of that Kings Reign shall be sifted, and made to Countenance their suggested
falsehoods, tho the Succession of the Prince himself contradicts it; who had
all the Consolidated Titles in him, that had been so long disputed, all that
his Mothers Blood, and his Fathers Arms, and the Law could Invest him with, but
because his Exorbitant proceedings, his Arbitrary power and predominancy which
themselves condemned him for over Parliaments awd them into an altering the
Succession as often as he was pleased to Change his bed or chop off a Wife,
therefore must we conclude Parliaments to have a Power to do that by Right,
which against all right perhaps they were compelled to do? why does he not
prove it a president for Polygamy, and Murder; because that furious Prince
still sacrificed Women to his Lust, and Men to his Anger? But yet allowing them
such a Power of meddling with the Succession, which certainly does not follow
from their having some time Vsurp't it, or been put upon that Usurpation by
their very Prince, for it is against reason to make that a right, only because
they can plead Prescription for doing a wrong; but here those several
alterations were all caused to be made for the securing of a Lineal, Legitimate
and lawful Succesior to the Throne; for as a Reverend Author says, Bishp.
Godwins Histo. H. 8. p. 37.
the King Lamented that he should leave the Kingdom toa Woman whose Birth was
questionable, and he willing to settle the Kingdom on his LAWFUL Issue; and for
this reason he got the 25th to pass, against his Daughter Mary. And the very
Preamble of the Act tells us, that it was for the Surety of Title and
Succession and Lawful Inheritance.

Three years are scarce past till the 28 of his Reign repeals almost all that
the 25 had Enacted, their Protestant Queen Elizabeth made as well as the Popish
Mary, plain Bastard, and tho our prejudiced Author may make the same Vid.
Pulton, Stat.
matter right and wrong, as he stands affected, he must think this his powerful
Parliament dealt a little hard with the latter, whose Mother was never divorc't
but from her Life, and she pact off for a spurious Offspring, only upon the
pretended suggestions of Anne Boleyn's unknown impediments, confess't sine to
Canterbury. But whatever they were, the Canons of the Church, tho born before
Marriage, and since after the very Laws of the Land did make her Legitimate.

But however, this greater piece of Injustice to this good Protestant Queen,
(which they will say, now proceeded n's 31 as incontinency was made impediment in
the first Anns Case, they declared the fuant of concupiscence an Impediment in
the 2ds. and only upon his sending some of his Lords to the lower house the
Lady Cleves was unlawful too. Vid Stow p. 581. Baker 288. Stat: 35. H. 8.
from the Kings putting the Parliament upon too much Power,) was palliated all
along with the pretense of providing a Legitimate Lawful Successor, and so the
clear Reverse and Contradiction of the proceedings of our late Patriots, to
whose Privileges those sort of presidents were applied, for those Parliamentary
In the 33 the Parliament petitioned to him whom they knew it would please for
the Attainder of Kat. Howard his 5th Queen.
Powers secluded but Bastards to make room for Heirs Lawful and Legitimate,
with us an Issue truly Legitimate should have been EXCLUDED, for the setting up
of a SPURIOUS ONE.

But then at last comes the 35th of his Reign, and that like a Gunpowder Plot
in the Cellars, blows up all the former foundations of the whole House; both
the two former Stat. for Disabling, Illegitimating, are null, voy'd, repealed,
the LADY MARY, Sister Elizabeth, in those seven years, suffered my Lord Bacons
transmutation of Bodies; and were turned all into new matter; and what was
Spurious, Illegitimate, and in Capable, with the single Charm of be it enacted
was become truly Lawful Lineal Heir of the Crown, and Capacitated to succeed in
an HEREDITARY DESCENT; and so far from Invading the Prerogative, so full of
giving were the bountiful Parliaments of those times, that they Empower their
too Powerful Prince to dispose of his Crown by Letters Pattents; or an
Arbitrary, Testamentary disposition, an Oblation I think his present Majesty
might esteem too great to be accepted, who knows his Successor to be the
Crown's Heir, scarce his own, much less the PARLIAMENTS.

Edward the Sixth upon his Fathers death succeeded, an Heir, Lineal, Legal, and
Testamentary, yet the first thing this Author observes upon him is the greatest
falsehood; viz. That he took upon him a power what surely no King ever had, to
dispose of his Crown by Will: When in the very Preceding president his own
Father by his Will manifested he had the Power, and left it him by his last.
But his he will say was a Power given him by Parliament. But that is not so plain
neither both from the Preamble, and the purport of both the dissonant Acts of
28, and 35 for the designs of both were only for the settling the Succession,
and then upon supposition of the failure of issue from those upon whom it was
settled, they fairly leave it to his last Will or his Letters Pattents; but
supposing this Liberty had not been allowed, can he imagine that a King that had
got them to alter the succession at his pleasure in his Life time, would not
upon the failure of the Limited Heirs have disposed of it by Will at his death,
but that none but this Edward of our Kings took this power upon him is utterly
false, from these several instances. First the very first King of his name, in
the Saxon succession, left it so to his Son to succeed: And Athelstan,
Malmsbury Lib. 2. c. 6. fol. 27. Jussu patris in Testamento Athelstonus in
Regen acclamatus est
whom above this Gentleman recommended to the City of London for a Mon. and
Illegitimate, against the sense, and silence of all Historians, was declared
King by the Command, and last Will of his Father Edward the elder; in the Reign
of the Danes, Canutus did the same; bequeathed Norway to Swain his eldest, and
England to his youngest Son; and for the Norman Succession, the very first
King, and who had the most right to do so from the Sword, left to Rufus the
right but of an Heir Testamentary, tho followed by his Son Henry the first, And
Richard that had less reason so to do, for his Daughter Maud by the Law of the
Land would have been his Heir without the Legacy; and so would to the latter
his Nephew Arthur, and tho both were by Rebellion rejected, yet still sure
their right remained.

But for this Edward the 6th disposing it by Will, it was not only against the
Customary Descent of the Realm in a right blood; but of an Express Entail in
several Acts of Parliaments. I am so far of this Authors opinion, that I
believe it was no way warrantable, but never the sooner for his Parliaments
settlement, had it not been at last upon the right Heirs; for tho those Princes
of ours heretofore took upon them to leave Successors by Will, they still
nominated those that by Blood were to succeed without such a Nomination, so
that the bequest was more matter of Form, then Adoption; only to let the
Subjects know whom they looked upon to have the right of Succession, rather
than to superadd any thing of more right, and that is the reason (or ought to
be) that we properly call the next in Blood the Kings Successor, but the Crowns
Heir.

It Is a little prodigious Paradox to me, that it must be such a received Maxim
that a Parliament can do no wrong, and that in plain Terms they tell us it can
do any thing; mollifying it only with an Exception that they cannot make a Man a
Woman, yet that they bid pretty fair for too in these Presidents of Harry the
8th, when they made Bastard Females of those that were Legitimate and then
Legitimis'd again the same Bastards; and it is as mighty a Miracle to men
unprejudiced, that our Parliament Patriots should contend for the disordering
the Succession of the Crown, who still labor for the Lineal Descent of their
own Common Inheritance, (...) I will appeal to the breast of the most (...)
contender for this Power, whether an Act made for the disabling one of their
own Sons, or designed Successors, would not by themselves be looked on as (...)
if not utterly defeasible; and then (...) sure prodigiously strange where so
many Learned Heads tell us of a sort of (...) from a power Divine, where the
(...) Custom of the Kingdom has (...) a constant course of Lineal Descent,
(...), as has been shown, a perfect (...) intervened: And where themselves
(...) this sort of Succession has (...) sometimes by Statute entailed, yet
(...) they should think that but Justice (...) their Kings Successor, which
they (...) resent as an Injury to their own: (...) they may vouch for it, the
common (...) of Recoveries from a right Heir, with too Cunning sort of
vouching, and (...) too much practiced; but I am sure no way agrees with the
Laws of Foreign Nations, and has been a little (...) by some learned Heads in
our own, (...) some that have brought it into (...) seem to have raised a
Devil, not Vid. Dr and Student p. 49 to 58.
soon to be put down; in their Dialogue but however this Objection is (...)
analagous, nothing of a Parallel (...) for here is a Complication of both (...)
Concerned, and concluded upon (...) both their Consents, and where shall (...)
find the perfect Proprietor of (...) and Scepters, and when God has told us
(...) that by him they Reign that bear (...) and they will hardly vouch the (...)
for a piece of Injustice. But allowing for once a mere Human Constitution,
(...) in their bandied Authority of Saint (...), an Ordinance of Man, and the
(...) Consent with his Parliaments to (...) the Point, yet still the great
(...) would call for a little longer (...) than a Common Recovery, (...) not
presently to cut off the right of Heir to three Kingdoms, only (...) commonly
done at Westminster of (...) to so many Cottages; and besides, (...) that has
been practiced so long, and (...) the test of Time, and this their (...) would
have been the first President. And at last what has silenced their Advocates
for ever, the non-concurrence of the King and his Lords, whose consent was by
themselves supposed to be necessary because required; and will like those
recognitions of some of our former Parliaments for an Hereditary Succession
perpetuate that right, in spite of the Laws of others that were made for
altering it, and should the Commons ever get such a Bill to pass; it is enough
to say 'twas once rejected by the Peers, unless they can prove that the
Question was put again, Whether the lower House should take advice of the Lords
in the Legislative power, and that 'twas Resolved that the House of 6. Feb. 48.
carried in the Neg. p. 15. voices.
Peers was useless, dangerous, and ought to be abolish't, and Ordered that an
Act be brought in for that purpose.

Queen Mary succeeds her Brother In the very first of her Reign there was an
Act made declaring her Succession and Inheritance to be by right of Blood.
Edward, with all the Right of Blood, with all the Law of God, and Man too on
her side; for whatever the Parliament pretended, they could never (...) that
which was begotten in Matrimony, celebrated according to the Laws of the Church
and the Realm; for whatsoever defect there was found subsequent to the
Consummation of the Marriage in common reason and equity ought not to have
extended to the making that Issue spurious, which had all the requisites to the
making it truly Legitimate; (...) perhaps the subsequent discoveries (...) be
sufficient to cause a Divorce; and in the too Common Case of Adultery, 'twould
be severe, far from Equity to make Bastards of all that were born before the
Conviction of the Fact; but it may be reply`d to this, That these were such
Impediments as related to the Contract ab Juitio, and where that is (...) there
the Children begotten after (...) be supposed Lawful Heirs when the Contract it
self is against Law; but tho (...) I shall look upon that as a rigorous
resolution; when I think Innocents and Infants ought to be more favored,
especially when there is a Maxim in the Quod fieri non debet factum valet.
Law even in the like Cases, that the fact may be valid tho the doing of it
cannot be justified; and besides there being a Rule that obtains amongst
Civilians, That Leg. qui in provincia Sect. divs H. de Rit. Nup. l. 4.
Marriage contracted without any preconceiv'd Impediment, tho it after (...) to
be dissolved as unlawful, yet (...) begotten in such a state are reputed truly
Legitimate; and tho Appeals to (...) were then Punishable with a Praemunire, yet
the Civil Law then obtained much more than it does now; that Stat. being very
young as well as the Reformation, and by the Laws of the Church long before it;
they were such Latitudinarians in this point, that the subsequent Marriage
would Legitimate those that were born before the Contract, but that I confess
was 20. H. 3d.
rejected here in 20 Harry the 3d's time, because contrary to the common Laws
of the Realm which the Parliament resolutely declared they would not change.

But what ever power they had of Nullifying this and making Mary spurious, it is
certain another, and latter Act 35. H. 8.
made her as much Legitimate by making her Hereditary, insomuch that what ever
Edward her Brother was prevailed upon, a young Prince and a dying one, whose
forward Understanding might be well disordered with an approaching Death, and
an untimely end, and which might be easily prevailed upon in such
Circumstances, by the Cruel solicitations of the defigning Northumberland,
Stow. 609 Vid. Bishop of Hereford's last year of E. 6.
whose Son had but just Married Suffolk's Daughter the designed Queen; yet
(...) then (...) the truly Loyal Bishop and as true a ( Protestant, of which
his (...) to the right of the Crown was the best testimony, tho now it is made
but a preposterous Emphatical expression of that Religion to invade it;) that
worthy Prelate tho he suffered in the Succeeding flames of a real Persecution,
when demanded by these State Projectors his sense of the setting up of this
Testamentary Queen, declared it was no way agreeable to Equity to disinherit
the two Sisters, and that the Succession could not be Lawfully altered upon any
pretense; tho Religion then too, was the very thing pretended; the Bishop of
Hereford that was as good a Protestant observes upon the Suffolk men siding
with Queen Mary, tho they knew she was for setting up of Popery, says that our
English are in their respects to their Prince so Loyally Constant, that no
regard, no pretext of Religion, Ibid. page 157.
can extenuate their Affections to their Prince and Lawful Sovereign. And he
writ it in a Time when the most malicious cannot object it was to flatter a
suspected Successor, and when most of the Prelates themselves were so far from
Rome, that there was scarce an Arminian.

Upon the death of her Sister; Doctor Health Archbishop of Canterbury
presently Stow, 635.
declared Queen Elizabeth's right to the Parliament then sitting, who did not
put it to the Vote, as our Republican would insinuate they use to do, but
however did as much as was usual; acknowledged that she was right Lawful
Inheritor; and presently she was proclaimed in Westminster Hall; and in the
next vote they do declare moreover in full Assembly Lords and Commons, That
this 1. Eliz. c. 3.
their Queen Elizabeth is their Lawful Sovereign, by the Laws of God, (and so
not only in relation to 35 H. 8.) by the Statutes of the Realm, and the
Blood Royal; and in this open and generous Recognition, they must Implicitly
disclaim all power of Election, or give themselves the Lie, and so must our
Impostor put upon them a falsehood, if here his Parliamentary Choice must pass
for a Truth; but where matter fails them before, and he cannot prove his
Election antecedent to the Monarchs right, then as in some other places and
here at present he can make the Prince tho owned Hereditary, by some subsequent
Act of his own to make himself Elective, and for this he cites you the 13 of
this Queen; the purport 13. Eliz.
of which is, to disable any one even after her Death to inherit the Crown,
that shall pretend to it during her Life: But does not every one know that this
was Enacted as all the forementioned irregular Acts of her Father, with her
own seeking and desire? and the bringing this for a president for a
Parliamentary Power, is just as pertinent as that of palliating the Treason of
their late Covenant, with the Title and Pretense of an Association, made in her
Time too with her own Consent, and for the same purpose that this Act was past,
both being contrived in opposition to the pretenses of the Queen of Scots; and
must the only thing that has Blackened her clear Integrity with Injustice, and
Blemish't her Virgin Innocence with Blood, be brought upon the Stage for an
Imitation to our State, and because the Grandmother suffered with a Bill of
EXCLVSION and an AXE, and the Father with the same Fate, must the Son too that
has experienced exile, dangers, and all but death from this power of
Parliament, Succeed only in their Misfortune, and his Blood be made Hereditary
only in being Split?

All that he says of King James is but 1. Jacob.
what makes against him, and what he might have said of all the rest, that they
made a Recognition of his right upon his coming to the Crown, and truly such an
one as must silenced all such (...); for they acknowledge him, Lineal, Lawful,
Liege Lord, by the Laws of God, and Man; this may suffice for my sense of his
History; and all honest hearts will concur with my Sentiments, his subsequent
observations are but the same with the Principles of his ASSOCIATES that
follow, where I shall reflect upon them together as they are combined. And here
only give him an omitted Instance, as pertinent as the Presidents he has
proposed, to bring down his Narrative to the Times.

Charles the first; notwithstanding his proximity of Blood, his possession of
the Crown, and his pretended right from God, (...) the Parliament imprisoned
him, MVRDERED him, and put the Power in the People.

And now what can any Rational Soul See all the 3 Votes in their Journal Book.
living infer, even from this Authors own Observations; but that those
Parliaments which he brings us here for Presidents both for disallowing the
Descent of the Crown to purge the Defects of the Prince upon whom it descends;
as also those that concerned themselves in altering the Lineal Descent it self;
are so far from warranting the same Practices and proceedings, that they stand
upon Record, are Chronicl'd in History, registered in Coke, Ch-Treason 2d.
Inst. resolved by all the Judges of the Land the deposers were all Traitors.
their own Journals, declared by Special Acts, REBELS and TRAITORS; and then no
wonder if the poor People are encouraged to Rebel, when the very Presidents of
TREASON, shall be published as a Parliamentary Practice; the deluded filly
Souls, don't so soon consider, that if every Seditious Senate's determination,
shall decide too the Descent of the Crown, that this consequence which even
themselves may blush to own, must as inevitably follow, that from the Union of
the Seven under Egbert, to our present Sovereign the first Born Heir, to our
Three United Kingdoms; there never was, or could ever be, a REBELLION, or ever
one USURPER in the whole Catalogue of Kings.

Henry of Bullingbrook, by this unreasonable sort of supposition, had as much
right to the Crown, as that Unfortunate Richard from whom it was rent and torn;
Edward the Third but a Son; Intitl'd to the wearing it, before his Father had
done with it himself, and that Butcher of his Brothers Babes, and the Monster
of Men, as Lawful a King as his Nephew that he Murdered: That Arch-Rebel that
of late mounted the Throne, Cromwell himself, as much right to sit there; as a
Charles the best of Monarchs they Martyred; all these were by Parliament 1. Ed.
3d. 1. Hen. 4. 1. Rich. 3.
acknowledged for their Lawful Sovereigns, against the very Fundamental Laws of
all the Land; Laws that even with the Allowance of one their late most
Laborious, most popular (and pillor'd Advocate for this Power of Parliament,
Prynn's power of Parliament fol. 107.
Pryn himself,) have still placed the Descent of the Crown in the right Heirs
at Common Law; and who himself Confesses that Acts of Parliament have
translated it from them, to others who had no good Title; and then certainly
such a translation at best can be but bad, and Evidences that there is somewhat
else required besides their Power to the making of a King; so powerful and
prevalent are the Dictates of Truth and reason that they force their
Confessions sometimes from the very Mouths of those that Labor to give them
the Lie, drop from them unawares, and steal from their unadvised Lips.

Lastly, It Is most prodigiously Strange that such Seditious Sycophants as fawn
upon this Parliamentary Power, for altering the Succession, and asserting of an
absolute wrong; yet are such unreasonable Souls as not to Consider the several
Acts of the self-same Powers that have declared it unalterable, and maintained
the Monarchs Unquestionable right. Edward 1. Edw. 4.
the 4th's first Parliament they themselves know declared those that came to
the Crown by the Common Consent of the People to be but Usurpers; Kings only de
Facto, which implys 'its contrary, to be just, and that some de jure must be
Kings; they know the first of James declares his Royal Office an Heritage 1.
Jacob.
Inherent in the very Blood of him, and also that all our Books of Law besides
the Fundamental Constitution of the Land, do make the Regal Power Hereditary
and not Elective, and such an Elected Usurpers Laws can no further oblige the
Subject; of England then they they will submit; no more then the Czars of Muscovy,
a pecuniary (...) must be but a bare oppression; and a Capital Punishment
MURDER: But Will. Prynn, I Pryn's. That the Parliament and Kingdom are the
Sovereign power, a piece Printed by Order of the house of Commons.
Confess in another of his Treatises that he Printed, will have all such Acts
made by Consent of Usurping Kings, bind the right Heirs of the Crown that Reign
by a just Title: That all such Acts oblige them is utterly false, for one of
them is commonly for their Exclusion; but that some are admitted to bind is as
really True, but that is rather upon a Political account of their being
serviceable to the Public and the Country's Good. And is it not now an
unaccountable boldness; that the very same Cases of Usurpers upon the Crown,
that this Indefatigable piece of Faction published against the Father they
fought, and Murdered; should be retrieved against the Son whom the kind Heavens
even by Miracle so lately restored?

But at last allowing those palpable falsehoods they so much Labor for;
falsehoods so gross that they can be felt, to be matter of Fact, contradict the
true sense of all Chronicle; with a Seditious Supposition; to be secured of
Truth, give all the Laws of the Land the Lie; raze Rolls and Records, the
better to rise a Rebellion; and grant the Kings of England have been all
Elected, all almost from that Union of the Heptarchy in the Saxon; to that of
our three Kingdoms in the Scot, (and sure no Soul living can conclude with them
in a fairer Concession than in granting the very Postulate they require) yet
since they then in the End of K. James, tho but so lately had settled the
Succession and made it Hereditary; can with men of Common sense the Presidents
of its having been formerly Elective, prevail for an utter Subversion of such a
Settlement? Popery was once in England by Law Established, and must it
therefore again be Established by Law? Certainly all succeeding Reformation,
must null and abolish that from which they Reform; and a Repealing Act will
hardly be made Declaratory of the very Statute it Repeals; if these be but
their best Arguments, the same you see will reason us back into the very
Religion of Rome; we have seen several Rebellions, and some even of late to
have lain the Land in Blood; and can such sad Sufferance be made to Prescribe
for our Misery, warrant some such as Bloody to succeed; but since all this
supposed suggestion, must vanish like to soft Air, since the Succession has
been settled for so many several ages; to rake every musty Record only for a
sad Review of some Time of Confusion, is certainly but an Impious Industry to
Confound the work of the very God of Order: We may as well be discontented at
the Frame of his World he so well digested, and plead for Prescription the
Primitive Chaos.

CHAP. II. Remarks upon Plato Redivivus.
THE best Animadversion that I can make on his whole first days Discourse, is,
that it wants none; that it is Impertinence has superseded reproof; and the
fulsome flattering Dialogue as unfit for a serious Answer, as a Farce for a
Refutation out of a Sermon.

The great acquaintance these pretending Platonicks would be thought to have
with that Sect of Philosophers, did not oblige them to be so morosely reserved
as to know none other; and they may remember an Ephesian Sophy I believe as
Learned too in his Politics, that was never so much tickled, as when he saw
the dull Animal mumbling of the cross-grained unpalatable Thistle; the
disputing against the Laws of the Land, and the Light of Reason, they will find as
uneasy, as absurd; and the latter as Impious and Profane, and which deserves
to be assimulated to a more serious sort of Obstinacy, that of so many Saul's
kicking against the Pricks; but the Pleasant and Ridicnlous Disputants put in
for another pretty Quality of that insensible Brute, the length of their sordid
and stupid Flattery outdoes their Original Beast, and the sad Sophister would
force one Smile more, to see three of the same sort of Creatures for a whole
day clawing one another.

Certainly whatever they fancy the Dialogues of Plato, whatever the Favorers
of his Principles can suggest, surely they were never filled with such Fustian:
But that good old Philosopher did as plainly cloth his Disputes as well as
himself in an honest homely Drugget of Athens: Tho I confess they tell us of
his rich Bed, and his affectation of State, which a Soul so sublime could not
but Contemn; while these Sectaries are such refined Academicks, so much
polisn't with Travel and the breeding of the Times, That all the Fops of
France, the Dons of Spain, his Adulano of Italy, seem melted down into one Mass
of Impertinence; they cannot pass by the thin Apartments of a Page without a
Congee Bon-Grace, and a formal Salutation upon one another Excellencies, the
Doctor claws the Patient with his Lenitives, Frications, Emollients of Praise
and Adulation, and the Patient (who in the literal sense must be said to suffer
with such a Doctor, (if not in Body Natural, I am sure in the Politic) as in
Cordial Affection and Common Civility he is obliged; returns him the reputation
of his Book De Cord; for the tickling the very Auricula's of his Heart; (for
Praise must certainly be Pleasant for an AEsculapius that sets up for a
Matchiavel;) confutes Solomon and the Bible, as he says, for saying, the Heart
is unsearchable, tho but Vid. Argument to the Book.
an Ordinary Divine without the Critics, Tremellius, or a Munster would say,
that in the Text there is nothing meant but the mind: But Cor hominis must not
be Inscrutabile now, only because the Doctor has handled its fibers; and thus
this Triumvirate of Fulsomness and Faction, treat one another with their
Fustian and Foppery through the whole piece; I seldom care to lard our English
with the least scrap of Latin; but because it is the property of such pedantick
Scriblers, who still most affectwhat is most ridiculous, Foppery and Folly,
I Will only give them an Argument out of the Mathematics fora Demonstration. of
their agreeable Faction and Foolishness; and for his Cor hominis as it relates
to this Doctors Pharmaceutria, let him take one of Euclid's Postulates that has
a greater reference to their mighty Three: In Quae convenient uno Tertio
convenient inter se.
English thus, and if they will have Lattin it is in the Margin: Those that
agree in one Third, must needs agree among themselves. The Venetian Claws the
Doctor, the Dr. our English man; and he the Doctor and Venetian, one of them
must be somewhat of the Ass among them; and then it is Demonstrable they have a
great share in it all, and because the great Galen of the Times, is so bold
with his Catharticks as to set up for his Purging of the Court of Chancery; tho
I Page 129.
am no Practiser in it, yet I shall take the pains to defend it against the
Doctor in its due place; and since the Mountebank for the Body Natural is here
all along made an Empirick for the Diseases of the POLITIC; and from his
College brought to the Coffee-House, to talk only of the Marasmus of State,
I Will give him my sense tho no Statesman of this whole Work, in his own
Phraseology: The Piece seems to me like a sort of Preparation among the
Doctors; a mere Amalgama; the Chemical Operator understands it better than many
a Politician the Marasmus; it is a Composition of mere Quicksilver, and Lead,
tho this Political Spagyrist, perhaps will call it Saturn and Mercury, here
this Author with the help of the Fire of his hot Brain, has incorporated his
volatile thoughts and his dull ones together, gay Compliments and Air, Faction,
and Hell in a lump: And tho this homely Physician will not allow himself to have
been abroad, tho the courteous Venetian contended for his breeding in Padua,
Page 81.
yet the frequency of Murders here too, would make a Body mistrust it; and
however their Human Bodies escape, such Principles I am sure have Poisoned some
of their Souls; and thus I have placed my Pleasant Observation, upon their
Ridiculous Stuff together, that I might only reflect hereafter on what they
would have thought serious, and I shall worth a Reflection without the Mixture
of Mirth: Their mingled Foppery must otherwise provoke a little Laughter as
well as their Principles of Sedition incense; and I cannot Trim my Passions so
well, as to keep them in a pure (...) of Mirth and Anger. If any affected to
the Cause, or disaffected, thinks his Introduction deserv's a more serious
Reply; let him take the pains to give (...) a more solid Elaborate Confutation.

In the Second day they wisely agreed not to play the Fool; and (...) well they
(...) upon it for the sake of their Senses, and the first Observation of the
Venetian is as long as his Noble gown, down to the very heels of two Pages, but
for brevity you shall have it in as many words. Why that our English Nation
signifies so Plat. Red. Page 16.
little abroad, yet makes such a great sight at home; our Author having been so
much Conversant with Dons and French cannot forbear falling to his Formality
again, and after a soft sort of Compliment to the Courteous Stranger and the
Government, thus Thunders out his Negative Reason: Evil Counselors, Pensioner
Parliament, Thorough paced Judges, Flattering Ibid p. 20
Divines, designing Papists, French Councils. So I have seen at another sort of
Cabal where such Disputants use to assemble for Edification, and Doctrine, not
Dialogue and Dispute; the Jack-Pudding of their Pulpit has seemed to whisper
his God Almighty in the Ear as a common Zany does his Mountebank for
Instruction; and then raves out to the listening and Attentive Rabble, his
Choledochons, Phlegmagogons, Balms of Gilead, Conscience Salve, Curse ye Meroz,
Sword of Gideon; and for this Enthusiasm too those Harleqins of their
Assemblies the Burlesques of the Bible; shall Blaspheme with the very Book, and
vouch the Almighties coming to them in a still voice, and sometimes in a
rushing wind, and the Devil of Sedition shall be countenanced with the word of
God; I should hardly pardon my self the Liberty of sullying the sacred Text
with so much as the repetition of such a Simile, did not I know the Zealots
themselves had vouch't it for a Justification of their sudden Raptures and
Inspiration; and for this Preacher of the Politics, tho I never saw him in his
Geer and Gestures, I am sure he makes just such another Figure in his Speech,
on a sudden it is all Aposeiopesis soft and fair, and as soon all in Exclamation
(...) Ecphone, and these heats and lucid Interval's of raving, run through his
whole Work.

But first for his Forreigner, with his Observation, is it a Mathematical
Postulate that our Nation is so despicable with our Neighbor's, that it must
be granted as soon as ask't? or has he rather begged the Question; or can the
Noble Student from his Geometry, measure the same and reputation of the
Kingdoms of the Earth; but whatever his skill be in the Doctrine of Triangles,
I am sure he is much out here in his Measures, and whatever reputation England
has at Venice, or a complete Monarchy with a mixed Republic, I am sure with
better Governments it has as much esteem; and when ever it loses any, it must
proceed from the Scandals and Infectious breath of such Authors and Seditious
Vipers, that wound the Reputation as well as the Bowels of their Dam.

But that matter of Fact may contradict what Malice does but suggest; near the
very same Time this most Impudent About 80. or 81.
Observation was made, did they propose to our present Prince the League of
Guaranty, and desire HIS entrance before that of the Empire: But I can tell him
what once brought a Scandal indeed upon the Nation, made it a reproach to it is
Neighbors; in a thing of the like Nature, not to mention the Murder of their
King, for that supersedes all hopes of regaining it is former Esteem, for did
not the Proceedings of that Rebel Parliament, make us a byword to the Heathen,
and a Scandal even to the revolted Holland? did not the very Turks bless
themselves at the Villainy, and the Dutch since in Derision cut off the Tails of
their Currs, to let us know we made less of a Kings head, than a Dogs Neck? But
this we mean to apply related to it is reputation upon a League too; this was a
Scandal also brought upon it by a Parliament; this was the effect of unjustly
altering the Succession. And this was in the Time of Henry the 8, when the
Princes of the Empire would have made him Head of the Protestant League, but
upon hearing of his Extravagant Parliamentary Proceedings, of their repudiating
what Wives he pleased; and allowing a more cruel Divorce of a Pious Protestant
Queen from her Life as well as his Bed, and severing her Head from her
Shoulders, as well as the Crown; when they saw the Senate of England so
Inconsistent with themselves as to Legitimate Bastards, and then make Bastards
of those they thought Legitimate: Then began our Nations Reputation to be low
with our Neighbors? Then began our Parliament's to be looked upon as
insignificant, and the Supreme Power of our (...) Assembly, to Foreign
Councils seem inconsistent, and their mighty Credit so mean that they could not
be trusted; and thereupon all the Leaguer's (...) rejected Henry whom they had
preposed for their Head.

And well might they distrust the Councils of such a State, that while they
pretended the Reformation of Religion could chop off the Head of the most
zealous Reformer, and as Baker calls her Page 284.
one of the first Countenancers of the Gospel; make her Issue spurious, that
was like to and afterward did prove the most Protestant Princess, and all this
but to please a Lididinous King that could make her suffer for his constant
Crime, Inconstancy, when that too was so little proved and her Innocence so
much; whatever Papists were then Martyred for opposing their Kings Supremacy,
Protestants the Mass, a sort of Parliament persecution destroying both. Witness
the 6 Articles set forth in 31 of his Reign. Burnets Abridgment, page 157. Viz.
The Protestant Queen.
prospect these pretenders of Reformation gave to the Princes of the Empire
that they should think of making the head of this dissembling Parliament that
of their League too; I am sure they must all of them as Oats did when he took
the Mass, the Sacrament for his Religion, only pretend it; and tho they made
the World and Foreign Princes think well of their affections to Reform, tho
they had excluded the Pope, still they and their King could remain Papist's;
and a Reverend Author that has had the thanks of the House, says that a
Parliament was Summoned that was resolved to destroy her; so that we see a
Parliament could then contrive to make our Nation signify so little abroad,
and that our present King without one, signifies so much, that he stands the
sole Arbitrator of War, and Peace, and Europe only debarred of the benefits of
it, by the very Faction; that upbraids the Government with its being
disesteem'd, and this Noble Traveller, not only taken the Liberty to Lie with
Fame, but given Fame it self the Lie.

After he has Thundered out his Anathema's Page 20.
against the State in the Jargon I recited above, of Evil Counselors,
Pensioner Parliament, thorough paced Judges, which still the most malicious
Soul cannot allow to be the true Reasons of our Maladies and Distempers: But
however the State Negromancer, with his Rosacrucian the Doctor, knew these
terrible Names with the Populace are swallowed like his Pills without chawing,
and which they understand no more than his Catharticks with which they are
composed with that unhappy effect too; that they can no more discern the bitter
cheat, when these Prepossessions are got into the Guts of the Brain, then that
of the drug when in those of the Belly; but like Persons absolutely possessed
rave and rail only with the same words that are dictated by their Devil, yet,
after all this, and having Libel'd Courtiers that contrary to the true meaning
of the Law, as well in this Kings time as in that of the Late, they have got
Parliaments Dissolved, Vid. p. 20, 21. Plato Red.
Proroug'd, for the keeping of the Governments Life and Soul together; after
all these Seditious suggestions still he defines but Negatively, that none of
these are the Causes, but the effects of some Primary Cause that disturbs it;
but I am afraid this Primary Cause, to him is yet an occult one, unless the
Discovery of our late Plots, has so far illuminated his Understanding, as to
disclose it, or he consulted his Doctor, for his Diagnosticks; and got him to
make a better Crisis and Judgment of the distemper of the State.

But for those Acts by which he thinks his Majesty is obliged to call a
Parliament, for the Triennial one, I think runs with a Clause and a Proviso
that it may be oftener called and within the Term if occasion be; and pray who
shall be Judge of that occasion; the King who calls them, or the People who
would be called; and what if it be Judged an occasion, not to call them at all?
the Preservation of the Prerogative may as well exclude the force of this, as
some new Emergencies, which themselves plead for upon a necessity; and for the
Commonwealth and Peoples Benefit and Advantage can Invalidate others; but for
that obligation, and Law for the Parliaments sitting in the late Kings time,
that which he would truly have reinforced, is their Page 21.
being perpetual again and not to be dissolved; but for that I think he need
not persuade the Courtiers to Address or be so bold to Petition himself, unless
he would tell his Majesty they must again have the Militia; they must fight
once more against his Person for the sake of his Authority, and sit taking of
Covenants, and Associations, till they have taken off their King.

But after our Englishman has been so tedious in his Impertinence, so Fulsom
in his Complement, that the Venetian is forced to condemn his troublesome
Civility (that is) our Author begins to be ashamed of himself: Why then we come
to know, that before this great Secret that occasions our Disquiet, can be
disclosed before we can come to know the Distemper, that disturbs our own. We
must Discourse of Government in general; and for the Original of it, the
Gentleman is resolved to doubt: And why? Because this Government must be
Antecedent to such Authors as could give us an account of it, and the matter of
History, as I suppose he must mean, did occur long before they could get
Historians to transmit it to Posterity: as for particular Governments, he is
forced to allow the Knowledge of their Originals to be possibly transmitted, and
truly, that he might well in Civility consent to, what in Modesty he could not
contradict, and Rome and Athens will be found what they were in their Primitive
Plutarch, Florus, Paterculus etc.
State, so long as we can find Authors that can tell us of a Romulus a Theseus
for their Founder.

But when the Gentleman is so cruel to himself as to keep close to the Text,
that there is no Origin of Original Primitive Government known (for in truth,
these last mentioned might be Modern, and I believe that Rome and Athens were
never heard of, when Sodom and Gomorrah were burnt with Brimstone,) then he is
forced to give himself the Lie, and the word of Truth it self, God and the
Bible; and that he does in excepting Moses from the number of those that had
the Help, and Information of any Constitution Antecedent; as the Founders of
the forementioned Monarchies that were Established so long after, might well be
supposed to have had for their Instruction; and yet does that sacred Penman
inspired by God himself, almost Coaeval with the World, give us a clear account
of all Original Government, from the time that there was a Man to Rule, or a
Beast to be governed; and that too of an absolute Monarchical Empire: So that
all what the sublime Speculations, of this refined Politician can cavil at, is
only, that we cannot give him an account what was done before Adam, what truly
was the Constitutions of their Government, and He allows Moses to have had no
help of any Preceding administration, but only the aid of God himself. Page 29.
whether the Prae-Adamites lived like our Englishmen under a true Monarch, or
like the Venetian Republic, under an insignificant Duke: For this certainly
must be the Consequence of his Inconsiderate Assertion, that Original
Government is unknown, at the same time that he excepts Moses from the Number
of those that Established a Particular one; which by the Consequence of his own
Concession must be the first General and Original, unless he allow another
before it, dis-believe the very Bible, and give his God the Lie: But he is not
the first Author that has fancyed Prae-Adamites, and writ about them too:
Besides his Brother Heathen the Stagyrite, as great a Philosopher as his Plato,
tho not so Dogmatical, makes it more than an Hypothesis, one of his Principles
that our World was Eternal; and then indeed we shall be puzzled for this
Original of Government in General, for lack of a Creation; when the Bible shall
be baffled, and Books of Moses at a loss.

But I wonder since he allows that Primitive Penman, to be one inspired by God;
and excepts him too from the Number of those that have transmitted an account
of the Original of particular Governments, which must imply that he did of that
which was General, and so contradict his first Position, (That we wanted such a
Tradition;) that yet all the while he will not take notice what is the account he
gives, and what is the first, this Moses mentioned, without doubt he knew the
very Consideration of it would confute him, and that he would be confounded by
the very First Chapter of (...): And therefore he presently takes it for
granted that Politicians (...), (tho none but such as himself) that nothing but
Necessity Page 29.
made the first Government: But then, what does he think of the Dominion that
the Almighty gave in express Words to his created Man? was it only to extend to
the Beast of the Field, and Genesis 1.
Fowls of the Air, and every Living thing that then moved upon the Face of the
Earth? or ought it not in Reason be applied to those Beings too that should be
hereafter the product of those Beasts, and that of his own Loins; but even God
himself confirmed the Donation of this power afterward, to make it more sure,
made him Ruler In an (...) Subjection over his Wife Eve, and afterward
subjected Abel in a subordinate one to his Brother Cain.

It Is strange and prodigious to me, that Men professing Christianity,
Protestants even to a fault, in being filled with Fury instead of a sober Zeal,
yet should so warmly contend for the Doctrines of professed Atheists, and pursue
with heat the Principles of avowed Papists. Does not Mr. Hobbs teach us our
Ibid. only Mr. Hobbs says, Fear, this Fellow, calls it Necessity made the first
Government, Hobbs de cive chapter (...)
Original State? was that of War? and this Political Atheist tells us as much,
that Man was first born like a Beast, (...) to prey upon one another; does not
Bellarmin declare by Nature all Men were equal, and this Pseudo-Protestant
informs us, Every Man has a Right to every thing. What can this Harmony mean
with the professed Foes to all Religion, and avowed Enemies of our own; but that
these Sycophants dissemble with their very God, when they declare for his
Worship, and would close with the Devil for its Extirpation? It Is plain, they
do with the Positions of the rankest Jesuits, and the Fiends in Hell cannot be
made more black than themselves do commonly paint that Society, whom I am
afraid, as the Indians do their Gods, they only make the more ugly for
Adoration:

In the next place, all Paternal Right Plato, p: 31.
must be laid aside; that is a thing so ridiculous as not to be mentioned: But I
hope it is only so because inconsistent with his Principles, when we have so
many Texts of Scripture for its Confirmation; and Aristotle that learned
Heathen, tho a Native born even in a Republic, places that Original of all
Despotical power in the heads of Families, and I cannot (...) where a man that
has a Power to (...) it over some few, has not a share of Sovereignty too, as
well as he that has an Empire over many more: The Government of those Families,
and the setting their Father a Ruler over them in their several Tribes, was
really from God, as appears plain enough from the Old Testament; and that
without doubt made Paul to make this of a larger extent and Interpretation in
the new, when he tells us expressly that all Powers are ordained by God, and
there are none but what are from him: But they will say this may be applied to
any Democracie which is a Power too: But then it may be as boldly replied, That
they are not of his Ordination; for we have the Authority for the sole
Sovereignty of every Father of a Family, from the very first Original of the
World, and that of their Popular Supremacy, never commenced, but by some
Division in a Tribe or Family, and even then they made some Head in that
Division, which was no more than what we now call Rebellion and Usurpation.

The first Original of Monarchy, he resolves Page 33.
into the Corruption of the Times, which the preposterous Statesmen ought
rather to have made the product of their Purity, at least of their desire to be
bettered and purged, for allowing what he says, some better Government (tho the
greatest Opposers of the Divine Right, grant that of a King to be the best)
might degenerate, upon the disorder of Times and Debauchery of Manners, into
Monarchy, (which the resolute Republican is resolved shall be the worst;) yet
still his own very Argument shall contradict his reasoning; and in spite of
his Villainous Principles prove it the best: For if manners be depraved under
another Form of Government, and that the People grow so careless as to neglect
the Constitution and Frame of it, as not worth the keeping, and so uneasy
under it as to admit any Usurpation and Intrusion of a sole single Sovereignty;
certainly they must have a very bad Esteem of their preceding Government to
suffer it to be utterly abolish't, and somewhat at least of a good opinion of
that new Sovereignty in a single Person, so easily to admit (...); for the
depravity of Men's manners can never arise to such an Acme of transcendent
Wickedness, as only for mischief sake to undermine a Government they think the
best, and for an Instance, their own Malicious Accusations as common as they
are False, fly in the very Face of this Conjecture; for they make now the most
Debauched Atheists at present, the greatest Sticklers, for our Government. Now
if the Depravity of their manners would make them neglect the Monarchy they
love, I am sure we have such a Number of true Profligate Villains on their side
that as Mortally hate it, that we should soon have it undermined: It Is a
strange Paradox that a Republic which was always the result of a Rebellion,
and which is restless till it return to that Government from which it revolted;
should be looked upon by these prejudiced, preposterous Politicians, for a piece
of (...), which can proceed from nothing else, but from the Turbulent Hunjour,
and discontents of some restless Spirits, that dislike the Constitution of that
under which they were Born; and would that of any to which they are Subjected,
yet still can Fancy that Monarchy which they will have Established by the
common Consent of the People, to proceed from a Corruption of their Manners;
when this their Peoples Consent, and Unanimous Agreement for it, should
determine him at least to think it eligible for the best: And if the People
that in a defection from a Government (who must be supposs'd the least Number,)
shall be allowed to reform for the better by running into a Republic; as I
know he thinks of the Rebellious Dutch; yet why should not even there the
Universal Consent of almost all the King of Spains Subjects in retaining of
their Monarchy make it preferable; much Overbalance the Scales, against the
revolt of an handful of Rebels? unless he Fancies the Nevills, the Sydneys, the
Harringtons, etc. the Wisest and the most Honest part of the World. And that
they are always among such Renegadoes.

And can in Reason three or four petty Commonwealths, most of them in Europe
too, and such as by the Machinations of some of these sort of (...) Contents,
and by the Poison of their Principles, were Debauched in their Loyalty, and
animated to Rebel; be so prevalent an Argument as to persuade Men in their
Wits, that the Monarchy's in which almost all our Christian World Conspires,
and all the Heathen agrees as far as it is known; and which Government we have
still found even in those unknown parts as far, and as fast as they have been
Discovered; that this all the while must be the worse Frame, only from it is
being by so few rejected, and so generally received?

But to Convince any reasonable Soul unprejudiced, that these Democratical
Devil's wont stick to give their God the Lie, and set themselves a
Contradiction to all History and Truth, this Demon of Plato (as an Ingenious
Author and Answerer of his Diabolical Principles has Naturally named him;) let
him but consider this (...) Falsehood of his Factious Heart, tho that I believe
fails him too, in asserting this Impudent Paradox: That Moses, Theseus,
Romulus, Page 52.
were the Founders of Democracies, when for the First his own God, if he
believe any, and against whom he Rebels too if he do, had appointed him the
Supreme Ruler, and also a Judge, to lead On the morrow Moses sat to Judge the
people Ex. 18.13.
them in their Decampments, and give them their Laws in the Camp, against whose
absolute Monarchy he can object nothing but that they did not call him King,
and yet even that is done too by those Primitive Rebels in the Rebellion of
Corah; when they Expostulate with him for making himself altogether a Prince
over them; that is, what our Modern ones call Arbitrary, Absolute; but even
that is literally said, and Moses was King in Jesurun. And will our Numb. 16.
Murmurers at the Lords Anointed never be Convinced till they are Confounded
with the same Fate, till Fire come again from Heaven, or they go quick down
into Hell?

The Survivors of those discontented Mutineers upbraiding Moses for destroying
of that Rebellious Brood, whom God only in his Judgments had destroyed, the
Almighty would have Consumed them too in a moment; neither was his Anger stayed
till Fourteen Thousand fell in a Plague, our Land has Labored under all these
Judgments; but because the Almighty's resentments of our Rebellious Practices;
are not declared to us as of old, out of a Cloud, and he does not reveal
himself now to his Vicegerent, as then to his Servant Moses; and the Glory of
the Lord discends not in a visable Brightness upon our Tabernacle, Must we
therefore be so vainly blind as to think they were not sent us for those Sins
that have most deserved them, our Conspiring against our Rulers; especially
when the manner of our Punishments has been so Remarkably the same with their
sufferings, as well as our transcribed Villainies the very Copy of their Crimes?

For that of Theseus we have the good Authority of an Authentic Historian that
writ his Life, who tells us when he first went to reduce them to one City, and
the Government of ONE; the Common Ordinary people were well enough pleased with
his Proposal: And Plutarch. In Theseo. Remp. absque Regia dominatione sore si
Regem se constituerent.
to those that were Powerful and Great, he told them his Government should not
be altogether Regal, ( which in their Greek, was Tyrannical,) if they would
allow him for their King; this prevailed he says upon them too, either out of
Fear of his Force, or the Power of his Persuasions; now can such a False and
Factious Imposture, can such a Wretch Insinuate well his being no King, that
calls himself so; and only because he Consulted their Opinions in Weighty
Affairs make it a Democracy? then we need not contend here for a Republic, our
King still Consulting his great Council in Arduis Regni.

And for Romulus his founding his Lucius Flor. Hist. prima aetas sub regibus
fuit prope 250 per Annos.
Rome a Democracy, so far from truth that I defy him to show the least shadow
from any Color of History for such a piece of Imposture; Florus in the very
First line of his Prologue calls him King Romulus, and in the same tells us
Rome in it is first Age and Infancy, for about two hundred and fifty years, was
Governed by Kings: Tacitus too in his very Tacit. An. Lib. 1. Urbem Romam a
principio Reges habuere.
first, Remarkable too for an unintended verse, tells us, that in the beginning
'twas Kings had the Government of the City of Rome; and afterward tells us this
very Romulus Governed them Arbitrarily and at his will, Sext. Aur. vict. says
Sext. Aur. de vir. Illustr.
he was the first King of the Romans, that he lead them forth against the
Sabines; that he sought, and that he made a League, which none I think but
Kings by Romulus ordein'd an 100 Senators, which grew to 300, in Fortescues
time there were just so many in our House of Commons, Fortescue. C. 18. fol.
40. Coke. 4 Inst. C. 1. And had we therefore then no King, their number is
greater now, and must therefore our Monarch be less.
themselves can do; so that should it be allowed, what is contrary to some of
the very Express Words of our formention'd Historians, that Romulus was not an
absolute Prince; yet still here is still matter, and Evidence enough to make
him a Monarch, and the Government of Rome Monarchical: which surely Contradicts
his extravagant Assertion, That it was a Democracy; unless he can reconcile the
Contradiction of, Sole Sovereignty with the Government of a numerous Senate.

Another of his pretty Paradoxes is, that all Empire is founded in Dominion and
Property; and that must be understood too of a Propriety in Lands; so that
where a Prince has not a foot of Land, he cannot have twelve Inches of Power, a
Position that would confine some Princes Authorities in the Dimension of a
Span; notwithstanding Kings are said to have such long Arms; but pray let this
positive Politician tell me, How it comes to pass that the Property of an
owners Land is so inconsistent with the Prerogative of a Prince over those very
Lands that he owns, or why those that have the greatest Interest in this his
property must presently have the greatest Portion too of Power and Property, in
the Government; that is (only to contract his Absurdity) why the Peasant that
has two Acres of Land, and the Prince that has but one, should not presently be
preferred to be the Prince, and the Prince Condescend to be the Peasant? The
Question might be soon answered with another Quere, Why this King cannot be as
well Born an Heir to the Crown, as his Countryman to the Cottage, tho the
latter commonly has Land about it when perhaps a Crown may have none; For
certainly according to his Position, a King must have but an Insignificant
Power, that has not a Foot of Crown Lands, and then to have it to any purpose,
to extend his Empire over all his Subjects, the Hereditary Lands of the Crown;
must by his own Rule necessarily make up more Acres then all the Kingdom
besides; and as he observes, that within this 200 years the Estates Page 37.
of our greatest Nobility by the Luxury of their Prodigal Ancestors being got
into the hands of Mechanics or meaner Gentry, by his own Platonic Dogma these
Plebeians must have the Power and Authority of our Nobles; that is a Rich
Commoner must presently run up into the House of Lords, and a Lord perhaps less
wealthy descen'd into their Lower House, for they must allow their Lies more
power in our House of Peers, they being a Court of Judicature, which the other
cannot (...) too.

The Disorders, Confusions, and Revolutions of Government, (...) would ensue
from the placing this Empire, and Power, only in Dominion and Property; which
according to his own extravagant Position, I think may be better rendered
Demesne, would be altogether as Great, as those absurd Consequences of this
Foolish Maxim are truly ridiculous; for we must necessarily have new Governors
as often as a new Demesne All Lands are mediately, or immediately held of the
King as Sovereign Lord. Eliz. 498. Ass. 1 13.
could be acquired; for meaner Persons must have greater share too in Public
Administration's, as soon as they grow mightier in possessions: But besides this
simple suggestion as full of Folly as it is, carries in it is self as much
Faction too, it is but another Invention of setting our Parliament again, above
our King, and the making him according to their old Latin Aphorism, Greater
than a single Representative; and less than all the Body Major singulis, minor
Universis.
Collective; for he thinks it may be possible the King may have a greater
portion of Land than any single Subject, but I am sure it can never be that he
should have more than all; but this Sir Polilick (...), has wandered so much in
the wide World, that his Wits are a straggling too; so full of Foreign
Governments that he has forgot the (...) of his own. Is it not a received Maxim
in our Law, that there is no Vid. Eliz. 498. Ass. 1. 18.
Lands in England, but what is held mediately, or immediately from the King,
that are in the hands of Subjects? does not himself know we have nothing of an
Allodium here, as some Contend they have in Normandy and France? tho they too
are by some of our best Civilians Duck. de Authoritate, Lib. 1. c. 6
contradicted; and as great many Eminent Lawyers of their own tell us that the
Feudatory Laws do obtain, and are in force through all the Provinces of France
too; so that their Lands are there held also still of some superior Lords; and
he knows that our greatest Estate here in Fee, is not properly free, but held
mediately or immediately of the King or Donor to whom it may revert; and it is
our King alone as our Laws still acknowledge that has his Demesne his Dominion
free and holds ofnone but God; and our Lord Cook tells us, whom this Gentleman
may Credit, as having in Vid. Cook. 1. Inst. C. 1. Predium Domini Regis est
dominium directum cujus nullus Author est nisi Deus.
some things been no great Friend to the Monarchy as well as himself; yet that
Eminent Oracle tells us that no Subject here has a direct Dominion, properly,
but only a profitable one, (not much better perhaps than the Civilians
usufructuaries,) and what becomes now of this Gentleman's and the peoples Power,
and Empire, founded in Dominion and Demesne? must the King have the less Power
over his Tenants, only because they hold the more, and cannot he have a right of
Sovereignty over the Persons and Estates of his Subjects without Injuring them
or their property? or must his Subjects, according to this unheard of Paradox,
as this their Property grows greater, encroach the further upon his Power and
Praerogative? none but our Elect Saints must shortly set up for our Governors,
and I know this Factious Statesman cannot but favor his Friends Anabaptists
and Quakers, his absurrd Politics here Extraordinarily suit with some of their
mad extravagant Principles, he lets them know, Empire is founded in Dominion;
and they thank him, kind Souls, and tell him Dominion is founded in Grace.

Two or Three whole Leaves the Copious Page 98. 99, 100.
Author has allotted for the service of the Church and Glergy; and there we find
the Devil of a Re-publick has so possessed the Politician; that he openly
declares against God and Religion, and his Atheistical Paracelsus that confirms
his Brother Brown's Aphorism, to be none of his Vulgar Error; that it is thought
their Profession to be so; I mean the Doctor in his Dialogue, interrogates his
Matchiavel what he thinks of our Clergy, why truly it is answered: He could wish
that there never had been any, Page 98.
the Christian Religion would have done much better without. He presumes much
it seems upon his own Divinity, but if that be no sounder then his Politics
either of them is enough to send him to the Devil; and on he goes, in a tedious
railing against the Frauds and Rogueries of our Church when it was Romish, all
impertinently applied to the present, that is now so much reformed. But would
not the most refractory He call's ours a mungrel Church, from it is Innovation
he means of Ceremonies.
Jew, take this Snarling Cur, for a Mungrel Christian, that libels that only
Church that maintains the Gospel in it is greatest purity; and as a wise Prince
well observed the most reformed in the whole Christian World.

And it is (...) wonder now, that such irreligious Impostors, who have so little
veneration for the Church, should broach such pernicious Doctrines against our
State; to which, after so long and preliminary Impertinence that half the piece
is made a Preface, the Courteous Traveller is at last arrived. And first he
begins with their old Factious assertion that the Sovereign power of England is
in King, Lords, and Commons, making his Majesty but one of their three States:
we all know when this pernicious principle was first set a foot, what it
terminated in, BLOOD, and that in the Destruction of the best of Governments,
with the best of Kings; we quickly saw, when once they had made their Prince
Coordinate, they soon set up their own Supremacy, and then as soon made him
none at all. Did this prophetic Demon foresee from his Astrological
Judgments, that his House of Commons were drawing another Scheam of Rebellion,
and that they had prepared a draught of a second Covenant not only for making
our King Coordinate but Leveling the Monarchy with the Ground; yet'twas
convincing enough to me before that the broaching of the very same principles,
did as really design the same subversion of the State; this Plot might as well
have been seen in 80. when this Author and as great Incendiaries appeared in
public, and so popular; and well might a late House of Commons animadvert on
our Judges for suppressing such Seditious Libels, which were so Zealously kind,
and impudently bold, as to set up their Supremacy, it had been ingratitude not
to stand by those Villains that for their sakes had forfeited their Necks.

This very same Principle of the Subjects Sovereignty was Printed, and
published in 43. preparatory for the Covenant, which the Commons had then
called for out of Scotland; and up rises this Ghost again in 81. as if even
then it had heard, (for Spirits are very Intelligent) of an Association talked
off in Parliament; but I Will tell him in short why the Sovereign Power of
England, is not in King, Lords, and Commons; because King, Lords, and Commons
are not all Sovereigns, may not our Monarchy be called Mixed in Opposition to
its being Absolute, and Tyrannical; without making it a mere Hotch-potch, that
if our King will have any thing of his right of a Sovereign power, he must put
it in Medley with that of his Subject, as our Sisters are obliged in
Co-parcenary: But tho he take his Treasonable Maxim, for Reason, and Truth,
without showing the least Law or Reason, I shall show him from all of them,
that it is both Irrational, Illegal, and a Lie.

First, It Is against Reason to Imagine there can be three such Powers
Coordinate to make up one Sovereignty; and that our King can at the same time
pass for a Monarch, for Sovereignty is inseparable from a King, and that is the
Reason without doubt we promiscuously The King calls them, Adjourns, Dissolves
them at his pleasure, and this long Practices proved from the Chronicles of our
Land and its Fundamental Law. Speed, 645. 4. Inst. 27. 2.
call him our King, or Sovereign; and if our Lords and Commons will assume it,
they may even take the Crown too; we saw how the participation of a Sovereign
power, tho it was but in a shadow, and that by him that had a better pretense
for the Sovereignty then all the Common Subjects can have, by being the Crowns
Heir, was like to have unhinged the very Monarchy it self in the Reign of Henry
the Second; and raised such Commotions in the State till it was almost
overturned: And I am sure we have found, and felt, that this Co-ordinacy of
their three States, terminated at last like the participation of that
Co-parcenary Prince, into an insolent demanding of the whole, and what they had
made but half the Kings, they soon made all the People's; until the Government
was quite run of the hooks, and the Nation engaged in an unhappy War, and a
downright Rebellion.

Does not the very Etymon of Monarchy it self express the sole Sovereignty of
that Government they would make so preposterously Mixed, and even Archon alone,
which was the next Titular Appellation, the Loyal Athenians gave to the Son and
Successor of their Matchless Medon.
Codrus; only because they thought that no Succeeding Prince could deserve the
Title of Tyrannus; which they made to terminate with him, only because they
presumed his goodness (...) imitation. Tyrant then was not applied, as Sidney,
whose very Motto, (...) haec inimica Tyrannis.
some of our Inveterate Traitors have done it since, in it is Corrupted sense,
(tho to the most merciful King,) for a Tarquin or Caligula; yet even this word
Archon without addition of Sole that Moros that has since succeeded to make it
Monarch, was then an Absolute Government of one amongst the Athenians, and
continued so in the same Family for a long Season; till at last by popular
encroachments it was made Annual, and this Contender for this Coordinate power
of the People, has exposed his Damnable designs so plainly to his Disputants,
that his own Conscience and Soul upbrai'd him for the Villainy, and makes his
Venetian interrupt him for making an English Monarch, but a Duke of Venice;
Page 114.
tho the Doctor, the Pontaeus of the people, that sucks up all the Poison of
Rebellion, like that of Toads, only for the Trial of his Skill, and then thinks
to cheat the Devil with an Antidote: He politickly opines however, that he has
made him too Absolute, if ever there were a medley of more Malicious Villains
(...) Page 105.
to Libel a Government I Will forfeit my Neck too it, as well as they; Heaven and
Hell must be reconciled (which without a Recantation, will be so for their
Confusion) before these their Contradictory defamations can be made consistent:
But in this the Politic Rebels agree, to secure an Odium upon our Monarchy in
both extremes; and making the most opposite Objections serve for one and the
same purpose, it is absoluteness and Tyranny must make it all Bugbear
formidable, frightful, at the same time that their holding the Reins shall
render it all Hobbyhorse, Ridiculous and Contemptible.

Secondly, I Will show that this their confounded principle of perfect Confusion,
is not only against the Fundamental Law of the Land, but against the sense of
every Law, that ever was made in it. Every preamble, of an Act; and that
ofevery Proviso there, runs with A, Be it It is no Stat. if the King assent
not, 12. H. 7. 20. H. 8.
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the CONSENT of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in the present Parliament
Assembled. And then let any sober person Judge where lies the Sovereignty,
would it be suffered to be thus expressed were they not satisfied they were not
all Sovereigns, or if they were, ought it not according to this Rebel and
Republican, run, We the King, Lords, and Commons Enact, but I Will let him know
how and what the Libertine would again have that Enacting part of an Act of
Parliament to be, tho the Politic Knave; feared it was too soon yet to declare
plainly for an Usurpation, viz. Be it Enacted and ordained An Act. March 1657.
Vid. Act of Oblivion, 51
by his Highness the Lord Protector. Or the Parliament of England having had
good Experience of the Affection of the people to this present Government, by
their ready Assistance in the defense thereof against Charles Stewart, Son of
the Lale Tyrant, and his Forces invading this Nation, do Enact, etc.

That our Kings in the time of the Saxons, Danes, and some part of the Normans
had more absolute Power over their Subjects, than some of their Successors
(...), himself cannot deny, the Charter of Liberties being made but in the Reign
of Henry the Third; and when the People had less of Privileges, the Kings must
be supposed to have had more of Praerogative; therefore we shall examine only
what and where the Supremacy is at present, and where the Laws of the Land; not
the Will of the Prince do place it. In the Parliament that was held at York in
Edward the Seconds time, The Rebellious Barons that 15. Ed. 2.
had violently extorted what Concessions they pleased from the Crown, in His
(like those in the three foregoing Reigns, when they sealed almost each
Confirmation of their Charter in Blood;) were all censured, and condemned, and
the encroaching Ordinances they made in those Times all repealed: Because says
the Statute, The Kings Royal Power Great Stat. Roll. 26. H. 3. to Ed. 3. 1.
Ric. 3. Exact Abridg. fol. 112.
was restrained, against the Greatness of his Seigniory Royal, contrary to the
State of the Crown, and that by Subjects Provisions over the Power Royal of the
Ancestors of our Lord the King, Troubles and Wars came upon the Realm: I look
upon this as an absolute Acknowledgment of a Royal Power, which is sure the
same with his Sovereign; sufficiently distinguished here from the Parliaments,
or the Peoples coordinate Supremacy, for those condemned Ordinances were looked
upon as Usurpations upon the Kings Supremacy, which they call the Power Royal
of his Ancestors, and not as our Author would have too, of the Sovereign power
of Lords and Commons.

At the Convention of the three Estates first of Richard the Third, where 1. R.
3.
the Parliament call themselves so; themselves expound also what is meant by
it. And say it is the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons of this Land
assembled in present Parliament; so that we have here the whole three States,
besides the King, owning themselves such, without assuming to themselves a
Sovereign power: recognizing the Right of Richard, and acknowledging him the
Sovereign: And tho I shall for ever condemn, as well as all Ages will, their
allowing his Usurpation a Right, which was an absolute wrong; yet this is an
undeniable Argument, that then they did not make their King Coordinate with
themselves; made themselves, declared themselves, three States without him, and
acknowledged their King the Sovereign and Supreme.

That Act that punished appeals to Rome with a praemunire in Henry the Eighth's
time, gives this Reason why 24. H. 8.
none should be made to the Pope, nor out of the Kingdom; because the King
alone was only the supreme head in it: It tells us expressly, That England is
an Empire, that the King the Supreme Head has the Dignity, and Royal Estate of
the Emperial Crown, unto whom a body Politic divided into Terms and Names of
Spirituality and Temporality, been bounden (...) next to God, humble Obedience,
etc. Who has furnished him with Plenary, Entire, Power, (...), Authority,
Prerogative, and Jurisdiction: Here his Body Politic is divided into
Spiritual, and Temporal, here he is called the supreme Head, and here I think
is a full Recognition of his sole Sovereignty: And it is strange that what a
Parliament did in Opposition to Popery, should be so zealously contradicted by
such Sycophants that pretend so much to oppose it.

In the next place, he tells us of an error he lay under, that he thought our
Commonalty had not formally assembled in Parliament, before Henry the Thirds
time; but of that now is fully Page 103.
convinced, by the Labors of some learned Lawyers whom he names, and lets them
know too how much they are obliged to him for the Honor: But I suppose he reads
but one sort of Books, and that such as suit with his Humor and Sedition, and
of that Nature he can meet with Variety; for I dare avow that within the space
of six years, all that ever was or can be said against the best of Government;
our own, all that was, or ever will be raked up for justifying a Rebellion, and
restoring a Republic, from falsified Roll, and Record; from perverted History,
and Matter of Fact; by Pens virulent, and Factious, with all the Art and
Industry, and whatever thought could invent for its Ruin and Destruction, has
been Printed and Published; such an Universal Conspiration, of Men of several
Faculties, each assisting with what was his Excellency, his Talent in Treason,
which seemed to be the Task-Master of the Town, and Monopolizer of Trades.

But our Politician might return to his old Opinion again; did he but consult
other Authors, I believe as learned Antiquarians; I am sure more Loyal
Subjects: who can show him that the Saxons Councils called the Witena Gemotes
had in them no Commons: That the Conqueror called none of them to his great
Councils, none in those of his two Sons that succeeded, nor none in any of the
Parliaments down to Henry Coke first Institutes Lib. 2d. C. 10. T. Burgage.
the Third; my Lord Coke tells us of the Names this Parliament had before the
Conquest, as Sinoth, Michel, or Witena Gemote, which he says employed the Great
Court or Meeting of the King, and all his Wise Men: And also sometimes of the
King with his Council of his Bishops, Nobles, and the Wisest of the People; and
unless from the wisest of the People, and all his Wise Men, they can make up an
House of Commons; I am sure from this Authority, they can have no proof, and
from Wise Men can be gathered nothing, but such as were Noble, or chief of the
Realm; for the meaner sort, and that which we now call the Commonality, were
then far enough from having any great share of Learning, or common
Understanding; and then besides these Wisest of the People were only such whom
the King should think Wise, and admit to his Council, far from being sent by
their Borroughs as elected Senators, King Alfred had his Parliament, and a
great one was held by King Athelstan at Grately' which only tells us there were
Assembled some Bishops, Noblemen, and the Wisemen whom the King called, which
implies no more then those he had a mind should come.

But the Antiquity of a Parliament, or that of an House of Commons is not so
much the thing these Factious Roll and Record Mongers contend for, it is its
Superiority, Supremacy; and there endeavors to make them ancient is but in
order to the making their Power Exorbitant, and not to be controlled by that of
their King; whom in the next place, this Re-publican can scarce allow the power
of calling them at his Pleasure, and dissolving them when he pleases: But so
great is the Power of Truth, and the Goodness of the Cause he Opposes; that he
is forced to contradict himself to desend his Paradoxes. For he tells us the
King is obliged with an hear say Law, which his learned in the Faculty and
Faction cannot find out yet, Page 111.
to call Parliaments as often as need should be, that is they think fit: And
also not to dissolve them till all their Petitions were answered; that is, till
they are willing to be gone: But then will I defy the Gentleman to show me the
difference between this their desired Parliament and a Perpetual sitting: do
not these industrious Endeavors for such a perpetuity of them plainly tell us,
it is that's the only thing they want, and that they are taught experimentally;
that, that alone run the three Kingdoms into absolute Rebellion, and ruined the
best of Kings: and can as certainly compass the Destruction of the present: But
I Will tell the lump of Contradiction first the words of our greatest 4. Insti.
27. 2. 1. Inst. Sect. 164.
Lawyer, and then his own, Cook says, none can begin, continue or dissolve a
Parliament but by the Kings Authority: Himself Plato Red. page 105.
says that which is undoubtedly the Kings Right is to call and dissolve
Parliaments. It Is impertinent to labor to contradict that which he here so
plainly confutes himself, the Statesman being so big with his Treasonable
Notions, so full of his Faction that his Memory fails him, makes him forget his
own Maxims, and makes his subsequent Pages wrangle with the Concessions of
those that went before.

His next Observation is a perfect Comment upon his Text that had in it
implicit Treason before; he tells us in Justification of the Barons Wars, which
all our Historians represent as a perfect Page 107.
Rebellion, That the Peers were fain to use their Power; and can he tell me by
what Law Subjects are empowered to Rebel. He calls it arming of their Vassals
for the defense of the Government: That Bill by which they would have
associated of late, that I confess had it past into Act would have made
Rebellion Statutable, And they themselves must indeed have had the Sovereign
power, when they had gotten their Sovereign to suffer himself to be sworn out
of his Supremacy, they might well have armed their Vassals then; when they had
got his Majesty's leave to commence Rebels, and Traitors, for the Protection of
his Person, and the Preservation of his Crown and Dignity: But these humble
Boons were no more (...) that Bill must have begged; and these kind
Concessions, no more than was expected from the Grant of a King so Gracious, a
Petition that might well have been answered like that of Bathsheba's, by
bidding them ask the Kingdom also.

The Barons standing in open defiance Ibid. page 108.
to the Laws, (tho they stood up too so much for them): He calls the Peers
keeping their Greatness, and this is the Sovereign Power the Rebel would have
them again set up for, to be great in their Arms, as well as Quality, and
demand with the Sword again the Prerogative of their Kings, and the grant of
the Regalia; which in their preposterous Appellations; was abused with the
pretense of privilege, and right, and which the force of the Field can soon
make of the greatest (...) and 109.
wrong: But in the very next Page it is expounded clearly what has, may, and
must be done in such Conjunctions; that is, to your Arms. He tells us after
they had obtained the framing of their Charters, and I think they were as much
as the most condescending Monarchs could grant, or the most mutinous
malcontents require; Then arose another grievance (...) and (...) for: This
was the Intermission of Parliaments, which could not be called but by the
Prince, and he not doing it, they ceast for some years to be Assembled; if this
had not been speedily remedied, The provoking Rebel, (for certainly he is as
much so, that Animates a Rebellion, as he that is actually engaged in it, and
is by Law so declared) tells us the Barons 25. Ed. 3. Plat. page 109.
must have put on their Armor again, and the brisk Assertors of their Rights,
not have acquiesc'd in this Omission that ruined the Foundations of the
Government: After all the kind Concessions of the Prince, the putting him upon
that which was the taking away of the very remains of Royalty, puts me in mind
of one of our late Expressions of a popular Representative, that could declare
in open Assembly, as attested by some of the very Members of it, that tho this
their Bill of Exclusion were past, (which was more we see than the most mildest
Monarch could grant, or even our House of Peers, sure the better part of our
Nation; could in Modesty require;) yet still there was more work to be done,
and a Reformation to be made in the Church, as well as the State: The Patriot
was prepared to lanch out in such kind of Extravagancies, and told the truth of
the Plot before his time, had not calmer Heads interposed and cooled his hot
one into common Sense: several of the Speeches spoken in Parliament, for which
its Publisher deserves to be Pillor'd, if not Authentic and True; and brought
before them on his Knees at least for his Presumption if they are: It being
here as Criminal to Print Truths at all times without an Imprimatur, as it is to
tell it without leave, even inseveral of those Speeches Published in that Paper
I reflected on in the beginning, where the Pedantick Author has exposed me in
the Tail of his History, that History of the Association Printed by Janeway.
looked like the Narrative of a Rump: There are as bold Expressions, of as
dangerous Designs; for at the end of one of their Harangues, the beginning of
which is only marked with R.M. and its Author may be loath to let any more
Letters of his Name to be known; you have these following Lines; If at the same
Page 3.
time we endeavor to secure our selves against Popery, we do not also do
something to prevent Arbitrary Power, it will be to little purpose; I think
nothing can prevent that better than frequent Parliaments, and therefore I
humbly move, that a Bill for securing frequent Parliaments be taken into
Consideration, can any thing be more Expressive than that the Bill so much
clamoured for, was only the burden of the Song, and that the Ballad it self
must have been all to the Tune of 41. when Arbitrary Power never ceased its
Cry, till the Parliament was made Frequent, its Frequency never sufficient,
till standing and perpetual; which proyed too as dangerous as a standing Army;
never restless till it had really raised one too, and the Kings Head from his
Shoulders; Hunt in post. page 92, 93.
and can these worst of Criminals make it a Crime, to make the Nation fearful
of Parliaments, when there are such Speech-Makers in it: I shall to such
Accusers Faces defend them to be formidable, not out of any Apprehension of
fear for my self; for whenever such a Seditious Senate, their Commons, become
dangerous again to good Subjects, the safety of the Government must be but in
as bad Condition: But it may well terrify even a Crowned Head, and frighten him
from their Frequency, when some of their most popular Members have been since
found in an actual Conspiracy, for p^lling the Crown (...) (...)
(...) suffered publicly for Traitors.

Sir. G. H. I do agree a Bill for Banishing Ibid. page 3.
Papists may do well: But I hope if you Banish the Men you will Banish some Women
too, consider how to prevent the Royal Family marrying Popish Women; -- No man
can doubt but the Protestant Interest has been much praejudiced by his
Majesty's marrying a Princess of that Religion, Popish Instruments having (...)
themselves under her Protection: The Country Gentleman wanted the Civilities of
the Court being a declared Enemy to all Ladies; but this shows plain their aims
were beyond that of the Duke, and that it was the Sense of some of the House,
the Queen was in the Plot, as well as the Opinion and Asseveration of Oats his
Oath, against his expressed Testimony given before, Sir E. H. -- Have we not
ordered several good Bills to be brought in for the securing us against
Arbitrary Power; and shall we now lay aside all those, and be content with the
Exclusion Bill only? which I think will be worth nothing unless you can get
more, and what some of those more are is explain (...)
ed in the next Oration to it, W. G. -- I do admire no body does take notice of
(...) standing Army, which if not (...) such a Number as may be but convenient
for Guards, and limited as they may not be increased: All your Laws signify
nothing; the words of that Hellish Association only differ thus, when they
swear more modestly only to endeavor entirely to disband all such Mercenary
Forces as are kept up in and about the City of LONDON.

These are some of the very Words as our Author relates them as they were
spoken in his House of Commons; I do them only that Justice, that this
Historian has done to their Honors, or they to themselves: so if these
accounts are Authentic; (tho I remember when dangerous to Question even the
Authority of an unlicensed piece of Sedition;) then (...) see that many of our
late malcontents of the Commons, as 'well as our Plato's Rebellious Barons,
were not like to be contented any more with our Kings granting them all the
security themselves could ask for their Religion; then these Imperious Lords
were after all their Liberties were fortyfied with an extorted Charter, and
made as firm as Fate, (...) their foresight could provide. But that nothing
would satisfy, unless both lopt off the best Limb of their Prerogative, and
allowed them to have Parliaments, without Intermission; or at least frequent
enough for an Usurpation of all the Power that is Regal; for as the Doctor of
Sedition observes, upon the Kings being allowed to Call and Dissolve them, That
our Liberties Page 105.
and Rights signify just nothing: So might (...) this politic Pis-pot have
remarked, That when once it comes to the Power of the People to summon
themselves; or sit so long a Season, till their own Order shall determine the
Session; that truly their Venetian Doeg would be a Prince to the Monarch of
Great Britain, and we should soon have less left of a King in England, than
such implacable Republicans have of Loyalty; for I am sure we must in reason
have better Ground to dread those dangers, and utter Subversion of the State
from their too much sitting, that has been experienced, than they for that
panick fear of Tyranny from their (...) so often Dissolved, which they never
yet felt.

But to see the boldness of such Villains for encouraging an Insurrection: The
briskness of their Barons that rebelled, for a Charter, and frequent
Parliaments, was most providentially brought upon the Stage, when they knew
they had forfeited most of their own by their Faction; and made their House of
Commons, from their obstinate proceedings, not likely to be soon summoned when
once Dissolved: so that here was a plain downright Encouragement of a resolute
Rebellion as Occasion should serve; and letting the People know they must put
on their Armor as well as the Barons, and be as brisk upon Intermission of
Parliaments. How far this good Exhortation encouraged an Assassination of our
Sovereign, and the succeeding Plot, may be gathered from their attempts to put
it in Execution; and for which both Author and Publisher Merit full as well the
Fate of those that dyed for the practicing those Principles that they the more
primitive Traitors had instilled. In short, to insist no longer on this black
Topic of plain Treason, With what Faith and (...), with what Face and
Countenance, can he call that perfect Conspiracy of a parcel of Faithless
Peers, a Defense of the Government, that Page 107.
for almost forty Years laid the Land all in Blood? and with their Witchcraft,
their sorceries of Rebellion, that briskness as he calls it, of putting on
their Armor, made it imitate an AEgypts Plague, and Anticipate the very
Judgments of the Almighty, by purpling her Rivers with the Slain? can the
Defense of a Kingdom consist with its Destruction, or those be said to stand up
for their Country that invited an Invader, and swore Allegiance to Lewis a
Frenchman, against him that was their Liege Lord: I am sure this was making
over their Faith to a Foreigner, and many may think it as much to be condemned
as that of their King his Crown to a Saracen: especially when that by some
Historians is doubted; but their falsehood's confirmed by all: Then was our
England like to have been truly France, which they now but so vainly Fear.

In the next place, he is pleased to grant the Militia to be in his Majesty's
Power; But it is only until such a sort of Rebels have strength enough to take
it out; for he tells us the Militia being Page 116.
given but for an Execution of the Law, if it be mis-imployed by him to subvert
it, it is a Violation of the Trust, and making that power unlawful in the
Execution: And that which shall violate this Trust, has he reduced to three of
the most Villainous Instances, that the most Excrable Rebel could invent, or the
most bloody Miscreant concelve, the Murder of three Kings by their Barbarous
and Rebellious Subjects: And in all three their strength and Militia were first
taken away, and then their Lives; first he tells us Edward the second forfeited
his Executive Power of the Militia; In Ibid.
misapplying his revenue to Courtiers and Sycophants: Richard the Second for
(...) Worthless People to the greatest places. And Charles the First, in the
Case of Ship Money; can now the most virulent Democraticks hug such a piece
without Horror at its Inhumanity? or the vilest of the Faction preserve it
from the Flames: can those popular Parliamentarians, and the most mutinous of
all our murmering Members, of whom my self have known some that could
Countenance this very Book? can they here defend iusinuated Treason, when
Stanley Stanley's Case H. 7.
dyed for a more Innocent Innuendo? but if Faction has forced from their Souls
the poor remains of Reason, will Humane Nature permit such precedents to
prevail, that terminated in the miserable Murder of as many Monarchs? It Is
remarkable, and it is what I remember; these very Papers were Published near
about one of their late Sessions wherein they were nibbling again at the
Milittia; and could so merciless a Miscreant be put in the pocket of a Member
of Parliament, much less then into his Heart, and drop from his unadvised Lips?
can those that come to give their consent for the making Laws, be thus Ignorant
of those that are already made? has not the Military power, for above this 500
years been absolutely in the Crown? and almost by their Parliament it self
declared so in every Reign, was it ever taken out, but when they took away the
Life of their King too? was ever his Head protected from Violence, when this,
the Guard of his Crown, was gone? or can any Hand long sway the Scepter, when
it wants the Protection of the Sword? 1 Edward 3. 1 C. 3.


1st. Edward 3d. Chap 3. The King wills that no man be charged to Arm himself
otherwise than he was wont in the time of his Progenitors Kings of England, In
H. 7. declared by Stat.: All 2 Hen. 7.
Subjects of the Realm bound to assist the King in his Wars. Queen Mary 4. 5.
Mary.
and all her Progenitors acknowledged to have the Power to appoint
Commissioners This Commission was in force, Rot par. 5. H. 4. n. 24. repealed
by this 4. and 5. of P. M. but this repealing Stat. is again repealed Jacob. 1.
and so of force in this King, now, as well as when they denied it to his
Father. 2. Ed. 6. 2. C. 2d. Cook 2. Inst. 30. Car. 2. C. 6.
to Muster her Subjects, and array as many as they shall think fit: The
Subjects holding by Serjeantry heretofore all along to serve their Sovereigns
in War in the Realm, and a particular Act obliging them to go within or
without, with their King; He and only He has the ordering of all the Forts and
Holds, Ports and Havens of the Kingdom, confirmed to this very King, and Cook
tells us no Subject can build any Fortress Defensible, Cook Litt. p. 5. And
since some of our late Members of the lower House were so tickled with this
Authors soothing them with the Kings Executive Power of War forfeitable; I Will
tell them of an Act expressly made in some Sense against their Assuming it; and
for another Reason too; because some mutinous Heads would argue to my Knowledge
for their Members coming armed to the Parliament at Oxford; and which was
actually done too by College and his Crew.

It was made in Edward the First's time, 7. Ed. 1.
and expressly declares that in all Parliaments, Treatises, and other
Assemblies, every Man should come without Force, and Armor; and of this the
King acquainted the Justices of the Bench: and moreover that the Parliament at
Westminster, had declared that to us belonged straightly to desend Force of
Armor, and all other Force against our Peace, at all times when it shall
please us, and the Judges were ordered to get it read in the Court, and
enrolled. And now can it with common Reason or Sense be suggested, that the
letting Favorites have some of the Treasures of the Kingdom, or Courtiers, as
he calls it, the Revenue, or the preferring of such Persons as they shall think
Worthless and Wicked, which with such Villains as himself are commonly the most
deserving; that this shall be a sufficient violating (as he terms it,) of a
Kings Trust, to the forfeiture of his Power of putting the Laws in Execution,
with which the common consent, of almost all the Laws, and all Ages, have
invested their King, as an absolute, (...), singular Right of the Crown.
Certainly such an Opinion is as extravagant, as Treasonable, and could enter
into the Head of nothing but a Madman, the Heart of none but a Traitor.

Next we meet with another Assertion as false as Hell, and then its clear
contrary nothing but the God of Heaven is more True; He tells us, (after having
hardly allowed His Majesty a Negative Voice, at least as such an Insignificant
one, as not to be made use of) That Plat. page 124.
it is certain nothing but (...) of Parliamentary requests produced the Baron's
Wars, and our last dismal Combustions; when I Will demonstrate to him, as plain
as a Proposition in Euclid, that nothing but their too gracious and unhappy
Concessions, to their perfidious and ungrateful Subjects, made those mighty
Monarchs miscarry: read but any of our Histories, tho penned by the most
prejudiced, and those that ware at best but moderately Popular, of our first
Civil Wars. The Barons, Daniel that speaks Daniel 53. H. 3d.
most commonly as much as the Peoples Case will bear, tells us his thoughts of
those unhappy Dissentions, that neither side got but Misery and Vexation: We
see that notwithstanding as often as their Charter, and Liberties were
confirmed; notwithstanding all the Concessions of those two yielding Monarchs,
still more K. John. Henry 3.
was demanded. The Charter in Henry the Third's was no sooner several times
confirmed in one year, but in the next; presently they fell upon his
Justiciary, Hugo de Burg. and he must be removed, Vld. Stow page 183.
or they threaten to do it with the Sword; Then the poor Prince complies and
sends him to the Tower; Next the Bishop of Winchester is as great a grievance
as the Chies Justice was before, for bringing in the Pictavians; and unless all
those are put from him they tell him plainly they will depose him from his
Kingdom, and create a new: The Bishop is sent away and those Pictavians
expelled; but still were there more grievances, and as soon as one was removed,
be sure another would be found out; and the true perfect Occasion of those
Intestine Broils was rather the Concession (...) King Henry in his Youth; they
having been used with so much Compliance in his Minority, that being emboldened
afterward with Age he grew too much a Sovereign to be overaw'd, or overreach't
by his Subjects; and they having been accustomed not to be opposed in their
encroachments on the Crown, which they had been long Habituated to, he being
Crowned an Infant and they having the fresh Precedent before them with what
arrogance they used his Father John, upon any the least denial betook
themselves to the Sword, for this you will find; if Occurrences of those Times be
but Impartially examined: and for his Second Instance of our late Kings time,
his abominable Falsehood so far from Truth that not only Narrative and Record,
but the very Memory of man can give him the Lie; did he not grant them, these
very Villains insolent demand Parliaments at last without Intermission? was
there not a Triennial one first Insolently demanded, and as Graciously
consented to? was not that as ungratefully thought insufficient, and nothing
could satisfy, till unhappily settled during the pleasure of the two Houses, an
Act of Concession which the (...) Prince could himself call, (as (...) it was)
unparalled by any of his (...).
Predecessors; nothing but their Ingratitude could equal so much goodness, and
only for bettering of theirs, the Wretches (...) his own affairs should be the
worse, what punishment would the Law have found for such Monsters of
Ingratitude, that punished once all Common Offenders in it with Death? were not
his Gracious Answers at last to the Propositions, so full of Concession, that
some of the Cannibals that thirsted for his Blood, could Vote it a Ground for
the House to (...). (...). 5. (...). 1648.
proceed upon for Peace. Lastly had he not granted to his Inveterate Foes,
whose Necks were forfeited to the Gibbet, the Heads of some of his best
Friends, till he had none left to dispose of but his own, and that at the last
must be brought to the Block. And can such an impudent Demon, the very spawn
of the Father of Lies, thus confidently now declare that obstinacy, Denial in
the late King was his Ruin; but his misery and misfortune, has unhappily left
tho for us happy (could a Nation be said so under such a loss) such Politics
written in his Blood, that all those of such Rebels and Republicans can never
undermine.

In the next place the State Empirick comes upon the Stage and that only to
vilify our Court of Chancery, which with all Persons that can but distinguish
Equity from the Rigor of the Law, mustbe had in Estimation; the greatest
Objection his utmost Malice can asperse it with, is only, That it may be
Corrupted, and so may the best of things, whose Corruption is the worst. There
may be Roguery in Clerks, he thinks, Plat. page 130.
in entering Rules; and so their may be more Dangerous Knaves among Doctors,
that can prescribe a dose of Sublimate Which has been done too as one of (...)
own Authors tells us. (...), in's Centurie, Hist. (...), the Grand Court of
Equity and (...) moderating the common (...). (...). Crompton Jurisdiction.
for Mercurius dulcis; and such a Villainy in his Art, is sure more fatal then
the worst that can occur in their faculty, that at the worst can but bereave
you and that long first of your Estate. This Ruffian in a Moment robs you of
your Life; and I should choose to live a little in the World, tho a Beggar, than
be sent out like a Rat. The Ridiculousness of his Objections cannot be answered,
but with such Merry ones as I make. But to let him know I can defend the
Constitution of the Court in Good Earnest, so far is it from Obstructing his
right by the Common Law as he Ignorantly Objects, that it is a (...) Commonly
never to relieve him here when he can have his Remedy there, but always in
Justice and Equity renders him that right which the Rigor of the rest many
times forecludes him off, where the Common cannot Compel a man to an agreement
this will enforce it, Recoveries of Legacies, Performance of Wills; otherwise
Irrevocable, and not to be Compelled shall be obtained here. It enforces the
Husband to give the Wife Alimony, and perhaps the Doctor dislikes it for that,
and For more of this Courts power and practice, see (...) and (...) Reports.
certainly this must be a greater Solaecism than he can suggest in
contradiction to the Court, that a Court of mere Equity to moderate the Rigor
of the Common Law, should Injure their Petition of Right or Invade the Liberty
of Magna Charta.

But that which is more Ridiculous The Chancellor (...) two Powers one
absolute, the other ordinary, by the first he is not (...) as (...) Judges or
limited (...) the Letter of the Law. Vid. (...). (...). Cap. 20. fol. (...).
and False, is his Foolish fear of Injustice from such a single Judge sitting
in the Judicatory, and his Impudent assertion that never any Country in the
World had such a way of Judging. For the first, (should we not consider the
prudence and Integrity of that Honorable Person that presides in it at present
whose Equitable determinations were sufficient to supersede and silence such a
(...) suggestion) it is morally impossible there to meet with Injustice; where
nothing is decreed but upon a Fair, and Full Examination of Witnesses and the
Judges hearing what can be alleged by Counsel on both sides. All the Panick
fear that Alarms him, is that the Prince (for such is the Malice of a
Republican that nothing can be thought Wicked enough for a King,) may put in a
Person that may Act against Right and Reason, carried away by Passion and
Prejudice, and at best but a Tool for the State. If the possibility of such
vain suggestions shall prevail for an Extirpation of an Officer of Justice
Co-oeval, if Polldore Virg. makes the Chancellor only Coaeual with the
Conqueror, but (...) in that too as well as others. Mr. (...) shows us they
were long before in's Orig. And so my Lord Coke also in his 4 (...).
not before the Conquest, and still Recorded for his just Administration, I
will allow what cannot well be granted, this Emperick to pass for a Politician,
and the same Monumental Folly, will serve for as Ridiculous Objections against
all other Courts of Judicature, where the King, has the power of placeing in it
whom he pleases; and they all Subject to the Passions and Infirmity that any
single person, and in their Breast too lying all the Decisions of any
Controverted Law. But that such a single Judge sitting in Judicature, such a
Tribunal is scarce in any Country of the World, is most absolutely FALSE; the
Civil, the Law of Nations, and that of almost all the Civilized part of the
World has no other Method in deciding Civil causes. Their Libels, are but Bills
of Plaint, as in this the Subpaena requires the Defendant's appearance at a
certain day in Court, by them a Day in Court is assigned him to Answer, their
Replications, Exceptions, here are Answer and Demurrer. They pronounce Contumax
and Ex-communicate. Here goes out Attachment and Commission of Rebellion,
through the whole process the same Practice observed the same Rules as in all
Foreign Courts of Civil Judicature; where the Decretum finale, or Sententia
Definitiva, is in the sole Breast of a single Person as our Common Decres in
Chancery.

But what is the Law of all Nations Certain it is that both British and Saxon
Kings had their Courts of Chancery. Coke 4. Inst. C. 8. Vid, Mirror C. 1.. 3.
Glanvll, lib. 12. C. 1. (...) Lib. 2. C. 12.
will be soon Rebelliously Condemned, by those that cannot bear with our own;
and are so truly Licentious that they would live without any: But for that
Justice of the Venetians which he extols so much in opposition to our own, his
Republican Soul would be loath to venture there it is Human Body notwithstanding
it is Equal Distributive Justice, which he would make Arithmetical too, by
making it so exactly proportionable to the Crime, should he be found there as
great a Criminal against that State, as his Published Treasons have here
rendered him to our own, he would hardly come to know his Fault there till he
came to feel the punishment, and would find a Banditi with them to make the
best Executioner; it is there Sedition, and the Defamation of the Government is
punished as soon as Information is received, and that with nothing less than
Death, and commonly drowning; no Trial per Testes and Examinants, but Ferry'd
away in one of their Gondola's, which must prove your Infernal Boat too, and
the first sight of your Sin is with that of a Confessor, and a Hangman, and
thesesure must be most Malicious, Inveterate Villains, that can commend such
Judicatures that are rather shambles, for Butchery and Murder, before those of
their own Nation; where a Penny property cannot be taken away without a Trial
per pares, and the Law, much less their Life. But if our Republican when he
commends so much the Justice of that State, means only what is distributed in
their Decemviral Council which is the Supreme, let him for a Confirmation of
his Error and Folly Consult only the Vld. Reliq. Wotton p. 307.
Case of Antonio Foscarini one of their own Senate; whom upon the bare
Testimony of too profligate Russians, that he held correspondence with the
Spanish Ambassador, (which with any foreign one for a Senator is their Death
by the Law,) without any Collateral or Circumstantial Proof, without seeing his
Accusers, was seized, mussl'd up, clapped in a dark Dungeon, and in a few days
sentenced to be strangled, and which was done accordingly; the Conspiracy of
the Witness was soon afterward detected, his Innocence declared; and the poor
Gentleman for want of a due process at Law, plainly Murdered; and all the
Conviction I wish to such unjust reproachers of the Constitution of any of our
Courts of Judicature, that they may never have the benefit of those Laws they
Condemn, and only have the Fate to Fall by that Justice of the Republic they
so much extol.

The Villains that signed the Warrant for our late Kings Execution; did not
more Sacrifice his Person, than this Impious Wretch has Murdered him again in
Effigy, with a redoubled Cruelty, to blast that unblemishable reputation;
which if Dearer than Life, must be the greater Treason: He tells us the
Parliament Pages 167, 168, 169, etc. (...). Journal.
never made War upon him, because by Law, ( says the Sycophant) He can do no
wrong, but this shall not be allowed for a Maxim with such Malcontents when it
makes for the Monarch: But what if a Parliament of Rebels, put out in their
Declaration, that He has wronged the Law, and vote that he Levies War to
destroy the Fundamental Liberty of the People, to set up Arbitrary Government;
send down a Traitor to keep him out of his own Garrisons, when their Guards
could not secure his Life from the rage of the London Rabble instigated too by
that Villainous Assembly that made his Repairing to Hull for the Preservation of
himself, an Insurrection of their King for the Destruction of the People: And
can such a senseless piece of Sedition imagine that undistinguishing Bullet they
brought into the Field, could be commanded to take off none but Evil
Counselors and Seducers; or that ARMS which soon silence all LAWS, especially
when lifted against their Sovereign, would favorable consider his Right, and a
Maxim of our own that he could do no wrong. He tells us the King was displeased
for parting with his Power to dissolve Parliaments, and took unheard of ways to
demand Members with Arms: Most Inhumane Wretch even to the Pious Memory of so
good a Prince, to give him the Lie in his Grave; does not himself tell us, as
if his Prophetic Soul had foreseen the suggestion of such a Rebel, in his
making it his deepest plaint, The Injury of all Injuries (...).
is, that some will Falsely divulge, that I repining at the Establishment of
the Parliament endeavored by force and open Hostility; to undo what by Royal
assent I had done. While at the same time the Contradictory Wretches would
asperse him for a resolved, and a wilful occasioner of his ruin; but for the
demand of the Members, so far from Irregularity: That this Malicious Accuser,
is a double Traitor to his Memory, by being an Abetter of those, that were
truly so; and representing it False, the King was advised in Scotland of those
Conspirators having Invited that Nation to come into ours Armed: And shall not
bringing in a Foreign Power, an Actual Levying War be allowed Treason: He had
his Witnesses ready for the proving every Article; his Attorney had drawn up all
their Impeachments, and could not their King have the benefit of those Laws, he
gives Life too? Could not their King Impeach a Commoner? when they themselves
can any Lord. He ordered Him to inform the House of Peers with the Matter of
the Charge, and a Sergeant at Arms to accuse them to the Commons: did they, or
could they call this an unheard of way, or Irrogular Proceeding? and will the
protection of their House extend to an Indictment for High Treason, as well as
No privilege of Parliament holds for Treason, Felony or even Breach of the
Peace 4. part Inst. 25.
an Execution upon Debt? certainly this President will not be found among all the
Miscellanies of Parliament, tho that Industrious Author might have cited too
his Majestys Murder out of their Journal. But let them blush at their late
Arbitrary Proceedings against their Fellow Subjects, and Remember what they
denied their King.

Here was an obstruction of Justice, that was already a Rebellion against the
Executive Power of the Law, such an one, as only their next Ordinance for
seizing the Militia, could make it more so; the Sergeant that was sent to
Arrest their Persons is countermanded, and if again attempted, it is Ordered,
and Resolved they will stand upon their Desence, and make Resistance; how should
the Mildest Father of the most Merciful Son, Mollify so many Tigers Tugging
for the Praerogative, with the pretense of Privileges. Why he tells us, himself
went attended with some Gentlemen his (...).
followers, much short of his Ordinary Guard; to desire he might proceed
against Traitors only in a free, and Legal Trial, that he had furnished himself
with proof and wanted nothing for that Evidence which he could have produced:
But what ( I am sure they were resolved to deny their Sovereign) even what they
made the Rabble clamor for against himself, JUSTICE; the Chronicle tells us,
none of his Followers moved farther than the Stairs, but only he himself with
the Palsgrave entered the House, demanded whom before he had Accused, and the
Villains themselves so Conscious of his Equitable demand, and their own Guilt,
that they feared their very delivery from their Friends, and that Death I doubt
they had so justly deserved, the Criminals were fled, he renews his Charge and
so satisfied, returns; but so were not those whom nothing could Content at last
but his Life, they load it with all the Obloquies, and Exasperations
imaginable, such Protectors of Liberties could only think Treason against him
worthier of Protection, then their injured King; an Execution of Law, is Voted
a Breach of Privilege, the demanding the Benefit of it by him that gives it
it is being; they made MURDER, the City Guards are set up in several places, the
Train-Bands are Commanded down to Westminster, a greater Army sure then only
the Kings Retinue to protect Impeacht Traitors, and with the late Hosanna's of
our Old Bailey they lead in Triumph, that Primitive Council of Six accused for
High Treason, and what Security had this present King that the like Cabal
should not have been as well Secured from his Justice, had they been but
detected in some of their late Sessions, they were all Members too, the
Difference between our King and Commons in as high a ferment, the Charge that
then was given to the Lords, the Articles that were offered to the Commons
appear upon Record but the Counterpart of this Kings Declaration; only there
they had not come so far as to contrive his Murder, their Accusation was, for
aspersing of his Majesty's Government Vid. Baker p. 516. An. 1641. Vid. Kings
Declar. 1683.
and altering the affections of his People, Countenancing Tumults against him,
inviting a Foreign Nation, the Scots, as too this Actually did, and Conspiring
to Levy War, as these did to Raise an Insurrection: And might not any Jealous
Soul fear such Parliaments, that protected such Traitors? and might not such
Traitors been again protected by such Parliaments, when the City too was their
own again, the Guards set, the Watches placed, the Streets Chained, and that
when they could accuse no King for Breach of Privilege or Coming to their
House with Arms, and the having a Guard for their house was offered at now when
nothing but their King was again in danger? and can the retrieving the Memory
of those immediate Forrunners of our first Misfortunes be made a Crime? And the
most Flagitious Villains Hunt, Pla. to p. 169.
concerned in it no way Criminal, can such a Senate sit till it has Murdered a
King? and shall not an experienced King secure himself from such a Seditious
Senate? that the design of the whole House of late was to raise a Rebellion, is
utterly false, but that some of the late Members have actually designed it
since, is Certainly true, it is attested in their Sufferings and Sealed in their
Blood: The Honor of that Assembly may be no way Tainted, tho both Blood and
Issue of some that did sit in it, is since at present so by Law; a man of
Common Sense can apprehend the Constitution of a Body Politic to be one thing,
and the Constituent Members another, and this without the help of Metaphysics
or Abstraction, I am Sworn, besides that Natural affection I still shall have
for my Sovereign, to be Faithful to my Liege Lord, and should I fail in my
Faith, I should be for-sworn; I know the privilege of having a Parliament is
the Interest of every Subject, and should I contend against that, I should be a
Fool; but because there is a necessity of obeying your King, does the same
Obligation tie you to an Usurper. A Parliament is a great Privilege to a
Nation, but not so when it Vsurps all sorts of Privileges, that you saw took
away it is head, laid the Land of it all in BLOOD. I Will maintain with my last
Breath that a Parliament is the Subjects Birthright; but God forbid we should
be Born to all sort of Parliaments, that would make us Traitors by a Law, and
we have many besides what in this Kings were declared, by Statute Treasonable.
Coventry Parl. 38. H. 6. declared Develish by 39. H. 6. 1. Edw. 4. that of
Rich. 2 Treasonable. Par. Car. 1. 1641.


But to return to what is the Blackest piece of Treason our PLATO, was the
Glorious Martyr the First aggressor too, or did they first seize his Militia,
when they could not have it by Consent? was the withdrawing of the King,
Treason to his Parliament? or were the Parliament the Traitors that made him to
withdraw? did the King Rebel against his own Garrison at Hull, or was Hotham
the Rebel that kept out his King, let even prejudice here determine, what the
worst of Malice can suggest: Does Matchiavel he cites, countenance the
Licentiousness of the People, or rather allow too much Liberty to his Prince,
and make an Hero, of a Tyrant, an Agathocles, and Grotius whom (...). in
Princip. C. 8. qui itaqae hujus viri rerum gestarum, rations animo reputaret
nihil aut parum in (...) animadverteret aut fortunae asseribendum.
he Libels as much when he makes him to favor a Rebellion, and who has
expressly Condemned our own. After this Re-publican like a Roman Velite, has
held our Monarchy his Foe in play, all in the front of the Book, he begins to
rout it entirely when he comes up with the Body, to the Battle, and the Rear,
there he tells us plainly the Sweetness the profitableness, of a Commonwealth,
that only it is not to be Plato page 221. p. 234. p. 236. Making Leagues
absolutely in the King, 19. Ed. 4. 239. 249. 252.
set up during these Circumstances, that is, it is too soon, to Rebel yet, and
he has found out better expedients; the King has too much Power, the Presidents
of John and Henry the Third, are trumpt up again for being Compelled to give it
away, the Murder of Edward, and Richard the Second, at least the Deposition, of
which that is an absolute Consequence, is two or three times again Recommended
for Instruction; and now he tells the Parliament plainly what Branches of the
Praerogative, they must insist upon, Power of making War and Peace, Treaties
and Allyances, which the Kings wicked Ministers have made Destructive to the
Interest of our English Nation: You have here the best of Kings in effect, tho
applied to the Courtiers, of which I think he must be the Chief, resembl'd to
the very Rebel that Usurped upon his Crown; as if it were designed by him as
well as a Cromwell, (that had no right to maintain himself in the Throne, but
the Power of the Sword) to Crave aid from FRANCE, Plat. 239.
to keep Under his People of ENGLAND. The Militia must be granted them, because
out of Parliament, or Session, it being in his hand they cannot raise the
County Bands, nor those of the City to Guard themselves, that some irusty
Members whom if the King pleases may take care of his Household, that a
Parliament Plat. p. 249.
meet of Course at a certain Day at the usual place without Writ or Summons,
and that because Peers depend so much upon the will of their Prince for
Creation, they should never be made but by Act of Parliament, I appeal to the
most Plat. 252.
moderate mild Soul Living, whether any single Line of all this absolute
Treason has not of late, almost since the Publication of this Damnable piece
been (...) to be put in Execution, was not the Haereditary Descent, struck at
in the Duke? was not the Militia offered at in some of their Votes? Frequency
of Parliaments which would have been as good as without intermission, Clamoured
for in some of their Speeches; the Nomination of some of the Officers of Power
by the People. And lastly was it not agreed to meet without Writ and Summons,
when the Major part of Members were to be convened after Dissolution, and can
any still say that an alteration of the Government was never designed, by those
that were then so busily concerned, and when some of the most popular and
Active, have been since Actually Convicted for the Compassing all this, by the
Blood of their King, which they dispair'd of obtaining from his Le Roy vult:
But it is to be hoped that the God of Heaven, who has brought to Light the
Darkness even of Hell, has so much illuminated Peoples understanding as well as
Eyes, that the next Assembly that shall constitute this Politic Body, truly
Honorable, adsolutely Necessary in it is Constitution, will be such, as will
transcend, what has been one of their best Presidents; An healing one; and that
of those wounds such (...) and Doctors have scarifi'd instead of closed, and
with a merited Vote Condemn such Devils to their own Element the Fire, that
have so Seditiously set three Kingdoms in a Flame.

But tho this refined Statesman, this polisht piece of the most accomplished
Treason, may perhaps value himself upon the Product and Invention of his own
Villainy, proud of the being reputed a witty Republican, whose greatest Glory
here is to be at the best, but an Ingenious Rebel; yet his very Reputation, tho
it be but in his Roguery, must sink too. When you consider (what I shall soon
satisfy any sober Person in, any Soul that has but so much Sense as to
distinguish an Author from a Plagiary a Man of Honesty from a Thief,) that even
the very Notions and Principles he Prints for the establishing this Government
were formerly Published, and proposed by the very Villains that actually
subverted it; not one Expedient in all his Politics, but what was by sad
Experience the very Propositions of declared Traitors: The Blessed Wit would
rob the Records of an old Rebellion; and that only to put in for an Inventor of
a new; the worst of Felons, and in Foreign parts punished as the greatest that
Steals his Fellow from the Gibbet: His Book has not only borrowed all from
Harrington, I Will allow it him with all my Heart, and that (...).
by what follows you may find.

A Parallel between the Propositions sent the late King by the Rebel
Parliament, and the Rebellious Proposals of our Plato Redivivus.
PARLIAMENT'S. PLATO'S. 1. That all the Kings Privy Council, great Officers and
Ministers of State may be put out, excepting such as the Parliament shall
approve, and to assign them an Oath. 1. His Majesty's Power to nominate, and
appoint as he pleases all the Officers of the Kingdom, one of the Powers in the
Crown, that hinder the Execution of the Laws, Plat. p. 239. why may we not
begin by removing all his Majesty's present Council by Parliament? Page 232. 2.
That all Affairs of State be managed by the Parliament; except such Matters as
are by them transferred to their Privy Council. 2. That his Majesty exercise
the Four great Magnalia of Government with the consent of Four several Councils
appointed for that end, the Councils to be named in Parliament, Page 240, 241.
3. That all great Officers of the Kingdom be chosen by Parliaments and their
Approbation. 3. That the Election of the great Officers be by those Councils;
and those Councils to be chosen by the Parliament, p. 258, 259. 4. If any place
fall void in the Interval of Parliament, the Major part of this Council to
choose one to be confirmed at the next Session of Parliament. 4. Preserving to
themselves the Approbation of the great Officers, as Chancellor, Judges,
Generals of the Army, p. ibid. 5. To reform Church Government as the Parliament
shall advise, to concur with the People in depriving the Bishops of their
Votes. 5. That the Clergy, quatenus such, had, and will have a share in the
Sovereignty, and Inferior Courts in their own Power called Ecclesiastical;
this is and will ever be a Solaecism in Government, p. 178. 6. Marriages and
Allyances to be concluded in Parliament. 6. The Kings absolute Power of making
War and Peace, Treatises and Allyances, one of the Powers in the Crown, that
binder our Happiness and Settlemene, p. 327. 7. To settle the Militia as the
Parliament have ordered it. 7. The Kings disposing, and ordering the Militia,
one of the Powers in the Crown that hinders our Happiness, p. 239. 8. All Forts
and Castles to be in the disposal of the Parliament. 8. The King enjoying the
Power of garrisoning and fortifying Places, one of the Powers that binder our
Happiness, ibid. 9. To employ only such People about him as the Parliament
might confide in. 9. That those of the Four Councils appointed by Parliament,
if his Majesty pleases to have the ordering his economy and Household, etc.
page 242. 10. No Peer hereafter to be made to sit in Parliament without their
consent. 10. That for the future no Peer shall be made, but by Act of
Parliament, page 252.

These made the Substance of those Seditious Propositions, that they pressed upon
the poor Prince, with which they would have forced our Charles the First, to
the Misfortune and Fate of a Richard the Second; the most aggravated Misery
that can befall a Monarch, the deposing of himself. These were they that filled
their Parliament Papers and Proposals to their King at York, the most Insolent
that could be proposed surely to a Prince, that was then in a Condition more
likely to demand with Arms, what he was denied against Law, whom they might
expect to see as they did soon after at the Head of good Soldiers, as well as
in the Hearts of Loyal Subjects; such Insolences as would have been
Insufferable had they tried, and gained, what was afterward so unhappily gotten
that unlucky Fortune of the Day, had they then, (what their Prosperous Villainy
did at last effect,) made their Mighty Monarch their Peoples Slave, and a mere
Captive of a King. Carisbrook, and the Isle of Wight could not have born with
of much Indignity, as was offered to him here; when even at Nottingham and
York, their Non Addresses when his Person was in the Castle, were less hard,
than such an Address when his Standard was in the Field: These were those that
provoked even the Mildest Prince to Protest in Vi (...). (...).
some rage, That if he were their Prisoner, he would never stoop so low; These
were those by which he must have made Himself, what our Republican would have
him now made, of a King of England, but a Duke of Venice; and with These did
they never cease to perplex his unshaken Heart, his unmoved Soul, continually
upon all their Messages, Treatises and Remonstrances and Petitions, These still
the Subjects of their demands, when their Commissioners were sent to Oxford
after their Newbury Battle; these when the perfidious Scot had gotten him in
their Power and Hands at Newark and New Castle, but bandied then only for the
better buying of their King, whom his own Country as basely sold; then offered
rather to make matter of delaying War then truly designed for Peace, that there
might be somewhat in Agitation till the Sum was agreed upon, and his Majesty
diverted with the small Hopes of being at last a Titular King, while they were
selling him to Foreigners for an absolute Slave. Lastly, with these did they
Plague and Pester the Poor Prince, when they had made him a perfect Prisoner at
Hampton Court, and how well these Proposals of the late Rebels, agree with the
Politics of this present Republican, I Will submit even to the most partial
Person of the Party, upon the perusal of this Parallel.

And what could be the design then, at such a Season, of Publishing such a
piece, of our Mutinous Members hugging in their Hearts, and applauding with
their Tongues, Printed and Published Treason? But that what was offered in their
Plato, was once presented in Parliament, that the Politic Rebel, could be
picked even out of the Journals of their House: That they had Presidents there
too for a Common Wealth, as well as in Starkey's Shop; and hoped to see her
Revive again by Vote, as well as by Book.

But these blessed Expedients, tho but proposed out of the Press, are the more
Pernicious; at the same time, its Publisher makes them pertinent to what I have
here applied them, the Propositions of a Parliament; for he tells us he would
Plato p. (...).
not have them wrested from his Majesty; but that he be petitioned to part with
them, very seasonably suggested; I confess, when we were so full of
petitioning. He would not have it effected by the Power of the Sword, the
Politician it seems is mightily for Peace, and the Preservation of his
Majesty's Person; but would only have them raise at first a civil War upon his
Soul, use the Son a little more kindly than they did the Father, and not seize
his Militia with an Ordinance, because they cannot Fight him with his consent,
nor Rebel first against their King with an open War, and then send him
Propositions for Peace, and the making him a Slave.

And since some of our Seditious Souls have not only a great Veneration left
for these Parliamentary Projects, and as great esteem for this Statesman, for
the reviving them in his Politics; since some that would be thought Persons
sober and moderate, can think the Kings Compliance in some of these Grants and
Concessions somewhat necessary, and a Trifle of the Crowns prerogative to be
pared from the State, as requisite as a Surplice, or Ceremony to be parted with
in the Church; since the Propositions of that Rebel Parliament, and the
Politics of this rank Republican, make up so perfect a Parallel; It will
supersede some separate labor and pains, to be able to animadvert upon them
together, and at once; (His Answerer will be somewhat obliged to his Authors
being but a Thief,) and will show, (that whatever some think, that such pieces
of Power might be pared from the Crown like some sappy Excrescencies from the
Trunks of Trees, for the better Nourishment of the Stock,) that all, and every
one of them strike directly at the very Root: That the Government cannot well
subsist without them, all; and that all of them are inseperably settled in the
Crown, by all, the Fundamental Laws of all the Land.

The first that feels the reforming Cook. 4. Inst. Cap. 2. p. 53. Vid. (...)
several Rolls of Par. cited by him for it is (...), Rot. Par. 50. Ed. 3. n. 10.
1. (...). 2. (...). 4. etc.
stroke of their Fury, we find to be the Kings Privy Council; and what is that?
why their own Oracle of the Law will assure them, the most Noble, most
Honorable and reverend Assembly, consulting for the public good, and that the
number of them is altogether at the King's Will: And shall those be numbered
now, and regulated at the Will of a Parliament, whom their own Acts, Statutes,
Rolls, declare, acknowledge and confess to depend upon the Nomination, Power
and Pleasure of the Prince? would they repeal those Laws of their Ancestors
enacted even according to the greatest Reason, only for an Introducing their
own Innovations against all Reason and Law? Can it be consonant to common
Sense, that those whom their King is to Consult, and Sit with at his Pleasure;
and that according to the very express Words of Authentic Rolls and Records,
that those Rot. Claus. 12. Ed. 3. Par. 2. m. 19.39. Ed. 3. fol. 14.
should depend for their being, and Existence upon the suffrages of such a
senate, whom all our Laws declare, has it self no other being, but what it owes
to the Breath of that Sovereign, over whom they would so (...) Superintend as
to set a Council? can they think that even the Spartan Ephori would have ever
been Constituted, had their Kings by as strong Presidents of the Laws Ad
moderandum Regum (...). Calvin's 2. edit. Strasburg, 1539.
of their Land, been allowed the Liberty of Choosing their own advisers? or
would Calvin himselfhave recommended them, and the Roman Tribunes, the
Demarchi, the Decemviral at Athens, had he been assured that their Decrees and
Edicts had all along placed it in the power of their Prince to be advised by
whom he pleased? and this Rebellious Project we now are examining, I am sure
would prove a greater Scourge, and curb, to our own Kings, than ever the
Romans, or Athenians had for the management of theirs; we must turn about even
the very Text, and invert our Prayers to the Almighty; when a Parliament shall
come to Counsel his Counselors and teach his Senators Wisdom; when it shall be
in the Subjects power to set himself at his Sovereigns Table, you may swear
he will be first served too, and that with his own Carving; and therefore were
they not forced to raze Rolls and Records for the making such a Reformation in
the State; Reason it self is sufficiently the Faction's Foe, and as much on the
side of those that are the Kings Friends. For let any sober Person but
consider, whether the greatest Confusion, Disorder and Disturbance in the
State, would not be the Consequence of this very distracted Opinion; do we not
already too much experiment the disquiet of a divided Kingdom to be most
dangerous, when but a tumultuous part of a Parliament too much Predominates,
this Gentleman's Quarantia, Plat. page 241.
(or if you please) the Kingdoms four General Councils, are to be named in
Parliament; and then what would be the result of it, but that his Majesty must
be managed by a standing House of Commons, or at best some Committee of Lords;
they need not then Labor for the Triennial Act of the late King, confirmed 16.
Car. 1. 16. Car. 2.
by the too gracious Concession of this; His Councils once their own Creatures,
would have too much Veneration for their kind Creators, to diswade their King
from a speedy Summons of a Senate; tho assured, secured of its being
sufficiently Seditious, they would soon supersede as supersluous one of the
very Articles of such a Counselors 4. (...). p. 54.
Oath, where he swears to keep Secret the Kings Counsel; for by such a
Constitution they would be obliged to make a Report from the Council Board to
some Chairman of a Committee; a better Expedient, I confess, than an order for
Parl. 25. Car. 1. just so took upon them to search the Signet Office, and that
of the Secretary, whereof the King as justly complained. Vid. (...) Coventry
speech to the Commons.
Sr. Stephen's bringing in the Books: And indeed none of the Kings Services
should be then called Secret, they would be soon Printed with their Votes, and
hardly be favored voured with some of their own Affairs of Importance, to be
referred for the more private Hearing, to a Committee of Secrecy; the good
advise his Majesty might expect from such Councils, might be much like those of
late from his Petitioners, And he again told to be the mightiest Monarch, by
condescending to be the Ibid. p. 57.
most puny Prince: My Lord Cook tells us, those Councils are there best
proposed for the Kingdom, when so that it cannot be guessed which way the King
is inclined, for fear, I suppose, of a servile Compliance; but here the
knowledge of his Inclination, would be the most dangerous to the King; which to
be sure would be opposed, and only because known; the good the King would
receive from such Counselors might be put in his Eyes, and the Protection the
Nation could receive from such a King, must be but in good Wishes, and are we
come to deny our Sovereign at last, what every Subject can Consult, his own
Friends.

But tho this bold Gentleman as arrogantly tells us, that this Privy Council is
no part of the Government; (his imagined one he must mean) a Commonwealth;
Plat. page (...).
I Will tell him more modestly, and with better Authority than a Dixit only of a
Platonic Dogmatist, that he might as well have told us too, (what indeed are
such a Republicans real thoughts,) that the King Himself is no part of it, and
show him both from Law and Reason, that they have a great share in it too.

And that the Laws great Oracle tells us too, who is so far from letting them
have no part in the Government, that he tellsus they have a very great part
even Cook 4. c. 2 Inst. Stanford 72. F Senators sunt parts corporls Regls.
in the very King. That they are incorporated to the King himself. His true
Treasurers, and the most profitable Instruments of the State: And without doubt
this great part they had always in Public administrations made them of old so
much esteemed, that in all Rolls, and Acts of State, they were mentioned with
so much reverence and respect; certainly had they been no constitution allowed
of by the Fundamental Laws of our Land, they would never have been transmitted
to posterity, with such veneration to their Memories, and that too through
every Reign and all the Records of Time; let them have but the benefit and
privilege of a Common Borough, and let their President, an Office as old as
King John's Time, and that Holl. fol. 169. Matt. Paris, 205.
by Letters pattents, but have as fair play as one of their Port-Reevs,
prescription would incorporate them into the Government, as well as entitle
those to their Franchises. It Is an absolute Contradiction to Imagine that Rolls
then the (...). Par. 3. H. 6. (...). 3.
very Parliaments Acts, or Opinions in Transcript, should have recorded them so
Honorably, for their Public Administration; were they not allowed by the
people so much as to be Ministers for the Public good; and such Honor was
given them too by our Ancestors; such Semblance of Sovereignty to their
Persons, that their Houses had in some sense, the self-same privilege of the
very Kings Palace and Verge; wherein if Coke. 4. Inst. p. 53. Inas c. 46.
a blow was given it was punished with a Fine, the loss of a good Sum of Money
as in the other, of a Hand: And is it not at present Treason to destroy them;
and can Absurdity it self imagine that the Laws which are made always by those
that Govern, would make such provisions for those that were no part of the
Government.

And lastly, to prove this proposition of our Republican, but a Rebels Plot;
and a fair progress toward a Rebellion, I Will show this presumptious projector,
how vainly he presumes upon his parts and Invention, that he is a double
Plagiary, not only borrowed this (...) project against the present Privy
Council from these proposals of our Seditious Senate in England, but his very
Quarantia of Venice was set up, long before he could for an Author, by those
Zealots that were so resolutely resolved to Rebel in Scotland; and he shall see
those Daemagogues too, those Devils of Sedition, looked upon it even then as a
praeparatory project and the best Expedient for their Invading of the Kingdom,
and the Crown.

Their Edinburgh, their Metroprolis, as Anno 1638.
well as ours here, was then the Seat of Sedition, so truly great, that it is
Faction and Villainy was Commensurate even with it is very Walls: And those too,
when Casually fallen were not suffered to be built; as if they would have let
the World known by praediction, their Ominous Treason was to extend further:
'twas here that the Sycophants at the same time they pretended so much for
their Kings preservation, that they protested against the pious Prince's
Proclamation only for the dispersing of that dangerous Rabble that seemed to
denounce with an Omen, what too fatally followed, his Death and Destruction;
his Majesty's sincerity to them and their Religion, was repeated in it, often
with assurances; but what was as Sincerely promised from a King by these
Monsters of the People was as Rebelliously Ridiculed with scorn and derision;
and that the Government might be satisfied with a sure report of their
Sedition, Vid. Sir Will. Dugdale's short view. 45. and p. 48, 49, 50.
they made those Heralds that proclaimed their Princes pleasure, to witness how
much it displeased his Rebel Subjects, and in defiance to their very Faces read
their own Protestation.

Big thus with Rebellion; and Laboring with their teeming Treason, at last
they are fairly delivered of the same Rebel Brat, this Republican would adop't
for his own, a QVARANTIA: they Covenant and agree (and 'twas time to Unite for
a Justification of those Villainies, which naught but a Combination could
defend;) for erecting four principal Tables; and 'twas time too to set up their
own Councils, when they had so Seditiously resisted their Kings. To pursue the
Contempt of this Proclamation, which by his Majesty's Council and Command was
published; for a further Violation of the Regal Authority they set up this
truly Popular, the first of their four Councels to consist of their Nobility;
the second of the Gentry, the third of their Burgesses, and the fourth of their
Ministry; and the Decrees of these their principal and general Tables (as they
called them,) as if as Universally to be received as Moses his Two of Stone,
what Baker 406.
they did, and was approved of by the General one, the Choice Flower of all the
Four, was to be forced as the Peoples Law, but far I am sure from the
Fundamental one of the Land, from this their Rebellious assuming of the
Sovereignty in their pretended Councils, (as they called them too) but in truth
a Convention of Conspirators; proceeded presently the Renewing of their
Negative Confession; their Band, their Covenant imposed on all sorts of People,
with artiside, force, and Blood it self: And can a Test now established by
Authority and Law, be looked upon an Imposition even by those that imposed
Oaths Unlawful and Rebel'd against both? it being by them expressly declared in
two several 10. Jac. 6. Act 12. and Parl. 9. Regn. Marlae. Act 75.
Acts, that all Leagues of Subjects amongst themselves, without their Princes
Privity, to be Sedition, and their Authors and Abetters to be punished as
movers of such.

And what did this Venetian Government terminate in in Scotland, but a plain
Confederacy to confound all, and tho the Civil and Courteous contriver of our
Ruin and Subversion minces the matter with making his Majesty to Exercise his
four Magnalia with the consent of these four Councils, 'twould puzzle his
Politics to tell me the distinction between them and those principal Tables of
the Scot, what should confine them from Confederating against their Plato p.
240.
King, instead of Consulting for him? what would signify his Majesty's having
a president among those, of his own placeing, when every one of them would be
their own Masters, and out of his power to displace? what should hinder those
from protesting with their old Rebellious Assembly in Scotland against all
their Kings desires, intentions, and Inclinations for the public good, while
they presume their own Maxims the wisest, and their measures the best? and to
tell us that these are to give Account and to be answerable to such a
Parliament, who chooses them, is to say a Sidney is the best Judge of the
Misdemeanor of a Nevil, most qualified to answer his Quaere whether this
project be not a better Expedient than the Justitia of Arrogan, or the Spartan
Ephori, or to Plato 242.
tell us one that has suffered for Treason to a Monarchy, is the fittest to Try
him that would betray it to a Commonwealth.

The second Proposition in the Parallel is, that Affairs of State be managed by
the Parliament, or by such Councils as they shall appoint: The true Spirit, the
Life, the Soul of Sedition, that informs, and animates the whole Body of the
Faction, speaks here the Dictates of this Demon this Devil of a Republic;
that has possessed the Nation for this five years, with greater Phrensy then e're
he did before the Restoration, when by the very Finger of God he was first calt
out; and would now return too with more worse than himself, only because he
finds it swept and garnisht: For I defy the most diligent Perusers of the most
pernicious Libels that were Printed in 1642.
the most Pestilent time, when Treason was Epidemick, and spread as the Plague
it self more than once did; and that in their Mighty Babylon, their Metropolis
too. I challenge even those to show me so much Penned even then to persuade the
setting up a Republic, as has so lately been Published in this very piece.

His Majesty upon the presenting these Vid. Rings Answer to the 19.
propositions.
their Proposals I have parralleld, told them they designed him for a Duke of
Venice; and that they only dared to do, when they had bid him defyance to his
Face, and made him fly for refuge to his Friends, when they had a fund for
Rebellion in the City; A General, and an Army in the Field; but here we have a
single Republican declaring expressly for the good Government of the Venetian,
Arraigning of our Monarchy, condemning of our Courts, reforming of our
Councils, only to set up their Republic, for the framing their Decemviral, the
constituting their Quarantia, the making every Member of Parliament; Rex est
principlum, caput and Finis Parl. Vld. Modus renend. Parl. and 4. Inst. fol. 3.
but a Noble Man of Venice, and his Mighty Prince, that presides in it by Law
as a Principal Head, but a plain puny Doeg; and all this at a time the
Government stood firm upon its Foundations, and the best of Basis its
Fundamental Law, to what an height of exalted Insolence was the very Soul of
Sedition then aspired to, to suffer such a Serpent to see the Light that hist
at the sight of a Sovereign, and spit its Venom in the very Face of Majesty.

And whatever Recommendation this virulent Republican gives us of the Venetian
Justice, he would find sufficient severity, sublimed Cruelty, instead of Law,
distributed to such daring Offenders, as should offer at a Monarchy there, tho
but a mixed; and of which they seem to have some necessitated resemblance in
their constant creating of a Duke, as if there were yet some remains of Royalty
left which they could not extirpate; and like Nature it self whom all the Art
of Man can never expel; the Libeller would not be long then without an Halter;
Vid. Reliquiae Wotton. ^oscarino's case,
the Jealous State would soon send him the sight of his Sin, and Sentence
together, and that by the Hands of his Hangman, and some little Gondula to
Ferry him to the deep. No Magna Charta, no Petition of Right, no privilege of a
Trial of Peers, or even a Plea allowed to the Prisoner; and whom with a
Praevious Sentence too, they many times dispatch as soon as seized: And shall a
Monarchy here founded upon Kingly Government has been the usage of the Land
beyon'd History it self; and the Common Law is but Common usage. Plowd. Comment
p. 195, Le Commen Ley n'est que Commen use. 2. part of the Inst. fol. 496.
Kings Praerogative is part of the Law of England.
on its Fundamental Law, and that for fifteen hundred years, be invaded with
impunity, by the Pen of every virulent Villain, each Factious Fellow that can
but handle the Feather of a Goose.

I confess, when they were arrived here to their Acme of Transcendent Villainy,
when Vice had fixed her Pillars here, and that in an Ocean too, but of Blood;
when they had washed their Hands even in Insuperable Wickedness, and shed that
of their Prince, when by a Barbarous Rebellion they had subverted thebest of
Civil Governments, our Monarchy, and established their own Anarchy, a Common
Wealth, then they might well be so bold, as to write their Panegyricks upon
their own Usurpation, when they were to be paid for it by the Powers instead of
Punishment.

Then they might tell us (as indeed they did;) that the greatest of Crimes was
the committing of High Treason against the Majesty of the People: That the
Romans gave us good Presidents for Rebellion, Merc. Pol. Number. 107.
in the turning out of their Tarquins, and the Government together; that Caesar
Usurpt upon the power of the People; Marius and Sylla on the Jurisdiction of
the Senate; Pisistratus turned Tyrant at Athens, and Agathocles in Sicily;
Merc. Pol. Jun. 17. 52.
that Cosmus was the first Founder of a Dukedom, and a fatal Foe to Florence;
that Castruccio made himself the Lord of all Luca, and oppressed the Liberty of
all the Freeborn Subjects of the Land; that all our Kings from him they called
the Conqueror, to the Scottish Tyrant, were but the same sort of Usurpers upon
the power of the People. All this with much more Execrable Treason was Printed,
Published, and Posted through the Kingdom, with Approbation of Parliament, and
which we shall in its proper place represent in its own blackness, black as
Hell it self, the seat of such Seditious Souls, full of Anarchy and Confusion;
But why we should now have so lately left us such daring desparadoes to
retrieve to us the same Doctrine, to tell Plato.
us that Affairs of State must be managed by a Parliamentary; that is in their
own Phraseology a mere popular Power, could proceed certainly from nothing but
the deepest, the most dangerous Corruption of the Times; from the desperate
Condition of a Government, ready to be undermined, by Treachery, Plot, and
Machination, brought so low; that it did not dare to defend it self; and its
boldest Assertors so far frightened into a dishonest and imprudent sort of
Diffidence, as to distrust the strength of their own Cause; and that was
evident too, from the sad servile Compliance of some fearful Souls, otherwise
well affected, that seemed to give up their Government like a Game lost, that
had rather sink then swim against the Tide.

But for a more direct Answer to this Proposition we shall show, that Affairs
of State must be managed by our Monarch; that matter of Fact has proved it by
Prescription; that it is our Kings Prerogative by the Lands Law, and his
unquestionable Right, by the force of Reason.

For the first it is evident from History, that for above 600. years, near a
thousand before the Conquest, we had Kings that had an Absolute and Sovereign
sway over their Subjects, as appears from the Gildas B. who was born Anno 493.
most Ancient Writer of our British History; it is apparent that all our
Monarchs, Britains, Saxons and Danes exercised unlimited Jurisdiction without
having their Affairs Governed by any estabisht Council much less a Parliament,
and that to be proved beyond Contradiction from the several Authors, that These
were Nennius a Monk of Bangor who lived An. 620. Bid a Saxon, who wrote in
their Heptarchy, died in the 733. Asserius Menev. who writ the Acts of King
Alfred. Colemannus Ang. who lived in the time of the Danes and Harold the
first. Vortiger the British King on his own Head, called in the Sax, on without
his Subjects consent. Egbert an absolute Monarch of the Saxons over all the
Isle. Canutus as absolute among the Danes, called only his Convention of Nobles
at Oxford about 1017.
Lived, Wrote, and were Eye Witnesses, of the manner and Constitution of their
Government, and then sure must be supposed to understand that to which they
were Subjected, from those good Authorities can be easily gathered that the
power of Peace and War was always in the Prince, that they were Governed by him
Arbitrarily and at his Will, that he called what Councils, of whom, when, and
where he pleased; so far from being Limited, that the most popular
Parliamentarians would be loath his present Majesty should prescribe to such an
Absoluteness, and which nothing but the kind Concessions of some of his
Predecessors, to their Clamourous Subjects has given from the Crown and
dispensed with that power and right enjoyed by their Royal Ancestors.

It Is strange and unaccountable that those which stretch their Wit and
Invention for this power of Parliament, and run through all the Mazes of Musty
Records, for the proving it so Ancient, yet will not allow that of their King
so long a standing, and which after all their fruitless Labor lost proves at
last nothing but the Council of their King, those Noble and Wisemen he would
please to Assemble; their Gemotes the name of that most Ancient Assembly
implying nothing more, as appears even from 1. Inst.. 164. p. 110. Magn. Chart.
Chart. Forest. Stat. of Ireland made H. 3. the 1. Laws we had from their very
words seem all made by the sole power of the King. No Commons mentioned in
Stat. Merton, 20. H. 3. only discreet men mentioned in Stat. of Marlbrigd. 52.
H. 3. But all the Commonalty is said summoned in the praeamb. to Stat. West.
1.3. E. 1. In Stat. Bigamy 4. Ed. 1. Stat. Mortemain 7. E. 1. Art. sup. Chart.
28. E. 1. Stat Escheat. 29. E. 3. not summoned, 34. E. no Law to be made
without Knight. and Burg.
their own Cook himself, and their Commons whom this Author would have now so
great as to Govern his King; far from having the least concern in public
Administrations, there being in all Historical Accounts of (...) Ancient times
no mention of them in those very Conventions; whereas Nobles Bishops, and
Abbots are expressly named. The greatest Color they have for 'its Conjecture is
only from the word Wites or wisemen which Constituted their Witena; and the
Prefaces or preambles to all their Laws imply that they were with the
assistance of the Wisemen, made by their King; but can any person of sense and
Impartial, conceive this Term the more applicable to the Common sort of People
and mere Laymen, than to the Nobles the Bishops, the Lords; and then as we may
well believe the most Learned of the Land; their Literature sure was then but
little, and then I am sure that of the meaner Layity must be less, certainly
the word Wites will import no more than an Expressive Character of those
Qualifications, such Nobles were supposed to have that are still expressly said
to be summoned; Vid. also Dr. B. Answer to P. (...) 10. But still left to the
King how many of those he would call. And per Stat. 7. H. 4. the (...) was
first framed directing 2 to be chosen for each County and Borough.
and to say that by Wisemen were still understood the Commons; such an
Emphatical denomination could not be so well resented by their Lordships, since
it would seem in some sense to Exclude them from being so, but as a Learned and
Labourious Answer of this popular point has observed, and what will nearly make
it Unanswerable, that in their Laws when the Senate was generally signified and
the whole Constitution it self, then Wisemen or Wites expressed it; but where
any sort of the Constituent Members are Particularized there you will (...)
nothing but Nobles named; so that such an Assembly, and that all of the
Nobility, depending upon the choice and Election of the (...), was not much
more than our present Privy Council: But then they were able to make Laws, and
these now but Orders and Proclamations, and Parliaments then were so far from
Usurping upon their King, that they were in a Literal sense but his own
Counselors.

But were it granted, what the Faction so furiously contend for, that Commoners
Of Ancient time both Houses sat together first severed. a. H. 4.4. Inst p. 2.
were understood by the word Wisemen, they were still far from (...) such a
Senate as (...) wherein they now sit, only some few (...) jointly with the
Nobility, called there by their Sovereigns sole Summons and Choice; and this is
granted by one of their most (...) Advocates, when he tells us (...). p. 95.
the Dr. has only found out what no Historian is unacquainted with, that our
Parliaments were not always such as now Constituted; if so, why then all this
Labor for the proving them such? why so much of the Commons Antiquity Asserred?
why must the Press be pestered with three or four Volums for the purpose?
Laborious Drudges of Sedition! it is not Jani (...), etc. Argument. Anti Norman.
there Antiquity you so much contend for, and so little able to defend; the
pains to prove them Ancient, is only in order to make them more Exorbitant: M.
P. must Print their Rights, and that at a time when they were even ready to
Rebel, and with a superfluous piece of Sedition tell them of their Power,
Miscel. Parl.
when all good People thought they Usurpt too much. Hunt must Harangue upon
their Integrity to their Prince, and State, when some have since suffered, been
proved Principal Actors for the Destruction of both: These like the Roman
Velites, were fain to Skirmish in the Front, and entertain the good Government
their Foe, with a little light Charge, of the Commons power and privilege,
faithfulness and sincerity; it is a Plato they permit to bring up the Body to
the Battle, and assail it with the Subjects supremacy, and making the Commons a
standing Council for the management of Affairs of State, and the better
Government of their King, poor prejudiced Souls, that to please a party
contradict themselves, give all History the Lie, and then constrain themselves
to believe they tell a Truth; you say Postscript. (...) sup.
Parliaments were not always so powerful as now, and will not you be satisfied
then they had once less power. All our Chronicles tell us our Kings of old,
never allowed such Privileges to the People; and cannot this People be
contented even with an Usurpation upon their Kings.

And as it will from those Authors cited before plainly appear, that the old
Britains, the Saxons, and Danish Princes were far more absolute than of late
our succeeding Sovereigns: so was the Conqueror, the Norman too for several A
Priest of (...).
Successions. Consult Alfredus that lived in his time, and writ down to it, or
Gulielm. Pictaviens. that writ a Treatise of his Life; who tho an absolute
Prince by Conquest and Arms, yet themselves will allow that he governed by
Laws, and that our English ones too; yet those very Laws, were then of such a
Latitude, that they allowed him what his Parliament of Lords would never have
allowed had he been obliged to consult them, he singly ordained, what of late
Vid. Baker,
has been so loudly clamoured for, that no Prelates should have any
Jurisdiction in Temporals, and disarmed all the common People in general
throughout the whole Kingdom; the first themselves, tho such Sollieitors and
Petitioners for the compassing it, would not now allow his Majesty alone, to
exclude from their Votes, (tho for their own Satisfaction) without an Act of
Parliament, and for the latter they will hardly allow, tho granted by the Law,
and tho it be only disarming and securing some Seditious Souls that disturb the
Peace.

William the Second laid his own Taxes Vid. Eadmerus a Monk who writ the Life
of William 2d. lived in his Time.
on the People; a sufferance no Subject can sustein now but with his own
consent and Permission, he could forbid his People by Proclamation not to go
out of the Kingdom, not to be done now but with a ne Exeat, a Writ and Process
at Law, confirmed, as all others are, by Act of Parliament. Henry the First had
as great a power and prerogative, and exercised it too; punishments Vid. Baker
p. 34. (...). William 2d.
before his time, which were Mutilation of Members, he made pecuniary;
provisions for his House which were paid in kind; he made to be turned into
Money; an Alteration of Custom and Law, not now to be compast but by particular
Act: Baker makes him first to have So also Florence of Worst.
instituted the form of an High Court of Parliament, and tells us that before,
only the Nobles and Prelates were called to consult about Affairs of State: But
he called the Commons too as Burgesses elected by themselves; but this cannot be
gathered from Eadmerus the much better Authority, who in the Titles and the
Style of near Nine or Ten Councils of his time not so much as mentions them.

King Stephen what he wanted, and was forced to spare in Taxations, which were
not then granted by the suffrages of the Common People, tho they commonly bear
the greatest burden of it; tho he did not according to the Power he was then
invested with, raise great Sums upon his Subjects, and the greatest Reason,
because he could not, the Continual Wars having impoverisht them as well as
their Prince; and it has the proverbial Authority of necessitated Truth, That
even where it is not to be got, the King himself must foregoe his Right; yet
this mighty Monarch's power was such; that Confiscations supplied, what he
could Baker p. 49.
not Tax; and as our Historian tells us upon light Suggestions, not so much as
just Suspicions, he would seize upon their Goods; and as I remember the Bishop
of Salisbury's Case in his time confirms: But tho the Menace of the threatening
King, the Text, be turned now into the clear Reverse, and our Kings Loins, no
heavier then the very Finger of some of his Predecessors, still we can The
words of a Priest lately tried and convicted of High Treason.
find those that can preach him down for a Rehoboam, or some Son of Nebat that
makes Israel to Sin.

Henry the Second resumed by his own Act all the Crown Lands that had been sold
or given from it by his (...), and this without being questioned for it, much
less deposed or murdered, whereas when our Charles the First attempted only to
resume the Lands of Religious Houses, that by special act of the Parliament in
Scotland, had been settled on the Crown; but by Usurpation were shared among
the Lords, when 'twas only to prevent their Scandalous defrauding of the poor
Priest, and the very box of the poor, to keep them from an (...), and even a
cruel Lording it over the poor Peasant, in a miserable Vassallage beyond that
of our antiquated Villains; and when he endeavored all this only by the very
Law of all the Land, by an Act of Renovation, Legal Process, and a Commission
for the just surrendering Superiorities and Tyths, so unjustly detained from the
Crown: but our modern Occupants of the Kirks Revenue, had far less Reverence
for the State, chose much rather to Rebel against their Prince, for being, as
they would Phrase it, Arbitrary, than part with the least power over their poor
Peasants, which themselves exercised even with Tyranny: This was the very
beginning of the first Tumults in that Factious Kingdom, and it is too much to
tell you in what they ended.

Richard the First had a trick I am sure would not be born with now, he
pretends very cunningly to have lost his Signet, and puts out a Proclamation,
that whoever would enjoy what he had under the former, must come and have it
confirmed by the new, and so furnished himself with a fine fund; he could fairly
sell and pawn his Lands for the Jerusalem Journey, and as foully upon his return
resume them without pay: And all this the good peaceable Subject could then
brook, without breaking into Rebellion, and a bloody War; and as they had just
then none of their Great Charter, that made afterward their Kings the less; so
neither had they such Rebellious Barons, that could not be contented even with
being too Great: as they were then far from having granted so gracious 3 Car. 1.
a Petition as that of Right; so neither, you see, so ready to Rebel, and that
only because they could not put upon their Prince the deepest Indignities, the
greatest wrong.

And these warrantable proceedings of our Princes, whose power in all
probability was unconfined before the Subjects Charter of Privileges was
confirmed, must needs be boundless, when there were yet no Laws to Limit them;
yet these two Presidents were as impertinently applied (by the Common Hackney
Goose quils, whose Pens were put upon by the Parliament to scribble Panegyricks
upon a Commonwealth,) to prove 1648. 49. 51. Mercur. Pollt. n. 64. 65.
all our Kings a Catalogue of Tyrants; tho the Presidents they brought from
those times were clear Nonsense in the Application, and no News to tell us, or
reproach to them, that those Princes were Arbitrary, when they had yet given no
grants to restrain their Will.

Here I hope is sufficient Testimony, and that too much to Demonstrate that our
Kings of old, by long Prescription were so far from being guided and governed
by a Parliament, as our Factious Innovator would have them now, that in truth
they never had any such Constitution; and the People then insisted so little on
their own Privileges, that they could not tell what they were; and the Princes
Prerogative so great, that even their property could hardly be called their
own: But these being but Presidents before their Charters were granted, or the
Commons came in play, tho these preceding Kings might deviate from the common
Custom of the Realm, in many, that some may call irregular Administrations; yet
the Customs of the Vid. Lex Terrae.
Kingdom relating to the Royal Government, in all those Reigns were never
questioned, much less altered; they never told their King then, as this piece
of Sedition does now, that their Nobles were to manage their Affairs of State,
as well as he would have even a Council of Commons.

We come to consider now whether An. Reg. 17 John.
from the granting them Charters, which was done in the next Reign, that of
King John, when the long tugged for Liberties, were first allowed, or from the
Constitution of admitting the Commons to consult, which by the greatest
Advocates cannot be made out handsomely, before this Kings time or his Son, and
Successors; who might well be necessitated to Consult the meaner sorts when all
the great were in Arms, and wisely flatter their Commons into peace, when the
Lords had rebelled in an open War; though still good Authorities will Vid Dr. B.
Introduct. p. 72. 105. etc. p. 149. The King calls Parl. per advisam entum
Concilii. Vid. Bract. Parl. 4. Inst. p. 4. and shall they suppress those by
whose advice they are called.
not allow them to be called in either of their Reigns, not so much as to be
mentioned in any of their Councils, and that even to the 18 of Edward the
First; we will see I say now whether from these, as they count them the most
happy times, That blessed Epoche wherein their Kings were first confined, down
to those which Posterity will blush at, the Period of Villainy, when this
Proposition was among the rest proposed, whither ever the Parliament pretended
(unless when they actually rebelled as they did here,) to manage their King,
and his Affairs of State.

The greatest Lawyer, and the most Equitable Bracton, l. 4. Cap. 24.
one, that lived in this Henry the Thirds time, tells us the King has a power
and Jurisdiction over all that are in. 5. ibid.
his Kingdom, that all are under him, that he has not an Equal in the Realm;
and sure the Project of putting the Parliament upon choosing of his Council for
the managing of his Affairs, or assuming Plat. prop.
themselves to manage it, certainly would make the Subject have some power over
him, make him more then Equal or Coordinate, as the more modern Contenders for
the Peoples Supremacy very Magisterially are pleased to Phrase it.

In the Reign of Edward the First the (...). Edw. 1.
Parliament declares, they are bound to assist their Sovereigns at all Seasons,
and in that very Sessions declared the Supreme power to be his proper and
peculiar Prerogative, and so far from taking upon them to manage Him, or His
Affairs, or the setting a Council over Him as a superintendent.

In Edward the Second's time, they (...) Ed. 2.
several times confirmed to him the power of the Sword, as his Sole undoubted,
(...) Ed. 2.
unquestionable Prerogative, and that he could distrain for the taking up of
(...), all that held by Knights Service, and had twenty Pounds per An. and I
think that allowed him to be his own Adviser, when it put him into an absolute
Condition to Command.

But I confess, his Seditious and Rebellious Subjects, afterward served Him
just as these our Proposers did their Sovereign; took upon themselves to reform
his Council, managed His Affairs till they did all the Kingdom too; deposed him
with that power of the Sword, they themselves had several times in his very
Reign put in his Hand, as ours also denied His Majesty the Commission of Array,
Vid. dugd. Baker. 5. H. 4. 1. Jac.
which they well knew the Laws allowed: But as this Usage was shown to both, so
was it done to bind them both, that both might be more easily Butchered.

In the following Reign of this unfortunate Prince's Son, too forward to Edw.
3d.
mount the Throne before his Father had thoroughly left it, which he could not
be said to relinquish but with his Life; there I Will grant this Republican his
own Rebel Tenent was as stoutly maintained; Exilium Hugon. Edw. 2. 1 Edward 3d.
C. 2.
but by whom? why by the very same Wretches, whom too several Parliaments had
condemned, for the same sort of damnable Opinions; and solemnly sent them into
Exile too; the daring and presumptuous Spencers, who being the first Authors of
that Seditious Sophistry, that damnable Distinction of parting His Majesty's
Person from his Vide Jenkins's Lix Terrae first Edit. p. 5.
political Capacity, that is, making Allegiance no longer Law, than their King
could maintain his Authority with Arms, for that must be the meaning of such
Treasonable Metaphysics; for if they will owe but Obedience upon that political
account of his being a King, as soon as they can but find out some blessed
Expedient for the proving of him none, that is, Misgovernment, Vid. Parl.
Declarations. 41. p. 4.
Arbitrary Power, And Proceeding of L. (...) in the Old-Bayly.
Popish Inclinations, and the like pretty Pretenses to make him fairly forseit
it; why then truly all the Majesty vanishes like a Shadow, before this New
Light; and if he cannot hold his Scepter in his Hand with the power of his
Sword; why they have Metamorphosed Him into a common Man, and may pluck it out
with theirs.

And truly the In three several Places in Plowden they are made inseparable, p.
234. 242. 213. Corpse politic include le Corpse natural. Son Corpse politic and
natural sont indivisible Ceux Deux Corpse Sont as encorporate une Person.
Peoples Politic Capacity is such, they will soon make their Kings incapable;
when once they are grown so strong in the Field as not to fear it: Here was the
Rise of that Rebellious reasoning that run all indispensable Obligation of our
Obedience to the Prince, into the Capricious and Arbitrary Conjecture of the
People, whose Title, and Deposition must depend upon his own Demeanor, and that
to be decided according to the diversity of thought, which in a discontented
Vulgar deserves the better Epithet of Distraction: The good King would have a
Right to his Crown, as long as his kind Subjects would be pleased to think so;
and we have more than once found, their Politics have too soon made them
incapable to Govern; and then deposed, and murdered their very Persons, for the
want of this their politic Capacity: I am sorry to say, and posterity will
blush to hear, that such Seditious, and sophisticated reasoning obtained even
to the making Ed. 2. in whose time 'twas first started. Vid Lex Terrae, Rich.
2. because by misdemeanors he had made himself incapable Vide Trussel.
Three mighty Monarchs in a most miserable manner to miscarry; and it appears
still too plain in their Prints; and those too Charactered in Royal Blood; that
they never (...) severing our late Charles the 1st. the Parliament declares
because the King had not granted the Propositions; ( i. e.) deposed himself, he
could not Exercise the Duties of his place. Answer of the Com. to the Scots
Com. p. 20. and the Scots expound their preserving the Kings Person in the
Covenant; but as it related to the Kingdom ( i. e.) in English, if they please
they may destroy him.
Sovereign's Person from his Crown, till at last his Head too from his
Shoulders.

I could not but with some passionate Digression reflect upon this pernicious
Principle; and so the best of it is, I can be but pardonably impertinent; but
which I would apply pertinently to this Republicans and Parliamentary
Proposition for their managing all State Affairs is one of the Consequences
that may be drawn, and which those Sycophants, the Spencers did actually craw
from this their damnable Doctrine, for so they did conclude from it too (as
well they might) That in default of him their Liege Lord, his Lieges should be
bound to govern the Affairs of State; and what News now does this Devilish
Democratick tells us? Why the very Doctrine of two damnable Parasites, whom
themselves have condemned for above two or three hundred years agon, who to
cover their own Treason

(as they then too called it) committed against the People; and that but in
Vid. Cook 4. Inst. C. 2.
Evil Counselling of their King, invented very cunningly this popular Opinion,
to preserve themselves, and please the Rabble they had so much (...).

And could after so many Centuries, after so long a series of time, the
Principles even of their execrated Enemies, by themselves too; be put into
practice, and what is worse still, shall the sad effects that succeeded the
practicing it so lately, encourage our Seditious Libellers for its
Reimpression? if this most Rebellious Nonsense must re-obtain, all their
declaratory Statute, the determined Treasons of their good King 25. Ed. 3.
Edward may pass for a pretty piece of Impertinence; they may do, as once they
truly did, they may Fight, Shoot at, Imprison, Butcher the Natural Body, the
Person of their Sovereign, and tell us the Laws designed them only for
Traitors, when they could destroy him in his politic. The same Laws make it
Treason to compass his Queens Death, or Eldest Sons; and must it be meant of
their Monarchs being Married in his politic Capacity; as well as murdered, or
of his Heirs that shall be born by pure political Conception: they might e'n
set up their Commonwealth then, if these were to be the Successors to the
Crown.

But yet with the same sort of silly Sophistry, that they would separate the
Kings natural Capacity from his political; did the same Seditious Rebels as
Iremember, make their own personal Relation to a politic Body Inseparable?
Rebellious Lumps of Contradiction! shall not your Sovereigns sacred Person be
preserved by that Power and Authority derived even from the (...)? and whose
very Text tells us, touch not mine Anointed; and yet could your selves plead it
as a Bar to Treason, because perpetrated under a political Denomination, and a
Relation only to that Lower House of Commons, that was then, only an
incorporated Body of Rebels and Regicides? and this was told us by that
Miscreant Vid. Trial of the Regicides. page 50.
Harrison, the most profligate, the vilest, the most virulent, of all the
Faction concerned in that bloody Villainy, the MURDER OF A KING; the silly Sot
had it infused by his Council as Senseless, as Seditious: That it was an Act of
the Parliament of England, and so no particular Members questionable for what
was done by the Body.

I consess the good excluded Members, and the bubbl'd Presbyterian Senate would
not allow it for a Parliamentaty Process; and why? because themselves did not
sit in it; and truly upon that unexpected and most blessed Revolution, might
hugg themselves, and shrink up in a silent Joy, that they were kept out: And I
cannot but smile to see Vid. Ibid page 52.
two or three sit upon the Bench, and upbraiding the Prisoner, for pulling them
out of the Parliament, and making themselves none; This was pleaded too by
Carew p. 76. Treasonable words sworn against Scot. spoken in Parliament, he
pleads Privileges of the House for speaking Treason, tho it is expressly
declared not pleadable, no not so much as for the breach of the Peace. 17. Ed.
4. Rot. Parliament. N. 39.
Persons whom Policy had only placed there, when the poor Prince was forced to
compound with a party for a Crown, forced to prefer those that had dethroned
his Father before, only the better to settle himself in it, and to compass more
easily the punishment of those that murdered him after, Persons, (and a great
one too, that I could name,) that have served him as ungratefully since, and
been as deservedly rejected; Persons, that had his late Majesty's Arms, been
but as Victorious as his Cause was good, had been as much liable to the Laws,
and their Crimes as Capital for fighting him in the Field with an Ordinance of
the House, as those that brought him to the Scaffold, and Butchered him on the
Block; from the time that their Tumults forced him to fly from their Houses,
they were no more a Parliament, than those were afterward that pulled them out,
and it looked a little loathsome to see some sit a simpering, and saying, all
Acts must be past by the King, who themselves once had helped Trial of the
Regicides. page 52
to pass many without; and they could no more justify themselves; (had it been
but their turn to be brought to Justice,) by their Memberships, political
Referrences to the two Houses) then the Criminal at the Bar by his Relation to
the Rump.

I have their own Authority for it, their very Answer of the Commons to the
Scots Com. that the King had (...) the executing the Duties of his Place, and
therefore could not be left to go where he pleased. Anno. 1646. Imprint. Land.
p. 20.
Houses Act, that they declared, designed, and actually made their King a
Prisoner: For they told the persidious Scot, that his denying their
Propositions, (and what were those but Expedients to destroy Him?) had debarred
him of his Liberty; and that they verifyed too, (when they had got their poor
purchase at Holdenby) in a usage of their Prince, with a restraint, that would
have been Cruelty to a Peasant; and which even his very Murderers enlarged when
their Joyce took him from his Jaylers: And I am sure it is provided, that to
Imprison him till He assent to Proposals, shall be Parliam. Roll. Number. (...).
Lex and Consuetudo Parl. 25. Ed. 3. El. 1 Jac.
High Treason by particular Act, as well as to Murder him, is made so by the
25. And whatever the Mildness of H. post. sc. p. 89.
Mr. Hunt, the Moderator of Rebellion would have this Mystery of Iniquity,
would not have it so much as remembered; it was these his own darling
Daemagogues, whom he defends and adores; and that even for Ibid p. (...)
Restorers; who stripped him in his politic Capacity, anticipated his Murder,
and then left his naked Person to be persued by the Salmasius has the same sort
of simile. page 353. defensio (...).
Wolves that worried it; they had turned their House into a Shambles, and that
of Slaughter; and were the Butchers the less Bloody, that only bound Him, and
left to their Boys the cutting of his Throat: yet this Barbarity must be
defended; this extenuated by them, and the help of their Hunts, and such
Advocates; the guilt not to devolve to each individual Member, because an Act
of an Aggregated House.

But base Caitiff's (to use even the very Hunt. page 94.
Lawyers own Language,) your selves know that a politic Body may be guilty of
a most political Treason, and tho the 21. Ed. 4. 13, 14. and noted. Cat^^^'s
Case.
Laws tell us it has no Life or Soul, and so cannot suffer; yet its constituent
Members may lose both, be Hanged and Damned in their proper Persons, and that
for committing it too against such another political Constitution.

It would otherwise be a fine Plea for Corporators, that have been many times
Defendants in the Case, when their King has been Plaintiff: And against whose
more dangerous Sedition there was lately made special Provision by a particular
Act for Regulating Corporations, where they particularly swear, they abhor the
Traiterous Proposition of raising Arms by His Majesty's Authority against His
Person.
Oath.

Lastly, to conclude the Confutation of this sad silly sort of Sophistry, this
Seditious Nonsense, it is shrowdly to be suspected that from the same sort of
Sophisters, fallacious Inferences was first insinuated that prejudicial Opinion
(I call it so, because it looks like a Doctrine of some concerned party) That
Societies were not punishable in the next World for the Villainies they had
committed in this: That is, the Members were not to suffer there, for what they
had acted in Relation to such a BODY here: this Religious Absurdity has been
published by some Seditious Pens from the Press, I wish I could say not imposed
upon Loyal ones too, both from that and the Pulpit; for Errors, especially when
colored with the bait of Interest, tho first hatched by the Brooders of all bad
Principles, till well examined may delude the very best: I know it may be
returned with some seeming Reason, that Crimes committed here, as a Member of a
body politic, cannot well in Justice be laid to the Charge of any particular
Person hereafter; for upon the dissolution of the natural one, the Relation to
such a Community ^^asing, the Guilt and Crime contracted should dye too: But
the Judge of Heaven has declared he will not be mocked, tho they thought those of
the Land might. How contentedly would some of the Regicides have given up the
Ghost, could they have pleaded to the Almighty their Innocence of the Royal
Blood, from the shedding it in Parliament? But tho National Sins, may require
reasonably the sufferings of a Nation, and no more than what for this very Sin,
our own has since suffered; therefore to suggest the single Individual, the
singular Sinner shall escape with Impunity hereafter, because not punished here,
or that because several of them suffered here for that Martyrs Blood; and the
Treasons of an Universal Body seemed to be punished in as general Conflagration;
that therefore the Criminals have superseded their sufferings in Hell, and may
now dare Heaven; for my part, seems an Opinion as ridiculous as the Popish
Purgatory, and their being saved by a fantastic Fire: It Is almost an
Irreligious excuse for all manner of Crimes and Immoralities; the
Constitutions, Circumstances of Men being so various, that I dare avow scarce
any Villainy, but may be committed by Communities, or the Politic Relation of
the private Person to some public Society. In short such Law, and such
Divinity, would make the worst of (...), (that is incorporated ones) fear Hell
no more than they would the Hangman, and baffle the Devil, as well as the
Gibbet.

And I may well here so warmly condemn these sort of damnable Doctrines, when
they were so hotly maintained by the rankest of our Rebels and Republicans; and
this very Demon, this Devil of Sedition, can only countenance his Rebellious
Positions with the making use of His Majesty's Authority for the Ratification
of his Proposals, that is, the Destruction of his own Person: For it is a great
Truth, I wish I could not say an experimented one, that the granting them these
Regalia, would not only be an Act to bereave him of his Crown and Dignity, but
would pass his very Person into the Donative; a yielding up of his last Breath,
the making himself his own Executioner, as well as a Betrayer of his Trust:
This Project is only the pernicious Principle improved; the late Rebels falsely
assumed His Authority, for the Fighting against His Person; but the prevailing
upon him for these Destructive Grants, would make Him truly Fight against
Himself.

In all the Reigns of the three following Henry's, their Sovereign's Supremacy
was still (...), and that over Parliaments too, tho one of them was but an
Usurper on the Crown, and then I am sure as great an one upon their Privileges;
and tho themselves had placed the First in the Throne, themselves also
acknowledged 1. H. 4.
the Regality of the Crown of England to be Subject to none but God: To the 2
H. 5. Cap. 6.
Second, they acknowledged that to Him only belonged the Management of Foreign
Affairs, with Foreign Princes: To the 32. H. 6. 13. (...). 334.
Third, that he could constitute County Palatines, and grant any Regal Rights
per Letters Patents. And these were Matters and Affairs, themselves then
declared they could not pretend to, tho this Gentleman would now have them or
their Counsel manage all.

In Edward the Fourth, and the (...) time, 'twas always received Law, then
made, and should I hope, hold still, that State Affairs were to be managed by
the Prince; for it was then allowed for 22. Ed. 4.
Law, That if all the Common People of England should break a League, by
agreement with any Foreign Nation, it shall still be reputed firm and
unviolated if without his consent: And in his very 1 Edw. 5. fol. 2.
Sons that Succeeded, resolved by all the Judges and Sergeants, that he was the
only Person in the Kingdom, that could do no wrong; which sufficiently declares
him above all them that could; and then who so fit for all absolute Power in
all public Administrations, than whom the very Law presumes always to do
Right? and whom Reason tells us must be most impartially concerned for the
public good; having no dependence upon any Superiors, from whom an
Apprehension of Fear, or hopes of Favor might prevail upon to degenerate into
that servile and sordid Compliance, to prefer his own private Interest before
the public good, Whatever Presumption the Law had of it then, I am sure they
have a Prince that justifies the Supposition now; and then the most ungrateful
Paradox, and against Sense it self, for our Seditious Souls to suggest, and
insinuate his Real Intentions for their Good, to be nothing but Design and Plot
upon them for Ill. An ORDER of Council, with such Sycophants is turned into a
trick of Court; And their Kings Proclamations are (...) only because they
cannot conveniently, resist, as if the whole Board was packt only to please a
designing Prince.

But, base Villains, your selves know that his aims have ever been for the
public Peace and Prosperity, even at the same time your dangerous disorders
have made it almost inconsistant with his own safety, and security: You see
your Sovereign Sit and Act in a Sphere, (and that only He) where Favor cannot
charm, or Fear frown into Compliance: And who can be supposed, then, besides
him, less prejudiced, or more concerned for your good? Would you have your
Gentlemen of the Shop and Yard take their Measures of the State too? We have
experimented already that those made the very Government a Trade also; and by
those your very Properties and Lives too, would be bought and sold, we too
lately saw some Symptoms of that state Distemper; when some of the Seditious
Souls had but gotten the Government of a single City; and that but under a
Sovereign their Supreme; and sure it is an Argument unanswerable that those
Salesmen of his Prerogative would as soon Barter your Properties.

See the sad experienced result of all the Democracies since their first
Institution; what was left the poor Lacedaemonians upon putting in Execution,
that popular Project, their So also in Syracuse.
Petalism, or Impoverisht Athens her self upon such another Order of her (...)?
why both were beggared of their Nobility, the Scum, the Scoundrels of the Town
turned the Mighty Massinello's of the State: The Tod-Pole Train, the product of
those beggarly Elements Mud and Water, Lorded it even over all the Land, And
those Rulers naturally retaining in this Medley, this Mixture of Sway, the
Native Principles of that Abject Matter from whence they came, still as mean as
the one, and restless as the other, could never reduce them to composed States,
till they had recalled the good Governors they had Banished before. Vid Mercur.
polit. June 17. 1652.
you know all this is too true, and your selves too, vile Caitiffs, have owned
it in Prints.

Lastly, Let your Lords too be allowed for once, your only, as well as it is
your beloved Government: Let Aristocracy for once obtain for the best, and
Banish your Monarch; set up that Idol, and fall down to the Gods of your own
Hands, that good Government must still be of many, still of as much divided
Interest; there would still be many then to mind the making their own Hay in
the fair Sunshine; whereas should your Prince perjure himself for the minding
only his private concern, and neglecting the public good; which he must do if
ever he is Crowned, where an Oath is administered for his very disavowing it;
yet still here would be pursued but the Interest of a single Person, there of
so many.

When the rash and unadvised Romans had upon that bandied Argument, the
Dissoluteness of their Tarquin, the popular president of the Party, for the
Banishing of all Kings; (as if the Practice of a Rebellious Rome against a
single dissolute Prince, and that so long since, could with the same Reason
prevail at present, for an extirpating the Government even under the best of
Princes;) yet this very precipitous Act of Rage, and Rashness, was afterward
even by the relenting Romans, as much repented of, and their Error, best
understood in their following Misfortunes; and of which they were soon sensible
too, soon saw it in their subsequent sufferings; for the first Frame of
Government they constituted after this Expulsion, was the Rosin. Ant. Romans L.
7. C. 9.
Consular; and one would think that being but of two of the (...) among them,
that it might have lasted, as indeed the best sort of Aristocracy, coming
within an Ace of a Monarch, a Duumvirate: yet even from those they suffered
more, than from the first Constitution they had abolisht; their more immoderate
power broke the Laws more Consulum immoderata (...) omnes metus Legum (...).
Live. Lib. 2.
immoderately, than the Lustful, Licentious, and Lewd Monarch, they made to fly
with his Fugitive Government: We shall in some other place consider the
restless Revolutions they ran through, from their turning out this Monarchy,
till they tumbled into it again. This serves only to let us see that public
Administrations, even in the hands but of two of the best of the People, are
not always the best managed. What pray better can be expected, when the
Optimacy is made up of so many more?

And where then? into what form? to whom, shall we run for the best maintaining
of this popular Darling? this dangerous Violation that has been clamoured for,
rebelled and fought for, the Peoples RIGHT, but to that Sovereignty, which our
very Laws say can do no wrong, to a Monarchy, where Mechanics can never meddle
with Affairs of State, to make them truckle to their own; or the Nobility so
powerful as to be all Sovereigns; and under what Prince can we better acquiesce
for this enjoyment, than the present, that has so often declared for its
Protection? And shall the Speech of some Noble Peer be better assurance,
promise more, than the word of a King? All Subjects under him have either
Riches or Honor for their private Aim, to make them act more partially for the
public; and which the Laws presume therefore they may injure, and have
therefore made the greatest punishable, But him exempted from all He cannot so
much as be a disscisor 4. El. 2. 4.6. The King has no Pcer in the Land, and so
cannot be Judged, 3. Ed. 3. 19.
Statutes that are Penal: And these sort of Arguments, I can assure them, their
King himself has used to prove the public Interest his own; and that he alone
of all the Kingdom can be presumed most impartially concerned for the good of
the public. A Reason worthy of so good a King, and which the worst, the most
Seditious Subjects cannot Answer.

Did not the Parliament, in Richard the Third's Time, give even that Usurper an
Arbitrary Power greater than any they can dread now from their most Lawful
Sovereign? Did not Vid. Exact Abridgment fol. 713.
they declare him their Lawful King by Inheritance, tho they knew they made him
Inherit against all Law? Did not they declare it to be grounded upon the Laws
of God and Nature, and the Customs of the Realm? whereas we now can oppose this
Divine Right, from the panick fear of making our true Legal King too powerful,
and the Succession of a Right Heir must be questioned by our Parliaments now,
when their Predecessors declared it unalterable even in a wrong. Did Vid. (...)
717.
they not to him but an Usurper, a Tyrant, own themselves Three Estates without
including himself, and say that by them is meant the Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal and Commons? and shall the Press be pestered under our undoubted
Sovereign, and the mildest Prince, to make him Coordinate with the People? Did
they not make particular Provision in 1. R. C. 15.
Parliament, for the preservation of His Person, that was the very Merderer and
Destroyer of His Subjects? And shall our (...) ones Associate for the
Destruction of the mildest Monarch, whose greatest Care is their Protection?
Was this Monster ever questioned or censured for the Murder of several of His
Subjects, as well as the more Barbarous Butchery, the spilling almost of his
own Blood in his Nephews? and must our most gracious one stand the mark of
Malice, and Reproach, and that only for desending that of his Brothers? who
Reigned more Arbitrary, and managed all Affairs more Monstrously, than this
very Monster of Mankind? And must a Parliament, be now the Manager of the
mildest Monarch? and think him dangerous if not governed, by themselves?

The two Succeeding H. 7. H. 8.
Henry's had their Power as much confirmed: Henry the 7th. had his Negative
Voice, the thing, those Seditious discontented Grumblers, so much repine at,
maintained, asserted, for his undoubted Prerogative. It is at present by the
Law of 12. H. 7. 20. 7. H. 7. 14.
his Time, no (...) if the King assent not: A Prince beloved and favored, only
because he was their King; who tho he had as many subsidies granted, more than
any before him, His Subjects you see never thought it a Grievance then to
contribute to their (...) being Great: but acknowledged his Supremacy even
under their greatest pressure: His (...) upon penal Statutes Vld. 4. Inst.
Baker page 248.
Historians call and the Law, the most (...) way for raising of Money that was
ever used; yet still had he the Hearts of his People, as well as their Purses:
They thought Rebellion then could not be justified with clamor of Oppression,
as since by Ship Money and Lone, tho levied by a King whom themselves had
Oppressed. The simplicity of those times made them suffer like good Subjects and
better Christians, when the refined Politics of such Authors, and a (...) age,
can tell them now to be Wise, is to Rebel.

I need not tell him who managed Affairs in Henry the H. 8.
Eighth's Time, when Parliaments seemed to be frightened into Compliance with a
Prown, and Bills preferred more for the pleasure of the Prince, than the profit
of the People: Their Memberships then so far from meddling with the measures of
the State, that they seemed to take them for their sole Measures; so far was
then an Order of the House from controuling that of the Board: And I cannot see
that the Peoples 1 Car 3.
Petition of Right has since (...) away too the King's Prerogative; yet it was
affirmed for 25. H. 8. C. 21.
Law in this King's Time, that he had full power in all Causes to do Justice to
all Men. If the Parliament or their Council shall Plato.
manage Affairs, let them tell me what will become of this Power and Law.

His Son Edward succeeded him, and tho a Minor, a Prince whose Youth might have
given the People an opportunity for an Encroachment upon his Power; and the
Subject commonly will take advantage of the Supremacy, and that sometimes too
much, when the Sovereign knows but little, what it is to be a King: I am sure
they were so Seditiously Wise in that Infancy of Henry the Third; and yet he
had Protectors too, as well as this: But notwithstanding such an Opportunity
for the robbing the Rights of the Crown; you shall see then they took the first
occasion for the asserting them: In the very First year of his Reign, it was
resolved that all Authority and Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Temporal, is
derived from the King; but this Republican has found out another Resolution of
resolving it into the power of the Parliament. And in this very 5 (...). (...).
c. 11.
Reign too, it was provided as the common Policy and Duty of all Loving
Subjects, to restrain the Publishing all manner of Shameful Slanders against
their King, etc. upon whom depends the whole Unity and Universal weal of the
Realm; what Sentence then would the Parliaments of those times have past upon
Appeals to the City, vox patriae's, and a Plato Redivivus, upon a Libel that
would prove the (...). (...) 117.
Kings Executive power of War forfeitable, and that the page 237.
Prerogative which is in the Crown, hinders the Execution of the Laws; tho I am
sure those very Laws are the best Asserters of the Prerogative? there next
resolve would have been to have ordered such an Author to the (...), by the
Hands of the Hangman, instead of that Honorable Vote, the thanks of the House.

In Queen Mary's Time too, the Law left all to her Majesty, tells her all 1.
Mar. c. 2.
Jurisdiction does, and of Right ought to belong to her. In Queen Elizabeth's 1
El. c. 1.
Time, what was Law before; they were obliged even to Swear to be so. Every
Member of the House before qualified to sit in it, forced to acknowledge his
Sovereign SVPREAM, in all Causes, over all Persons: And were their Memberships
to be modelled according to the Commonwealth of this Plato, their Oath must be
repealed or they perjured. Their very Constitution would be Inconfistant with
his Supremacy; they must manage and Command at the same time they Swear to
submit. and obey.

Was there ever a more full acknowledgment of Power and Prerogative, than was
made to King Jac. c. 1.
James upon his first coming to the Crown? And tho I confess they took upon
them to manage Affairs, in his Son and Successors time: yet this was not until
they had openly bid him defyance to his Face, and actually declared War against
His Person; then they might well set up their Votes for Law, when they had
violated the Fundamental ones of the Land; yet themselves even in that
Licentious, and tumultuous time, could own K. (...) his Collect. (...). 1. part
(...). 728.
that such Bills as His Majesty was bound even in Conscience and Justice to
pass, were no Laws without his Assent: What then did they think of those
Ordinances of Blood, and Rebellion, with which themselves past such Bills
afterward? so unconscionable, so (...): Here it was, I confess, these Commons
of this pernicious Projector, took upon them the management of the State; their
Councils, their Committees, set up for regulating the Kings: Then their Vid.
will. Prynns (...). right to elect. privy (...).
Pillor'd Advocate that lost his ears, as this with his Treasonable Positions,
should his Head; Published the very same Proposal in his pestering Prints; the
very Vomit of the Press, to which the dangerous Dog, did in the Literal Sense
return to lick it up, still discharing again the same choler he had brought up
before, in a Nauseous Crambe: A Wretch that seemed to Write for the
Haberdashers and Trunk-makers instead of the Company of Stationers that
Elaborate Lining the Copious Library for Hat-cases, and Close-stools, that Will
with a whisp, whose fuming Brains were at last illuminated for the leading Men
into Boggs and Ditches, Rebellion and Sedition. The Confusion of others only
for the confounding of himself, Vid. his Memento to Juncto, for the
for a King, for the 2d. his Parliaments Sovereigns Power. For the
Parliament, for the 3d. his Lords, Bishops, none of the Lords, Bishops or the
Buckle of the Canonical Girdle turned behind.
Presbyters, for every thing, for nothing, but that ONE thing Scribble.

Compare the power of his Parliaments, and his Vnparliamentary Juncto; the mere
Lumps of distorted Law, or Legal Contradiction, with the 25th. of Edward. He
first deposes his King, and even there then finds his Deposition Treason. Their
Divine Baxter never baffled himself more with the Bible, and the Gospel, than
this Elaborate Legislator with the Statute, and the Law. William Writ against
Pryn too, in one Page proves his King Supreme, in the other his Parliaments
Supremacy, the most Mutinous Member would needs be Loyal, when it was to late;
and the most Malicious Miscreant at the Pen, Published his Memento, when his
Money with his Membership was sequestered from his own Home, as well as his self
from the Parliaments House, and then palliated it with a piece against his
Majesty's Murder: I the more Liberally enlarge upon this, because his party the
Presbyter would appropriate to themselves from some (...) Papers, the
Vindication of their King; but what I am sure in sincerity was their own
Revenge, They, the Scot, and the Todpole Spawn of both; that Independent, made
use of unanimously the Defense of their Prince for the Destruction of his
Person, and then the differing Daemagogues, with the very same Vid. Answer of
our English (...) to the Scots Commissioners. The Scots reply from their Camp
at Newark. The Members to the Army. The Armies Answer to the Members. The Scots
Remonst. to the Army. The Armies reply.
Pretenses strove to put upon each other, that is, both alike, full of the same
falsehood, both alike, fancyed their own Integrity: they seemed to Labor for the
two sublimated Vices, Hypocrisy and selfconceit, whereof the one made them
twice Villains, the other double Fools: And this Confounder of Paper, as well
as the People, Published then, the very same An. From 41. to 48. Pamphlets or
waste Papers. 125.
Principles this starch't Republican has proposed now for new Politics of
State; Pryn and Plato differ only in this, one Labored to make Law speak
Treason, the other Sense.

Lastly were not the Parliament very tender of this last, this present Princes
Power and Prerogative, when they enacted a new Act for Regulating Corporations.
Oath, to be taken by all in Office, for the Renouncing the Traiterous
Position, of resisting his (...), with his own Authority: And this Rebellious
Proposal of our Republican is to make even the Parliament it self to make use
of his Vid. Plat. Parl. of Commons begun with H. 3. within 400 y. Kings in
Caesar's time 1000 y. since.
Authority, even for an Usurpation upon his Prerogative; and when once they
come to Manage that, they may be sure they will be his Masters too, and I hope
it is now in some Measure proy'd even in the several particulars, I undertook
should be so, that our Monarchs had heretofore an absolute Management of
Affairs, without an Interfering of Parliaments, which then had not so much as
Being, and which were, since they had it never called, as their very Writs
express it, but to Deliberaturi de arduis. 4 Inst. 2. p.
consult, that they never offered to set a Council over their King, much less
themselves (as this Plato.
popular Pedant calls it) to Manage his Militia, and demonstrated this as was
designed, from Prescription, even beyond Chronicle, from the Laws of every
Reign, and my little Light of Reason.

All the following Propositions are as much against Reason and Law, for the
third is, that the Judges be nominated by Parliament; which as it would divest
the King of part of his Supremacy; so it would make themselves in effect, both
Judges, and party, for those, then their own Creatures, would have the
Exposition of those Laws, which themselves had made: The Cook 5. fol. 62. 9.
Ed. 4. Cook 8. f. 145.
Law allows all the Four Courts at Westminster, to be all Courts by
Prescription; and then let them tell me to whom belongs the power of Electing
those that are to preside in it, to the Kings of England, that can prescribe to
their Government, even from the very Britains before Caesar ever set Foot in
it, near 1700 Years agon, and with whom, their Courts of Judicature were ever
Coeval? or the Constitution of a Parliament, that first within this four
hundred years could be said to have a Being? and so that which themselves would
now control, had a Priority even in time to their Existence, for near 1300
Years: It is called the Court of Kings Bench: Let them name the Judges; it must
be no longer His, but the Parliaments: It Is Rehellion in them to assume it, for
they must at the same time too take the Sovereignty, the Supremacy; and it is
that such Seditious Proposals must aim at, and truly do; for it is expressly
declared for 3 El. Dyer 187. Cook 4 Inst. c. 7. p. 73.
Law, that the Justices of the Kings Bench have Supreme Authority; the King
himself sits there in them, as the Law intends, if the Parliament can choose
their Kings Representatives, they can their King too, and make the most
Hereditary Kingdom Elective, before the Reign even of Edward the Ibid. p. 74.
First, the Chief Justice of this Court was created by Letters Patent; it is
out, ever was, and will be out of the Parliaments power to create per Patents,
even a petty Constable; it is the King alone that by these his 32. H. 6. 13.
Letters can constitute Courts, and grant all Regal Rights: He can erect a
Plowden 334.
Court of Common pleas, in what part of the Kingdom he pleases, and shall he
that has a power over the very being of the Court, not be able to place his
Ministers of Justice in it?

The Chancery is a Court of such Antiquity, that long before the Conquest, we
have several accounts of it, tho some that were Pollid. Virg.
Foreign to our Laws as well as Land, would make it commence with the
Conqueror. Our very 4 Inst. 6. 8. ibid.
British Kings are said to have had such a Court, and Ethelred the Saxon,
granted the Mirror c. 1.. 12. Fleta. l. 12. c. 1. Glanvil. l. 12. c. 1. and all
the most ancient Lawyers speak of it.
Chancellorship even in Succession; I need not, it would be Nonsense to design
to prove Parliaments had nothing to do with such Affairs so long before they
themselves exsisted; and in this Monument of Antiquity famed for the
Distribution of the most Equal Justice (since they cannot pretend without shame
to the power of Electing such an Ancient Officer of the Crown;) why, what they
cannot presume to mend, must Plato.
be quite Marred, and utterly Abolisht; Pryn himself could never pretend, that
this Great Officer was the Peoples; tho that popular piece of Absurdity might
have proved it too as well he did the rest from the paradox of all our Princes
being Elected; which tho allowed them from their perverted Histories, yet still
those whom they say were Chosen, had the Liberty of Choosing their own Ministers
sure; they cannot have the least shadow for such a silly Conjecture, therefore
this Prvn's Parl. right to elect great Officers and Judges.
Sophister having just so much sense as to conceive from the begging one false
Principle the most Damnable Falsehoods can be deducted, concludes, but yet very
Cautiously, with a (believe so) that since Kings were first Elected by the
People, Officers of the Crown were so too; that is, first he Lies like a Knave,
and then infers like a Fool.

But the Printing and Publishing now the Reasons for the rejecting this
Judicatory is only to try how near the natural Sons can tread in the Prints and
the very footsteps of the former Rebellion of their Fathers; for in the Reign
of Henry the Third; when this Mighty Parliamentary Power was first hatched, far
from being brought to the Maturity to which Time and their popular
Encroachments have since ripened it, then the (...) Embryo of State just
modeled and conceived. The Rebellious Barons being then the Parents; as also a
Rebellion since the Nurse of such Seditious proposals; demanded the very same
piece of Praerogative, to have the An. Reg. H. 3. 22. Dom. 1230. Vid. Baker p.
84, 85, 86. Vid. Stow.
Chief Justice the Chancellor, and Treasurers to be chosen by themselves; and
then exercised the power when they had got it like so many Tyrants too, that
Ostracism upon the Kings Officers of State, succeeded no better then that at
Athens, only to make room for so much worse; the Leaguers in Vid. Davila. page
482.
France Petition their King to remove his Counselors and Officers, that they
might put in others of their own, and shall the Presidents of Papists, and that
of Rebel ones obtain, even with our Puritans, to Rebel; will they boldly own
themselves Protestants, and not Blush in the practices of those very Catholics
they condemn.

Did not our late Rebels and Regicides show themselves more Modest, and Regular
in their Attempts for Reformation, than this more insolent Republican; they
never entered upon Abolishing this Court, till they had extirpated the
Monarchy; it was the 5 Aug. 1653. Vid. Scob. Coll.
Council of State, that then voted it down; the Rump it self, the very Nuisance
of the Nation, had but just thought it convenient, among the midst of all their
Innovation, to root out a Constitution so Old; they had but just Voted for the
taking it away, when Pride's Purge came and scoured both these Legislators and
the Law, and tho then, the Chancery was criminated with the same Aspersions; we
find lain upon it in Plat. Red.
this Libel, for Vid. Exact Relation of the Parl. Dissolved. December. 53.
Chargeableness, Dilatories; yet even by those most virulent Villains, it was
allowed, if well managed, to compare with any Court in the whole World; Plat.
p. 130.
whereas the Doctor of Sedition here thinks, that at the best, there is not to
be found a worse Tribunal in the Universe, neither was it easily compast even
in those Times of Confusion; there being no less than three or four Bills
brought in for the purpose, before they could with the Corrupt Committees of
that Council agree on one; for the Commissioners for this Regulation,
understanding as little Law, as they had broken much, had hardly the Sense to
propose their own Sentiments in such a way, as might make the Members Sensible,
there was any Reason for the prosecuting the very Work they had Undertaken;
they seemed to resolve only to Ruin a Court constituted with the Monarchy it
self, before they could agree for the reestablishing another in its Room; there
seemed a sort of Sympathy between that and the Government, both founded, both
fell together, and both before the Subverters, had or were like to find out a
better; Livy tells us like it, of another such a sort of rash Rebellious
Reformers in Itaely, a distempered State, that fell out with their Aristocracy,
and designed a Deposition of their Old Governors, and that only to chose new.
But before they could agree upon choice, they found it, I Will assure you as
difficult to get better, as it was easy to destroy whom they thought worse,
and, so with a wise Acquiescence, were satisfied, and sat down with an
unintended Submission: It had been well for ours, had they been so wise as to
have thought so, and done so too. But so furious were they here, in this very
point of Reformation, that tho Vid. Exact Relation of the Proceedings of the
Parl. (...), Vid. December. 12. 53.
they could not agree upon what they would Reform before the Term approacht,
the Members that had Voted for the Abolishing, (as they called it, this Corrupt
Court) would not care to pass through the Hall, while it was sitting, but moved
to have its Jurisdiction suspended, till they were agreed for the manner of its
utter Extirpation; and on they went with their Legislative Swords, their Armed
suffrages, till they past that Second Vote for the new modelling of all the
Law, and so not only suppressed the Chancery, but that Malignant party, Justice
and Equity was Banished by those very Villains that had broke all the Statutes
of the Land. In short, they never did destroy these Judicatures; but when they
did (...) their King, they never chose their Judges, but when they had (...)
the Supremaey, they never can do either without subverting the Monarchy; for
it is their own Sovereign that sits and presides in them, and the (...)
Officiate but for him, because not Et pur ceo que nous ne (...) in nostre
propre Person Oyer and Terminer, etc. Vide (...). f. (...). Vid.
(...).(...).(...).
sufficient for it himself, and therefore has committed all his power of
Judicature to these several Courts of Justice. The King is said to Judge by his
Judges, (...) the Parliament elect them, they are none of his; they choose their
Sovereigns Representatives, while they would think it hard his Majesty should
make the Peoples, or nominate but to a (...) Borough.

Thus much for their Management of the State, the next part of the Proposition,
is their modelling of the Church, and in that our modern Republican agrees with
our Old Rebels, for the depriving the Bishops of their Votes: That was one of
the Projects was set afoot, as the very forerunner of our former Troubles, that
was published Vid. Bishops Right, and Discousre of Peerage 81.
over again in several Papers and Pamphlets now, besides in this very piece:
and could they condemn our Fears of a Subversion of the Government, when their
Libels in and about 80, looked only like the new Editions of those in Vid. (...)
Libel on the (...). and (...) in England.
41, as if printed Rebellion was to suffer but a (...).

You shall see how they began with the Bishops just before the last War in
their Libels, and then how of late they began to War upon Episcopacy again in
their Papers and Pamphlets, you shall see how the Parliament Espoused the
Peoples Quarrel to that Hierarchy then; and how near our late House of Commons
was for falling upon the Prelacy now? Leighton, a virulent Scotchman, led the
Dance, with a Zeal like that the Nation it self showed afterward against that
Apostolical Order; he told the People plainly, they must Murder all the
Bishops: And in his canting Phraseology, Vid. Leighton's Sions Plea. (...), ed
1636.
Smite them under the fifth Rib. It Is true the Government of Church and State,
stood yet so strong upon its Basis tho shaken with an undermining Plot, that it
dared to punish such an Execrable Villain, with the Pillory; and sentenced he
was in the Star Chamber, to be stigmatized, cropped and slit, and tho the
Parliament had not openly declared themselves against this good Government of
the Church, yet they had shown such Symptoms of their Disaffection to it, that
this Impudent Libeller could presume to make them his Patrons, and present them
with his Plea. And I have not found in all their Journal, any Order for so much
as the censuring him for such a piece of Presumption.

To exclude the Bishops from Voting in their Assembly, the Confederates of
Scotland drew up a Libel against them, one in the Literal Sense, full of
Scandal and Reproaches: But the denying them there their Rights in Parliament,
was soon seconded with the Robbing them of all too they had in the Church, whom
they had excluded, they soon (...), and then abolisht utterly the sacred Order,
so did also within two years after the good Parliament of England begin with
the Prelacy too. Pennington with his packt Petition of Prentices, presented to
them their Abhorrence of that Hierarchy, the cunning and counterfeit Commons;
that Honse of Hypocrisy, seemed a little dissatisfyed with an Alteration of
the Church Government it self, (that is) they did not care to pluck it up
presently, Root and Branch, but fell upon another Argument somewhat more
plausible, tho to the Zealots less pleasing; but what in truth was but
Introductory to the same thing they more deliberately designed, that they might
proceed somewhat like Senators soberly to Sedition: and that was about the
Synod, and Convocation, Canons, and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, which they
soon resolved to be against the Fundamental Laws of the Land: But these
Lay-Members were only mighty loath the Clergy should here have their
Representatives, as well as the Laick; they must otherwise have seen, that such
a Resolution would upbraid them to their Faces with a Lie; for this their Court
of Convocation, was as much founded upon Law, and more too perhaps, than even
that of the Commons themselves, who with their inconsistent Votes with
Contradiction it self, condemned it.

Exclude the Clergy, and the very Foundations of your House must fall: Did not
former times allow you Representatives, that every one might have an Hand in
the Composuion of that, which he had an Obligation to obey? Banish the Bishops,
your Assembly, and tell me by what Proxies the Church shall be represented; and
what shall tie her to the Observation of those Laws, to whose Constitution she
gives no consent.

For a Thousand Years before they had a being, there were such Beda tells us
Augustine the Monk called one of the Britain Bishops. An. Dom. 686. King (...),
a Convocation of Cletgy An. Dom. 727. of the Saxons.
Synods Assembled, never called but by the King's Writ; and they have no other
Authority for their own Sitting; and might as well have Voted, that their own
Assembly, as indeed it was afterward, was The very Words of their Vote against
the Cannons Vid. Journal.
against the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, Prerogative of the King, Property
of the Subject, Right of Parliament, and did tend to Faction and Sedition: And
tho those Canons and Constitutions were straightened and limited in Henry the
Register F. N. B. 4. Inst. p. 322. c. 71.
Eight's Time; and it was provided, that none for the future, that had not the
Royal Assent should be put in Execution; yet such Reverence and Respect, had
the Parliament of those Times (which I think was made up of a better sort of
Reformers, than what past their suffrages for the setting aside this Synod)
that notwithstanding that Limitation, they put in an express Proviso, Vid. 25.
H. 8. for their Antiquity. see Bractonl. 3. f. 123. Hol. 303. 6. H. 3. Rot p.
18. Ed. 3.
that such Canons as were made before that Act, so long as they did not
contradict Law, should be still in force after, and this was at a time too,
when they were so far from being the Bigots of Rome, that they were reforming
from Her, and acknowledged their Kings Supremacy even in 26. H. 8. c. 1.
several of those Convocations, tho whatever Religion they were of, Common
Reason cannot make it a Crime, the countenancing of the Churches Right; but
these Violators of her Privileges soon discovered their Design upon her
Patrimony too, for in the same Session, and that soon after, they that thus set
aside the Churches Synod, sent up an Impeachment of Treason against its
Metropolitan, and that by the Hands of Hollis, a hotheaded Member, whom his
Majesty could have made appear, and within a year after did demand for a
greater Traitor too: That Honored Hollis, that lived so long, and so lately to
Murder the Bishops once more in their Hls Discourse of Peerage. London 1679.
whom Hunt himself could oppose.
Peerage as well as Person (...) but having gone so far, what they had
scribbled down before with their Libels, they soon damned with a Vote. And in
the same Year past that Bill, that their Spiritual Lordships should have no
suffrages in the Senate of Lords.

And when they were come to this once, to deprive them of their prescribed
Privileges, and their Legal Rights, to send twelve of them to the Tower, only
because they would not tamely forego the very Church's Birthright, but entered
a Protestation against the betraying of their Trust, you might think their
Order it self, tho never so Primitive, never so much Apostolical, was not like
to be long lived; for in the very next Year, tho it was the good Kings giving
one, when Star Chamber was abolisht, the High Commission put down, Ship Money
relinquisht, with six or seven several Acts besides for disclaiming Privileges,
still his Seditious Subjects had so little Sense of his Goodness, that even in
that very season of Grace, a * Bill was brought in for Abolishing 1641.
this sacred Order, Root and Branch; it is true, 'twas then hushed up in the
House; the provident Patriots understood how to time it better, they had not
yet come to covenanting, and concluded with the Kirk; but as soon as they had
framed their Holy League Mildmay's Oath taken 15. of Junt 43. Scob. Col. page
42.
in Imitation of the Scots solemn one, which they afterward swallowed up too,
and called their Assembly of Divines by special Ordinance; then itwas as soon
ordained, according to the Resolution of the Lords and Commons, that all that
Hierarchy, should be utterly Abolisht, as an Impediment to Reformation and
Religion.

Thus you see their Mar Prelates, their Pryns, their Leightons, with their
Libels, then first led the Dance, for the destroying that Order; and I wish we
had never seen so great an Assembly as the Senate of England seduced to follow
them; but shall we not suggest the danger of a second Destruction, when the
same Designs were afoot? Did not a Temporal L. (...), Letter.
Peer some ten years agon fall very foul upon these Spiritual ones, in a
Libellous Letter, that laid all the Obloquies that Malice or Lies could invent
upon their Lordships? Was not there (...) of Peerage 16. 89. p. (...). (...).
Hollis.
Papers Published, when the late Popish Peer was to be put upon his Trial, to
prove that they then had not so much as Right to sit as Peers; tho they never
set themselves aside, but with a salvo jure? Did not they debate it even now in
Parliament, where such a thing was never questioned, but when the Order it self
was brought into Question? Did not these Plat. page 237. the 5. Proposition.
very Republicans about the same time, publish that the Clergys having a share
in the Sovereignty, would ever be a Solecism in the Government? Was not the
Paper of Union about the same time to be presented to the Parliament, just such
another piece as Pennington's Petition? Designing Knaves! your selves supersede
all such serious Expostulation: Your selves are satisfied, you had several
Designs on Church and State, which you may well disown now, since the sad
success seems now to make you Fools too; that presumed upon your Parliaments
patronizing, whatever the most profligate Person could 35. of (...). petitioned
to be (...) too in the late Rebellion, and actually was (...). Act for relief
of peaceable (...), against the Rigor of former Stat. 27. sept. 16 57.
propose; and defied your King for getting better Patriots; consider only the
sacredness of that Order, the Antiquity of the Constitution, and the
fundamental Law upon which it is founded. And then tell me whether without
Irreligion, Innovation, or Rebellion, by which it once was, it can be once
again abolisht? Malicious (...)! those that in the worst of Times could in
public Parliament Lord F. Speech to the Com. 1641. upon Commitment of the
London Petition.
compare them to the Pharisees, to the Dog in the Fable, to the Destroyers of
Unity, upon pretense of Uniformity: yet those were forced to confess, that the
very first Planters of Christianity, the Defenders of the Faith, against
Heresies within, and Paganism without, both with their Ink, and with their
Blood, were all BISHOPS. And here I am sure Established even with Christianity
it self, a Convention of them being called by Austin, the first Founder of it
here: The L. Digby's Speech to the Com. upon the same.
Noble Peer, that was for Clipping the Wings of the Prelates, was compelled
from the Suggestion of his own Conscience, to allow, forced in spite of
Faction, to grant that their Vid. Lord Newark's Speech. yet Assembly of Divines
declared it against the Acts of all reformed Churches.
Function was deduced from all Ages of the Church; a Function confirmed by the
Apostles; a Function dignifyed with the Piety of the Fathers, a Function
glorified in the Blood of the most Primitive Martyrs, admired by all the
Reformed Churches abroad, and till that time flourished in our own at home.

The Sacredness of the Institution, you see is sufficiently declared; the
Savior of our Souls, sending such to work out our Salvation: His Ambassadors,
his own Apostles, sent their Successors, the primitive Martyrs, and least
Laborious Cavil and Industrious Detraction, should make these primitive
Prelates be bare Elders, prime Ministers, or Assembly Men, the very Text, the
Testament it self, tells us, even in all its Translations, they were BISHOPS:
tells us that was their Title; his Disciples, his own Emissaries officiated
under that Denomination, and all our Vid. Eusch. Lib. 4. c. 5. 6. who tells us
Constant (...) In his Expedition, against the (...) had his Bishops about him
to consult in a Council of War. and is their judging now in Capitals a Crime? I
am sure that other was a more Bloody Business.
Ecclesiastic Writers deliver it down to posterity, that by that very order
all the Christian Churches throughout all Asia, where they were first
Established, to their Progress Westward, as far as they were propagated, were
all under their Government and Jurisdiction. I need not insist on it, on their
being the most Divine, or the most Ancient Order in the whole World, Envy, and
their Enemies, Faction and their very Foes confess it, all that is left is to
show how the Laws of the Land confirm it:

And that those of the very Britains, (...) themselves, and Danes demonstrate:
the British An. Dom. 686. Cook 4. Inst. C. 74. page 322.
Bishops were Assembled in a Synod for a thousand years agon; and Athelstan one
of the First Sovereigns of the Saxons, (with whom I am sure they never then
disputed the Legislative;) even in his own Leg. A. thelst. C. 11. Episcopo jure
pertiner. omnem (...) promovere Del and seculi, omne Legis scitum and Burgi
mensuram Spelm. p. 402.
Laws allows them the Management both of Matters Civil as well as
Ecclesiastical, from a just Presumption of their Knowledge in the Statutes of
the Land; they presumed as much upon their Equity, and Justice, and made them
Managers of all the Measures and Weights, and such was their public
Administrations then, and so since, that they were still made the Chief
Ministers of State, which made them not only Famous in their Ages, but
beneficial to posterity; and tho I never enjoyed the Benefits of their Bounty,
shall for ever Reverence their pious Memory. It was from their Liberal
Largesses, most of those solid seminaries of sound Learning and Loyalty, were
first founded and established: They can boast of more Bishops, for their
Founders, than ever Kings for their nursing Fathers, tho their Princes goodness
was the more to be admired in preferring those that did so much good; and were
these, thou venomed Head, the Plat. p. 101.
Vipers of their Age? the Cheats, the Hypocrites of those Barbarous Times,
whose blessed, and most Monumental Labors, can make the most Civil ones now to
Blush?

In the time of the Danes, the first Harold himself, called Harefoot, at a
Convention of the Princes and Prelates at Oxford was Proclaimed, and Crowned
Kings Writ of Summons runs cum Prelatis, colloquium habere.
King by Elnotheus, Archbishop of Canterbury; and sure then the Law allowed him
to meddle with Matters of State; In all our old Councils Vid. 1. Inst. p. 110
for five hundred years before the Conquest; and for above two hundred after,
Bishops and Abbots, made up the best part of those petty Parliaments, and that
so long before these Contenders for their excludeing them their suffrages, ever
sat in that Assembly as part of the Senate. And that ancient piece that tells
us of the Modus tenend. Parl.
manner of holding Parliaments, tells us too, that such Ecclesiastics were
always summoned. Seditious Souls! let those that are to take Care of them too,
have the same Subjects Liberty, you so much Labor for: Let Bishops be allowed
their Birthright, as well as your Lay-Lord-ships too; your Vid. Magna. Charta
the 1st. thing in the first Chap. Articuli cleri-Vid. Cook Com. on both 2. Inst.
Magna Charta, was made for the Loyal Bishops as well as the Rebellious Barons,
and that expressly declares the Church shall enjoy all her Rights inviolate;
and tells us as plainly, one of them was to sit in Parliament; your selves know
a discontented Stratford Archbishop. Ed. 3.
Canterbury, and I hope you will side with him because he was so, claimed for
four hundred years agon, his Privilege of Peerage, in Opposition to His Prince,
petitioned for his Right, and protested against the wrong, for fifteen hundred
years, for so long our Monarchs can be Chronicl'd, can in every Reign, the
Clergies being concerned in Parliament, be proved upon Record, and may they
with the Monarchy last, that with its Christianity commenced: They seemed
always to sympathize in their very sufferings, never to cease but by consent;
and Bishops were never excluded from their Votes; but when their King himself
had never a voice.

The Sixth pernicious Principle they propose is for Marriages, Alliances,
Treatises for War and Peace to be put in the power of the two Houses: And shall
the meanest Subjects be Mightier than their Sovereign? Not allowed the Marrying
his Issue when, where, and to whom he pleases: That the Parliament has presumed
to intermeddle with this undoubted Prerogative of the Sovereign, (since the
Birthright of the poorest Subject,) can no more be denied, then that the two
Houses have also actually Rebelled too; but they never pretended to make
Matches for their Monarch, but when they were as ready to make War too: There
was somewhat of that Mutinous Ferment got among the Members, in the latter end
of King * James's his Reign, who tho they mightily 19. Jacob. 1621.
soothed their Sovereign, with some Inconsiderable subsidies, for the recovery
of the Palatinate; so small that notwithstanding the Preparation for War, the
poor Prince was forced to pursue Peace, and to tell the Men at Westminster so
much too, that he intended to compass the Palatinate with an Alliance with
Spain, which he was not like to obtain from the smallness of their Subsidy, and
Aid: But tho the Commons did not care much for the maintaining the War, they
were as much startled with this seeming tendance to Peace; they knew their
Prince poor, and therefore thought that the time to show the Subject bold: and
so began the Puritan-Party to represent in a Remonstrance, Popery, Power,
Prerogative, and their Averseness forsooth to the Spanish-Match. The pious
Prince tho none of the boldest to resist an invading People; yet took the
Courage to tell them they took too much upon themselves, very warmly forbad
them farther to meddle with his Government, Dudgdale's short View. 21.
and deep Affairs of State; and particularly with the Match of his Son, with
the Daughter of Spain: And this account they will surely Credit since it comes
from an Rusworth Col. p. 40.
Author, a partial and popular Advocate for this power of Parliament.

And did not the Commons intermeddling with an other Spanish Match of Queen
Mary's, send their Memberships into the Country to mind their own Business, and
were presently Dissolved for meddling so much with their Sovereign's: And this
I hope will be as Burnet's Abridgm. 236.
Authentic since it comes from an Author that has had the Thanks of the House.

But this Disposal of the Kings of his own Children, and the Marrying them to
what Princes he pleases, has such an absolute Relation, to the making Leagues
and Allyances; that the Laws; which have declared the latter to be solely in
the Sovereign, are as Declaratory that the other is so too; and this power of
the Prince of making War and Peace, Leagues and Allyances, is so settled in him
by the Laws of the Land that till they are subverted, it can never be taken
out. In Henry the Fifth's Time, a Prince under whose Courage and Conduct the
Nation, I think, was as Flourishing at Home, as it was formidable Abroad: A
Prince that kept a good Sway over his Subjects, and wanted nothing to the
making him a good Monarch, but a better Title; though his Expensive War in
France, cost his People a great deal of Money, as well as Blood; yet they were
far from being animated into an Invading this part of Prerogative; but
declared, as appears by the Law of his Time, that to their King belonged only
to make Leagues with Foreign Princes; and so fully does this Fundamental Law of
the Land place this power in the Prince, that it absolutely excludes all the
Pretenses of the People; for it tells us 2. H. 5. c. 6.
22. Edw. 4. Fitz. Jurisd.
expressly, that if all the Subjects of England, should break a League, made
with a Foreign Prince; if without the King's Consent, it shall still hold and
not be broken: And must the Laws of our own, as well as those of all Nations be
subverted, for the setting up a Supremacy of the People, which both declare is
absolutely in the King?

The Seventh Proposal about the Militia is the most Impudent, because it has
been the most confuted of any, by Reason, and baffled above all parts of the
Prerogative Established by (...): History tells us, ever since Chronicle can
Compute, and that is for almost Fifteen Hundred Years, that the Power of the
Sword was ever in him that swayed the Scepter; and Statute tells us, even the
very First (...) Charta.
that was ever reckoned among Acts of Parliament, That if the King lead or send
his Subject to do him Service, in his Wars, that he shall be freed from such
other Services, as Castleguard and the like, so that you see that extorted
Instrument, the result of a REBELLION reserved this piece of Prerogative of the
Sovereigns Sole Right.

That the Members of the two Houses should have the Management of the Militia,
was undertaken to be proved too by that Plague of the Press, Pryn himself, who
proceeds upon his own false Principle and Premises which he beggs, and then may
well draw from them a Conclusion of an absolute Lie; for he takes it for
granted, that by the Kingdoms Suffrages they made their King; and them he could
not (as he says) have this Pryn's Parliam. Interest in the Militia.
Military power without the Peoples consent; but why may it not be with less
Presumption supposed, That a Parliament by special 12. Car. (...). c. 12.
Act declared Traitors, pitched upon Him for their Penman against the
Prerogative? and then it may be more easily concluded, that Pryn was the most
prejudiced, partial Person, that ever put Pen to Paper; for in spite of his
Factious Heart, he must be forced to confess, that not only this very Charter
of Liberties settled this Militia, but that it was confirmed to the King,
almost in every Reign, by Act of Parliament, since the Time the very FIRST was
made.

To the very Son and Successor of Henry, that Great Confirmer of the great
Grant, they declare, 7. Ed. 1. c. 1.
that to the King belongs to defend Force of Armor, etc. All that held by
Knights Service, the King could distrain them for the taking up Arms. By the
Laws of the very next 1. Ed. 2.
Reign: And in his Son and Successors that Usurpt upon his 1. Ed. 3.
Father's Right before it could be called his own, they declare the manner of
his Mustering and Arraying the Subject; and this they did too to Henry 4. H. 4.
the Fourth: A Prince that had truly no other Title to the Swords of his
Subjects, than what he had gotten by the Conquest of his own; yet so necessary
was this inseparable power of the Prince, thought then to be solely in him by
the People; that they Acknowledged it to be absolutely even in him, that could
hardly pretend to the Crown; so inseparable from the Right of Sovereignty? did
the Laws allow this unalterable part of the Prerogative, that they have
declared it Inherent even in such a sort of Sovereigns as seemed not very well
qualified for an Execution of that Royal Power, which the Judgment of their
very Parliaments decreed to be entirely theirs. They resolved it to be the
Right of the Prince, in the Reign of a 2. Ed. 6. c. 11.
Child; They resolved it so, when Subjected to the Government of a 4. 5. Mar.
c. 3.
Woman.

The Commission of Array was revived again to King 1. Jacob.
James, in whose Time they resolved it such a Necessary Right of the Crown;
that they repealed for it the very repealing Statute of the Queen: This their
Lord Cook 4. Inst.
Oracle tells us, and that in those parts of his Works, which the Parliament
that opposed this very power in their King, themselves ordered to be Printed;
yet themselves could as impudently Assert against the Sense of the very Law
they Published, against the very Law that was revived, but in his very Father's
Die Mer. 12. maji. 41. Vid. Journal and last p. Cook 2. Inst.
Time; that his Son and Successors, (tho necessitated for suppressing such
Insurrections as themselves had raised) 20. Jun. exact Col. p. 372.
could not Issue out such Commissions of Array; tho the very preamble of the
Act declares the very purpose of it was to prevent and preserve the Prince from
such Rebellious Subjects. And in truth the Rebels were Conscious of their
Guilt; and that it was which made them resolve not to know the Law: But
presently represented in a Declaration, that this 1 July exact Col. p. 386.
Vid. also Dugd. p. 97.
Commission was contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of the
Subject; tho the very express privilege the Statutable Right of all their Kings
Royal Ancestors; but would not those wicked Miscreants have made even the Crown
an Usurpation in their King, that just before This Declaration expressly
against the very Words, of 11. H. 7. Cap. 1.
declared, that it was against the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, that the
Kings Subjects should be commanded to attend him at his Pleasure: And ordered
17. May exact Col. 193.
that if they should be drawn in a Posture of Defense for their Sovereign, the
Sheriffs of the County should raise Forces to suppress them; and then how can
the most prejudiced partial Person presume to tell us that this their Kings
Commission, was contrary to the Liberty of the Subjects, when they set
themselves in Contradiction to all the Laws of the Land, in the very
Declaration that denied him his Array.

Their Eighth Proposition is for the Forts and Castles, and that the Fortifying
them be in the Parliaments power; but even that too, base Caitiffs, your selves
know to be by the very Letter of the Law in the Kings, the very Charter of
their own Liberties, in this point confirms also the Sovereign's Right, where
it is provided Si nos ab duxerlmus vel Miserimus eum in exercitum, sit quletus
de Custodia Castri. char. c. 20. Statute (...), and 2. Inst. 34.
that the King can dispense with the Services that are due for the keeping of
his Castles, when he sends those that ought to do them, to serve in his Host:
By the very Castlegaurd an old Service always due to the King, (...). Inst. 70.
111. 121. till such Services were taken away 12. Car 2d.
common Law and Custom of the Realm before; there was always such Services due
to the King, for the keeping of Castles: And certainly they were looked upon
then to be in the Disposal of the Prince, when the Subject was but a Tenant to
serve him in his Fortifications; And this Chapter of their very Charter I hope
proves sufficiently not only that the King can command his Castles to be
defended, but send his Subjects any where for his Defense, which the
Declaration of the Commons did as Rebelliously deny.

But besides the taking of the Kings Castles, Forts, Ports or Shipping is
resolved, and ever was reputed Brook Treason 24.
Treason; and were not the two Houses Traitors then by a Law, before that of
this King made them so by Statute, when they ordered Parl. 1641. Vid. Exact
Coll. p. 123. 21. Mart. 22. Martii.
upon the London Petition, and that of the Cinque Ports, that all his Majesty's
Forts and Castles should be presently fortified; that no Forces should be
admitted into Hull, without the Consent of Lords and Commons, seized their
Kings Shipping, and made Warwick Vice Admiral of the Fleet; This was a sort of
accumulated Treason, whose every Individual Act was truly so; as if they
designed that the Statutes should not declare more things Treasonable than they
could dare to commit.

My Cook. 1. Inst. page 5. A.
Lord Cook tells us, whom they cannot but believe, that no Subject can build a
Castle, or so much as a House of strength imbattailed, or any Fortress
Defensible without the Sovereigns consent, much less sure shall they seize
those that are the Kings, and Fortify them for the People; and tells us again
the 2d. Inst. Comment. Chart. Chap. 15.
same in his Comment upon the very Charter of Liberties; and will not that
neither with our Licentious Libertines be allowed for Law? Is not all the
Military power both by Sea and Land declared the undoubted Right of His present
Majesty, and that by particular 13. Car. 2d. Chap 6. Vid. the same repeated 14.
Car 2. c. 3.
Act in his own Reign? does not the very preamble of it seem to provide against
this very Proposition of such a Parliament or a Plato; when it tells us
expressly, that all Forts, and places of Strength, is and ever was by the Laws
of England, the Kings undoubted Right, and of all his Royal Predecessors, and
that neither both, or either Houses can, or ought to pretend to the same; and
declares that all the late Principles and Practices that assumed the same were
all Rebellious? And could some of our Mutinous Members, embrace such
Propositions from the Press, that presumed to tell them they had of late made
two such Impertinent Acts in the House? Plato p. 239. 240. 277.
Acts invading the Subjects Property; Acts betraying the Liberties of that very
People they represent. In short, and that in his own Words, Acts, that empower
the Prince to invade the Government with Force, Acts to destroy and ruin the
State, hindering the Execution of the Laws, and the preventing our Happiness
and Settlement; had they had but the least Reverence for their own
Constitution, and that Honorable Assembly wherein they sat, sure there would
have been some Ordered and Resolved for the sifting out such a Penman, and
sentencing such Papers to the Hangman, and the Flames; what can be the result
of this to sober Sense, or Common Reason, that such Villainous Authors should
appear in public at such a Session of Parliament, to Censure and Arraign the
very Acts of their former Representatives; but that they thought themselves
secure from any Violent Prosecution from those that then were sitting; and that
it was not the Constitution it self of that most Honorable Assembly, the
Seditious Sycophants were so Zealous for, but only the present Persons its
Constituent Members they so much admired.

The last, the Tenth of those pretty Proposals that deserves particular Animad
version, (for several of them Symbolize with one another, and so are by a
general asserting of the Kings Supremacy sufficiently refuted) is the
Parliaments Right to the making Peers, the prettiest Paradox, that the
Abundance of Sedition, with the want of Sense could suggest; I have heard the
Laws declare the King to be the Fountain of Honor as well as Justice; but the
Commons I think as they are no Court of Judicature, so were never yet known to
be concerned in the making Lords. The King whom only our 3. Ed. 3. 19.
Law declares to have no Peer, is sure the only Person that can make Peers; has
not this Power been unquestionably in the Prince ever since these Realms had
one to Rule? was not the Title of Baron in Edward the First's Time confined
expressly to such only as by the Kings Writ were sommoned to sit in Parliament;
And even when there was an Innovation in this Point? In 11. Rich. (...).
Richard the Second's Tumultuous Time, this Power was then not taken from the
King till they took away his Crown; did not he take upon him to confer the
Peerage, and as the first President per his Letters Patents? And Beauchamp
Baron of Kederminster the First of that Creation; did the Parliament ever
pretend to make Peers, but when the Body had rebelled against the Head and
rejected their Prince?

But the Creation of Honors might well then be inverted, when the State it self
was turned Topsie, It was then I confess they denied their King too, not only
the conferring of Honors for the future, but passed an 4 Feb. 1651. Scob. Col.
page 178.
Act for Voiding all Titles, Dignities, and Precedencies already given by him:
But this was done to extinguish the very Remains of Royalty, that there might
not be left behind him, the mere marks, the Gracious Dispensations of the very
Favor of a King; the inveterate Villains laboring with their Monarch to Murder
his very Memory: And sure none of the Nobility have great Reason to rely upon
Parliaments for the maintaining of their Old Honor or creating New, for the
Privilege of their Peerage, or the making Peers, when the very First thing that
they did, when they had got the Power, was an Vid. vote Journal 6. Feb. 1648.
Vid. Histindepend page 15. and perfect Diurnal p. 1250.
Ordered and Resolved, that the House of Peers was useless, dangerous, and
ought to be Abolisht: And all the Kindness their Lordships could be allowed,
was to be capable of being elected into the Lower House; and what an Honorable
House of Lords was afterward Established, even by those that had purged away the
Peerage, may be seen in the Persons of those that Usurper put up afterward for
Peers, But under the Name, the Notion of that other House, when they granted
that power of their Nomination to that Arch Rebel, which they but so lately
denied their Lawful King, why we had there then See the List of their Lordships
in Dugd. view page 454.
Lords of no quality, no worth, little Land, and less Learning. Mr. Hewsons
Lordship, that Honest Cobbler, Sir Thomas Pride's Lordship, Knight and Dray-man,
My Lord James Berry Blacksmith, My Lord Barksted the Bodkin-Seller; and the
Cant of their Counterfeit Cromwell, their Creator, might well tell them from
the Text, not many Nobl's, not many wise were called, but a Creation according
to the very Notion of the Schools, An House like that of the World too out of
nothing; framed by Him that had Himself Vid. Engagement and Protectors Oath.
Sworn to be true to the Government without, founded in the Perjury of him that
made them Peers, and of Persons that would have disgraced a Pillory: Persons
preferred for their little Honesty, little Quality, little Sense, Persons whose
Lands and Possessions could only qualify them to be Noble, by being purchased
with the Blood of our best Nobility. Lastly, Persons that were only famed for
their Villainies, Mighty but in Mischief, making it an House indeed, not of
Peers, but Correction, which the very Law tells us must be made up of Beggars
and Malefactors.

This Gentlemen, was the Peerage produced Their 19th. Proposition to the King
at York.
by a Parliament's Rebellion to make Peers, of which it was too the most
natural Result; for that very Act upon a Just Judgment, would have Tainted all
their Blood; but they provided here for the purpose, Persons that defied,
superseded the Work of an Attaindure; Persons whose Blood even Treason could
not more Corrupt: This, Gentlemen, was the product of that most preposterous
Inversion, when the The First Feb. 6. 1648.
Commons could make Lords, and their Kings House of Peers, with their very
Titles and Honors The Second 4. Feb. 51.
Abolisht by an House of Commons; they seemed to be ashamed of that very
Bastard Honor, of which they were brought to Bed; and could not tell how to
Christen the base Bantling they had begot; till at last some simpering Gossips
stepped up and Named it, an other House (i. e.) an House without a Name.

Distracted Dolts! the Compounds of Madness and Folly; did you for this destroy
your Kings Nobility created by Law, to dignifie the meanest Men, the Vilest
Villains against the 17. Ed. 4. an Act for (...) Nevil Marquess Montague,
Because not sufficient for the maintaining the Dignity (adding) that Men of
mean Birth preferred to Honor, promote all manner of Injustice.
Statutes of the Land? did not you confess that of the Kings Lords to be a
Lawful Government, and the best by recalling it, tho compounded of Wretches,
the very worst, poor Prodigals! whose Repentance only rendered you more
Miserable, and reverst the Fate of him that fed on Husks, who returned to Herd
with Swine. Have we not had heretofore Peers by particular Act degraded for
being a disgrace to their Peerage: Lords whom the Kings Law made Honorable,
only their Lands could not maintain their Lordships Honors, and that tho Blood
and Descent, had entitled them to it; whereas many of these their Parliament
Peers, had neither Law, Land, Blood or Money to make them so: Did not the
Parliament, that very Parliament that Abolisht afterward our English Peers,
Petition the 2. Car. 1.
King against Scots and Irish Titles, and told him to this purpose, that it was
Novelty without president, that persons should possess Honor, where they
possess nothing else; and have a Vote for the making Laws, where they have not
a Foot of Land; had their own Objection been afterward applied to some of their
own Country, and that pitiful Peerage of their own choosing, they must have
Blushed upon the Reflection of their own Thoughts, when they remembered with
what they upbraided their King. The possessions of their Noble Peers, being
Just none at all; or what was worse than nothing, the purchase of their
Villainies.

It is recorded, I remember, in the Conqueror's Time, that Hugh Lupus, Earl of
Chester, upon special Favor of his Prince, being the Son of his own Mother, by
a Second Husband, Arlott having Married Harlowin, a Nobleman of Normandy, that
his Earldom was granted him by William the First, with as ample Jurisdiction as
himself, held the Crown: A power I think beyond any of our present Palatinates,
upon which he presumed to make three or four Barons; but Historians observe it
was such an Honorable Concession, as never any Subject before or since enjoyed;
and how they can presume to pretend to it now, I cannot Apprehend.

It was always a particular piece of Providence amongst all Nations, not to
render that pitiful and Contemptible to the People; which they resolved should
be Reverenced and Esteemed, and unless we can imagine our Idolaters of the
Peoples Peers, would like some Infidels adore their Wooden Deities, only for
being Ugly and Deformed; or like the Israelites Worship Calves of their own
Rearing, I am sure that empty Title, with which their Honors of that other
House were only full, could draw no other Reverence and Respect, than that Ass
in the Apologue from an Image that it carried: This I remember was the result
of the Petition of the Portugals to Philip the Second of Spain; and he I think
obtained that Kingdom too, as our Republicans did once, and would again ours,
with the Subversion of its Laws, and the Force of Arms; it was their request,
that he would not make their Nobility, (of which they are not a little proud)
pitiful and contemptible, by preferring such to that Degree: whose Quality
could not deserve it, what Peers we had when picked by the Council of State,
What Lords when cullyed out by the Commons? let those remember who are so ready
to forget it.

Seditious Sots! have not the Laws of all Nations, as well as our own, provided
that this power be the peculiar prerogative of the Prince, and must these
Politics would Be's, be wifer now, than the wide World? Do not the Digests
declare; those Civil Sanctions whose Authority obtain with all Civilized
Subjects ( i. e.) with almost all besides our own, and whose Reason cannot be
refuted by the best of the Rebellious Republicans that so little regard those,
that their so much admired Legislators, their Solon or Licurgus never saw the
like, Laws that must be allowed the most Rational by being so generally
received, those Postquam ad Curam Principis Magistratuum creatio pertinere
cepit, etc. D. 48. 141. Ordinis vero cujusque arbitrium primo Penes
Imperatorem. Zouch. de jure milit. nobilitat. pars 2. Sect. 2.
tell us, and the World, that the conferring of Dignities, depends upon the
Sole care of the Sovereign; that the Subjects ought not to dispute it; and such
a Religious Observance of this settled Sovereignty do those sacred Sanctions
recommend, that they Censure it for a Crime, as great as Sacrllegli instar sit
dubitare An is Dignus sit quem Princeps elegit C. 19.20.3.
Sacrilege it self, to suspect his insufficiency whom the Prince should prefer;
some of those Laws were the Constitutions of Heathens, as well as other of
those that afterward learnt Christ; and had not the Doctrine of his Disciples
declared Kings even an Ordinance of God; the pious Pagans always esteemed their
Princes Sacred: and such a source of Honor, was in their Sovereign Emperors,
that even against their very Laws, they could allow them to continue those
Noble, whom the Marriage with a Plebeian, had degraded from their Nobility, as
Antonius Augustus did for his Niece Julia.

It Is Nonsense I confess to talk of the Laws of all Nations, to those that
cannot obey their own; or the Decrees of Emperors, for the Preservation of
their Majesty, to those that will break Statutes to Libel their King; yet still
it serves to show that even in this very point, the Laws so long before ours,
Vid. Coke Calv. Case. fol. 15. Coke 7. fol. 33. None but Peers of the Realm to
sit In House of Peers, (...) Peer to be made but by the King.
allowed this power to be the peculiar prerogative of the Prince; and tho we
are bound only to submit to the Singular Laws and Customs of our little Land;
yet still (if in our Senses) we must be Subject to such Laws as are founded
upon an Universal Reason; and for these Republics that have revolted from that
Regal Government, from whence they must derive their Honors, we find the best
of their Nobility to be but Burghers. And the very Nobleman of Venice, this
Courteous Author so much Caresses and Admires, one that must make himself so,
and at best but equivalent; (if such great things according to the Latin
Aphorism may be compared with small) to a Gentleman of England, who wears only
a shorter Coat, while the other a longer Gown.

It Is a solecism in Sense to imagine, that Plebeians can concur in conferring
that on others which themselves have not the least Tincture of: A Title of
Honor. Or that any thing, besides somewhat that is Sovereign, can really
communicate it to a Subject: And we have seen, when it was Usurpt, what a sort
of singular good Lordships and precious Peers were put upon us; The Thebans
would not so much as admit a Merchant into their Government, till they deserted
their calling for ten Years, while the meanest Mechanics were made Members of
our House, and a Tinker of the Army's, just taken from his Tool: The Bishop of
Ely was accused only in Richard the First's Time, for putting in pitiful
Officers into public places of Trust; and it is but a little since, a
Parliament entrusted our Lives and Fortunes in the vilest Hands. And lastly,
this very Libel Lashes one of our Rich. 2d. Plat. page 116.
Kings for the preferring Worthless Persons, and makes it even a forfeiture of
the power of the Sword; at the same time that he contends for the People in
this point, who were never yet known to prefer any other.

An Italian State, as Tumultuous as our own, took upon them once to create a
new Nobility; but as soon as the popular Faction, or if you please the
Convention of the People had set themselves, for the Preservation of their
Liberties to make Lords; why truly the Election was like to be of such
senseless Scoundrels; you may suppose a Barksted, or an Hewson, some mender of
Shoes, or a maker of Bodkins: But so sensible were those Seditious Souls, that
they were like to set up their Servants, that they wisely resolved to retain
their old Masters: And I think were not some of us so wicked, we should all be
so wise too, since we saw our own distracted Nation was never at rest, Till our
Rulers were restored to us as at the FIRST, and our Counselors as at the
BEGINNING.

And last of all only let me take the Liberty in this last and dismal scene of
Sedition to represent, but a bloody prospect of that Harmonious concurrence
there is between all sorts of Rebellious Principles, tho projected by Persons
of different Persuasions; Persons that differ in Manners and Customs of their
Countries; Rebels remote from one another in Time; Rebels as remotely allied in
the Lands; wherein they live: As if the Sea it self, could not separate such
Seditious Subjects, In their Principles and Practices; that had defiled their
Land with such a mutual Conspiration in the Murdering of their Sovereigns; and
let in an Inundation of Blood upon the Subjects; and this Bloody Correspondency
between the practice of primitive Rebels, as well as modern, between the
Proceedings of Foreign Rebellions, as well as our Domestic, must result from
the Reasons, any sort of Subjects have to resist their Sovereign, which we
shall see were at all times, with all sorts still the same; that is, just none
at all, and that appears, in that People of such several sorts, were all forced
to pitch upon the same Pretenses for the Justifying their Treasons: And to make
use of the same Cavil and Calumny against their Princes; when they saw they
could never ground any real Accusation. And lastly, to promote the same
Projects, and Propositions, almost in a Literal Transcript for the levelling,
the raising the Foundations of their several Monarchies, and making themselves
the Masters of the Crown; or rather, this Seditious Harmony of all Rebels,
proceeds from their having ever been animated, and instructed by the self same
Agent of Hell: the primitive Prince of Faction, the Devil; and this parity of
pernicious Principles, Practices, and Propositions, will appear in the perfect
parallel, that there is between the Proceedings of our old Rebellious Barons in
England, And the later Rebellion of the late Leaguers in France, and the clear
conformity of the Proposals of our Parliament, and the polticks of this Plato
to both: I Will place them in their turn as they succeeded in their time, and let
them that would prescribe to Treason, be proud of the Precedence.

For the First, the Barons being greedy of Rule, the Commons of Liberty; (as a
learned Author and * Antiquary lets us Barons Cotton's view of Henry 3d.
know,) some of the popular Lords began with the plausible pretext of the
Peoples Liberty, when to suppress these Troubles, and supply the Kings
Extremities, a Parliament is called; but such an one, as proved much to the
liking of the Lords, and as little meant to relieve their King, much less to
redress the People: The Clamor was of Encroachment upon their Liberty: To
silence that, the Charter is several times confirmed: But they finding what a
power the Kings Necessities put in their Hands, were resolved to supply him
with so little, that it might well keep their King from being Great; they M.
Paris page 807.
force him to the very sale of his Lands and Jewels for Bread, and to turn out
of his Palace, because not able to sustain himself in it; they seized upon
Dover his Castle, and the Kingdoms Key, which was Treason for that account, to
deliver to a Foreigner, and than a Fortiori for a Subject to take, made Head
against their Sovereign, called in French to subdue him: Which when they had
done, (in which Actions none more Zealous than the Loyal Londoners for his
Destruction) what was the Event? Why our Historians tell us, (and what are
still the unfortunate Effects of a prosperous Rebellion) Murder, and Sacrilege,
and Sword. And the Victorious Barons Lorded it like so many Baker p. 86.
Tyrants too, till Providence in a more signal Victory restored their Lawful
King, and the Subject's Liberty.

As the Baron's Wars began in King Leaguers.
John's Time, but broke out in a more perfect Rebellion in his Son Henry's, so
were the seeds of this Civil Dissension sown in the Reign of Charles the Ninth,
and were fully ripened in the Reign of his Son, and that a 3d. Henry too: The
Nobles here were disgusted, and soon made the Commons so too: A Parliament
there too was thought to remedy those Discontents; and that as our Henry's
increased the Distemper, they told the French too of their Taxes and
Impositions, and accused their King of Misgovernment for imposing them; as our
Lords combined, so these Leagued for the redressing of Grievances, and were
first Aggressors in seizing Verdun and Tull, two Towns in France, as those did
Dover and Hull in England; See their History written in Italian, by D'avila, in
Lat. by Touanus; in French by D' Aubigm; in English a Translation by Mr. (...).
their Henry was forced to fly from Paris, his Principal City, His
Metropolitan, also of Sedition, and that by Tumult too: And what did it
terminate in, but in the Murder of their King too? The calling in of the
Spaniard, that was like to inslave the People to a Foreign Yoke; and at last
weary of the Usurpt Dominion of the Duke of Main, that had imposed on them a
Council of State too, the Tyrannous Assembly convened by Conspiraors, was
confusedly Dissolved in as much Distraction and Disorder: And the recovered
Nation returned to their Lawful Lord.

And did not our own late lamentable Distraction Commence in the Reign of King
James, and put all in Combustion in Charles the First; did not Rebellion In
Car. 1.
they first practice upon his Necessities, to which themselves had reduced him;
and then remonstrated against such Acts as were the very effect of his
Necessity, encumbered with a War, or rather betrayed into a breach; they would
not suffer the Vid. even Rushw. Coll. p. 40.
Father to make Peace, and then denied the Son the supplies of War: A
Parliament is summoned too here, and that serves him just as the two preceding
Ones did their Sovereign with Remonstrances of Oppressions: For this the
petition of Right was granted them, as Gracious an Act as that of the great
Charter; but nothing could serve unless like that too, 'twas sealed in Blood;
and for that they began by Degrees to be so Tumultuous, till this Prince was
forced to fly his Capital City, and that also, as in the others, proved the
Head to the Rebellion that succeeded; upon their Exact Coll. p. 123. 21. Mart.
Petition the War was first began; And Hotham sent to surprise Hull, as in the
two former were Verdun, and Dover; and now was all in Arms, and Blood, which
ended at last too in that of their King: The Scots called in here, as in the
former the French and Spaniard; the People enslaved by those that set up for
their Protectors: The Council of State, set up here as well as in France, and
the ruined Realms never at rest, till they had returned to that Sovereignty
from which they revolted.

It is sad even to see the least thing Plot in Carol 2d.
now that looks like a prelude, to such a sort of Tragedy: The clamors of
Sedition still the same; Parliaments that are Assembled to redress them; Vid.
com. Remonstrances. 79. 80.
Remonstrating against Grievances they never yet felt; Subjects Proceeding
Old-Bayly.
Associating against their Prince, for his Preservation; the draught, the
Scheam and abstract of the Baron's Combination, The French League; the Scotch
Covenant: so far from an Abhorrence of either, as to pitch upon a Compound of
all three. Designs discovered and detected, for the seizing of strong Holds;
the Rouse's Trial.
Tower instead of an Hull; and the Sydney's Trial.
Scot invited once more to pass the Tweed for a better booty: The Treason of
such Practices is never the less, because the Providence was so great, as to
prevent its Execution: Had that not interposed the Parallel Lines I am sure
would have led us on further; but all their draught beyond it must have been
Blood.

A Comparison between the Demands of our English Barons, and the Desires of the
French Leaguers, from whence they have copyed as Counterparts. The Propositions
of our Parliament, and the Proposals of Plato.
English Barons. French Leaguers. 1. That the King has wronged the public
State by taking into his private 1. That the Disposals of Places, of Office,
and Trust in the Kingdom, Election, the Justice, Chancellor, and Treasurer; and
require that they be chosen by the common Council of the Realm; Parl. Tent. 22.
H. 3. be in the Leaguers, vid. Henry the 3d. of France's Answer to their
Manifesto, who told them 'twas against the Prerogative of all his Predecessors.
2. That it be ordained that 24 of the most grave and discreet Peers be chosen
by the Parliament as Conservators of the Kingdom, Baker page 8. Ann. D. 1238.
Regn. H. 3.22. 2. That the number of their Kings Council should be limited to
24. D'avila page 341. our Propositions were not to exceed 25. or under 15. 3.
That those Conservators be sworn of his Majesty's Council, and all Strangers
removed from it. 3. The City of Paris set up a Council of 16. of themselves,
(...) their Kings, was to admit Persons whom they should choose. 4. That two
Justices of the King's Bench, two Barons of the Exchequer, and one Justice for
the Jews, be likewise chosen by the Parliament, ibid. 4. These sixteen so
managed the Judges of their King upon a Presumption of their favoring their
Sovereign; that they got three of them strangled without process. 5. They
brought with them Consciences sull of Error and Schism, against the Laws, and
the Canons, 5. That there should be a Reformation in the Church, and no
Hugonots, false Prophets fomenting Heresies against the Vicars of Christ. Mat.
West. page 332. favored. 6. They would not have this Henry the 3d's Daughter
married to Alexander King of the Scots, and for a long time would give him no
aid, which at last with much ado they did. 6. That his Alliance and Truce with
the Kingof Navar was against the Interest of his Subjects. 7. At Jews they
took upon them so much of the Militia, that they made their Prince a Prisoner.
7. That the strength of Provence, be put in the hands of the Duke D'Aumarle, or
such others as they should nominate. 8. The 24. to dispose of the King's
Castles, and no Peace, till all the Forts and Castles be delivered to the
keeping of the Barons. 8. Leaguers seized upon the King's City, Castles, and
strong Holds D'avila page 328. 9. His Counselors elected by the Parliament,
allowed him such a pitance for his Household; that they starved him out of his
Palace. M. Par. 807. 9. That the Kingdom could not be safe so long as the King
was environed with Non-confiding Persons. 10. They chose their own Peers called
the Peers Douze. 10. That they might have the Disposal of all Honor, vid.
their King's Answer to their Manifesto.

This Parliament of those Rebellious Barons, my Lord Cook, that had as much
Veneration as any Man for that Honorable Assembly, called the Parl. (...)
Cook's Insti. part. 3. p. 2.
mad Parliament, the reverse of that of Edward the 3d. which he calls the 50.
Ed. 3.4. Inst. p. 2.
good one. And I am sure the Propositions of that in 41, would have made the
Learned Lawyer, (had he lived to see them proposed,) pronounced that Senate as
distracted too, as that Oxford one of Henry the 3d's; but it may suffice that
special 12. Car. 2. Cap. 12.
Act since supposed them in their Wits, in declaring them what was worse;
TRAITORS.

CHAP. III. Remarks upon Mr. Hunt's Postscript.
THIS Disingenuous Author, with his Hypocritical Apology, for the Church of
England, has just done her as much Mischief, as that of Bishop Jewels sincere
one, did her Good. That pious Prelate with his unanswerable Arguments, had
defended her against all the powers of the Pope; and this with his Argument,
which he Answers himself, has made her all Popish. Never did an Hypocrite
pretend to so much Candor, and Sincerity, that had so little Shadow for such a
Pretention: His Falsehoods looked as if he designed, and thought, he could have
imposed upon the Government and his God; and, in spite of Providence, to have
secured himself from the Justice of that which was established; and at the same
time made sure of the favor of those that were for undermining it. The one was
to be blinded with his being Author of the Bishop's Right: The other imposed
upon with his Penning the Postscript. But however he deceives himself, the
Almighty will still make good his own Word, That he will not be mocked. He has
denounced express Judgment against a double Heart, and the Nation now deserved
Justice, To such a Sycophant. With what Face can such a Rumper tell us in the
tail of his Postscript, that no Passion or prejudice perverts him against the
State of the Kingdom; when all know that it is being thus established, not only
lost him a place in the Law; but disappointed him of being an Irish Judge; and
thus the virulency of his Pen, betrays the truth of His Passion, which he would
Apologize against with a lie, and that it can rise as high as any Furies, for
as deep a resentment of an esteemed Injury; when the Government all the while
was far from doing him any wrong: But if it should meet with him now, I dare
swear would do him Right: And this is altogether Reasonable the World should
know, that the best of our Rebellious Malcontents, though they strive to
palliate their Passions and Prejudices against their Governors, with a show of
being impartial and indifferent; that it is but a mere shadow to cloud the Fire
that Glows within, while truly still implacable, impatient, and impossible to
be governed, and that those that pretend but with Moderation to discommend many
things in our Monarchy, have nothing in them, but the mere Malice and Spirit of
Republicans.

And this will appear from his very first Paragraph that provokes my Pen, He
lets us know that the Church of England is like to fall into that of Rome, page
8. 9.
by the unpresidented folly of some of her Sons; Fall, by a Divine Fate, (as he
makes his Holiness to say) for her folly. That is, (as he must mean by
Consequence) for maintaining a Divine Right. For to this purpose (says he, (Sir
Robert Filmer's Books were reprinted, and others for the same. And truly, I am
so far of this Gentleman's Opinion, that the good man the Pope may very likely
call it a very foolish thing, and laugh at the Doctrine of any Kings Divinity,
that endeavors to set himself above all Kings, so that unkind even to himself,
and his Friends, the Dissenters; he unawares ties them up together with the
Tenants of the rankest Jesuits of the Romish Religion, and endeavors with the
self same Arguments and Objections, to set up the popular Supremacy, that those
Impostures do the Papal. But first only let me beg a postulate or two from him
that pretends to be a Christian, which an Infidel or Heathen will not deny, much
less then one that has the Bible, for an asserting it is belief, viz. 1. That
power in general without appropriating it to any particular Government, is
somewhat that is Divine, not barely (as it is exercised by some Humane Beings
below;) but as it is communicated to such from their God above, that is all so,
and has it as one of his Attributes, any of which is Infinite, and adequate to
the Divinity it self. 2. That this power is actually communicated to some Being
here below for their better Government and Subsistence, No Humane Beings, but
such as desire to live like Beasts, can well deny, 3. That this part of God's
Attribute, so communicated to Man from his 1. Genesis verse 18.
own Mouth Dominion imparted cannot cease to be Divine, notwithstanding such a
Communication, though to a Creature Humane, all that understand the least part
of Divinity will assert; and without any supernatural Illumination, even from
this natural simile of the Sun's Light, can easily comprehend, which though it
dart its rays through almost an Infinite Darkness; yet wheresoever they are
extended still remain Light, neither is his own by the Kindness of such a
Communication the less. So that taking it for granted which must be, that a
power of Government is communicated to us here below by the God that Governs
this and all above, and this so communicated, remains still Divine wherever it
is lodged, the Question is reduced to this, Whether it appertains to a
Multitude as many, or a Sovereign Sole, whether with their St. 1. Pet. 2. 13.
Peter, it is seated in the Ordinance of Man, or the Powers with Romans C. 13. 2.
St. Paul are ordained of God.

That this Divine Power and Right is in Kings, he has superseded my Labor to
prove, by letting us know it is the Opinion of most of our Orthodox Divines, and
their Sentiments are sufficient to determine the point, especially in Matters
to be proved from the Bible, whose best Explanation one would think must be
found amongst those whose Profession it is to expound, unless you would imagine
the Bishops the better Readers upon the Statute. Hunt and his Casuists the most
Conversant among the Critiques. That this power Divine is placed in the People,
I Will show it is the Opinion both of viiolent Jesuits, and the most virulent
Phanaticks, and their Seditious conspiring in the same sense, the most powerful
persuasive with me that their Sentiments are Erroneous, their Position a Lie.

Bellarmine Bellarmine de Laicis l. 3. c. 6.
tells us, God has made all Men by Nature equal, and therefore the Power is
given to the People. Buch. de Jure Regni p. 11.
Buchanan tells us, That they have the Power, and from them their Kings derive
their Right. Doleman l. 1. C. 3.
Parsons proves, Kings have been Lawfully chastised by their Subjects. Knox
Hist. 372. 343.
Knox says, Princes for just Causes may lawfully be deposed, or bridled by the
Nobility Suarez defen. Fid. Cath. l. 3. C. 3.
Suarez shows, the Power of Deposing a King, to be in the Pope, or the
Commonwealth. Calvin's preface to instit. 2d. Edit.
And Calvin seems for suppressing the rage of unruly Kings, as well as the
Ephori did those of Lacedaemon. Mariana de Reg. and Reg. Inst. l. 1. C. 6. 59.
Mariana a Jesuit of Spain, says. The Commonwealth, from whence the Kings have
their power, can call their King to an account. Bez. 60. 216. Confessions:
Beza, Calvin's Successor at Geneva, tells us, The Statesmen of the Kingdom
must restrain the fury of their Tyrants, or they are Traitors to their Country.
These few Instances may serve of four or five rank Romish Priests, that have
been transcribed almost to a word in the Writings of some of the false
Reformers of our late Times, and those that truly reformed our Religion so long
agon, who so far agreed with the Romanist, from whom they dissented. But whose
Errors in such pernicious Principles in themselves might be imputed to the
multiplicity of Matters, then to be reformed, which might make them want time
for all Amendments, and that Rome, from which they did well, for the more
purity of Worship, to withdraw, was (as an old Aphorism tells us) never built
in one day. But to see now, those that have had all the Advantages of time,
Instruction of the former Ages, experience of this, and of what Positions still
were the promoters of Rebellion in both: those whose fury against the Romish
Faith, sometimes has exceeded the Moderation of the Christian, and whose
Zealous Rage has made them preposterously judge, the best reformed Church in
the World, our own, Antichrist, it is matter of Astonishment to see such
espousing her Doctrines, wedded to her Principles, whom in their canting
Tropologies, they still represent as a Whore: Yet still love for her Lewdness.

The Restoration of the King was brought about, he tells Postscr. p. 10, 11.
us, without the Assistance of any of the Cavalier party, and the recovered
Nation obliged a wary General.

The Suggestion is somewhat Impudent so boldly to deny truth, when the memory
of man can give him the Lie: prithee did the recovered Nation oblige the Wary
General, or the Wary General compel the Nation not yet recovered: 'twas well he
had an Army at his Heels, and that at his Devotion too, or else his long
Parliament would hardly have Dissolved so soon, and then it would have been
long before we should have had a free one. The Parliament upon the returning of
the secluded Members, was made up of merely Presbyterian, and how likely they
would have brought in the King, had their Session continued to Sit, may be
guest from their expiring Votes, (and sure you may believe the Words of dying
Men.) ORDERED that the General give no Commission to any Officer, who will not
declare, that the War undertaken by the Parliament against the Forces of the
King, was just and Lawful. ORDERED that they further declare, that they believe
the Magistracy, and Ministry to be the Ordinances of God. ORDERED that they and
their Sons, who have assisted the King against this Parliament, be made
incapable to serve in the next.

And had not some of the Honest Cavaliers, in spite of this Exclusion-Bill
crept into the next Senate: Had not that Honorable Person, that eminent
Instrument of the Restoration, the present Earl of Bath, (whose bold and Loyal
Undertakings, may they last beyond our Annals, and be as they merit eternal)
been ready to solicit His Majesty's Cause, whose Goodness could not but
incline so good a General; it is shrewdly to be suspected, these his
Presbyterians, that cursed then His Majesty with their expiring breath; in that
blessed Vote that sanctified all their Rebellion against his Father, that those
that cried Crucify him to the last, would hardly have brought him into the
City, with their Hosannah's: But when the Net was spread for them, it is no
wonder they did their Garments, and when the Birds that had lived so long wild
within their Wood, were once Caged, they might well be for cutting down their
Branches in the way, and their greatest glory is; they cried out then, their O
King Live for ever! when 'twas too late to Vote Vid. Journal Mar. 1648.
again, the Sons of Charles Steward should dye without Mercy.

A From p. 13. to 28.
Leaf or two, this Gentleman spends upon the Reflections that have been made,
upon the Censures that have been past upon the Procedings of some of our late
Parliaments, and upon the Forgeries that have been contrived for the creating a
belief of a Protestant Plot; but I hope as much possessed as he was, the Devil of
Sedition has left him now, as he does Witches and Wizzards, when he has got
them in the hold, and brought them to the Stake, sure his Eyes are illuminated
now by the discovering so many Deeds of Darkness, and he was only blinded then
with too much Light, that of Phrensy, or he that was co-eval almost with the
Transactions of the last Rebellious Parliaments, would have observed somewhat
to make him suspect the Loyalty of some of the late. Did not that begin with an
Impeachment against the Duke of Bucks, and these with the Banishment of a
nearer Duke? Was not the late King by that accused of Arbitrary Power, and
Popery? and were not both these Accusations levelled at our present in several
Vide Printed Votes of the House of Comm.
Votes? Was there not an actual Plot of Papists discovered only from finding
some Letters of a poor Priest in Clerkenwell? and have we not had a notable one
now, as deep as Hell, that none but Heaven can sound the bottom? Was not the
good old Queen brought into the Conspiracy? and was not Her present Majesty
sworn into this? Did they not declare the King seduced by Evil Counselors, and
impeached several of the Seducers? Were not several of the Council now
impeached, and declared Seducers of the King? Were not the Judges then
impeacht, and Jenkins clapped in the Tower? Were not Articles drawn against
Scroggs, and some of the rest declared Arbitrary? Were not the Spiritual Lords
excluded from their Right in Temporals? and did they not now again dispute the
Bishop's Right? Were not the Ecclesiastical Courts then to be Corrected, and
that now taken into Examination? Was not Manwaring and Montague censured in the
House? Thompson and several of our Clergy, now brought on their Knees? Was
there not a Council of Six, whom the good old King impeached for bringing in
the Scots? and have we not had Six of the Senators that have suffered or fled
Justice for the same Conspiracy? Was not the Militia aimed at now, and taken
away then? Was not the House of Peers Voted useless, and now Betrayers of the
Liberty of the Subject? Lastly, did not the whole House take the Covenant at
St. Margarets, and the Major part to have subscribed an Association now? and
last of all, Did not the Junto at Westminster pass an Act for the King's Trial,
and sign a Warrant for his Execution? and now a remnant of a disbanded House,
propose horrid Things, that made even some of the Conspirators Vid. Russel's
Speech.
fly out, upon which ensued a discovered Assassination of their Sovereign; and
was there no danger of a Parliament? no sign of a Protestant Plot? Only,
because the King did not leave Whitehall, and go down to Hampton Court, because
there was no Essex in the Field, as well as the Plot, no King secured at
Oxford, as well as in the Isle of Wight, that there was no High-Court, erected
at Westminster, but only a better expedient found out at the Rye. If these are
Arguments to render an House of Commons unsuspected, and a Plot of the
Protestants unimaginable; if because here are perfect Parallels of Proceedings
as even as if drawn with a Compass, Mathematical, and which according to their
proper Definition, I could draw to infinity; yet still there must be presumed a
great Disparity between the Subversion of the Government, that was actually
compast, and the Destruction of it; now that was so lately intended. If there
be the least Difference between what led to the last setting up an Usurper, an
Arch-Rebel, in the Throne, and these late Machinations of Hell to retrieve the
same Usurpation (bating but the Providence that interposed against its
Accomplishment) Then will I own what this Villainous Author will have taken for
granted: That those that have the least Suspicion of Parliaments are the
greatest Villains; that a Plot of Protestants proved by Confession is still a
Paradox, and that my self deserve, what he has merited, a PILLORY.

The Pages that he spends in declaiming against trifling Wit, supersedes all
answer and Animadversion, which himself has prevented in being Impertinently
Witty, upon the very thing he condemns: The stress of his Ingenuity is even
strained in the very declaiming against it: And Settle has not so much answered
Himself, as Hunt here his own Harangue. That Gentleman sat down a while for
his second Thoughts; but this preposterous Prigg sets himself in his own glass
at the same time a Contradiction to his own Writings.

His page 39.
Observations upon the perjuries of the Popish Priests is so severe, that the
absolute Argument of their Guilt is drawn from their very denial, their
Superstition I abhor as much as the Treasons they dyed for; but I pity their
Obstinacy, which till I am better satisfied I shall not condemn; his inhumanity
is hard, which unless he had good Assurance, by Christians must be blamed;
there is not a Criminal of our latter Conspiracy I will declare Guilty beyond
his own Confession, and then there is not one that dyed but whom I can well
think Guilty.

His next page 49.
Observation that is worth Ours, Is that upon the Legislative Power; and there
he makes each of the two Houses to have as much of it as the King, and that I
deny with better Reason than he can assert; that the two Houses are concurrent
to make a Law, I Will willingly grant, it is my Interest, it is my Birthright: But
that which I look upon to be truly Legislative, is the Sanction of the Law, and
that still lies in the breast of our Sovereign. If Mr. Hunt that in many places
is truly Pedantick, will rub up his Priscian, the Grammatical Etymology will
make it but Legem far, and then I believe his House of Commons, will be most
Legislative, it is their Duty, their Privilege rather to bring and offer up all
Bills, fit for Laws; and the King still I hope will have his Negative in
passing them, the Commons pray, petition to have them past, and that implies a
consent Superior to be required that can absolutely refuse. Vid. quel
Impositions le Roy poit grant sans Parlm. Roll. Abr. 171. Le Roy poit Charge le
sujet lou per benefit del Sujet sans Parl. 1. H. 4. 14. Roll. 2d. Abr. 171. Les
Commons Priont was wont to be a Form Croke. 2d. part. 37.
the King can with out Parliament charge the Subject where it is thought for
their Benefit, and allowed to dispense with a Statute that concerns his own;
resolved by all the Justices, the King by himself might make Orders and Laws
for the regulating Church Government in the Clergy, and deprive them if they
did not obey, 22. Ed. 3. says, the King makes the Laws by the Assent of the
Lords and Commons, and so in truth does every Act that is made, and every
clause in it. Bract. Lib. 1. C. 2.
Bracton says the Laws of England, by the Kings Authority, enjoin a thing to be
done, or forbid the doing. These are Arguments that our King sure has somewhat
more than a bare Concurrence in the Legislative: If not, he must be
coordinate, and then we have three Kings (which is what they would have) and
then as well may three hundred. I love my Liberty better than our Author, who
has forfeited his; yet I remember when too much freedom, made us all Slaves.

The Extent of the Legislative Power is great; but then I hope it is no greater,
than the King shall be graciously pleased to grant it shall extend: And then I
hope it must be allowed that Equity and Justice must always determine the Royal
Sanction too, which cannot of it self make all things Equal and Just, should it
stamp a Le Roy vult, at the same time upon Acts inconsistent and contradictory,
upon such as were against the Law of Nature, and all Reason; such would be de
facto void: It Is hard to be imagined such Error and Ignorance in so wise an
Assembly; but what has but bare possibility in Argument must still be supposed:
but that it has actually been done, will I prove possitively, and not with some
of their illogical Inferrences suggest that a thing must be so only from a bare
possibility of Being.

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and by the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, ( 'twas then first those,
that were by special Act since declared Traitors made their King Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Com. the three Estates. Cook. 4. Inst. of Par.
the very first Leaf and Line, and will not they believe their own Oracle?
coordinate, assumed to themselves so much of the Legislative, that they left
out the Fundamental form, by and with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and Commons,) that the said Earl of Strafford's Bill of Attainder.
Strafford be adjudged and attainted of high Treason; provided that no Judge or
Judges shall adjudge or interpret any Act or thing to be Treason; then as he or
they should or ought to have done, before the making of this Act, as if this
Act had never been made.

This piece of Paradox, the Contradiction to Common Law, Common Sense, and
Reason, had all the Consents, all the Concurrences that could if possible have
made it truly Law, and even his unhappy Majesty's forced, extorted Compliance.
But will any Creature that is barely distinguished from a Brute, that can only
offer at the mere privilege of his being Rational, debase his very Nature so
much as to call it Justice? Would they ascribe an Omnipotency to this their
power of Parliaments, beyond that of the Almighty, and blasphemously allow to
this their Created God, what the Schools would not the Divinity it self, to
reconcile Contradiction? but still these Statute Mongers, that can make any
Miscellanies of Parliameut for their turn, this they will defend to be Legal,
only because it was past into a Law: Let it be so, but still there must be much
difference between this their Legality, (which now in their Sense can be
nothing, but the power of making Laws,) and common Justice, which must be the
Reason, for which they are made, and what is contrary to that, and all Reason,
by the Laws of God, and all Nations must be null and void, otherways the most
Barbarous Immoralities that an Heathen would blush at; by such an indefinite
Legislative would be truly Legal, only because they are past into a Law; Murder
it self made Statutable as soon as ever those that have the power have Signed
it for an Act. These Suggestions of Consequences are far from being
extravagant, because at, present, the Principles that lead to them, are what
but very lately have been Printed and Published; and the very Practices
themselves, not long since put in Execution.

This Postser. p. 55.
Author I am handling has made his Legislative not to be confined; and that
Plato, we have pretty well examined, allows his People can pass any thing for
the good of the Commonwealth; and then it may Polygamy too, because it was
practiced in his Republic, and is now tolerated amongst the Turks; and what
some Waggs tell us, an indiscreet Member was once moving for here: But that we
can have Parliament Murders too, for I cannot call it less, since the Law has
declared the Contrivers of them Parl. 12. Chapter 2d. C. 12.
Traitors, the Case of Strafford, the Martyrdom of their King, are too terrible
Testimonies, that our Legislative has been strein'd to make the greatest Injury
Law, and Treason it self the Statute of the Land, for they past an Act for the
Trial of their Sovereign, and then declared it Legal, because it was past.

Their God Almighty of the Law, Cook 4. Inst. C. 1. p. 36. huic nec metas
rerum, nec tempora (...)
Cook himself, (whose Words with them, is all Gospel too) tho he in his
Pedantick Phraseology, puts no period to this Power of Parliament, yet in the
very page 37.
next Page condemns the self same sort of Proceeding; and that was in the Case,
that hard Fate too, of an other Earl as Innocent perhaps also, and as
unfortunate: Earl of Essex 35. H. 8.
Cromwell was attainted in Henry the Eighth's time, much after the same manner
my Lord Strafford was in Charles the First; but only if so great Injustice can
be extenuated, the latter was more Inhumane: For tho the First was Sentenced
and suffered by Parliament without being admitted to Answer, (A Proceeding
against our Magna Charta C. 29. 5. Edw. 3. C. 9. 28. Edw. 3 C. 5.
own Laws, those of all The Manner of the Romans, was to see Accusers Face to
Face, and Answer, (if you believe the Bible) Acts 25. v. 16. Matt. Paris vita
R. Johan. 275. incivile videtur and contra Canones in absentem far Sententiam.
Nations, and of Deutrinomy Chapter xjx. Verse jv. The Almighty provides for
the Prisoner's Defense.
Heaven it self, against all that was Humane or Divine; yet Wentworth's Measure
was more hard, whom they made to suffer with an Attainder after he had argued
for his Life, confounded his Accusers, and convicted some of his own My Lord
Digby, with several others.
Judges: The same sort of Severity Sir John Mortimer met with from this
Parliamentary Po upon whom they past a Judgment without so much as permitting
him to be arraigned; but these Barbarities of Mr. Vid. Rot. Parl. 2d. H. 6.
number. 18.
Hunt's unlimited Legislative, were condemned even by this their learned
Lawyer: (though he would not, did not, or dared not question their Authority;)
yet damned them (in his own Words) But of these says he, Auferat Oblivio (si
potest) si non, ut cunque silentium tegat 4 Inst. p. 37. Postscript p. 74.
if it were possible to dark Oblivion, if not to be buried in Silence; but this
more Dogmatical Judge with his Postscript, has rather Encouraged such Injustice
and Severity, and represented to his Parliament a power they have of Proceeding
more unwarrantably, when he tells them, tho the Succession of our Crown be
Hereditary, they can alter the whole Line, and Monarchy it self, by their
unlimited power of their Legislative Authority.

But I shall also show him that his Legislative power, as it cannot justly
extend to such great and impious Extravagancies (yet, but what we see it has
been actually stretched to,) so neither can it to some other things that are
less so. In King Edward the Third's Time, there were several Acts past, that
took away the power of Pardons from the Prince; yet all these made void by the
Common Stanford 2. 101.
Law, because against the Prerogative of their King: And it was resolved by the
Judges in King James 2. Jacob. Term. Hill. Cook. Lib. 7.
his Reign, that Himself could not grant away the power of Dispensation with
the Forfeitures upon the Penal Laws, because annexed to his Royal Person, and
the Right of his Sovereignty: And if what is only Derogatory from the Crown's
Right, and King's Prerogative, shall be actually voided by the Common Law, as
we see it did to the nulling three several Statutes; I cannot see how this Bill
of Exclusion, had it past into an Act, would not have been as much null and
void; unless it can be proved that our Hereditary Descent of the Crown, is not
so much the King's Prerogative that wears it, as the Pardoning of a Felon, or
the remitting a Fine: And that I believe will be difficult to be cleared by
those that have spent so much Pains and Paper for its Justification, and our
Author himself so much Labors for; so that even the Common Law it self will
anticipate the Work of the Statute: and perhaps his Highness need not have
stayed till that of Henry the 1. Henry the Seventh Fol. 4. Que Le Roy est
Person dis charge D'ascun Attainder. quil prist sur luy le Reign and estre Roy.
Seventh, had taken away his Exclusion, as well as Attainder, and purged away
all his Defects, and framed in capacities by his coming to the Crown.

I have but two Cases more with which I Will conclude Mr. Hunts great point of
Legislative. In 5. Ed. 3.
Edward the Third's Time, an Act was purposely declared void that was past, and
the King had declared to give his consent to it. But it seems upon some
oversight, or error, it was not actually done: And in the First of 1. Jacob.
King James, when they recognized his Right, they petition him to put his own
Acknowledgement too, without which it would not be complete and perfect, from
which I shall infer, upon the First; here was an Act past, upon the King's
declaring, he would give his consent; had there been nothing else but his bare
Assent required, that declaring that he would, might have been taken for
granted; and his not opposing it afterward sufficient, not to have rendered it
all null and void, and the great Imprimaturs the other two Houses had given it,
with their Legislative have might in some Sense made it somewhat Obligatory:
But here it is absolutely declared void as wanting the very Sanction, that makes
it a Law, or any thing besides waste Paper.

Mr. Posticr. page (...).
Hunt tells us, we would not say an House of Commons can make a Prince of
Wales, because the Prince of Wales was once confirmed by an House of Commons:
And I Will tell Mr. Hunt, just such another Tale; The King cannot make his Coin
without Metal and Allay, but does therefore the Metal and Allay make the Kings
Coin, it is his Royal Stamp, it is his own Impression that makes the Money
Current as well as the Laws.

From that of King James we may 1. Jacob.
justly conclude, That if here, as they say, there were nothing required, but
barely the Kings consent to the making it Law; that might well in such an
extraordinary Case as this be thought unnecessary to be demanded, since the
King, that came so far for asserting his Right, could not but in Reason be
supposed very willingly to consent to any Recognition of it. But they knew it
might be an Acknowledgement of his Subjects without his Assent: But never an
Act of Parliament, without such a Sovereign Sanction. In short, it is the
Privilege of all our three States, Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons; it is
their Birthright, and that of every Subject to have a Concurrence in the making
all Laws; (and why should I, be thought to Love my Native Right less than Mr.
Hunt?) yet still this Peoples concurrence need not to be Coordinate with their
Kings, or their Kings, but a bare Concurrence with the People: It Is a Solecism
to sober Sense, to say Subjects can be Coordinate with him, to whom they are
Subjected; and as absurd when they would salve it with saying, As such a
Senate, they are not Subordinate, when even for that their politic Existence,
they depend upon the breath of their Sovereign.

It Is Remarkable to see, and observe, how Providence has defeated, not only all
their Attempts upon the Government, but even their most Malicious Postscript
page 55.
Suggestions, What pains did he take to turn over his Annals of Scotland, and
pick perhaps out of his Hector Boethius, an Author that lived at his
University, when he writ, far from the place where the Records were kept (as a
Learned and Ingenuous Author of that Nation observes) which were the only
things that could inform an Historian well in the Descent of the Crown? or from
the prejudiced Writings of Buchanan, whom none but one so partial as himself;
such an Enemy to our own Government, as that was to the Scots, would have
consulted in any thing that related to the Crown, and that only to make his
Sovereign descended from a Bastard: He might from that Buch. (...) Reg. p.
(...). 62.
Author have told us too; The Scottish Kings have all their Power from the
People, and therefore the People's above the King: that the Multitude have the
same power over Kings, that they have over the Multitude, who can depose him,
and if he will not submit to their Charge, they can raise War against him, or any
private Person kill him.

But how has Time and Truth convinced the World that his Assertion is plain
lie? and I am sure without it, his Inferrence had been false; the King's
Learned Advocate there has shown from Records: That Robert the First King of
the Stewarts there, was married to this Elizabeth Mure, that she was his first
Wife, that from a copy of an Act of Parliament held at Scoon: the Succession
was recognized to the Sons he had in his first Marriage, which were the same,
Hunt has made first Spurious, and then would not allow them Legitimized by the
second Marriage, because the first intervened, contrary to the Canon of the
Church, that then obtained, and the Opinion of Hottom. de (...). L. cum quis C.
16. de nature. Lib.
all Civilians at present, and as he might have found it in the very Codes of
Justinian; With what Face can he now behold his own Impostures, or turn over a
Leaf of his Seditious falsehood without trembling? The most adequate punishment
I believe would be to confine him to read his own Works: Blushes and Shame, If
he be not proof against both, must torment him more in the review, than he
racked his tortured thought in the Penning it; the sham of the Black-Box may as
well be credited by the next Age, as this has done that of the Black-Plaister,
when such Hunts shall Write their History of King Charles his Court, after the
same rate that Welden has that of King James; when they shall not (...) contend
at the same time to make Bastards of those that are Legitimate, but Legitimate
those that are truly Bastards; and the one all against Record, Charter,
Statutes Ancient; the other against the many Modern and Express Declarations of
their present King: This piece of this Seditious and Discontented Lawyer; these
now unquestionable Falsehoods, will be revered by the next age as a Revelation,
if not sufficiently exploded in this; and I know that Welden is hugged at
present by the Faction as an Oracle of Truth, only for giving of his God the
Lie, and reputed as an Author sacred only for Libelling of his Sovereign, that
was truly so, and representing that Providence as a Vid Welden's Court ad finem.
Plague to his Royal Progeny, that has signalized it self in nothing more than
in Miracles for its Preservation.

Most of the rest of his sublimated Sedition is spent in exposing the Divine
Right of Kings, the Right of their Succession, and in truth of the Bible, and
its Author, the Almighty; he begins to confute Postscr. l. p. 63.
St. Paul with that bandied Argumentation out of St. Peter that Kings are the
Ordinance of Man, and with that very Text on the Front does that Devilish piece
de jure Magistratuum, in one of its Editions begin: So Mr. Hunt enters upon the
Stage of his Argumentation with a perverted Text, as Ficleney a supposed Romish
Priest, tho he railed against Pope and Mass, which might be pretended and
affected Puritanism.
well as one a reputed Papist, that was supposed to be set a Work by the Pope
for raising a Rebellion against our most Protestant Queen Elizabeth, of whom I
have two or three Editions by me, such Encouragement does Treason and Sedition
still meet with amongst our Puritans, and the Popish part of the World for
Reimpression and Improvement; and from this damnable Libel upon Christi anity
it self, and the Badge of its Profession, the Gospel, a piece so lewdly
Seditious, that both the Catholics and Phanaticks that hugg its Doctrine, yet
had not the Confidence to entitle them selves to the work; from this and Brutus
his vindicioe has Mr. Hunt and his Apostate, absolutely borrowed all their
Principles, at least unfortunately transcribed them by Inspiration, which I may
demonstrate with as plain a Parallel as any Corollary can be drawn from a
Mathematical Proposition; when I come in the next Chapter to handle that
Reproach to Christianity, that Opprobrium of our Church. In the mean while give
me leave to close this with these few Animadversions upon some of this Lawyers
Sentences, before we come to the Lewd Maxims of the Divine. P. 68.88.
He tells us with Passion and transport, that this Opinion of a Divine
Authority in Kings, renders us all Traitors, and this Doctrine of their
Divinity is dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom, and pregnant with Wars.

Nothing but a Zeal that had overcome his Senses, could precipitate him upon
such Paradoxes, the only thing that prevails most with me (and I believe with
all that are not open Enemies to the State, or fled from its Justice) for an
entertaining of this Religious Principle of our Loyalty, is that nothing can
possible with Christians be a better Argument for their living peaceable under
so good a Government; or were it not so good, than to believe that those that
are their Rulers have Authority from their God, and sure his Anointed is
preserved the sooner from being touched, from the regard an Heathen would have
to any thing that has a power Sacred and Divine: what can be a stronger
Conviction to a Reasonable Soul of the good, the peaceable Consequences of such
a pious Doctrine, than that those that contend so much against it, are still
found to be Disturbers of our Peace? Can he prove that the Consecration of a
Church, and the very presence of God in the Tabernacle shall be an
Encouragement for Sacrilege, and an Invitation for a Villain to rob it of its
Candlestick, Chalices, Offerings and Oblations: Only that he may break the
Tables before the Face of his God, that gave the Law. But whenever our Peace is
interrupted by this Doctrine, It is only by such Sacrilegious Desperado's, as
dare attempt Majesty, and that upon the same account, for Plunder and Prey.

At the last Page 148, 149.
he is mighty tender of his Fanatics, and their Throats from the Papists; but
sure he may be now less concerned, when we can match them with an intended
Massacre of their own, as clearly proved as the noonday, but may well be
disbelieved by such who can not only side with the Turks in their Arms, but
almost most in their Infidelity: But I can tell them a more Ingenuous, a better
way of denying their Plot, by confessing it, by owning what indeed it was, a
barefaced Conspiracy, a Resolute Rebellion.

Hitherto Mr. Hunt has been animadverted on, as his Lewd Expressions, and the
more abominable Principles in a Person pretending to so much sincerity lay
scattered promiscuously; so that our Remarks must have made a Miscellany, as
well as his Book; but its whole substance of Sedition, I shall reduce now to
three several Heads. First, * That Assertion of the Legisative p. 46. 61.
which he would not allow in the King. Secondly, That Divine Right which he
would rather place in the People. Thirdly, That Succession of the Crown to
depend upon a Parliament, or the power of both.

The first Reason that he gives for the first, is from his Rule, and Inferrence
in Arithmetic; where a Unite added to two makes a Third. And the Conclusion
is, because none can say therefore, those two do not go to the making that
number, and what then? Therefore the King has not the Legislative, and this is
the Logic of this Body of Law, when it sets up for the Mathematics, and would
demonstrate the King's Co-ordinacy as plain as a Problem, and he might have
told us too, without turning pedant in his Latinisms of Unites and Triads, that
one and two makes three, which no body can deny (as the burden of the Ballad
has it,) and here upon the strength of his Performance, he has found out this
wonderful discovery: I know not what kind of Figure he would make of the King
here; but I am sure such kind of Seditious Souls could with all their Hearts
make him pass for a Cipher, I could find in my Heart to cap the pretty fimile
with another as silly; A three legged Stool, take away one and all tumbles to
the Ground; they being all Equal and Coordinate powers, for the supporting of
this Supremacy in Cathedra, which sounds as well as their Curia or Camera,
their old musty Metaphysics that distinguished once the King from his Crown.
And this obliging Metaphor, will serve Mr. Hunt's turn much better; For here
every foot of this Magisterial Stool, is commonly made of the same Matter and
Mold, joint Supporters of the tripple Dignity, whereas his Unite even amongst
Mathematicians is allowed somewhat of Precedence, and to be the First, the
Foundation of all number.

But to be serious (if possible) in an Inference so silly, must he not suppose
in such a simile of two Figures, which by the Accession of an Unite is made a
Triad, and the two concurring as much to the making that number, as well as
that one, must he not suppose (I say) this to result from the equality of every
single Unite, so that one can not confer more to the Composition of this Triad
than another: If they be not equally concerned or empowered; then one would
concur more to the making up that (...) than the rest; so that this Law
Philosopher, this Cook upon Hereboord will be reduced to this Dilemma, either
they do not equally go to the making up that number, or they do: If they do
not, he denies his own Supposition, and gives himself the Lie: if he grant they
do, then his simile is Nonsense in the Application, and a very begging of the
Question: For we say that our Monarch, who, if he please, shall be the Unite
for once, is more than either of the other Two; and if the peevish Malecontent
will not be angry, I Will tell him more than Both? his Assent is such an One, as is
attended with a power to deny, and neither of them will pretend to the
Negative; and that is the true Reason we find all our Republicans so furiously
contending, for the taking away the Kings. It was for this, Pryn's power of
Parliam.
Pryn Printed and Pestered the Press: For this he trump'd up his Treatise, That
his Majesty's had not an absolute Negative Voice to deny Bills of Common Right:
For this Plato Red.
Plato tells us, That His Majesty having it, evacuated the very ends of
Government: For this Hunt Harangues, and says, He is so bold Hunt p. 50.
to say, That never any Bill in Parliament wanted the Royal Assent, that was
presented by the Desires of the People. (And I think it is bold enough said with
a Witness:) For is not this King left at last by the Laws of all the Land, Sole
Sovereign Judge, what is really fit for his Peoples good to be past? whereas he
presumes that their bare presenting, signifies the Desires of the People, and
that must absolutely determine the Jurisdiction of the Prince.

page 47.
He tells us, when a matter is moved in Parliament by the King, the Commons
consent last, and are therefore the Commons Coordinate with their King? Or
does that only signify, the Candid Custom of the Proceedings in Parliament?
The King is presumed upon his own Proposal of any matter; the Party; and they
being consulted is only for their Consilium impensuri. the Words of the Barons
Writ. 4. Inst. p. 4.
Advice, as the very Words of the Writ expressly have it, by which they are
called, and the very Etymology of their very Name, the great Council expresses.

Controversies in such Cases will be Eternal, until the Disputants agree in the
same Notion of the Thing, they so much dispute: For otherways it is but making
of Words, instead of Arguments; if they mean by the Legislative of the two
Houses, a power of Concurrence with their King in the making Laws, and that
their Consent is to be required, they labor to prove just nothing, or what they
may have without so much pains, and to so little purpose: If they will insist
upon the Natural Etymology of the very Word, they will find the Derivative
Legislative to be deduced as above, from the Latinism, Legem far; and then in
God's Name, let the two Houses enjoy even of that an Arbitrary power, and bring
in what Bills they please, so long as they will not again force upon us, an
Ordinance or Vote for Law, and the Statute of the Land; but if their Sense of
this Legislative power must signify, That their Commons, have as much of it as
their King, and That it is that which makes their King Coordinate with his
Commons, as is sufficiently clear from their Writings, that it is; then I
affirm it is against Law, against Reason, and a Lie: For the King by the very
Law it self has power to dispense with Statutes; his Proclamation is a Law,
and an Edict, and as much as any of the Decrees of the Roman Emperor's; with
the Advice of his Judges, he will dispense with the rigor of the Laws, if too
severe, and resolve their meaning if Ambiguous. Have their two Houses, whom
they would have these mighty Law makers, the power of repealing, or so much as
altering those very Laws they make, without their Kings consent? And tho this
Laborious Lawyer observes, That neither their King can pass any thing he
proposes without theirs; yet this his power, and that when they have not so
much as a Being, Evinces the Prince, at least supreme in the Legislative.

The Learned in other Laws besides our own, tell us, a Legislative power may
partly be delegated to other Persons, tho Subjects, and yet remain in the
Prince even entirely, notwithstanding such a Communication; I confess the
Opinion of Canonists and Civilians may not be so Authentic with some, that
abhor their very Names; yet Grotius himself is of that Opinion, and he a Person
that our Plato Redivivus.
Republicans can cite even on their own Side; but our own Vid. Brit. Fol. 1.4.
Inst. 70.
Laws allow it, or else I think our Judges too might make themselves
Coordinate; because their King's Commission communicates to them all the power
of destributive Justice, that is in the King: We are told the King has
committed all his power Judicial, some in one Court, some in another, and
therefore the Judgments run, Consideratum est per Curiam, etc. and 8. H. 4. 19.
It Is resolved, That if one should render himself to the King's own Judgment,
it would be of none effect; yet for all this it would be false to affirm, That
he does not do justice, because he has delegated it to others to be done. The
King does not put in Members of Parliament as he does Judges; yet Peers he
makes, and calls them to Sit; and Commons cannot come without his Writs for
Election; but certain it is that our Kings once had a more absolute
Legislative; for they all know their Lower House commenced but so late; and
heretofore their Nobles and Bishops, but such as the King should be pleased to
call: And I cannot imagine that when our Princes admitted the Commonalty to be
concerned in the making Laws, they then designed he should lay aside his own
Legislative, or put it in Common as they do their Land in Coparcenary; or in
their great Coke 1st. Inst. Corp.
Coke's, the learned Lawyers Language, make an Hotchpotch, a Pudding of his
Prerogative.

If every Politic Body, that has but a share in this Legislative, must also be
presumed to participate as much of it as the King, I can prove to them every
petty Corporation, Coordinate with their great Convention of States; and even a
poor Parish, as great Legislators as an House of Parliament; for by the Laws of
the Land, even those can make their Bylaws without Custom or Prescription, if
they be but for the good of the Pour Reparation del' Eglise d'an haut voy, etc.
44. Edw. 3. 19.
Public, and if they can but prescribe to it, may pass any private Acts for
their own: The Civilians make their Law to be the Will, and pleasure of their
Prince: But tho our Bracton l. 1. c. 9.
Ancient Lawyers would not expound that absolutely for our Fleta l. 1 c. 17.
own, yet they seem to make it but little less; only say it must not be meant
with us of his unadvised Will, but such an one as is determined upon the
Deliberation and Advice of His Council.

Pryn, that preposterous Assertor of this their Legislative, has furnished them
sufficiently with as contradictory Arguments, as absurd as irrational
Inferrences for its defense. He tells us in his Treatise Pryn's Treatise for
the Peoples Legislative.
that Kingdoms were before Kings, and then the People must needs make Laws;
(that I confess setting aside the very Contradiction that there is in Terms:
For certainly the Word Kingdom was never heard of, till there were Kings to
Govern; He might as well have told us of a Derivative, that was a long time
before the Primitive) but bating this Solecism in Sense and Speech; well
meaning Will, designed it perhaps for the Word Country that was; (I believe as
well as he) antecedent to the King, but must it be inferred, because the Land
was once without Kings; therefore now no Kings must govern the Land? For the
Conclusion is as absurd to say, That therefore the People have the Legislative,
and their Prince no Negative; they do not consider the result of such rash
Inferences, which return upon themselves more stronger in the rebound, and that
even upon their tenderest places, which they can hardly suffer to be touched.
Kings and Lords did a long time meet in Parliament before Commons in that
Convention were so much as thought of, and therefore must none now be convened?
The Papists proudly tell us, their Religion was long before Luther, and must we
not now profess our Protestant Religion?

Another of the same Nature, and as much Nonsense, is Ibid.
this, They infer from the possibility of the King's dying without Heir, and
the Government returning to the People who then would be the Sole Legislators?
That therefore they must have much now of the present Legislative, and be at
least Coordinate that have a possibility of being Supreme. The Supposition
sounds somewhat like the Song of the Children, When all the Land is Paper, etc.
Tho it spoils another good Proverb, That no Man dies without an Heir; but the
silly Souls do not consider, that by the same Solecism and Supposititious
Reason, not a Subject has a Right to a Foot of His Land: For the Law says, All
that is in England belongs to the King as 12. H. 7. 20. Ceke 1. Inst. p. 1.
Lord, which if the owners dye without Heirs must escheat to the Crown, and
sure it is as possible for any Subject to dye without Heirs as his Sovereign,
when the 25. Ed. 3. Treason to destroy the Heir of the Crown.
Law has taken special Care for them; and then it is but turning their
possibility of a Right into an actual one, and they will be the most obliging
Subjects to the Crown, that bring such Arguments against it.

Another of Pryn his Treatise ibid.
Pryn's pretty Paradoxes, is the very same with (...) page 51.
Hunt's impudent Assertion. I may with Modesty call it so; since himself says,
he dares to be so bold to assert it. It is that our Kings anciently always
consented to Bills offered for the public good, and the Postscript that never
any Bill was lost, or wanted the Royal Assent promoted by the GENERAL DESIRES
of the People:

That Bills have been rejected they will find upon Record, and in the Journals of
almost every Session; and whatever is presented in Parliament must be supposed
the Desires of the People, who Sit themselves there in Representative; but the
mistaken Gentleman, meant it of the Bill of Exclusion to be the Peoples General
Desire: but that at last he finds a Lie too, and that the Generality have for
the most part protested against it in Addresses declaring more the Sense of a
People, than a prevailing Party in an House of Commons, when the best part of
the Nation too, the Lords did not concur. But did not in Vid. Camb. vit. Eliz.
106. Edocta suit quantum emineat a successore designato periculum.
Queen Elizabeth's Time; and that even so lately, the Parliament, and even
every Individual in the Nation, desire her to declare her Successor, I am sure
with greater Solicitation, and a more general Unanimity, than they could be
said to desire that Exclusion of the present King's; did not the two Houses
offer her four subsidy Bills upon that very Consideration, and she as
resolutely reject both? And could the refusing to show even a Kindness to her
next Successor, upon the importunity of all her People, with Money in their
Hands, be less resented? And shall the King, for declaring only against a Bill
that was never tendered him, for declining to concur in this deepest Injury to
his own BROTHER and Heir, and to pleasure those only that denied to part with a
Penny, be reproached and condemned so much more?

Did not the Parliament tender to King James three several subsidies to break
of the Match with Spain, and the Treaty of the Palatinate, and he refuse tho
tempted with what is seldom the Subjects Bait, Money? How many Bills of
Rebellion did the Mutinous Members, and that in the Name of all the People
prefer in their Propositions to our Martyred Sovereign, to which the poor
Prince preferred the most Ignominious Death, rather than condescend with his
Veult or Avisera. Hunt's Phraseology, page 94.
Base Caitiff! (forgive but your own Billings-Gate) should these neither have
wanted the Royal Assent, because offered in the name of all the People of
England, and as the general Desire of the Subject; if that Suggestion must have
extorted his Assent; then, mighty Miscreant! he must have past an Act for his
own Trial, Signed a Warrant for his Murder, for in that name he was Arraigned,
Vide Bradsh. K. Trial.
in that name he was Sentenced, and in that he dyed.

Poor prejudiced Soul! whose discontent and Transport makes his own Maxims
undermine the very Cause he would defend: Is then this general desire of the
People, such an absolute infallible Determination of Matters of Religion, and
Descent of the Crown, (the very only points he labors for,) that if their
Desires be but promoted, put up in a Parliamentary way, by Bill or Petition, it
must presently oblige the Royal Assent? Be it so, base Creatures! your own
Arguments as basely betray your own Religion; your own Arguments will help
truly to subvert, that which you seek to Establish with such a furious, but
false Zeal, for ought I know the Protestant Religion had been so settled in its
Infancy, in its first Reformation in the Reign of him, that was the first
Defender of our Faith, that it could never have been so soon interrupted with a
succeeding Persecution, had but Henry the Eighth refused the Bill of the 31. H.
8.
Six Articles, pressed upon him by both Houses, this was Judged a just and
necessary Bill from Hunt's General desire of the People; but had it not been
better? had it not saved the Blood, perhaps of all the mighty Book of Martyrs?
had the sturdy Prince rejected this as he did many other general Desires? It
was this Royal Assent alone, which would to God it had been wanting: And this
Sycophant would have wished so too, did he really love the Religion, he so
salsely labors for. It was the Le Roy vult, the Result of the Peoples
importunity that then established Popery by a Law, which had it been but then
neglected, that new molded Mass of Idolatry, standing upon its last Legs, had
quite languish'd, dropped into the Grave, and been buried in the Ruins and
Rubbish of its own Idol Houses they demolished: For in the latter end of his
Reign, so enraged did he seem against some Persons of that Persuasion, that he
acted, as if he would have executed their very Religion; Vid. Burnet's Abr.
hanging up some iCarthusians even in their Habits, and mmured nine Monks in
their own Monastery, where they dyed.

This was it that so settled what they call Superstitious Worship, that it
survived the short lived Reign of the pious Edward, and in Spite of all his
providential care for it is exterpation, run only like the Guaronne that Miracle
of a River in one of their Climates of Popery, (if their Histories of their
Country be not Legends too,) only through a little Province in silent darkness
underground, but rose again, and that with greater rage in the next Region:
This good Kings Laws about Religion would never have been so soon repealed, the
Commons House never have been so forward, as the Barnet's (...). C! 3. 229.
Divine Doctor, whom themselves have thankt for it, does make them, for the
sending up a Bill for the punishing all such as would not return to the
Sacraments after the old Service. Had the Six Articles been but past by in
stead of being past into an Act; they would have had no such Service to return
to; they would have been Strangers to Rome and it is Religion, and tho they were
repealed in Edward the Sixth's time, his Fathers ratifying them made them take
such root, that his short Reign could never Eradicate; that left so many
Catholics in the Kingdom, that Commendone the Popes Legate, might well come
over to reconcile her Highness's Crown to his Holyness's See. And here had not
the Queen (if such a thing could have been expected from a Sister of that
Church so Zealous) done much better, had she refused the Bills of both Houses,
brought her for introducing the Pope's power and Supremacy? your selves,
Seditious Souls! reproach this Royal Assent with Reflections, so scurrilous
upon her Memory that the worst of Monarchs could never Merit, and then only
give but Loyal Ones, leave to think that your Excluding Bill, tho never so much
the General Desires might have been as much cursed by posterity, when it had
entailed upon it Misery and Blood, the common Consequences of a debarred Right.

To come now, after this Ecclesiastical point of the Church, to that Civil one
of the State, that other thing this Lawyer Labors for, the Descent of the
Crown; Shall the Peoples general Desires in this too terminate the Will of the
Prince? why then that Monster of Mankind as well as Monarchs did mighty well
too, to pass that Murdering 1 Rich. 3.
Bill presented by both Houses of Parliament, to make good his own Title to the
Crown, by the Butchering of those Babes in the Tower; for no less could be
expected, when it was once taken up by the Tyrant, than their Destruction for
the Maintaining it; so that this Peoples Desires dispatched them in the Senate
before ever they were strangled by Tyrril in the Tower: Had it not been a much
greater Honor to the Prince to have refused such a Barbarous Bill, than turned
Usurper and a Butcher for it is acceptance? Had it not left a less Blot in our
English Chronicle as well as upon the Nation less Blood? 28. H. c. 7. Rast. 4.
Did not both Houses exhibit a Bill even for the making Elizabeth the best of
their Queens a Bastard. And does Mr. Hunt say this desire ofthe People too, did
mighty well to prevail (as it always ought) upon the King? Did not that Royal
Assent so blacken his Person, and brought the Nations repute so low, that the
very Protestant Princes left him out of their League, whom they had designed
for its Head, and looked upon our England as a lump of Inconsistancy, whom such
Unanimous Leaguers could not Trust? And was it not in his Reign, That a Zealous
This was the Opinion of Sir Thomas Moor too, and the Brief History might have
cited this too, as he does another Opinion of this prevaricating Papist for his
purpose.
Papist said, It was the Parliaments Power to make a King or deprive him? a
fortiori then, a Popish Principle to destroy, or exclude his Successor.

But as bold as this Gentleman thinks himself, when he dares to say, Never any
Vid. Brief History p. 18. Burnets Abrig. p. 313.
King denied to pass those Bills which the People pitched upon to present: It Is
none of his own Politic asseveration, tho it be but a piece of Sedition: It is
no more than what a Seditious Senate Page 50. Vid. Declaration of Lords and
Commons about the Kings Coronation Oath Parl. 41.
told their King long agon; A Senate that sat brooding on the pure Elements of
Treason, and of which Pryn himself was a principal Member; A Senate that sowed
so much Sedition in one age, that all the Succeeding will hardly eradicate. A
Senate that sat drawing out the Scheams and Platforms of a Commonwealth. A
Senate that assumed to themselves indeed the Legislative the Nomothetical
Disposition of the Law, but they proved such a Confounded sort of Architects in
the State, that they drew a perfect plan, a confused Ichonography for Rebels to
build upon their Babel. Those told us in plain Terms what Hunt and Pryn.
these more cautious Coxcombs insinuate with a silly Circumlocution, That the
King is bound by His Coronation Oath to grant them all those Bills their
Parliament shall prefer. And that they gather from their contradictory
conclusion, that bandy'd Banter they have Box'd about in both Reigns for almost
these two Ages, the (...) justas legis esse tenendas, etc. Quas Vulgus
elegerit. Rot. Parl. H. 4.
VULGUS ELEGERIT. I am sorry to find these Seditious Souls not only to want
Sense, but Grammar Lilly would have told them more of the Law, and his
Constrctuion and Concord, made a better Resolution than their Coke upon the
Case. But as the People when they have got the Power, will soon decide on their
side the Supremacy; so these Times did here as soon turn the Tenses, and
transfer the past Laws into the Future: and it is no wonder that those that did
the Statutes of their Prince, could dare to break the Head of a Priscian. Is
not the perfect Tense much more agreeable to Sense and Reason, here than the
Future: The question is, Whether it shall be meant of those Laws, the People
shall Choose, or have Chosen? I will not object here Our Kings being absolute and
complete Monarchs without so much as taking such an Oath, without so much as
being Coke 7. 106. 11. Calvin's Case. Watson and Clarks 1. Jae. Coke 7. fol. 30.
Crowned, which is the Time it is to be taken; tho of that the Law has in
several Cases satisfied the most Seditious and so resolved their silly
Suggestion, The resolution I shall give is the Strength of Reason, and that
must at least be as Strong as the Law.

Let it be but once allowed, That their King by this Clause is obliged to pass
all Bills that shall be brought, why truly then he Swears with an implicit
Faith, to Repeal all the Laws if the People please; for the bare possibility in
such a sort of Argumentation may be supposed, and we as well imagine (for my
Lord Coke tells us we have had Vid. 3. Inst. his Parliamentum insanum.
Mad Parliaments) such a Senate may prefer Bills for the Repealing all the Old
Laws, as well as for the passing any single New; and I am sure it is no more
than what has actually been done in Car. 1. An. Parl. 41.
one, since that Learned Lawyer lived, even to the Subversion of Vid. their 19.
propositions.
all the Statutes of the Land; so that this positive Oath in their sense, may
Labor under an implicit contradiction, for while he swears in the latter
Clause, to confirm all the Bills they shall bring, It may be extended to cancel
all Custom and Common Law, he is in the former sworn to defend; Mr. Hunt's
General Desire of the People may be for the Repealing the 35th of Edward, as
well as that of Elizabeth; and leave no Law in the Land to punish Treason, as
well as Recusants, only that they may commit it with impunity; for one of those
Bills has Regn. Car. 1. Car. 2.
twice been brought into the House, and both may be to save their Bacon. And
should the King with their Elegerit be obliged (especially so mild an one) with
an anticipated Mercy to Pardon Villains (...) the cutting of his Throat; and
leave no Law to punish perhaps a Rumbold, or the Ruffians at the Rye; certainly
were his Right not in the least Divine this would contradict all Sense and
Reason: Suppose Richard the Second took this Oath as well as the rest of his
Successors since, and afterward the general desire of his Parliament, we all
know, was that he would depose himself. Senseless Sots! was, that King sworn
too even in his Coronation to confirm his own Deposition.

In short, must not this senseless Suggestion put upon the Royal Authority the
greatest absurdity against all Sense and Reason, must it not make him swear to
confirm those Laws that have not so much as BEING; and that before he knows
whether they will be, good or bad; Is it not Resolved and that upon Record in
the King's Exchequer, where the Words run with some Signification, That the
King keep the Laws and Customs, which the Lords and Commons HAVE chosen, etc,
But grant them their own Sense (that is) Silliness, That Oath, these Malignants
of our Monarchy object was made first for an 1. H. 4.
absolute Usurper that came to the Crown by the Suffrages of such a Seditious
Senate, not much Inferior in Villainy to the late long Parliament, that labored
so much in this business of the Legislative, or rather less Villains only in
deposing a King, whom the latter Murdered, and why a Lawful King should be
bound by that Oath, (did the Laws oblige him to take it,) which was first
offered to an Usurper, I cannot apprehend? That aspiring Prince swore too in
his Coronation, that he held his Crown by the Sole Consent of the People, shall
our present Sovereign do the same, whom the 1. Jacob.
Statutes acknowledge to hold from none but God?

But do not in that very Oath, the Words they so much labor in, confute them
also (in my poor Reason) beyond reply; is not Leges, the Word Laws expressly
used; that it is Laws that the King swears to Confirm, Corroborate, Maintain
and Protect: And were the Commons ever allowed, or presumed without a Rebellion
to Elect LAWS? There is not the least of a Bill mentioned in that Oath, and
sure they will offer to elect no more, and in Gods Name let them choose to send up
as many of those as they please. And sure then these Leges here must relate to
those that are really so, and have had the Royal Sanction already, so that they
must be reduced to this Dilemna, If they will apply their Vulgus elegerit to the
Lower House, it is certain they can make no Laws; if to that of the Lords, it is
as certain they cannot be called Vulgus. Lastly, Laborious Drudges of Sedition!
let but these Laws ye long to subvert while you would seem to defend decide betwixt
you and your King; Is it not established by 2. H. 5. 1. Jacob. 1. 1. Car. 1. c.
7.
Statute it self, that the King has absolute power to Dissent to any Bill
though agreed upon by both Houses.

But yet in spite of all this Reason and Law, they tell us that the King
cannot deny to pass any Bills for the public good, and which perhaps never can
a good King; for his Refusal of his Royal Sanction determines their Goodness,
and they cease to be necessary when the King thinks there is no need of them;
for if upon this their presumptive Goodness, and the Prince as it is his
undoubted Prerogative to do, denying his Assent, the People should presume they
could with their Legislative, because their King is refractory, as they would
call it, pass some Bills into Law from their Assurance of their being good;
that power would enable them to make bad ones too, and allow their two Houses
to Judge when to make but one Law, they are as good Judges to make one
thousand, or as many as they please, and no end of such a distracted
Usurpation; and that we saw when they began with that Ordinance for the
Militia, which was the first thing they presumed to make Law from their Kings
(as their Seditious absurd Phraseology would word it) Refractory, refusing ( i.
e.) that courageously maintaining his just Right; when they had thus once broke
the Damm, no wonder if the deluge of an absolute Rebellion overwhelmed; for
upon the same ground the Lords might have Excluded both King and Commons for
not concurring with them in what Bills and Acts they thought good, and the
Commons (as Vid. Hist. Independeny. page 115. 17. March 48. Scob. Coll. ptg. 7,
8.
indeed they did) both King and Lords, for being obstinate to such BILLS as
themselves had offered.

But yet notwithstanding the Kings Refractoriness (as our Republican Phrases
it) is now trumpt up again for the warranting the Peoples assuming (as they
would have it) a sort of necessitated Power, and that of calling themselves to
Parliament; for this the Postscr. page 8.
Lawyer in his Postscript Labors with his Innuendo's: For this, Plat. page 109
Plato tells us, the Barons did well to put on their Armor, that it is an
Omission that ruins the very Foundations of Government; and Hunt will not have
them so much as discontinued, for it renders such Conventions illusory.
Seditious Sycophants! Your selves know this power of their Discontinuance and
Dissolution, is the best security the Crown has for its support: Was it not
miserably rent and torn from the Head, but of our own Sovereign's Father, and
that only because he could not Dissolve them, but had in effect signed his
Destiny with their Bill of Sitting during the Pleasure of the two Houses? Base
Hypocrites! it is not a Parliaments Sitting you contend for, but the Sitting of
such a Parliament, that good honest Parliament, the late long and (...) one,
which their virulent Villains Libelled for Popish Pensionary, perhaps because
it would not take the Peoples pay, long enough might, that have been
discontinued or Prorogued, wen ever heard then of the Statutes of Edwards, and
the Triennial Acts, but their Pens were employed then to prove even that (...)
that discontents them now so much. It Is not above Eight years since their Vide
Considerations upon the Question London 1677. The dissolver. The Letter of my
Lord Shaftsbury.
Pamphlets would demonstrate a Parliament dissolved for being but for Fiveteen
Months Prorogued; and were we but assured of having such another, the Press had
never been pestered for the calling one, with their impertinnent prints, nor
any Petitions preferred for their Frequency. Would you persuade the World your
purses are so (...), so free too, that you long for a Subsidy to fill up the
Kings? Dissembling Souls! the Parliament they clamor for, can proceed from
nothing else, but a presumption of one to be their Patrons, to patronize all
their Irregularities and Refractoryness to the State, to countenance all those
gross abuses they put upon the Government; they told us this to our faces and
Menaced men to make them fear them. Is this the way to have them Convencd to
make them formidable? For Gods sake can you credit that honorable Assembly with
making them the pretended Abettors of all your Scandalous Actions: The only
felicity we have in such a Senate's sitting, is, That the King must summon them
to sit, they are Rebels by a 35. Ed. 3.
Law if they convene without; they must meet and Associate, and the Kings
happiness consists in his being able to Dissolve and Discontinue. And this
furious, and indefatigable Scribler might have omitted the mentioning of those
4. Ed. 3. c. 14.
Statutes they have beaten so bare, been baffled in so much, and may now blush
to bring upon the Stage; but he shall have his answer here to this too, That
nothing of Mr. Hunt's like his managed Mungrel, Vid. Courantier 4. Volum. Numb.
30.
Julian, may be called Unanswerable.

For the First; it is the 4th of this 4. Ed. 3. c. 3. 14.
Edward. And I confess in as few words: That a Parliament be holden once every
year, and more often if NEED BE. It is all the Letter of the Law and every Line
of it: But they might as well tell us too; that before the Conquest, and for
some time after Parliaments were held three times in one year. They had then
their Easter Parliaments, their Whitsunday Parliaments, their Christmas
Parliaments; but they know then that they were but so many Conventions of that
Nobility and Clergy their King should please to call; And which they did
Arbitrary at their Will more frequently or less, as they thought convenient,
and the Mirror C. 1. Lib. 3.
Books tell us, they many times were held but twice a year: now if these
Gentlemen will tell us so much of old Statute Laws, why should not Custom which
is Resolved by the very Books to be the Le common Ley est common Usage Plowdens
Com. 195.
Common, decide the case too for the King as well as the other, which is their
own, must for the People; and then we find Our Kings had the sole power of
Convening Parliaments by a long prescription, of whom, where, and as often as
they pleased. Are not all our Judicial Records, Acts of Parliament, Resolved to
be but so many Declarations of the Common Law, and that by all our Lawyers;
even concerning the Royal Government, which they make the very Fundamental Law
of the Land; and tell us Dr. and Stud. 2. c. 2. lib.
That by Common Law is understood such things as were Law before any Statute by
general and particular Customs and Maxims of the Realm: Now if Statute must be
but Declaratory of these Customs of the Kingdom how can it be concluded, but
that such Acts as directly contradict any of them must be absolutely void; for
by the same Reason, that they can with a Be it enacted void any part of it,
they may the whole: With the same Reason that they can invade any part of the
Prerogative of their Prince, (which the 2d part. Inst. 496. tells us so in
terminis. By the Common Law it is the Kings Prerogative, quod nullum Tempus
occurret L. Coke Lit. p. 344.
Book tells us is the principal part of the Common Law) they may abolish the
whole; make Killing no Murder, and except Persons from the Punishment of
Treason: Does not this Common Law it self void any Statutes, that are made
against the Prerogative of their King? Was it not in this very Stanfor. l. 2.
101.
Edward the 3ds. time, that it was so Resolved, even to the nulling three
several Acts, that put Pardons out of the Princes power? The boldest of these
Anti-monarchical Zealots cannot deny but that by the Common Customs of the
Realm, it always was Our Kings undoubted Prerogative, to call and dissolve
their Parliament when they pleased: Chronicle confirms it, Speed 645. Inst. 27.
2.
Law Resolves it, and may practice for ever maintain it. Now I cannot see why
these Statutes that contradict the Customs of the Realm in determining their
King to call Parliaments, which the Common Law has left at his Liberty, should
not be as much void as 2. Ed. 3. c. 2. of King's not pardoning Felons so Also
4. Ed. 3. c. 13. The (...) of that other.
others that upon the like Reasons have been Resolved so. And if the Common Law
can avoid any particular Act of Parliament against the Prerogative of the
Prince, as we see it did more than one (If Stanfords Authoty be Law) then the
Conclusion is unavoidable, That for the same Reason it can any or all.

And in my poor apprehension, that Act it self of the late Kings, which
reasonably repeals that of his 16. Cap. 2. c. 1. that repeals 16. Car. 1. c. 1.
Martyred Fathers, that Act with which these reproachful fellows upbraided in
their prints their deceased King, is so far from countenanceing their clamorous
Cause, that it corroborates and confirms our own Case, for it tells us the very
Reason of repealing those Statutes: To prevent intermission of Parliaments. And
what is that? but what we say the Common Law would of it self void Vid.
Preamble to 16. Car. 2. c. 1.
an Act (as they say) in derogation of his Majestys just Rights and Prerogative
inherent in the Imperial Crown of this Realm, for the Calling and Assembling of
Parliaments: Nay they tell us besides of Mischiefs and Inconveniences (the two
main matters the Law labors to avoid) might be the Result of such an Act, and
endanger the safety even of King and Subject. And what pray now was this
Statute of Charles the First, but what some even of these Vid. Seasonable
Question and an useful Answer, Printed about 77. by a Bencher of the Temple.
Factious Fellows themselves confess, only a Reinforcement of the two Edwards:
If it were no more, by the same Reason they are gone too, as being against the
King's Prerogative, and in Derogation of his Right. But Factious Fools! that
baffle themselves before they can be confuted by others, the Statute they
repealed, did reinforce indeed those of Edward; but it was with a Witness even
as they 16. Car. 2.
resolved it, with an invading the Rights of the King, and endangering the Ruin
of the People; but still it is true in that latter clause of their repealing Act
they prevail upon their King to grant them a Triennial one; how far obliging I
leave their Oracles of the Law to Judge: For if our Kings have had it by their
prerogative indefinitely to call Parliaments by Custom or Common Law; it is as
much against both for him to be obliged to convene them in three year, as two,
one, or without Intermission: And I cannot see, how the last enacting Clause is
consonant to the Repealing Preamble which is so mighty for the Preservation of
the Prerogative; and we well know under what Circumstances of State, Affairs
then stood: the People could not have more than so good, so gracious a King,
was even in Policy ready to grant; it was within a year or two of his being
placed upon the Throne of his Father; And a Turbulent Faction as furious again
to pull him out; A Seditious Venner and his Fifth Monarchy Men.
Sect had but just then alarmed him, that were setting up their Christ's
Kingdom before his own was hardly settled; Sots, that thought their Savior
(the great pattern of a Passive Obedience) could be pleased with the Sacrifice
of Fools and Rebels, and an active Resistance unto Blood, that has commanded us
even to suffer unto it, and even in the same Season and Session as damnable a
Vid. Brief Narrative of the Trial of Tongue, Stubs, etc. Lon. 1661.
Conspiracy detected as this Hellish one, so lately discovered, Arms seized,
the Tower to be taken, and an Insurrection contrived, the parting at such a
juncture with his Prerogative might be the product of his desire to please the
People; it is too much to take the forfeiture in his own wrong, when in this
very particular the same Law provides so much for the Prince's Right.

But they will tell us, the King by his passing such a Bill, has parted with his
Power and Prerogative; But then do not the Laws tell us, it cannot be past
away? Was it not resolved by all the Judges, but 1. Jacob. Term. Hill. Coke l.
7.
in his Grandfathers time, That himself could not grant away the Power of
Dispensing with the Forfeitures upon Penal Statutes, and why? because annexed to
his Royal Person, and the Right of his Sovereignty. And shall it not be so much
our Sovereign's Right, which common Custom; the Fundamental Law of all the Land
has invested him with, (the convening of Parliaments at his pleasure?) But for
my part, for my Life I cannot apprehend, (did there lie such a great Obligation
upon 16. Car. 2.
his Majesty, from this his own very voidable if not void Act) how it is
possible to bring him at the same time within the Letter of the Laws of Edward,
and by them lay a necessity upon him to make all their latter Act an entire
Impertinence: For if by those Laws he be obliged to Call a Parliament at least
every Year; What signifies the latter that allows him three Years for their
Calling? And if he has three years for their Calling, where can lie the
necessity for his Calling them in one, for a Cook himself says, it is a Maxim
in the Law of Parliament that later Laws Abrogate the former that are contrary
to them. 4. Inst C. 1. page 43.
Subsequent Stat. that gives such a larger extent of Time, tho it do not
actually repeal those Preceding that allow less, yet it must at least render
them Illusory, and Vain: And to tell us that the latter is but declaratory of
the former Act, when it contradicts the very Letter of that Law, is as absurd
as maintaining an Affirmative may be confirmed with an absolute Negative. By
all the Rules of Reason, I have met with yet (and Logic is allowed sure to
hold good even in Law, unless the Legislators set up for Brutes and
Irrationals) A Proposition of a larger extent must include that of a less;
which if it does is in this Case Exclusive: For should this Authority, suppose
(to bring the Argument home to their Doors, and then they cannot say it is far
fetched) of the House of Commons, command me to dance Attendance at their Bar de
Die in Diem for abhorring or so, and then with a subsequent Order only demand
it every third: For my part I cannot apprehend the Obligation there lies upon
me for the performing both, but that the former stands still a Cipher in their
Journal, and by the latter is suspended, I could as soon resolve in the
Crazyness of the Natural Body, when it is battered with an Ague, that a
Quotidian and a Tertian can at the same time assault it together. But Mr.
Hunt's Illustrations lying in another Science, Number, and the Mathematics; he
may demonstrate this too, Hunt postscript page 46. 48, 49.
with his Unite and Triad, and tell us One and Two make Three.

But to be serious, and that in a matter that so much concerns the Sovereign,
(tho there be no better way of baffling Buffoons; and Arguments of Fools must
be answered, but with Folly; tho some may think there may be somewhat of sound
Reason in such pleasant Similes, for Sense and Nonsense, are become Terms now
but merely Relative; and every Author an Ass, or an Animal of Reason, as his
Reader stands affected, we being become parties in that too, as well as in
Principles,) if we would truly know the Sense of a Law; it must be collected
from an Historical Account of that time wherein it was enacted, and I think my
Lord Cook Cardinal of Winchesters Case, who came from Flanders to purge himself
before Parliament, of Treason, as only the Roll of Henry the Sixth says, but
Consult the History, it appears he had some of the King's Jewe's gaged to him,
which the King stopped from going after him, etc. 4. Inst. 7. p. 42.
tell's us as much too, And then turn but to the story of the Times, and see
there the Reasons of such Provisions, and when those fail, then must sure the
force of such Proviso's too; for certainly the fourth of this Edward, was made
more for this King's Satisfaction, than the desires of the People, and that
from the sequel you will see, they were not then clamoring for frequency of
Parliaments, when they were to pay for it too, and have their Treasure
exhausted with their Blood in frequent Wars. He had drawn the Scots upon his
back, who in the War like their Old Parents the Picts, were always ready to
invade us at home, when ever we attempted any thing abroad. He had before him
France in the Front, to whom he was ready to give Battle: And he perhaps
presuming his Subjects might be loath to be convened for subsidies so often, as
such Exigencies must require, might prudently get them to oblige him for such
an Annual Convention, which they must the better bear with, when the result of
their own Act, and none of the stretch of his Prerogative: It Is true the 36. of
his Reign is more expressive of the Reasons, for which they should be called (
i.e.) for the redressing of Mischiefs and Grievances; but it is evident that
piece of popularity was more for the tickling their Hearts and then they might
be soon brought to turn out their Purses; and those he wanted then too, tho in
peace, having begun to beautify and enlarge his Castle of Windsor, his best
Delight, as well as the place of his Birth. And his soothed Subjects seconded
it with such singular kindness, that about that time such a three years subsidy
was granted as they resolved should be no president for the 36. Ed. 3. cap. 11.
time to come; and these Suggestions I submit to the light of any others
Reason, for the Politics of that Old State cannot be expected to be clear in
History, since even in Matters of Fact, in many things it is dark. And such sort
of Suggestions seem to sound and salve the Case much better than that forced
Solution upon the very Letter of the Law, their if need be, or if there be
Occasion: For I am satisfied the Design of those Statutes was to determine
their King, tho I doubt of their Force, and that those Conditional Expressions
must be Relative to their Antecedent Words, more or oftener; and so must be
meant only of their being called inclusively more frequently within the Term.

To leave now this learned Lunatic, this distempered Body of Law, and consider
him under another Denomination that of a Divine, and zealously discussing with
a Rage unbecoming the calmness he professes as well as the Character of such a
Profession, the Damnable Doctrine (as he would plainly prove it,) of the King's
Divine Right: for he makes it the most Page 60. 69.70. 86. 87, 88, 89.
Mischievous Opinion, the most Schismatical, the Destroyer of every Man's
Right, the Betrayer of the Government, Monstrous, Extravagant, Papal Opinion,
Treacherous, Impious, Sacrilegious, Destructive of Peace, Pregnant with Wars,
produced our own Civil one, and what is worse Plague and Famine, and a
Crucifying of Christ afresh.

A Black charge indeed for a poor Criminal, that at first sight seems so
Innocent. He should have made it a Trojan Horse too for once, for he has made
the Belly of it big enough to hold an Army of Men, or a Legion of Devils. If
this be the Judges manner of Trying his King's Right, he would have made a
worse Chief Justice for deciding the Subjects. I have heard of some such
Sycophants that have proved Wolves in Sheeps clothing; but here the Cautionary
Text is turned insideout, too; and somewhat of the Lamb dressed all in the grisly
Garment of the Wolf: And it is like they had their Dogs ready to worry it too,
before they would discover the cheat. I am sure if they will not allow this
Doctrine to be Religious it is so far from being Romish, that those raging
Zealots are at present in a Conspiracy with the rankest Papist for the
extirpation of that opinion; as well as the Church, and that is pretty well
proved from their unanimous pens in the beginning of this piece, and sure they
must think those Bigots are as much concerned for the Popes Supremacy as Mr.
Hunt for the Peoples; for His Holiness has the help of Saint Peter to prove his
Divine Right from his Person, tho he cannot from His His (...), Pet. 2. 13.
Text. When whatever they would gather from that Apostle, the Lawyers Popelings
have nothing left to show for theirs, unless the very Charter and grant of
their King: yet tho this Doctrine be as far from Rome, as they think the
Romanist from Heaven, tho their Writers with Hunts own Brutish Rage have run it
down, tho it be so directly destructive of the Papal power, still has this
preposterous piece of paradox, made it Popish; and treated it almost in the
same Language, the Fox Vol. 3. p. 515.
Piousprelate did their Idol Church, and Vid. Dissenters sayings.
all the dangerous Dissenters do our own; Wolves, Thieves Enemies of Christ,
Brood of Antichrist, Babylonish Beast, Devilish Drab, sink of Sodom, Seat of
Satan.

It is a pretty way of Confutation indeed in the very beginning of an Argument
to beg the Question. He takes it for granted from the Text of Saint Peter, that
Kings are but an Ordinance of man, and then stoutly concludes that it is
impossible, that any that is of Man's appointment can ever be of God's
Ordination; to be presumptively bassled recommand me to such a disputant: And
with that supposititious Triumph does (as some think) a Jesuit's Book, de Jure
Magistratuum enter the List, full of Victory even before the Battle; and this
perverted Text in one of his Editions is turned into the Laurel and Lemma, to
Crown the Forehead of that Impudent piece. This is made the Goliath of those
Philistines who not with their bulk alone, but with the very Letter of the
Bible and the Book of Life, can defy the Living God, for such a Construction
upon Saint Peter by common sense can never be put; for place this power of
Ordaining Kings once in the Power of SVBJECTS, and all the World can never
hinder them from being too the SVPREAM (...). Was not this very Text, actually
turned up for the Supreme Authority of the Parliament of England? And was that
too, meant by St. Peter, when in the very next Line, he calls the King Supreme?
Seditious Dolts! do not make the Bible contradict it self, tho your Books do,
does not this very Text take almost an expressive care to prevent even with
providence such a silly construction, and give a Signal Signification where
this Supremacy resides, viz. in the King. But to give these well read Rebels
rope enough, and let them stretch their Treasonable Positions as they ought
their Necks, I Will plead for them, and in that which can be their only Reply,
viz. That this Supremacy must be understood, only to be in these Kings after
they are so chosen by the People: But no, their own Text will not allow that
neither; for in the very next Verse it tells us also of such persons as are
Commissioned, sent under him, (as ours has it) Governors, and some other
Versions, Captains, Judges, and sure had theirs been the Apostles sense too, He
would have more expressly let us known, That Kings were first Commissionated and
sent by the People, before that they could send out the Peoples Governors, and
if we can Credit some of these Gentlemen's own Writings, Their KINGS and this
Apostles are not all of a piece, and so their Principles and the Text wont hang
well together, for their Kings, which they will have to be of Man's Pryn's
Parliament Right to elect Officers. (...) p. 239.
Ordination, cannot send Governors under them, but as * Pryn positively tells
us, that People that Elect their King, must choose also the Judges and Officers,
if the Kings have had such a choice it is but by the Peoples permission, that
such Officers, are the Peoples. And that his Brother Bodin (you must know a
great politician) says; That the sending them is not the Right of the
Sovereign, but in the Subject: So that those Kings, whose Divine Right they
deny, must needs be of another kind, than those mentioned in Saint Peter, for
he makes his Kings so Supreme, that they send Governors themselves, and that
for the punishment of such Evil doers.

But to come homer to Mr. Hunt, that I know values himself upon his much Law
and his mighty Learning, his Remarks upon his (...) will tell us he understood
as much Greek as that came to, when he was at School. Yet betrays his little
understanding of the Greek Fathers, his very Schrevelius would have shown that
(...) might be taken for Creature as well as Creation, but his Scapula; that
more especially it is to be taken so in the Galat. 6. verse. 15.
Epistles.

And this has been the Resolution of one of the first Reformers of our
Religion, (And I hope sure they will favor him) That the general signification
of this word in Scriptural Expression is taken for all Pro humano genere. Beza
upon that very place.
Mankind, and I have another, the principal Reformer by me; the Bible in
Columns with one Greek, two Latin Versions and one Dutch, which I take to be
the Labors of the Learned Luther, where one of the Latin Translations of this
very Text of Peter is expressly Omni Creaturae, And that other Humanae
Ordinationi, is marked with a reference to the Marginal Annotation which is
Omnibus filiis Hominis. And yet all this while we shall not make Nonsense of the
Text as well as they put upon it contradiction and the greater absurdity; for
such Scriptural Figuratives are frequent, where Universal expressions are only
applicable to some particular things they would express; so that when he tells
us, Be Subject to all mankind or to all the Sons of Men, is easily understood
all those of them to whom we owe Subjection, and, as if the good Apostle, whom
these miscreants would so much abuse, did design to prevent such an imputation,
and even dissipate the Difficulty and doubt together; even he explicates that
General Expression of that one Text, by telling us particularly to whom our
Submission is to be paid both in that and the Verse 14.
other viz. Kings as Supreme and their Governors as sent.

And Lastly can any Soul that has but Common Sense, fancy from the complicated
consideration of that part of the Apostle's that thus pressingly inculcates
Obedience to Governors, that it did design the least room for such a Latitude,
that not only would leave them Indifferent to obey, but such an one as they
have made of it since; even an encouragement to Rebel, sure that submissive
Preacher of the Cross, so much his Saviors Disciple that he suffered on one
too, and that without resistance to a persecuting power; that great Assertor of
his Sovereign's Supremacy, that in the very next Lines, next to fearing his
God, commands Honoring V. 17.
his King, (as if he would express somewhat of that Divinity they deny, with
the closeness of the Connection) sure that most Primitive Pattern of Obedience,
did not pen his Epistles to teach a Julian the Doctrine of Resistance, or an
Hunt his Associate to debase the Divine Right, the Throne of his King to the
very dunghill of the People.

And were this Doctrine not to be countenanced by the Word of GOD, (we have
only Mr. Hunt's Word for it, that it is so dangerous) the only danger such
Seditious Souls can see in it, is, That it would oblige them to be truly Loyal,
and dread Rebellion, like the Sin of Witchcraft. And is it dangerous now to be
kept from being damned or running to the Devil? Where is this mighty Posts. p.
60.
Mischief that will ensue upon this Opinion? But a Veneration for our Governors
next to God, by whom they Rule, will not his having his Right from above, the
sooner preserve him from sustaining any wrong below? are things the sooner to
be violated, only because they are the more sacred? and will the Light of this
illuminated Lawyer, resolve us Sacrilege to be a lesser Sin than single Felony?
Had those Sects of Seditious Rebels that ruined the best of Kings, and that
only by debasing this his Right, and setting up their own for Divine? Had they,
or could they have been so sacrilegiously wicked under a Presumption, That his
Person was sacred, or even a belief of their Bibles, that their Lord's
Anointed, was not to be Touched? yes, they could, (and if we believe this
Impudent Hunt p. 85.
Imposture) it was that only, which made them so, And if such Opinions had
never been broacht, the War had never ensued. Mighty Madman! whom discontent
distracts, I can Fathom his Foolish Innuendo's to be as false, Divines did, and
as I think was then their Duty, preach up this Doctrine; but did not the two
Houses threaten Destruction long before a Manwaring, or a Sibthorp was so much
as censured? Had not Leighton Libelled both King and Bishops long before? And
did the telling the People, they were Jure Divino, exasperate them the more
against the Prelates, and the pious Prince that governed, whom these Devils
must needs deal withal the worse, only from their being told their Governors
were sent them from their God?

Mr. Hunt certainly himself cannot imagine it, he has too great a Veneration for
the Religious Dust, the pious Memory of those Rebels and Regicid's, to think
they were arrived to that Acme of Transcendent Atheism, to Actually done too in
Westminster Hall by the instigation of Hugh Peter's. Vid. Dugdales view p. 370.
spit in the very Face of the Almighty's Image, only because it represented a
thing so Sacred: No, it was of that they could never be satisfied, they were
Religiously taught the Jus Divinum of the People, (that is)to Rebel most
Religiously.

Tell me Mighty Murmerer! why must this Bugbear of Arbitrary, this Monster of
Absoluteness, and Posts. p. 88.
Bloody War, be the Consequences of this Doctrine of Peace? Is your King bound
to turn Cruel, only because he Rules by a Right from the very God of Mercy, and
a King too, de facto, not long since almost merciful to a Crime: If you talk
only in Theory of what another may be, then perhaps your Fears are as Panick as
the Objection is nothing to the purpose: For Usurpers commonly of the People's
Choice, (as appears even in our H. 4. (...). 3.
own History) have always been the greatest Tyrants too, who were so far from
having the Jus Divinum, that they had no Right at all: And tho Vid. Paper at
his Execution.
Sidney suggests this Doctrine, would attribute to any sort of Usurper the same
Right, I shall consider him in his proper place, and this may suffice for Mr.
Hunt, whose larger Comment upon this Text, I shall enlarge upon too, when I
come to that Gentleman's Papers, with whom they so much agree, and it is pity
but his Fate should do so too: It may suffice I have here attempted his
Bulwark, and upon which they would build their Babel, tho in the Burlesque of
the best of Books, (as if neither the Bible had its Jus Divinum) and will close
with him since he is so pleased with St. Peter, with a Verse 15.
Neighboring Text, not so much turned, and misapplyed. Mr. Hunt has done his
worst, and I hope we with well doing, may put to silence the Ignorance of such
Foolish Men.

The third Doctrinal Case of this Divine Lawyer, or what is drawn from the
other two, is the Parliament's Power upon the Succession; and that he has
proved he presumes beyond Answer and Reply, when the two Preliminary points,
The Parliaments Legislative, and The Peoples Divinity by his mighty
Performances are made unquestionable: But when he has begged the other two he
may expect to have this third for asking; and the first Presumption, that must
so proposterously warrant even that most Unwarrantable Proceeding, is the
Gorgon of the Party, that for this forty year has frightened the Nation, The
fear of Popery: And like that Monstrous Head of Medusa been represented ghastly,
full of Venom and Viper (only not to charm us into Stones and Stupidity) but
the setting all in Combustion and a Flame. Therefore he tells us if this can be
but kept out, (which the Lord knows has been I don't know how long coming in.)
We ought Page 50.
to admit of any Law for the purpose.

And have we not Laws sufficient in force, and that for the keeping out allthe
powers of the Pope, tho His Pilgrims landed here with a Legion? Have we not
Oaths, Tests, two several Acts of Parliaments against Priest, proselytes and
Recusants? Have we not the best Bulwark the Bishops and the greatest assurance,
the word of a King? But in short; the danger was then a Successor, and nothing
could serve less than a new Law: And what was that? why, for Excluding an Heir
to a Crown for Fifteen Hundred years Hereditary.

That Parliaments have presumed to alter the descent of the Crown, is as true
as that the same Convention of States have Rebel'd against the Crown it self:
And scarce one Instant of the Presidents he has given us, but serve to prove my
purpose as well as his own, that they either actually Rebel'd when they meddled
with the Succession, or else that it was for settling it on the Right Heirs
after such a Rebellion.

It was Postscript p. 52. all the following Casesmost absurdly applied, and all
make against his own Cause.
Richard the Second's; that was a Parliament indeed, that did more than meddle
with the Succession when they actually deposed their Sovereign.

That of 7. H. 4. c. 2. Hen. 4th entails declared void viz. upon the Claim of
Richard Duke of York.
Henry the Fourth, so far from a Parliament that they had no King. And that was
told them to their faces by the Loyal Prelate of Vid. B. Carlisles Speech, H.
4. in Baker and Trussel, H. 4ths Deposers, Traitors within 25 Coke Treason.
Carlisle.

Henry the Sixth, the Successor of one that had no Right, and to whose Heir
then they could never do any wrong.

Edward the Vid. 1. Ed. 4. Rot. par. 9. 10, 11, 12.
Fourth was for securing the Descent in the Right Line, and declaring all that
of the Lancasters Rebels; and that in spite of all those Entails this Lawyer
lies his mighty stress upon, and which even in his Fathers claim, (tho he never
lived to enjoy the benefit of his Right,) The Vid. Rot. par. 39. H. 6. n. 11.
Parliament of the Usurper himself did with blushes and shame acknowledge, That
his Title could not be defeated; that those Entails were only made for want of
a better Title, and very fairly made their Usurper a enant for Life, and that
to an Excluded Duke of York, and further did they force their Loyalty when his
Son, their Lawful Sovereign came to the Crown, they tell him in the first of
his Reign as appears in the 1. Ed. 4. Rot. ut supra.
Roll: That this Henry the Fourth upon whom Mr. Hunt triumphs that an Entail
was made, was an Usurper Traitor and Murderer of his Sovereign.

And for his next Instance of Richard Rich. the 3d and deposers of Ed. 5.
Traitors by Law within Stat. 25. Ed 3d Inst. c. 1. Treason.
the Third, would any one besides a Butcher and as Barbarous a Beast as the
Precedent he brings; tell us of an Entail they made upon his Heirs, which was
only a Settlement of Blood so much and Treason upon them and their posterity
Bless me! that men of Sense should be so inconsiderately besotted; so Foolishly
wicked: sure Mr. Hunt knows that that Bloody Senate could never have boggled to
settle a Crown upon the posterity of a Tyrant that they themselves had advanced
to the Throne in the Blood of his Nephews.

They might well settle the Crown on Henry the Seventh, that came to it by
three several pleas, Blood, Arms, and the Law, and is the Settling it upon a
Lawful Sovereign a President for Excluding another against All Law, and those
Entailments were but so many Recognitions, Officious, affirmatory Kindnesses to
the Crown whereas their Exclusion must have been an Invading it.

His Acts of Henry the Eighth, were such as all the World blushed at, and any
English man may be ashamed to own, Inconsistent, contradictory, Fruitless, and
illusory, that made Protestants desert us, that designed us for their Leaders
in a League; the shame of Europe and the Opprobrium of our Nation. Did not his
25th on default of Male? Entail the Crown on the Lady Elizabeth, and made Mary
Spurious? Did not his 28th make the same Lady, the Protestant Princess
Illegitimate, on whom it was Entailed before, and with his 35th. reinstated
them both again, and that both in Birth and Tail?

And lastly, that of Queen Mary's Entail, was by a biggoted House of Commons,
that brought in that very Popery they now so much, and so vainly fear; and were
like to have Entailed their Religion and Laws to the Vassalage of Rome, as well
as the Crown to the Heirs of Spain. And is this thy Loyalty, (Seditious
Sycophant!) this thy Religion? to bring us presidents for Rebellion from Acts
of Parliament, and the Statutes of Apostates, for the Establishing Popery.

The 13. Eliz.
13. of Elizabeth is such an one too, as none but a Hunt's Postscript page 51.
Defier of Sense could have designed for Application. It is apparent that it
was a Design to Secure the Crown to Her the Right Heir; and that tho by an
Indirect means. An Act which she doubted her self whether with all her
Parliament she could pass, but was assured all her Subjects would like it when
it was; done upon a double Design to Secure her Title against the Pope and the
Pretensions of the Queen of Scots, Cambd. vit. Eliz.
Cambden the best Account of her Life, makes it a Trick of Leicester's, Besides
had he Consulted other Books before he writ his own, by what appears by Keeble
Stat. that very Act is expired, ofno Force; and so he has made himself a Knave
in Fact, as well as Fool in Application.
but let them Lie for it for once, and raze the Sacred Truth of History, and
Record, (which the Law makes Felony;) even in their own sense, it was enacted
for securing a Lineal Descent to those that they thought the Right Heir. But
theirs would have been a Difinheriting of one they knew to be so. It is
Prodigiously strange to me that those that contend so much for this
Parliamentary Power over the Succession of the Crown, that this Judge Advocate
for the Parliament, Postscript p. 71, 72.
Hunt himself, that tells us plainly it is not established by any Divine Right,
but is governed according to the presumed Will of the People, that these
Sycophants do not consider they do the greatest Disservice to that Honorable
Assembly, put the greatest abuse upon that Ancient and truly venerable
Constitution, they give the Lie to several Acts of Parliament made in the best
of times, and make those Legislators the morst of Villains, or the greatest
Fools; or in his own phraseology Wicked, Impious, Sacrilegious, for have not
they in several Reigns by Special Act recognized even a Divine Right as well as
an Hereditary? In the first of 1. Ed. 4. (...). p. n. 9, 10, etc.
Edward did they not declare that their Sovereigns Title to the Crown was by
Gods Law, and the Law of Nature? Did they not even to a Tyrant, a Murderer, one
fit only to be the Peoples Creature, whom no Nature or God did design for the
Throne? Did they not resolve his Right to be both by God and Nature? Exact
Abridg. fol. 713. Rot. R. 3.
Tell me was it thought so Divine so natural so Sacred, THEN, even in the worst
of Men, and must it be impious, Sacriligious in the best of Princes? Did not
their best of 1. Elz. c. 3.
Queens, receive her Crown with a Recognition of it is Descent to be by the Laws
of God? And lastly look upon that of King 1. Jac. c. 1.
James, where with unspeakable Joy they acknowledge he Reigned by the Laws of
God. And as Posts. p. 87.
new as he calls the Doctrine, for five hundred year agon both by Divines and
Lawyers it was allowed of and maintained. Gervasius Doroberbensis Coll. 133. 30.
Gervase the Monk tells us, it is manifest the Kings of England, are obliged to
none but GOD, and Bracton l. 4. c. 24. Sect. 5.
Bracton that lived and wrote in the same Reign of Henry tells us, their King
was then only under God; and will neither Law nor Gospel, History Ancient and
Modern, Rolls, Acts and Acknowledgements of Parliaments themselves satisfy
them, that they have nothing to do with the Dr. Burnet tells us H. 8. declared
upon a dispute about Ecclesiastical (...) very warmly, that by the Ordinance of
God, he was King, Hist. Reform. l. 1. pt. 1. fol. 17. Either the Dr. lies, or
Harry the 8th, or this Doctrine is not so new, but 200. year old.
SUCCESSION?

Never could any Person that had not Proclaimed open War with Reason and broke
all Truce with Sense suggest as he does that the difference between the Descent
of the Crown and that of a Private Estate, are Reasons for altering the
Succession, which is one of the best Arguments for it is being Unalterable. Does
not the Law provide that but one Daughter shall succeed to the Crown, and that
for the Preservation of the Monarchy; which must be but of one and no
Copartners of a Kingdom? And so also the Son of a Second Venture to prevent the
want of Succession shall be admitted to the Throne; when he shall be Excluded
an Estate: His fancy of the Royal Families being Extinct, and that then the
Majesty of the People commences, was long since the pretty conceit of Pryn's
Par'. right, etc.
Will. Pryn too. In which they tell us as I Have told them before, just as much
as an old Aphorism, When the Sky falls, and spoil another good Proverb, that No
man dies without an Heir: But suppose what can be, may be: Would not all this
mighty Constitution of Parliament be gone too, when there was no Successor of a
King to Summon it. His Postscr. page (...).
Majesty of the People might set up another Policy of Government they think if
it pleased: But would not their Majesty of the People, find it more agreeable
to Divine Institution to agree upon the same Government in another person in an
Extremity? for would it not be more agreeable even to their own Interest, to
prefer that under which they had enjoyed so long, such an Experienced
Happiness, since the Almighty does not Reveal himself as he did of old to Moses
and the Prophets, and bid them arise and Anoint him a King over his Israel?

But as Mr. Hunt's private Estates (tho I know not with what equity a mere
Fiction in Law, robs a man of so much Realty) are frequently recovered with
fine at Common Law against the Right Heirs, he will not pretend therefore sure a
Parliament shall, a Kingdom and a Crown against a Royal Successor. His own
Reason for it is the best Refutation, for I say too, the Crown is Postscr. l.
p. 72.
Governed by other Rules than a private Estate, and the Romans who were
Governed by those Civil Sanctions, that have since the whole World, tho by
those they had a Dominion over their Issues, Heirs, and Estates, yet those will
not grant even to Kings, the power of Disenheriting their own Successors: Nay
such Favorers were they then of the Right Heirs, that they would not permit
their Common Citizens, to be disinherited at the Arbitrary Will of the Parent,
but obliged them to observe Cowel Instit. l. 2. Tit. 3. De Exhaeredatione.
such certain express Rules in their Exhaeredation. And heretofore, some of the
Writers of our own Law could affirm, that the Inheritance that descended from
their Ancestors was scarce ever suffered to be disposed by Will, but to the
next Heir, for my part I look upon the word Heir not to have the same Relation
in case of the Royal end, that it has in that of a Subject, who always claims
his Estate from his Ancestor, Common whereas the other Heir is called more
properly the Kings SUCCESSOR, but the Crown's HEIR. And it will be hard then to
make him pass for the Parliaments.

I will not tell Mr. Hunt here, of the Blood and Miseries, the common Calamities,
the dismal Attendants of a Royal Heir being barred of his Right: How many
Millions of Lives? how much Blood it has cost us already? (And if any thing, of
(...) would have frightened us,) for Excluding a Duke of York too; but it seems
Blood did not terrify Mr. Hunts Members of Parliament, to whom their Coke 4.
Inst. p. 19. 3.
Oracle gives all the properties of an Elephant, and then they must be only
provoked at Red, it is the Justice of it; and every Moral Action that must
direct Communities as well as Common Persons, and a Mighty Parliament as well
as a single Peasant If Expediency shall come to warrant Injustice in Aggregate
Bodies; every Individual may as well commence Villain for Convenience. Consult
these Daemagogue; Darling, Coke himself on the Case. 4. Inst. c. 1. page 3. are
his own words. The more high and absolute the Jurisdiction of this Court is;
the more just and Honorable it ought to be in it is proceeding, and give
Example of Justice to the Inferior Court.
Away with that Paradox of Folly and Faction; that a Parliament can do no
wrong, since we have seen such a numerous Senate transported like one Man with
rage and Folly even to the Ruin of Three Kingdoms. And with what Justice an
Exclusion which would here have been the greatest Punishment next to Capital
that a Crowns Heir could suffer, could well be past, and that for punishing an
Offense Antecedent to the Law, I leave, such Legislators to Judge. It looks so
much like their Bills of Mortimers 2. Harry the 6. Cromwells 32. Hen. 8.
Attainder, that I am loath to tell them such an one even in this Strafford 5.
Car. 1. reverst 14. Car. 2. c. 29.
Kings time was reversed with Ignominy and Reproach, and for a Repealing of the
Infamy, the very Records of it razed from the File, and should the Crowns Heir
too have suffered by a subsequent Law he could never Transgress? Would they
have given their God the Lie, and made Transgression where there was no Law?
Did the Seminary Priest suffer here, for Officiating, before that Statute was
in being? Should Kerby and Algore's Case, was of this nature but very hard upon
the 25. of Ed. in (...). 2. time.
the Profession of the Catholic Faith, and that but supposed, have had the
force of a Salique Law, even against him that cannot well be said to sin
against it? Set the Mark upon the door where there is Death and the Plague; and
then let those that will enter dye.

CHAP. IV. Remarks upon Julian.
THat this Author was a better Statesman than a Christian that he consulted
more the Security of his Person, than the Purity of his Religion; that he had
much rather burn his Bible that suffer but a Vid. Foxe's Martyrology. page 1534.
Tomkin's Finger into the Flame, are such undeniable Truths, that you must
suspend your own reason and give your own Writings the Lie but to suspect them;
but how far this Doctrine of self preservation is always consistent with the
Gospel; and whether a man may never deny himself to Confess his Christ,
requires. I believe, not an absolute determination of School Divines, but may
be Collected from the Practical Inferences that may be drawn from many a Text
in the New Testament. How far our Savior's Suffering on the Cross, should
influence those that profess themselves his Disciples to Suffer: How much the
precepts of their great Master was Imitated, by those Christians that were
truly Primitive, is a Disquisition proper for a Divine. And has been as
industriously enquired unto by several hands engaged in that Holy Function, the
tide is turned at last with the Time, and Jovian remains as (...), as his
Julian was thought to be (...) Answer, that Learned and Loyal Author has fixed
the Pillars to the Controversy, and if this adventurer, with the Second part
of his An Esquire in Divinity, or the Divine Squire, one Ramsey (that writ himself
so, and B, D. beside I remember) Printed the first, a pretty piece of popular
Nonsense.
Julians-ship will force beyond it, he may discover to us a new faith, a new
Bible, but can never confute him from either of the old, most of my Remarks
shall be upon his Political. Observations, for what he would Reform, in the
Doctrine of the Church is only as it relates to Matters and Affairs in the
State.

The Loyal Addressers feel the first Effort of his fury, and the (...) of
Mahomet's Hobgoblins are placed even within their Brows, for expressing (he
thinks) their contradictory Protestations; but such Bugbears will hardly
frighten them from following the Precepts of their Savior, that still
inculcate on sufferance and Subjection, but only may deter such as prefer the
Crescent of that Imposture, to the Cross in Baptism, that can baffie their
Bibles, where it restrains their Liberty, or admit an Alcoran of the Turks to
tolerate Licentiousness, it might well be a Grievance to such disaffected
Creatures to see the good Effects of his Majesty's Declaration, and that all
his good Subjects, had gotten an opportunity of showing that Affection and
hearty Loyalty which was overawed by the Tumultuousness of a Faction from
discovering it self, they knew their own Party's power had been prevalent a
long time in putting up Petitions, and in those Numbers augmented too with
Artifice, as well as Sedition, had placed a Confidence which they saw failed
them, and themselves foiled with a Weapon not much unlike their own in its
make, tho the Metal and Matter of Another and better temper: Here in truth lay
the contrariety, the Contradiction that confounded them, more than in the
Nature, and tendency of such Addresses, which if this prejudiced Divine had
examined he would have found no more Zeal in them, than what was consistent
with their Loyalty and Religion, Their Allegiance which they had sworn (and of
which some of our Protestants make as little account as if a Jesuits
Equivocation would absolve them from a positive Oath) that obliged them to
declare for the Kings Heirs and Successors, and the Protestant Religion might
still be maintained under any persuasion of their Prince, unless the Nation was
obliged to believe their Politic presumptions in a piece Their Association.
of Treason, for Gospel, and as infallible as a Creed; and that because their
Associated Excluders in a Scheam of Rebellion, tell us, Queen Mary proved the
Wisest Laws insignificant to keep out Popery; therefore it must be concluded it
connot now be kept out. This Gentleman knows, (that I believe chopped up so much
Logic with his Commons at the University, if Educated there, where commonly
better principles use to be Instilled,) that it is a most false Inference from
a Particular to conclude absolutely and Universal, and when besides Henry the
8th's Reforming, Edwards the 6th short Reign, had hardly settled the
Reformation, there being more Romanists then in the Kingdom, than such as had
truly Reformed, it was never truly begun or thoroughly perfected till Queen
Elizabeth's Reign; which might be easily observed from the Parliaments so soon
declaring for Popery in Queen Mary's first entrance upon the Throne: yet
however he might observe, tho the Suffolk Men set her up as undoubted Heir to
the Crown, which as the Bishop of Godwin in vita Mariae.
Hereford in the History of her Reign says, was then so prevalent with our
Englishmen, that no pretense of Religion was a sufficient Suggestion for
opposing such a Right, Yet they soon deserted her when they saw her bent for
introducing a new one, and such a defection might have endangered her
establishment, had not the generality of the Nation been then of her
persuasion. But what Maxims of State should now move another Prince of that
Religion to endeavor it is establishment, when All the Kingdom's so bent
against it, when the Protestant has been rooted here for above this hundred
year, and we have a King, whom God preserve, that has promised, and may live
yet many to defend it. They must imaginesuch a Successor seduced against his
Interest, his Councils besotted to set him upon such Measures now as must
certainly disturb the Quiet of his Government, tho the Faction cannot Overturn
it; so that this great point will come to this; Whether having more
contingencies than one of having such a Religion introduced, as first the great
Casualty there was of his not coming to the Crown, which might have been
prevented by a Natural death, without their Expedients at the Rye, their
unhuman, and unnatural Barbarities: and then imagining such an Actual
Succession, that Improbability of making such a sudden Alteration, in Religion,
only for his own Disquiet, and without any Probability of Establishment in his
Reign which according to the Course of Nature must betoo short, (tho I shall
still pray for any of the Lines longest Life,) and the little continuance it
can expect should it be introduced when all that are to succeed him are professed
Protestants. These being such Casualties as upon good Conjecture and
Probability may interpose, the question is; Whether in prudence or Policy we
ought to have Involved our State in certain danger, only to prevent a
contingent one. I could never get any one yet to prove that to be matter of
Expediency for the good of the Public: That such an Exclusion would have been
certainly dangerous our Annals too sadly Testify, and any one need but to turn
back to my Remarks upon our History and he will find it Chronicled in Blood. And
that any danger of our Religion is but merely Contingent must be allowed by all
that think it not Predestined to be changed: And what now have these good
Subjects done to be thus reviled by the bad? Why! they have declared in their
Addresses to Assert that Right, which in their Oaths they have Sworn to defend.
And a Pious Divine that has dispensed with them, Libels them for not being
Perjured for company.

His p. 7.
distinction of the Religion being Established by Law is far from creating any
difference, for the question is here, what is the Doctine of the Gospel, and it
cannot be imagined any sort of Christians upon the Privilege of any Political
Establishment, are enabled to dispense with the precepts oftheir Religion; and
confute their Bibles with the Statute Book. Saint Paul's sufferings are so far
from discountenancing such a Doctrine, that they are alone the best, the
clearest Confirmation of it: he was beaten, suffered Imprisonment, and all for
the sake of his Savior: he told them after his durance to whom they had done
it, and the greatest Sticklers for Passive Obedience, will allow Mr. I. to
plead his Magna Charta; if he will not with the Barons beat it into the Head of
his Sovereign with Club Law, or knock out the Brains of an Imprisoned So they
murdered at Pomfret Rich 2d.
King for it with a Vid. Baker p. 155. Stow says, it was with a kind of death
never heard of here p. 325. tho Walsingham would have it with Pining.
Battle-axe, his Breath can plead his defense without Resisting unto Blood,
Paul could have pleaded his privilege of being a Roman and uncondemned, sure as
available before his Sufferings, had he not thought it is duty to suffer, and
he may read in the same Book of those that went away Rejoicing that they were
counted Worthy of it for his Name. A man may be born to a great deal of Right
when it is none of his Birthright to Rebel; and that against the very Monarchy
it self.

His case of the p. 9.
Pursivant, is as much to the Purpose as if he had pitched upon the First in
the Report, there was an Arrest of a Body by such an Officer, to bring him to
appear before them, that constituted them, an Erected 1. Eliz. p. Letters,
Pattents.
High Commission Court. And as often it happens, in Execution of the Law many
times there is Opposition made, sometimes Maiming is the Result, many times
Murder; here it happened that the One Johnson Simpson's Case at the Assizes of
North. ampton.
Officer's Assistant was killed, and the Law that makes it but Manslaughter in
a Common Fray, in an Execution of an Office makes it Murder, and that must
depend upon the Authority of that Court from whence such Officer receives his
Writ, Warrant or Commission; it is Coke R. 12. pt. p. 49. Vid. also the same
Case, 4. Inst. Cap. 74. p. 333. But as quick as Mr. Johnson jumbles up the the
business, the (...) deferred their Judgment till the next Assize, and then
perhaps the emulation there is, and always was between the two Courts; made
their Lordships at last a little Partial. Brownlows 2d pt. p. 15. (...) Case
42. Eliz.
adjudg'd in the Case that they might have cited to Appearance, and upon
Contumacy to have proceeded to Excommunication, and then have arrested upon
their Writ of Capias; but that they could not Arrest him outright upon a
Surmise.

That a Man may resist an Authority, that is not Lawful any man will allow, for
it is the same as if he resisted none at all, however if Murder be the
Consequence of such a Resistance; all his Expositors upon the sixth Commandment
will hardly help him to distinguish it into Manslaughter. And tho my Lord Vid.
Pleas of the Crown Hales.
Hales, whose Memory will still be pious for his equal destributions of Justice
was a great Latitudinarian in allowing too much scope for premeditated Malice;
yet the Decalogue will make that Murder, for which the Law will allow him the
Benefit of his Clergy, and did in Harry the Eight's time without distinction to
all sort of shedding of Blood, and then the Book that he talks of was dedicated
to Cromwell, would have been Authorized by the Law, which in some sort it self
then, made all Killing no Murder: neither in an equitable sense was this
Homicide excused from being a Murderer, because he resisted unto blood before
the jurisdiction of the Besides it is observable the Judges at that time had a
particular pique to the power of that Court which they thought invaded theirs,
and might be very ready to give Judgment against them in Criminal Matters; as
well as Plague y'm with their Prohibitions in Civil and as they were then great
Foes; so my Lord Coke in his discourse upon the Court is but little their
Friend.
Court was Resolved, and to him in a Moral sense 'twas as much Guilt as if that
Authority had been Absolutely Legal, and tho he tells us he does not descend to
salse Arrests, yet I thank him for his Condescension, it is to such a matter as
is no way distinguishable from it, for an Arrest without Authority is
equivalent to a false, and is as much Tortius and Force as what is done upon a
Forged Warrant. The Cases reported by those two Lawyers he cites, one of them
but a Protonothary, that other our great Oracle, in my Conscience were never
designed for proofs against Passive Obedience. By their Resistance here of the
Law was never understood that which was forbidden in the Gospel, besides it was
but the Resolution of the Judges against the So much were the people postest
against the Power of that Court, in King Charles the First's time, that 2000.
Brownists broke into St. Paul's where it was sitting, beat down all the Benches,
and Bawling No Bishops, No Commission. Vid. Dugd. view.
Power of that Court, which to be sure they did not care to favor, and those
two Authorities he has cited, none of the best, in Matters of Allegiance and
Loyalty, that part of Coke is looked upon not very favorable to the
Government, and Brownlow first Printed when there was none.

But his Triumphant Distinction between his Religion Established by Law, and
that which has no Law for it is Establishment, is not only far from creating a
Difference here as I have shown before, because the precepts of the Gospel
(which must be more immutable sure than a Persian decree) are still the same,
and are now the Question; but the Offering here of such a distinction is in
Truth as impertinently applied, as it is really none at all, for whenever he
can imagine here, which God will avert, any Sufferance for the sake of his
Religion; it must be according to the Law of the Land, or else he will never be
brought to suffer, I Will secure his Carcass for a Farthing and be bound to
supply it with my own for the stake; if ever his be tied to it, without
reviving of the (...) de Comburendo. All the Martyrdoms in In Q. Mary's Reign
first the Parliament supplicated the Pope for pardon and promise a Return to
Popery. Vid, both Baker and Burnet.
Queen Mary's Reign, were but so many Executions of the Law, and that Writ de
(...) he will find in Fitz Herbert as well as a Common Capias: so that himself
must first without Charity (which will not sure, then begin at home) Give his Body
to be burnt with his Implied suffrage in an House of Commons, ((...) I believe
He is not likely to be a Bishop) before fire and faggot can come upon him to
singe his Hair or touch his Garment for the sake of his Religion, and how
likely we are ever to meet with such a Parliament, to Sacrifice themselves
again to the Flames; himself best knows who I believe does not fear it: so that
here his Foundation of Law Establishment, has nothing to support it, and then
all his Privileges of Saint Paul, his own Magna Charta, his Case of Commissions
all fall to the Ground; and his very supposition of his Religion being
Established by Law, and at the same time against all Law to suffer for it, is
more contradictory than his Horns or Addresses, for it cannot be supposed, but
that the Power that punishes him for an Heretic will have Repealed all those
old Laws that would have protected him for being such, and enacted new ones to
make him suffer for his Perseverance: and it is always remarkable and a great
Truth, that the laying down one single false Position, can never be defended
but with as many Lies. And this forces him to maintain, the Christians suffered
contrary to Law, in the time of Julian: Certainly, he knows but little of
Justinian, and the Codes; however his Hunt helped him to so much of our Cases
out of Cook. The Constitutions of the Jmperial Law were but the Decrees of
their Emperors, as well as the Corpus the Collection of one of them, all the
civil Law that governed then is called Pacius In Instit. Prolegom. p. 1.
Caesaria, Imperatoria, because their Caesar's, their Emperors where the Authors
of it; and how can he plead for them their Charters, that had nothing else to
trust to but the Will and Edict of their Prince?

The Testamentary Donation of Edward the Sixth he brings for an Argument for
Excluding the Right Heir; which makes but very little for his own, and as much
for the cause he contends against, not so Insignificant neither as he suggests,
only because they could not well avoid an Act of Succession in Harry the
Eight's time, for whether that Act had been made or not; Queen Mary must have
Succeeded by Proximity of Blood, as next Heir after her Brother. And 'twas that
inherent and unalterable Right, that made the Nation the more Zealous in her
Cause, tho there were enough too as Warm for her Religion; he very well knows,
how that Will was extorted from a weak and dying Prince, by the Powerful
Importunities of Northumberland, for the sake of Jane the Eldest of the House
of Suffolk, whom one of his younger Sons had Married, he knows nothing but self
Interest and Ambition promoted it, he may Read that both the Learned in the Sir
James Hales Judge Court Com. Pleas Sir John Baker. Chancel. Excheq. Vid. (...)
page 311.
Law, and as emiment of the Goodwin in Vita Mariae.
Divines were against it, Bishop Goodwin tells us of Cranmer himself present
that he opposed it, and that for the same Reasons all good Subjects do now,
because he thought no pretense of Religion could warrant an excluding the Right
Heir. This was the Sense of a Protestant so Zealous, that he afterward suffered
for it, but the power of the great Northumberland prevailed with him at last
for his Consent, of which himself afterward heartily repented to the Queen,
tells her he never liked it, that nothing grieved him more, and that he wished
he could have hindered it. And the ill success that Attempt had is alone
sufficient one would think to discourage such another: It Is strange that the
very thing that has once brought a Calamitous War upon the Kingdom, that in
this very Instance terminated in the Confusion of all the Attempters, brought
Northumberland to be Executed and to Penitence too, for having offended, and
poor Lady Jane (as her self said) to suffer justly only for accepting of a
Crown so unjustly offered. It Is Prodigious that such contradictory Mediums
should be urged for countenanceing a thing to which they are so much repugnant?
Did not a Parliament here of Protestants declare for a Popish Successor, and as
Bishop Goodwin says the Suffolk men set her up tho they knew her a Papist? Did
not a Popish Parliament after her death declare for Queen Elizabeth, tho they
knew her a Protestant, and were not in all these sudden Revolutions the Right
Heirsstill preferred, notwithstanding their Religion was not the same that was
professed? how then can men that offer at such a piece of Injustice, touch upon
those times for the Justifying so much wrong, where they see that under the
same Circumstances they still asserted their Princes Right?

The next pretty Notion of this Ecclesiastical novice in the Law, that we shall
now pass our Notes upon, is a quaint conceit relating to our Oath of
Allegiance: what it is form was of old; and what he would have employed in the
word HEIR therein mentioned to whom we Julian p. 19, 20. and 11.
swear; and here at the same time that he would deliver the poor people as he
pretends from the sad delusions of Error and Sophistry, does he put upon them
the greatest Falsehood and fallacy and the quaintest Sophism, a Quirk in Law,
viz. That the King's Heir in possibility cannot be meant in our Oath of
Allegiance, because it is a Maxim forsooth in our Law, Non est Haeres Viventis.
that no Man can have an Heir while he is living. And with this silly
Solaecism, a sort of Sense merely Sophisticated this Elaborate Gospeller in the
Law lays himself out in the pains of two or three Pages, to prove the prettiest
Postulate, which we would have granted, but for an asking, that in this our
Oath we did not swear Actually Allegiance to the D. of Y. And truly I am much
of his opinion too in that point, and that he was not then our Sovereign, tho
he had a possibility to Succeed. But can ever a more Senseless Inference be
made, by a pretender to Sense, or a more Jesuitical Evasion by the most
dexterous Manager of an Oath?

First I would ask him what he thinks was the Design of its first Imposition?
what was the Reason of Inserting, including the Kings Heirs and Successors in
those Oaths of SVPREMACY and ALLEGIANCE? Was it to perpetuate or acknowledge an
Hereditary Succession, or to warrant an Exclusion of the Right Heirs? Did the
Parliament design in the framing them, the Lineal Descent of the Crown when
they Swear to defend the Authority of the Kings Lawful Successor, as well as
his own? or did they then reserve to themselves a power of declaring who should
be his Successors by Law? But if the Divine Gentleman would have reasoned
pertinently and to the purpose (tho it would have been but an absurd sort of
Reasoning) this he must have inferred, that because we there swear only to be
faithful to the Kings Heirs when they come to Succeed; therefore this Oath non
Obstante, we are left at Liberty to prevent any Heir from his Succession, and
then I would have this Political Casuist tell me, What would be the Difference
between this Evasion and a direct Perjury, for we swear to be faithful to the
King's Heir that shall Succeed him, and truly in the mean while we make them
our own, suffer only whom we please, or just noneat all to Succeed; for by the
same Law, Equity and Reason, that we interrupt the Succession of one, we may
that of one thousand too, and still be true to our Oath; And even that is
allowed by Hunt in his Postscript, page 74.
if we abolisht the whole Line of Succession, for then those Juglers with a
turn of hand and a Presto will tell us very readily, why truly we swore to obey
his Majesty's Heirs and Successors; but must needs be absolved now, since there
are none that do succeed. And such were the Casuistical Expositions of some of
our Late Divine Assemblies, even in this very point, when they had Murdered
their Prince, and denounced Death Vid. Vote of the house in the Journal, 1648.
to His Heirs, and were urged with their Allegiance: But is not this first
Perjuring themselves to Commit a Crime, and then justifieing its Commission by
their being Perjured? May we not as well Murder one that would be the
Successor, and then plead our Innocence, we did not suffer him to Succeed? or
truly did they not design such an Impious and Execrable countenancing of the
Villainy, when they Associated for his Destruction and swore to destroy him?
would not they then too have Absolved themselves thus in Johnson's Sense and
the Jesuits; from any obligation to this his Majesty's Heir, because the Law
Maxim did not yet allow him to be so, and they had helped him now from being so
for ever? Will a Nice point of this his Law resolve does he think as tender a
Case of Conscience? This his Law makes it but Manslaughter where a person is
killed without Malice Propense; but will this be no shedding of Blood to be
required at his hands by the Judge of Heaven, because he had his Clergy allowed
here upon Earth? can he Prescribe with the Laws of the Land to impunity from
the Decalogue; and tell the Almighty some Killing is no Murder? Here his God,
his Savior is invoked in a Solemn and Sacred Oath upon the Gospel, and one
that should be a Divine Expositor of both, consults upon it the Readings of Mr.
Hunt, and a Resolution of Vid. Form of Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.
the Common Law; here he Swears to the plain meaning of the Words without any
Mental Reservation whatsoever, and yet this Mungrel in Divinity, means now to
take it in his mind, according to a ereiv'd Maxim in the Law. And this Libeller
of the Primitive Christians, looks like an Apostate that was as Primitive; who
kept pointing to the papers he put upon his Breast, while he was Swearing to
others that he held in his hand.

But yet I dare Appeal even to his own Breast who without doubt had often taken
these Oaths being graduated in an University, and Ordained a Divine, (tho
unworthy of both) whether the Words Heirs and Successors, were not understood
by himself of such as were to Succeed by an Hereditary Right by Birth and Blood
to the Crown; and whether that he did then Reserve to himself only such as did
Actually succeed by Consent of Parliament, and whether he did not think, that
by them he was not only obliged to obey those Heirs when they came to the
Crown, but also to do all that in him lay to promote in the due time their
coming to wear it; certainly to confine their Sense only to those that shall de
facto succeed, is but Swearing an Employed Allegiance to any Rebel or Usurper,
and the word Lawful, that still accompanys Successors, will not mend the Matter
with such men, for all is presently Legal and just with them, that has but the
shadow of a Parliamentary power for it is pretense: And I am well assured, That
those that would have thought such an Exclusion just and equal, with their
King's passing it, would have thought it as Legal could they havesate, till
they had made it pass without. The good old King at first disputed his Militia
as hard with them, and who could have believed any sort of men could have
thought it the Parliament's without his Consent? But as soon as the Rebel House,
had made their Ordinance for the Seizing it, which of those Miscreants did not
think it as much Law? And the more than probable project at Oxford shrewdly
Insinuates they would have warranted an EXCLVSION, without their Kings leave,
Legal, had they been allo'w but a further progress in their Vid. King's Speech
to the Parliament there.
Unwarrantable Proceedings.

But as much as Mr. Johnson Triumph's with this his Maxim of the Law, Julian
page 19, 20.
as if he were the first Divine that had discovered this deceitful Evasion;
this Jesuitical interpretation of his Protestant Oath. Tho he and his Hunt, and
all his Lawyers in the Hall should tell us Ten Thousand times of this Seditious
sort of (...), this Senseless Sophistry upon the plain word Heir, as well as he
Page 19.
says they do an Hundred; still all their Noise and Nonsense about Presumptive,
Apparent, Actual, possible, will be nothing more than what the late Rebels that
had Actually Murdered the best of Monarchs made their defense; to Justify
Treason and Sacrilege it self; so that all this Divine's Sophistry savours not
only of Nonsense and Sedition, but of an old, odious, rank Rebellion; and for
to satisfy him, that the Suggestion is serious, and founded upon Matter of
Fact, (if he can find among all his Seditious Papers he has habituated himself
to peruse; and what if he pleases I can lend him for his perusal) such an old
obsolete piece, as was published after they had Butchered the best of Kings, A
Treatise persuading Obedience in Lawful things; to Authority tho, unlawful.
Printed London about 1649 Ibid.
wherein they endeavored to persuade the people to be subject to their
Tyrannous Usurpation; there will he find the very two Pages that he spends to
promote the Quaint Conceptions of his Noddle about nothing, or what is worse,
Faction and Folly; for tho he tells us these tales Fifteen Hundred times over,
they told us so much for Forty years agon; and that to satisfy Tender and
Malignant Consciences that there lay no Obligation from their Oath of
Allegiance upon them to adhere to the right Heirs of Charles Stewart; because
that those Branches Page 10.
of the Oath which the Providence of Ibid.
God, had made Impossible to be observed, must be laid aside; and then they go
on to show, that Heirs and Successors must Page 12.
be taken Copulatively, and so the word Heirs must be meant only of those that
do Actually succeed: But the Providence of God, Vid. Also a Religious Demurrer
about submission to the present Power Printed London. 1649.
(as they called it) having kept the Heir of Charles Stewart from succeeding
his Father, had made, say they, that part of the Oath Impossible to be
Observed, and so the power must now be Obeyed Actively in what hands soever it
be. Seditious Soul! It Is too much to be Senseless too; Consider but upon this
Occasion; a Case your self have Julian, page 12.
Cited, it is that of the Lady Jane? Did not the Laws adjudge it Treason in that
poor imposed Princess for endeavoring to hinder the True Heir from being Anno
Mariae. 1.
the Actual Successor; and to say Queen Mary was then already Succeeded will
not salve the Matter, for it was resolved Treason too in her Father
Northumberland his Contrivance of the Will for the Queens Exclusion; which
confirmed as it was by the Privy Council was as much an Act of State as the
Bill by which our present Heir was to be Excluded: and then what they did was
but in pursuance of that Will after Edward's Death, and as the Duke told
Arundel that Arrested him, that he had Acted only by the Council and Commission
of King Edward: Yet all was adjudg'd a defense Insufficient; and I cannot see
why the same Law would not have made those Traitors (had the Bill past,) that
rebelled upon pretense of such an Act of Parliament; as well as it did others,
that resisted upon the pretext of a Will Confirmed in Council; and which *
themselves would Julian, p. 12.
have a sort of Exclusion; and is almost as much an Act of state.

It Is strange that men that would be thought so mighty Rational. should not
only argue against the known Rules in all Logic but against the very
Inferences of Common Reason, a man of Ordinary Sense without the help of his
Hereboord will allow that any Universal and General Assertion, in includes all
Particulars. And shall we when we svvear Faith and Obedience to the Kings
Heirs and Successors, Generally Reserve an Exception of such whom the
Parliament shall Exclude. It would prove but a senseless Solaecism in Common
Speech, and must sure be of more dangerous consequence in a Sacred Oath: But I
remember these same sort of Disputants in another Vid. (...).
Case managed the Reverse of the Rule after the same manner: They tell us
Popery cannot be kept out under a Successor Popish, because not long since
Queen Mary proved it so: Their first Irrational Argumentation from a
proposition (and that even in a Solemn Vow) clearly Universal, would except our
Obligation to some Particulars, and the latter absurd Inference from a
Particular Instance draws a conclusion Universal, sure men of unprejudiced
Reason would not infer against all the Rules of it; it must be nothing but
Passion and prejudice that can prevail upon their Sense and Soul when they
dispute against the very dictates of both.

And as Irrational are his Inferences upon our Old Oath of Allegiance, when by
the Statute we have had since established a new, he cites us for a refutation of
Passive Obedience, but a part of the poor Julian p. 11.
younglings Oath to be taken in a Court Leet, and because it is there said by
the Minor, and Sworn only, I Will be Obedient to the King's Laws, Precepts and
proceedings from the same: And what then, Therefore that Doctrine alters our
faith of Allegiance, and gives it new Measures of Obedience. So that the
Consequence must be this, That if we do but perform that Obedience to the Kings
precepts, and to processes out of a Court Leet, we are all very good Subjects,
and that is sufficient; and truly a Little of Loyalty, and less Sense, with such
Gentlemen may suffice; for certainly for any Consequence that can be drawn from
this clause of the Minors Oath against his Doctrine of the Bowstring and the
Doctors Obedience; he might as well have told us too, that the Wilkinsou of
Court (...) 4th Edit p. 298.
Tithing-man is there sworn to be Attendant on the Constable; and the
Ale-Taster make Oath, He will serve the King's Majesty, and the Lord of the
Leet in the Tasting of Good Ale and Beer: But he might have been so fair here
too, as to have let us known what follows, even in this Oath too of the
Youngling; and I Swear that I Will be a true Liegeman and true Faith and Truth
bear to Our Sovereign that now is; and his Highness Heirs and Lawful
Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, etc. As Soon as any Treason shall
come to my knowledge, I shall make the same to be known to the King's Highness
his Heirs and Successors. And even the first part of this very Clause, he is
pleased at last to recite in another Jul. p. 20, 21.
page, where he thinks it makes for his Sophisticated Sense, because (as I
suppose) after the Word Successors, follows Kings and Queens ofthis Realm: But
because God only knows (as he says) who shall come to be so, is it therefore no
breach of our Oath to his Majesty's Heirs to bar any one for ever from being
King, God knows too who will live to Succeed him, and may we therefore without
Perjury Associate to secure his Destruction, Swear to expel and destroy him,
because he is but a possible Successor. All these things may be done, and
justified, but so has too the Deepest Treason, and a Damned Rebellion, let but
any Impartial Soul consider the Sense of that Supremacy, that Allegiance he
Swears to his present Sovereign, and he will find all along he makes at the same
time an Actual Promise, an (...) Faith to those too, that are Possible Heirs,
and even PROBABLE ones according to the Ordinary descent of the Crown by Birth
and Blood, without any of the least Relation or Reference to any Extraordinary
Settlement of Parliament, Interruption or Exclusion: and tho in strict
propriety of Speech, a man cannot be said to be an Heir to him that is Living
and in possession, of that to which he is to be an Heir after his Death, yet I
humbly conceive a man may be an Actual Heir to a Right, tho he be but a
possible one to the Possession; and it is that unalterable Right to the Crown we
Swear to defend, Inherent in the Blood ofthose that as yet have but a
Possibility to the wearing it.

The Common Recoveries now too Commonly suffered to be really just; sure
supposes some Actual Heir, and one to have some Right, tho he is living to whom
he is to make himself so; for if there be no such Heir, then also this feigned
Recovery must be just against no Body; if they will allow such an Heir to be,
then there must be also of one that is living: And I look upon the Crowns
Customary descent stronger than any Tail.

His case of Excise is just such another Jul. p. 20.
Tale of a Tub, and only tells us that tho it is granted to the King and his
Heirs, the possible Successor cannot put in at present for a Penny, a pretty
piece of Impertinence and well applied, and were this all they would have
Excluded his Highness from, I believe they might have got his Vote to the Bill;
and so we say too, that he could not have put in then for the Crown, but if he
would have consulted the Sense and meaning of those Legislators that past that
very Act, it would soon appear to him that what they designed for the Revenue
of the Royal Heirs in General must as well be designed for's R. H. in
Particular, if ever he came to be an Actual Heir, and so he might as well have
told us, that had his Parliament excluded the D. from being Heir to the Crown,
they had shut him out too from the Hopes of the Revenues that belonged to it,
and in my Conscience those that had paid him off with such a Bill; would never
have paid him a Penny Excise.

The last Remark I shall make upon this their Non est Haeres Viventis.
Maxim in the Law, and this that our Flourishing Divine celebrates so much for
making those Heirs mentioned in our Oath, to be meant only of such as Actually
succeed at our Sovereigns death, because they will have it according to their
Exposition, that he can have none while he Lives, is only by way of Civil
interrogatory, what they think is meant by the word Heir in that 25. Ed. 3.
cap. 2.
Act that Declares it High Treason to compass the Death of the Kings Eldest Son
and HEIR, for if their formidable thundering Aphorism, must be played so
furiously upon us, we will for once force their own Engine upon our Foes. If the
King has no Heir while he is Living, why is it made here Treason to destroy
him; if Heir must be here meant of him only that will be so Hereafter, then
that whole word Heir is impertinent, for it would be Treason without it, for he
would be then de Facto King; if Heir Relates to Eldest Son, then even the
Statute too, understands it so as an Heir Possible, for an Eldest Son is no
more at the most, and then we see that even in an Act of Parliament, the word
Heir shall refer to one, that only may probably or Possibly be so in Futuro, as
well as to those that are de Facto such, and so agrees with the very common
acceptance, Afortiori then we may (even, with the Consent of our Reverend
Reader, the Divine Lawyer) Jul. page 20.
admit of the Vulgar acceptance of the word when administered to us in an Oath
so Solemn and Sacred, if it does not relate to the Eldest, but only to an Heir
in general that may Actually Succeed, then they must bring (which to be sure
they will not allow) a Collateral as well as a Lineal Heir, within the very Letter
of the Law.

And whether they will allow him so or no, for any thing they can say to the
contrary, a Collateral Heir may be within the Statute, tho not expressed in the
very Letter of the Law. I don't doubt, but that the same Intention they had of
preserving the King's Eldest Son and Heir, the same had those Legislators for
the preservation of the next Heir of the Crown, whether Lineal or Collateral;
and where their Intention may be presumed the same, there the Remedy without
doubt wasdesign'd the same too; and that Intention of all Lawmakers must
beonly gathered from the parity of Reason for the making such a Law: Now if
there be the same Reason for the securing the Person of any Collateral Heir as
well as the Kings Eldest Son and Heir, as doubtless there is, for the
perpetuating the Succession of the Monarchy, then we have Reason to believe
too, that such an Heir was also intended, especially if we consider that but
just before this Statute of the 25th, Vid. Britton, and Coke cap. Treason.
it was held, That Killing anyof the Kings Children was Treason; all of them
having a possibility of being Heirs Apparent and supplying the Crown with a
Succession: It Is true there is nothing expressive of a Collateral Heir in the
Letter of the Law; so neither is there anything expressed of a Second Son, or a
Third, when they should be come Eldest, yet allthese are allowed to be intended
too; and if Eldest shall extend to any that shall afterward become so, I don't
see why the word Heir, which I am sure is there more extensive might not
without much stretching refer to any that may become the first Heir, (Admitting
it otherways) they must admit; that this Law in this point is mighty
Superfluous, the very thing which it always endeavors to avoi'd, for if the
Prince must be only understood, why then that word would have expressed it
better; or else Eldest Son alone as well, and since Heir is superadded, and a
Rule in Law that Letter of it must have it is full Emphasis in Explication: I
cannot apprehend but the word Heir, there must signify somewhat more than
Eldest Son: There is no Provision made for the Queen Regent in that Statute,
Consort being only named; yet the resolution has been, That she is within that
Statute, as well as the King, and that for the Parity of Reason.

And for my Life I could never apprehend the little Lords Sophistry of a
Brother or Collateral Heir, being but a Presumptive one; it looked like a piece
of State Metaphysics, to distinguish his Highness out of his Title with a
Diminution; and that in order for Excluding him from the Crown: Time always
best resolves the Sense of such Statesmen, whose Politics are best understood
from the Measures they take, and who seem many times Fools in the dark, till
they disclose themselves to be the greatest Villains. When I saw him settled
for Excluding the Crown's Heir; we soon saw the meaning of Presumptive, which
before seemed in so great a Man a little nonsense: But I can tell them of
one-sense more it might have had. That is, the Duke was but his Presumptive
Heir, because he presumed he should Destroy him: Some men of the Law would
laugh at such Sophisters of the Faction. And truly they even at themselves,
should they maintain the Youngest Son in Borough English, was no Heir
Apparent, who can be dispossessed by latter Birth, as well as a Brother or
Collateral; but it was the want of his Lordships Law that made him abound with
so much Sophistry, and so little Sense: For my Lord 3. Ins. l. 1. p. 9.
Coke lets us know that a Collateral Heir is as much an Apparent one, as the
Eldest Son; but only this says he is not within the Statute. Tho as My Lord
Hales Pleas of the Crown Is It. Edit.
great a Judge and as good, was not so Dogmatical in this point, who as he had
Reason, so he left room too for doubt, tho the Quaere in his first Edition has
been very industriously omitted in the second. I have been the longer upon
this, to let the Divine see that he may be much out in his Law, and that tho he
would have Excluded the late Collateral Heir from his Oath of Allegiance, his
preservation might have been brought in within the 25. Ed. 3.
Statute of Treason, and the Doctor if he pleased might be Hanged for him as
well as Perjured.

It Is pretty pleasant to me to Observe how men of these sort of principlescan
prevaricate for the Promoting of their own Cause, and the Divinest of them all
run to the Devil with a Lie in their Mouth at the same time they in their
Conscience believe the contrary to be true. No Soul Living but will believe
this Libeller when so near Allied to the Gentleman of the Law we so lately
left, would entertain as soon the Damnable Doctrine of a Muggletonian, as
dispense with the belief of a Divine Right (since his Associate in their
Hotch-potch, of Scrible, Hunt has rendered it altogether as Devilish) yet what
that Lawyer will not allow, this Vid Jul. page 19.
Body of Divinity is forced at last to prove, viz. That even the Roman Emperors
Reigned with a Right Divine, and that all their Empire was Hereditary, and this
he is seriously bound to maintain too, as the only Basis, and foundation for
his Rebellious Book, so that these prevaricating Jugglers, with a turn of an
hand can make the two several Extremes serve for the same purpose, when it will
make for their Cause they shall make those Crowns Hereditary whom all Authors
and all the World acknowledge Elective; let it but cross the Interest of the
Faction, the same pens shall prove you a most Elective Monarchy, from one
absolutely Hereditary.

The Roman Empire was certainly from Caesar their first, to this Julian
himself, and even the very last of their Emperors uncertain in it is Succession;
sometimes a Right Heir would interpose, or an adopted, one but still, either
set up by the Soldiers, or depended upon their permission. And how it could
otherwise well, be no man can well imagine, when their standing Armies were
continually in the Field, and a new Monarch commonly created with a Shout and
Salutation of a Legion; so uncertain was their Succession; that they seldom had
so much as Certainty for their Lives: Look upon the List which I have
leisurably examined; and you will find from Caesar that was stabbed in the Senate,
to their Apostate Julian, whom they would have a Christian assassinate in
Persia, I am sure half, if not more were Murdered or destroyed by some
prevalent Faction, or a mutinous Army, and most of the Purples they wore were
died in their own Blood, Julian's Vid. Jrlian the Apostate.
Caesar's are just as well applied here to the Succession of our Prince of
Wales; as the Postscript has the Confirmation Post. p. 47.
of the Prince of Wales, to prove the Legislative of the House of Commons.

On the other side our own Monarchy for fifteen hundred years. Hereditary, and
that to be proved from all Chronicle and History, have the same sort of Pens
(and whom this Author vindicates too with his Brief History of Succession.
own) endeavored to make merely Elective. I cannot resolve this Spirit of
Contradiction into any thing less than an absolute Conspiracy among themselves
for the Vindicating rather Pagans and Infidels, the Government of Rome or
Constantinople, before the Constitution of our Church, or the Established
Monarchy.

Upon the Publishing this pernicious piece and its falling into my hands, I
remember (tho not much read in the History of the Church, or the works of a
Socrates, or a Sozomen) that I had casually lighted in one of them heretofore
upon the passage of Jovian's (this Apostat's immediate Successor) being saluted
Emperor; where the pious Prince told them, he would never Reign over Pagans;
upon which they Replied they were all Christians, and as such, had submitted
and not opposed the Government of a Julian, because their Lawful Emperor; a
President so directly contradictory to those he brings, that it was a
sufficient Prepossession to me against the professed Sincerity of the piece.
Paganism is as much obliged to this Apostate Churchman, as the Christian
Religion has received from him the greatest disservice; he represents to us in
several places his Pagan Emperor even with the Meekness Page (...)
of a Moses; and with such a command of Spirit and Temperament of mind, as if
he would have him rather Worshipped as a Saint, than Cursed for a Persecutor; he
makes him to take Reviling patiently, as if he would let us know, he also could
imitatehis Christ, who reviled not again; with such mollifying expressions in
several places, to the very reproaches of the meanest; as if he would recommend
the admiring of him for an Hero; which makes me remember his dying Words, I met
with once in Ammianus Marcellinus, so full of Magnanimity and all the highest
Expressions of a Moral Virtue, that of an Expiring Pagan, he seemed to me the
most like a dying Christian: But on the other side, those Pious Souls, those
Glorious Martyrs, famed for their Primitive Meekness and Moderation, that in
the midst of Tortures have accounted it worthy to suffer for the sake of their
Savior, blessed their Persecutors, in Groans, in imperfect sounds, and
unarticulated accents of Agony and Anguish, that tired the Invention of their
Tormentors, as well as baffled their Tortures, and with exalted Affection of
Spirit, Triumphed in the midst of Flames: These has he (...) represented for
the most Malicious, Seditious and Rebellious Brood of Christians, that ever
breathed under any Government altogether Pagan. What good the Protestant
Religion can receive from such a Representation of the Primitive Christians,
must be in pleading prescription to a warrantable Rebellion; and what
Obligation Christianity it self has to such a Protestant, is the making her
much worse than the Wildest Paganism.

Had he considered how unreasonable it was only from the selected Instances of
some Turbulent Spirits; how Irreligious and Uncharitable it is from a few
furious provoked Persons to have cast such an industrious blemish and blot upon
the Practices of all the Primitive Christians of those Times; certainly he
would have found it much unbecoming his Profession, more his Religion? Why does
he not conclude from thence too that in those days we never had any Martyrs; or
that all Fox's mighty Martyrology is nothing but a mere Romance, for he will find
Her Majesty the persecuting Mary; in many places as severely handled? Why does
he not tell us in her time Wyat, Crofts, and Rudston REBELLED: And then
conclude we had no Cranmer, 22. Aug. 1554.
Latimer, and Ridly that suffered: Why does he not tell us of the Protestant
Tumults of her time, that there were those then could throw Stones and Daggers
at a Bonner, or a Bourn, and not a word of the more Meeker men; a Bradford Vid
Burnets Abridgment 2d. pt. 3. l.
or a Rogers that bid them be Patient and appeased them, for his Maiden Virgin
that Reviled Julian, he could tell us too that of one Crofts, a Maid, that
Muttered out as much Sedition against Queen Baker, p. 329.
Mary from the Wall; and let him but deal as disingenuously in Conclusions here
too, the Reformed Protestant will be as little Obliged to him as the Primitive
Christian.

In short, if Julian abounded with such a Spirit of Meekness; (as he in many
places makes him to demonstrate) where then was this Terrible Persecution, with
which he makes such a dismal din? If they were really Persecuted and Oppressed,
how came they to be so powerful, as to make such a signal resistance? If his
Old man in Jul. p. 39.
Berea, was only rebuked by him, for raging so hotly against his King and his
Religion; and only bid by his Prince, in so much mildness as, Friend forbear
railing; if at the Reproaches of the Antiochians, he only declared against
seeing them any more, if as in his ridiculous Instance of old Father Gregory's
kicking of his King, he page 35.
was so terfify'd and awd; what is become of the Tyrant, and all the Bloody
Persecution that attended him to the Throne? And if as in another place he has
proved, there was much the greater part that remained Christian; where was this
General Apostasy to the Pagan? In my poor Apprehension, the several Examples he
has cited, did in some sense, tho beyond his design, as much oblige his
Adversaries cause, and the late Case of Succession; as some of the Loyal hearts
that labored so much in its defense, for they most of them prove that
notwithstanding the persuasion of their Pagan Prince, the Christian Religion
flourisht as much as ever; and he never Punished any Person; but for reviling
him for his Apostasy to his Face; and that they might have enjoyed their own
opinions quietly had they not so much molested, and opposed his: And must the
Christian Religion then be made so Rebellious, only because there were those
that could revile their Prince and his persuasion? that could call their
Julian, Goats beard, Bull-burner, Impious; page 33. 38.
Apostate, and Atheist? Why then this Gentleman himself may infer, that the
Protestant we (...) is as Rebelliously inclined; and that because some Seduced
Souls were not long since so much possessed with Sedition, as to Rebel Exclusion.
against the Succession, because a poor Perjured wretch could call his
Sovereign, Vid (...) Inquiry B. R.
Dog, Devil, and Traitor; because M. (...). himself suffers now a deserved
Imprisonment, for representing now his own most Christian King for Jul.
ten times as great a Persecutor as the worst of the Pagan Emperors; or because
Protestant Subjects actual Rebels and in Arms against their Sovereign; with an
Arch-Traytor Attainted long since legally, have published in his (...) of a
Declared Rebellion, that their Liege Lord by the Laws of God and Man; that is
Seated in the Throne of his Ancestors, by the Protection and Providence of God;
tho so much endeavored to be Destroyed and Excluded by the Plots and Practices
of these Devils, and that because such Rebel Subjects have declared this their
undoubted and Merciful Sovereign, an Usurper, and a Tyrant: Our Vid. Argile's
Declaration, his Majesty's first Speech.
Protestant Religion, I say, by the same reason may suffer for the sake of
those Seditious Souls themselves; from several of their own examples of a
Rebellious resistance, as well as in their Arguments, that traduce the
Principles and Practices of the Primitive Christian.

The very Rebel Books that are so much Consulted by our Asserters of a
Commonwealth; and the Favorers of a Republic, because they make a Monarch so
Mean, and Contemptible, even those have largely treated of the same Subject;
that Mr. Johnson thinks he himself has only so (...) handled. The Author of the
Rights of Magistrates De jure magist. p. 94. Quaest. 10.
makes it most of the matter of his pernicious piece in the last Question which
he proposes which is in these words, Whether those that are to suffer for their
Religion, can resist that Prince, that opposes the true Religion? I confess he
with abundance of Foreign Impertinence tells us of Princes being bound to
maintain the true Religion; a thing that no one ever doubted: but then I doubt,
whether every Prince would not believe his Religion to be most true; but when
he comes to the Question, whether the (...) can resist, if the Sovereign design
for them a false; then he comes to our Mr. John's: Resolution of the Case, of a
Religion Jul. p. 7.
Established by Law; the point in which he deluded unhappily his Patron the late
Lord Russel; then he tells us the Edictis Legitimis and Rogatis. p. 101.
Publicum Religionis Christanae exercitum quispiam eorum nunquam concesserat. p.
101.
same Triumphant notion and discovery, in which this Divine was so much
exalted; that the Roman Emperors had never allowed the Christian Religion any
public exercise: But yet this very work which some would have a Catholics
(but which I can hardly believe from his Brutish rage that he shows in his
railing against that Church, whom in several places he is pleased to call (...)
meretrico Sanguinaria^. p. 98, 99.
beast, whore and Bloody Harlot, that it sounds too much like the Language of
the Disciplinarians of those times; which were nothing else but what we now
call the Fanatics of our own,) yet this very piece sufficiently pernicious; by
both parties disowned and discommended; wont allow them to resist the Sovereign
when he alters the Religion, only by Ut illi non fas sit came pro arbitrio suo,
and sine causae Cognitione abrogare, sed eadem Authoritate tantum inter
cedecente; qua^ abinitio sancita suit page 100. page 18. That Author laughs
too, as well as Julian at the Martyrdom of the Thebaean Legion.
the same Authority by which it was Established, but then alone calls him a
Tyrant when he would abrogate it by his own Arbitrary Power, whereas our Julian
is a Bar beyond the best of their Advocates; and would have had us resisted,
before we had known when there our Religion was to be altered by Law, or without
it; whether it was to receive any Alteration at all; or whether the Prince they
so much Libel'd, would have come to be capable as a King, to Subvert, or defend
it; for the Bill which this Libeller (whom the very Law has made since so; and
a Court of Justice) would have so necessary to be past, by the same Reason that
we use Remedies against the Plague, that was only a Resistance of the present
Authority; in an Altering the Descent of the Crown, which their own Laws
Declare unalterable; and that only by providing against Contingencies, that
might never have happened, which is a sign that they aimed only at the
Succession it self, more than any danger that they feared from it, because the
Successor might be supposed, at the worst possible, and perhaps willing to
preserve to them their Religion, which they so vainly fear to lose; as well as
he has since ratified it with his Royal word, and at the present is the
Defender of our Faith too as a King, as well as he had often promised, before
he was so; and Mr. Julian might have spared his Plaguey Metaphor of his Pitch
and Tarbox; till he felt more fumes of an infected Air; and some better
symptons of the Plague: for while their is nothing but Cipher to that Disease
in the Weekly-Bill, the people would take this Doctor for a Madman, should he
run about the Streets with his Antipestilentials, his Jul. p. 5.
Fires and his Fumes: But yet in this his own Case, had our Author obliged
himself but upon a great penalty; not to use his preparation of Pitch and Tar
to prevent the distemper, I fancy he would run the risk of an Infection rather
then have than forfeited the Condition: And I should think an Oath taken to be
true to the Crowns Heir should oblige as much, prevail upon his Soul as well,
not to use such means and methods as would make him forsworn, tho it were for
the prevention of an ascertained danger. And I cannot see how such a Bill that
dissolved the very band of our Allegiance; could be called any thing less, then
an Act of Parliament for a Statutable Perjury; for none but a Johnson or a
Jesuit will allow that the same Lawful Authority that imposed an Oath to be
taken, can command its violation after it is took, and that sticks so much at
present with some of our moderate Covenanters; that they cannot think
themselves by special Act of their Lawful King, absolved from an Oath of
Rebellion administered by none but Rebels and Usurpers. And tho this Gentleman's
Oracle of the Law, was pleased to call them but Protestant Oaths, I might as
well tell them they are Christian ones too, if they believe the Testament to
which they swear. And as this Gentleman agrees with, and perhaps has borrowed
from this old Disciplinarian, several of his Doctrines; so has also Brutus's An
Liceat resistere Prinicipegem Dei violanti and Ecclesiam vastanti. (...) Juni.
Brut. quaest 2d.
Vindiciae handled the same Question, which he has proposed in this form,
whether it be Lawful to resist a Prince that Violates the Laws of God, and lays
waste his Holy Church.

But from that Excellent Author our Julian might not only have proved the
Doctrine of Resistance to be the practice of the Primitive Christians; but that
it was much Older, and Commanded by God himself to the Jews; and as the former
De jure Magis trattuum.
Author his Predecessor, can only from the Text tell us of the Kings of Israel
being obliged to propagate the true Religion, such as David, Solomon, Asa,
Johosaph, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. All Foreign to the Question, so does this
Brutus tell us an idle tale: and the Fancy of his own Brain; that therefore the
People of Israel fell with 1. Sam. 31.
Saul because they would not oppose him when he violated the Laws of God; that
the People suffered Famine for their not opposing his persidiousness to the 2.
Sam. c. 2.
Gibeonites, that they were punished with the Plague because they did not
resist Sam. c. ult.
David's numbering of the People; and that the People suffered for 2. Chro. c.
21. 2. Chron. c. 33.
Manasses poluting of the Temple because they did not oppose it; But where
stilldo any of these prove, that the People did resist their Kings, or were
commanded so to do? it is but an Irreligious Presumption to think the Almighty
should punish his chosen, only because they did not Rebel against his Anointed;
when that Rebellion even by the same sacred Text is declared worse than
Witchcraft; and that primitive one of Corah and his Accomplices was so
remarkably punished: But I know these Authors will tell us, That Eliah
destroyed the Priests of Baal, notwithstanding that Ahab their King
countenanced their Idolatry; That Jehoida the Priest set Joas on the Throne,
and not only rebelled against his Mother Athalia, but destroyed her to restore
the Worship she had abolished: But in both these Instances they may do well to
consider: 1. That what was done here was by the express Direction of the true
Spirit of God in his Prophets; to which when our inspired Enthusiasts, our
Oracles only of Rebellion, can prove their right, as well as they but pretend
it; they shall be better qualified to Judge their King when he offends against
the Laws of his God. And does not the Text tell us upon these very Occasions
always, That the Word of God came to his Servants: 2. Athalia here, whom the
People resisted, deposed, and slew, had no Title to the Crown, but what she
waded through in the Blood of all the seed Royal: Religion was not there the
rise of the Rebellion, but the right of the Crown's Heir, which was in the
young King Joas, whom they set on the Throne of his Father Ahaziah, and for
which Heavens had preserved him; notwithstanding the (...), and Design there
was to destroy him: 3. If Religion were the Occasion of such Insurrection, as
it really was not; yet the Worship then introduced was altogether Pagan, which
by the express Command of God, they were bound to extirpate. And whatever our
Apostate fancies in his Comparison of Paganism and Popery, my Charity will
oblige me, as a Christian, not to look upon the Professors of the same God and
Savior like to so many Turks and Mahometans, unless they can prove to me from
the Text, that by the Worshipping of Baal is only meant the Catholic Faith,
and to believe in Christ is to be an Infidel.

In the fourth place they do not consider, that even their own Arguments make
all such Applications to all ourpresent Kings altogether impertinent: For these
Junius. Brutus quest. 2. p. 37.
Republicans that maintain these Doctrins; tell us too that the Kings of Israel
were always to be regulated by the seventy Elders, as those of Lacedaemon by
their Ephori; that to these seventy the high Priest did always preside as Judge
of the most difficult Affairs; so that Arguments and Presidents brought from
such Topics, where they make the Kings to be governed by their Subjects, cannot
be applied to Monarchs that are Modern and more absolute, tho this their very
Assertion that makes against their own Application is no less than a great Lie:
For we find both the Kings of Israel and Judah from the Chronicles, the very
Records of those times to be Princes altogether absolute, and to have executed
too that unlimited Jurisdiction. I have related these few passages, out of the
fore mentioned Authors to let this unanswerable Julian see, as I promised in
the preceding Section, that this his Case, had been Controverted long before he
could Read or Write, and defended only by such Pens, as have Published
themselves and their Principles both infamous to posterity; such as have
endeavored to prove and promote Rebellion, not only from the practice of the
Primitive Christians; but the Privileges of the Haec scriptura nobis definiet,
and quod populo Judaico licuit; imo quod in (...) fuit nemo negabit quin idem
populo Christiano, etc. Junius Brutus quaest 2.
Jews, the words of the Book of Life, and the very precepts of the Living God.

His Comparison of Popery and PAGANISM, might be as well returned with a
Parallel of Johnson and the Jesuit, for in many principles of Sedition they
agree: and he takes (in some Sense) a little pains to prove his Kindness to the
Pagan; that has thus traduced the Religion of the Christian. And we see that
some sort of Modern Protestants could not only side with the Turk in his Arms,
but almost in his Insidelity: The Religion of the Romanists I shall for ever
dislike; yet still I would retain more Charity, for the (...) of the same God
and Savior, than for an Heathen that is ignorant of both. It was falsely
inferred from a Person at Fishers Conference; That the Church of Rome was the
more Secum and Eligible for allowing no Salvation out of theirs; whereas ours
did out of our own, a choice both Irrational and Vnbecoming a Christian, who
from the Charitableness only of our own might have thought it more eligible and
safe: But our avenging Priest here has paid them off with their own Spirit of
POPERY; and for their Damning of HERETICS, has sent them all to the DEVIL.

CHAP. V. Remarks upon Mr. Sidney's Papers.
COULD the Principles and Positions of such implacable Republicans be Buried
with their Authors, or cut off with the venomous heads, in which the Vipers are
both hatched and harbored, our subsequent Observations would be superseded with
an Execution of the Law; Treason and Sedition it self best silenced with the
Tongues of the Traitors, and the Stroke of Justice: But Since we have seen a
Most mighty Flourishing Monarchy, with these Undermining Maxims, of our
dangerous Democraticks, Usurpt upon by the very, dregs of the People; tho these
Principles of Anarchy, and Confusion, were Damned even by some of those
Misguided Miscreants, that were of late deceived into an Actual Rebellion; a
Calamitous War, led into a Labyrinth of almost an endless Misery: Tho the God
of Heaven restored us that Government with a Miracle, which these Instruments
of Hell had undermined with Treachery and Plot; tho the promoters of these
Principles that procured that dismal and utter dissolution of the State, for
the most part long since expired either with a dry Death which the Authors of
so much Blood and Misery did hardly deserve, or fell Victims to the Justice of
the restored Monarchy, which they might be better said to merit; yet still we
see their Positions to survive their persons, and their Monumental mischiefs
more than any Marble must adorn their Tombs. The Doctrines of these Devils of
Sedition, are transmitted to their posterity, with as much Veneration and
Deference as of old the delivered Oracles of the Deities of Rome; or the
murmering Israelites their Prototypes of Primitive Rebellion and Plot, or even
themselves do the Decalogue it self. And this Asseveration is so far from the
Product of Passion, that I can prove it in it is several particulars; Junius
Brutus, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, 1577.
Brutus his Vindiciae was only the great Copy, and as exactly transcribed, from
his immediate Predecessor in Sedition; that Daemocratical Dogmatist de jure
Ficleny de Mag. 1576.
Magistratuum, Pryn; and Harringtons Oceana.
Harrington here in our own soil, had his Needham's, Merc. Pol.
Needham to succeed him; or rather as nearly Cotemporaie's to support him in
his Political Treason: In our next age we are pestered with a Nevil, a Plato
Redivivus.
Plato (i. e.) A Plague to any Government that requires a Subjection; and the
very Subject of our present animadversion a Sidney's Systeme.
Sidney his Associate, all agreeing in every Syllable, in the same unanimous
Absurdity, the same Seditious Nonsense, the same Confused Notions of an Anarchy.

I shall show the Congruity of these Conspirators, (for I cannot call themless,
and there cannot be greater Villains (than what set up for Commonwealth's men,
under an Established Monarchy.) I will show their agreableness from their own
several Citations in a perfect Parallel of each Politician's particular
positions; and this work will be most apposite and proper for this place, and
such a Section; where Mr. Sidney must make the Subject a Person that valued
himself for his Antimonarchical principles; at a time when he was to be Vid.
his Trial p. 23.
Tried for Treason; at Vid. Paper at his Execution.
a time when he was to suffer for it too, or in his own Phraseology; singl'd
out as a Witness of the Truth; tho some (...) Subjects might believe it,
persisting in a great Lie: A Person that seemed to suggest his Salvation, his
Soul's safety to consist in asserting the Seditious positions of a rank
Re-publican; (as if Heaven it self had been Concerned for his answering
Filmer.) In short a Person the most Eminent Anti-Monarchist of our present Age,
and as he says from his Youth; famed and engaged for it in the past, of a
designing Head, and a discontented Heart, that would have been dangerous even
to that Democracy he did adore.

But as I don't design to write the Life of a person, that was the Daedalus of
his own Destruction, that drew down upon himself an Ignominious as well an
unfortunate death, and Sacrificed himself to the Bigoted Sentiments of his own
Brain, which might have been less dangerous too to its Natural Head, had it not
been busied so much about the Nations Politic Body, and might have left behind
it a more lasting Monument of its Wit and Parts; so happy to be as Loyal as it
desired to be thought had it been Learned, and the disgrace will ever supersede
the Glory of the greatest parts; when it can be said they were exercised only
in being so Seditiously Witty: I design no personal Reflection on his Name, or
Family; wherein the Exemplary Loyalty of some of his best, his Noblest Blood;
can almost restore and atone for his own's being tainted; and their
stedfastness to support the Throne; can make amends for his Faction to subvert
it; and as I should be very loath to give the least offense to the Living, so I
delight as little to disturb the Ashes of the Dead: I am satisfied it is the
most uneharitable as well as it will prove but a rude draught to design upon
the dust, to disquiet their Peaceful Urnes, who are said to rest from their
Labors; but the same Text tells us too their Works will follow them; and it is
those his principles, his positions I profess to censure and refute, tho I am
sure this Gentleman, and his Hunt, have hardly been so Charitably Fair to the
Fame and Memory of their Filmer.

And the first that fall in our way, are his first lines that were produced
upon his Trial, wherein he Labors to Vindicate the Vid. Trial. page 23.
Paradox of the Peoples right of being their own Judges, and deciding the
Controversy between themselves and their King; but tho they are told ten
thousand times, that this would make the very Generali Lege decernitur nemidem
sibi esse Judicem 6. 3. 5. 1.
party to be the Judge, and produce the most preposterous and unequitable
destribution of Justice, such as a Barbarous Nation would blush at; tho both
our Common Law, and Common Equity; tho both the Canon and Civil, provide even
against all Nemo Idoneus testis in re (...) Intelligitur D. 22. 5. 10.
Prejudiced Evidence, and must then a Fortiori, against a Judge that is so, and
tho this Equitable process is provided even in Favor of this People, yet
cannot these perverse implacable Republicans, think the same Common Justice
necessary in the Case of their very King. And then I hope they will allow (...)
Sovereigns Cause to be (...) by Witnesses as well as their own; and then who
shall give in Evidence the matter of Fact in which he has (...) his trust? why
they must tell us again, the People; so that the People (...) is Party, Judge,
Evidence, and all; and no wonder then if among the People too, we find a pack
of Perjured Oates's, that can impeach their Prince.

But it is not really the Reason of the thing they so much rely on; for that I
shall refute anon beyond Answer and Reply; unless it be from such as are
resolved to Rebel against Sense, as well as their Sovereign; but that which
truly determines these dangerous Democraticks, is the tradition of their
positions; which (as I observed) are delivered down to their posterity, and
revered for Revelation: The Principles of a Republic like the root of
Rebellion it self run in a Blood, or are received like the Plague, from the
Company they keep by way of Contagion: They are loath to dissent from their
Friends and Relations, or Condemn the resolution of their pious Predecessors.
But sometimes the Seditious Souls are Seduced and Prejudiced with the
Approbation of an Author; whom they shall as much perhaps pervert, as they
little Comprehend, sometimes imposed upon with a pretended Antiquity of their
opinion and policy, with which too they would delude others, so for the first
we saw not long since a Plato Redivivus dealt with the Devil he would have
raised in the Ghost of his Philosopher, and endeavored to obtrude upon the
World the lewdest Sedition, for the Dogma Platonis; so did also the Leviathan
of the Usurper, that took his pastime in his unfathomable Oceana; (i. e.) a
political piece of Paradox, deep and un-intelligible; besides the quaintness of
its pretty Style, that renders it a Composition of Pedantry, and Romance, That
Illuminato was persuaded, (among the wonders in his deep,) that he had
discovered what had been so long buried in the Floods; the old Model of the
very Primitive Commonwealth, (as if his Idaea of Government, had determined
the Deity, or at least had been concurrent with the Design of the Creator, when
he framed a World to be governed) for the bold Gentlemen being very Opiniative
(and I think one might say a little impious too,) Ocaeana p. 15.
Appeals to God, whither the Sentiments of this Oliver's Architeck, do not suit
exactly, with the very Protoplasts, the Almighty's Mind; and whither his Model
(which all must acknowledge the result of a most unnatural Rebellion) was uot
the very Commonwealth of Nature? And this his Prototype of the Primitive
Republic, the Pragmatical Dogmatist is pleased to call, the Ibid p. 20.
Doctrine of the Ancients, or Ancient Prudence, but if such (as he says) were
the Government before the Flood, I shall only conclude it so; because its
Lewdness and Sedition, might occasion the deluge; and might have been preserved
for them in the Ark too, since there was Beast in it of every kind; and their
admired Aristotle will allow his (...), to be Communicable to an Ant, an Ape,
or an Ass as well as a Man.

This opinion of the Peoples deciding between themselves and their King, you
shall see is not only Mr. Sidney's, but the Doctrine of all the Democraticks,
all the rank Republicans that ever writ; Junius (...) vind. cont. Tyran.
Intelligimus Magistratus, quasi Regum Ephoros, etc. (...) in Regno Israelitico,
denique Praefectos, Centuriones and Caeteros. Vid. 6. 37. Quaest. 2. Rex Qui
pactum perfide violat, hujus faederis seu pacti Regni officicurii Vindices and
Custodes sunt. Quaest. 4. page 169.
Brutus in his Vindiciae makes the Magistrates whom the People shall Authorize
(by whom he understands their Representatives, their Dyets, or Parliament; or
else such as was the Ephori of the Lacedaemonians, the Seventy Elders among the
Israelites, the Praefecti, with the Centurians among the Romans, these makes
not onlythe Judges, but the Avengers of the Perfidiousness, (as they call it)
of their Princes; upon their presumption that they have Violated the Laws.

About a year before the Publishing of that Pernicious piece, some say a Romish
Priest, a Catholic, others a Reformed one, A Calvinist; maintained the same
Doctrine, in a Treatise concerning the Sovereigns right over the Subject, and
the Subjects Duty toward his Sovereign; for there he tells us (tho it be a
Common Objection that the King has no other Judge but God himself, and the
Example of David as commonly objected, whose Murder and Adultery no less Laws
could punish than the Almighty's,) he Populi ordines jus sibi retinuisse
fraenandorum Principum, etc. Quod ni secerint perfidi in Deum and patriam
habeantur. De Jure Magistratuum. Quaest. 6. page 73. Edit. Francfurt.
Answers to it very positively, that the States of the Kingdom always retained
a power of Judging and Bridling their King; which if they do not do they are
Traitors to God, and their Country; he would resolve the Case of King David,
(whom the People could not Judge for his more than Ordinary Crimes) to result
from his sins and offenses but being Personal ones; and (as he must mean I
suppose) not perpetrated against the Welfare of the Neque supremum Magistratum
pro privatis delictis Coercere, quae proprie Personalia sunt. ibid.
Commonwealth it self; tho I cannot see why the breach of any Law established
in a Community, may not be Construed to be a Transgression, also against the
Public; tho the Injury sustein'd more immediately relates to some private
Person: It Is for that Reason all our Indictments run in the Kings Name, and the
Criminal Process, in all other Nations; at the suit of the Power that is
Supreme; so that properly there is no Personal Crimes, especially of this
Nature, but what can be considered too; (as they Commonly are) against the
National Interest; and the very well being of the Civil Society: So that if
they will Punish, or sit as Judges upon the Sovereign, for designs against the
Public State it self, they can as soon for any injury done to an private
Member of the same: But that we see the Israelites didnot pretend to do even in
their David's Case; and so his solution of the Nature of the Crime signify's
just nothing.

Mr. Harrington whom his advocate, and his Plagiary too, in his Publisher to
the Reader.
Plato Redivivus is pleased to recommend for his Learning, least the Notion of
the Balance that he borrowed from him should be taken for a Fool's, as well
himself (...) for it there, and played the Knave; why truly that Learned
Gentleman Chimeson in the same Din of the Peoples Judicial power, (and these
drudges of Sedition like the Common Pack-horses pursue all the same Track, and
the leading Bell; for he tells us too, Harrington in his Epitome of the whole
Commonwealth. Oceana page 278.
the People, or Praerogative (all one with them,) are also the Supreme
Judicatory of this Nation, having Power to determine all appeals from the
Magistrate; and to question him for his Administration.

In the next place, that Marchion. Needham, the supposed Author of Merc. Pol.
Independent Brute, that Assertor of his Free State, as he calls it, ( i. e.)
to be unconfined, and live like Savages: In Mr. Hobbs his Language, The State
of Nature; or if you please, in Mr. Harringtons, The Balance of Beasts. This
inveterate Villain, that vilifi'd our Monarchy, (tho that Heaven instituted it
self, after its own Theocracy,) that debused this Divine Institution, even
below their Human Invention, and The Brutish Principles of Monarchy. Merc. Pol.
Numb. 92. March 11. 1652.
calls its Principles Brutish; That Panegyrist of the Usurpation, some of whose
most Villainous Expressions, I may hereafter revive, for the Reproach of the
last Age, that suffered such a Miscreant to Murder Monarchy it self from the
Press, when they had Butchered it before on the Block; and for the Information
of this, that think themselves so hardly dealt with, when only their own
Treason, and Sedition, is less severely handled: That Opprobrium of Man, as
well as Subject, That pursued the Sons of the Martyred Sovereign, in such
scandalous Satyr, and bitter Invective; such Satyr, as themselves would think
but rudeness, if offered, only to the very mark of Infamy; their Perjured
Evidence, or their Pillor'd Oats; such Invective, as themselves would think
Inhuman, were it past upon Beasts, or their own more Barbarous Regicides: This
most unnatural lump of Anarchy, whom but to name, is to digress into
necessitated Horror, and Detestation; he published too, this very same
position, only in plainer Words, and more expressive Treason, viz. That the
People were not only Judge, of his Majesty, but That it be made an unpardonable
Crime, to incur the guilt of TREASON, against the MAJESTY of the PEOPLE, Ibid.
and notwithstanding those gaudy things called MONARCHS, the PEOPLE always made
a shift to bring them to an Accountable Condition, For this the Plato
Redivivus, or the Politic Plagiary Plat.Red. page 39.
founds all his Empire, and Dominion, in Property, according to the Doctrine of
the Ancients, or Oliver's old Oceana, only a new Babel built upon Rebellion:
For by this their own Maxim of Balance, or Property, the People must be the
supreme Judges of their King, and so the only deciders of their own Case; for
tho the King may be said to have, and surely has more of this Property, than
any single Subject; yet they are satisfied, he can never come to have more than
all, unless we could imagine he had in actual Demesne, the Major part of every
foot of the Land in his whole Dominions; tho I think I have shown in some
foregoing Section, in what Sense even the Law will allow the Sovereign to have
some sort of propriety over all: So that this their Ancient Prudence, or Empire
in property will allow the Collective Body of Subjects, to be the best Judges
of their own Case; nay necessitate them to be so, tho not some certain
Subjects. But then tell me, Seditious Dolts, the disparity between these
Brutus's Vindiclae quest. 4. p. 169. ut singuli Principe (...) sunt, (...)
universi superiore; or Rex major singulis minor universis, (...) (...).
Maxims you so much admire for their Antiquity, as if founded upon Eternal
Truths, and the Doctrine of a Brutus, or a Pryn, the very Words of our Modern
Common-wealths-Men, which almost all the World will allow to be great Lies? and
what does Hunt's Harangue tend to, but to maintain all the very same Position
of this Peoples judicial Power? Does he not for this tell us, That no Postscr.
page 71.
Civil Establishment, but is controlable to the public Weal: Page 73.
That the Crown is the Peoples Right? and in a word, in the very words of that
Monster; in his Mercury I mentioned above: A Miscreant that did not dare to see
the Light, till the Monarchy it self was involved in its darkest Cloud; and in
his lewd Language, does this illuminated Lawyer open too, even in this very
Case, ( viz.) That Treason, (may very well be committed against the Majesty of
the People; and the same says, The Counterpart of this excellent Lawyer Ibid
page 73. Will. (...) against the King's (...) voice.
Will.Pryn in one of his Treasonable Treatises, Pamphlets or wast Papers.

Here you see the Harmony, and agreeableness between the several sorts of these
Seditious Demagogues, that is, the Seducers of the People, according to the
very Literal Etymology of that very word they so much delight in; and Mr.
Sidney, when he says, there being no Judge Trial page 23.
between King and People, that therefore the Case admitting no other, they must
needs be Judges of things happening between them and him, is just no more than
what you see, all those I have cited before, have all, all to a syllable said.
Could I distort my Soul, and my little Sense so much, as to wrest it for a
while, to play the Republican, ( i. e.) to be Senseless, and Seditious; sure
common Prudence would prevail with me not to labor so much in such a Subject,
where the most sublimated Wits, with their most exalted Sense, can never say
any thing that is really new, any thing besides what has been as much baffled
of old, especially where the pains must be as unprofitable, as the argument
dangerous, and well it may, that sets up for a Commonwealth, under a Monarchy
so well established.

But since we have here seen all what such a series of time, and such a number
of Sedulous and indefatigable Authors have said upon this point, they surely
cannot but forgive us, only for asserting this point of the Government, which
they with less Reason are so ready to oppose; when our attempt, if it merit
nothing, cannot be condemned from any Law, only for desending its own
Establishments; and theirs for disturbing the public Peace, must be liable to
be punished by the Laws of any Civil, or Human Society: But to take no
advantage from our having the better end of the Argument; consider the Case
only in the absolute Abstract of pure and unprejudiced Reason and Equity; Mr.
Sidney says, Ibid. p. 23. The words of a late learned and Loyal Lawyer of our
own, are expressly, the same; Persons must not be Judged and (...). Jenkins Lex.
(...) Ed. (...) 48. Page 16.
It Is a most absurd solly, to say a Man might not in some places kill an
Adulterous Wife, or a disobedient Son or Servant, because he would there be
both party and Judge, (tho the Romans for that Reason would have killed him,
that stoned his Son to Death) I don't know what Civil Society allows of such a
sort of Severity, or what Barbarous one he had been bred in, but I am
satisfied, that for that very Reason, they being the Parties most offended,
have therefore sure the less Reason to animadvert on the Offense, unless we
could imagine them God Almighties too, as well as Governors, that had Injustice
for their all, their Attribute; and nothing of Human Passion, or Frailty, from
their suffering injury to transport, or deceive them in their executive power,
beyond the Measures of its Administration: The Sons of Brutus had saved once
their ungrateful Rome from a Foreign Foe, as well as the Father had delivered
it from the Domestic Slavery, (as the Democraticks of those times termed too,
their Rebelling against their perpetual Tyrant, their Caesar or their Prince;)
yet so transported were the People, with the unsuccessful Attempts of those
unhappy Youths, only for the thought of restoring that much better piece of
Polity, the Monarchy, they had helped but so lately to subvert, that without
the least Consideration of their past Services they soon sentenced them to
suffer: But were it granted them, That in some places, the Parties are
permitted to be the Judges; Does that argue for the Reason, and the equity of
the thing that they must be so in all others? it is sure a very sorry sort of an
Argument, that will conclude from a particular wrong, to an universal Right.

It Is such an one, as themselves would not allow of in the like Case, when it
makes for the Monarchy: For when it is objected to them, that God in the Sin of
his Servant David, did somewhat signify he reserved the judging of KINGS
Vindiciae Quest. 2.
to himself the King of Kings, and Judge of all the Earth; and that therefore
the Elders of the Israelites, or their Seventy, which Brutus says, were then to
constitute their supreme judicatory, we see Falsa est conclusio non debuisse
poenas de (...), aliquo sumi, quia semel sumpte non sunt, de jure. Magist.
Franckfort page 72. Quest. 6.
did not, or could not call him to Account; why truly to this it is answered by
his Predecessor in his Principles, that Plato to this Aristotle, That Author de
jure Magistratuum, That it is a false Conclusion to say, Kings ought not to be
punished by the People, because David, or any particular King was not.

I shall grant this renowned Republican, more than he will be willing to accept
of, especially in one of his Instances of the Father, tho party to have
heretofore been judge even in Capital of his Sons Offense, tho against himself;
but that was when the Government of almost all the World was purely
Patriarchal, and then he had the same Despotical power over his Wife and
Servant, his whole Tribe and Family; and even as their Aristotle, a
Commonwealth man insinuates to us in his Politics, those ruling (...). Ethic.
Lib. 8. c. 12.
Fathers, afford us the Foundation for all Monarchy; but says Sidney, There
being no mean Judge between King and People, therefore they are his Judges, and
their own; and why may it not be as well said, therefore he is both his own
Judge, and theirs? there is no one to mediate even in his own Instances,
between the Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Master and Servant; and does
therefore the Son Judge the Father, the Wife the Husband, and the Servant the
Master? or are either of them therefore the Judges in their own Case? Certainly
with Men of Common Sense, the Supreme power must conclude the Judicial too, and
that even themselves seem to suggest; tho it be bottomed upon a false
Principle, when they place it in the People: For they tell us themselves in
their old Antiquated Aphorism, when they consider them Collectively, they are
satisfied they have the supremacy, and then they would be not only Judges in
their own Case; but would for ever Exclude their King from being Judge; but the
very Foundation of this piece of folly under any Monarchy, must needs be false,
and so the very Babel they would build upon it must needs fall into Confusion.

But to give a farther Confutation to this first Maxim of this Antimonarchist,
tho it be really no more than what was Printed in the Rebellion, in another
pernicious piece, besides what we have mentioned above; It went under the Name
of a Treatise of Monarchy, and its Author Anonymous, who very fairly puts it in
the very power of every Man to Judge the Illegal Acts of his Monarch; Treatise
of Monarchy, p. 28.
But yet will not admit it to argue a superiority of the Persons Judging, over
him that is Judged; and indeed it is such an Inference, as seems to be just as
full of Folly as Faction, only they that would make the People supreme for it,
are the more lying Knaves; and this that would make them decide the matter
without, the more Factious Fool: for when you ask these Sophisters in policy,
if a Sovereign transcends his Bounds, who shall be Judge. of that excess of
Sovereignty? why themselves tell us there is no Judge, and yet will have the
People and the Party to be so; but what if I should for once force them upon
some shadow of Argument, and tell them the Fundamental Laws of the Land, to be
the best Judge? Yet still they be at a loss for this THEIR Judicatory; for the
King who is the Fountain of all the Laws, is the best Judge too of their being
violated.

But besides the very Supposition of such a Violation of the Laws, by our own
(...), is as false in Fact, as it is expressly against those very Laws to suppose
it; for by Vid 4. Eliz. 2. 46. Ne poet estre diseisor ne fair ascun tort. also
4. Ed. 4. 25. B.
those he is declared to be never able to do any wrong, and so his Subjects
cannot be injured by him, or the Statutes violated, when by those very
municipal Sanctions, he is still presumed to do right; but besides, Regal
Authority cannot in Reason be subject to the Penalty of any positive Laws; tho
it may perhaps be obliged to the Observances: And this made as Sir Walt.
Raleigh. History of the World. So the Civilians (as Baulus says) the Prince
does do well to observe those Laws to which he is not (...).
Learned a Person, as any our Land bred, to distinguish this Royal Obligation
into the directive and coercive part; to the first, he thinks them somewhat
subject, tho never to be compelled with the latter: Consult but your Bibles,
and the most curious Decet tamen Principe^ servare Leges, quibus ipse solutus
est, ut inquit Paulus d. 32.1.23.
of our Common-wealth's-Men, will hardly discover, what these illuminated
Virtuoso's of the State, have of late brought to light, that any of the Kings
among the Israelites, or the Men of Judah were tied to the Laws of their Land:
That very Description that Samuel gives them of their Sovereign Saul, which our
Democraticks delight to represent so very grievous and intolerable, and which
the late Mercury-maker Merc. pol. Number. 65.
calls the giving them a King in his Wrath; yet that serves sufficiently to
satisfy these mighty Murmerers, that the Nature, the Constitution of Monarchy
was looked upon then to be much more Arbitrary, than themselves, the most
Seditious Subjects, would well allow, or our present Sovereign aim at or offer:
For he tells 1. Samuel C. 8. verse 11, 12, etc.
them, The manner of a King must be to take their Sons for his Service, set his
Soldiers to devour the product of their Ground, seize their Daughters for
Cooks, and Confectioners; their Vineyards, and their Seeds, their Cattle, and
their Servants, all must be his, such an absoluteness, and even an Opprestion,
that they shall, as Samuel says, cry out because of their Verse 18.
King; yet even this, after he was by the same Prophet anointed, and endowed
with all that formidable Power, he so fearfully represented, we don't find even
him reproached for a Tyrant, or upbraided for violating the Laws, or any breach
of Trust; whereas their Brutus, in his Description of a Tyrant, calls it
Tyranny Tyrannus est qui exteros in praesidiis collo cat Vindiciae quest. 3.
Page 139, 140.
only for a Prince to bring in Foreigners for his Gaurd; and then our
Haringtons, Hunts, Nevels, and Needhams, might have made it Treason too against
the Majesty of the People; for our Kings that have suffered several French
Soldiers in their Troops: I say seriously they might have made use of such a
Ridiculous Argument of this Authors, for accusing our Princes of their
Arbitrary Power, as well as they have borrowed from the same Senseless Soul, as
silly and Seditious stuff. But least our Republicans, as they really do, should
rely too much upon Samuel's frightful Description of an Arbitrary Prince,
(which they nowa-days too much make the Bugbear of the People, as if their Dogs
can worry the best Government, when dressed in a Bear-Skin;) it is the Sense of
some Learned Men, that the Prophet gave them only this draught of a Monarch, to
let them know the extent of his power, and as Sir Walter says, to teach the
Subject to suffer with patience any thing from the Raleigh Hist. Chap. 16.. 1.
Hands of his Sovereign; and I think that unfortunate Gentleman when he Penned
most of that Excellent piece as a Prisoner, had no Reason to be suspected
Postscript page 68, 69.
for a Dissembling Flatterer of Kings, as Brutus representsany one that defends
his Sovereign's Right, for a Traitor Betrayer Merc. Pol. (...). 92.
of the People, as Hunt has it, or as Needham; Debauched with the Brutish,
Principles of MONARCHY; but I am sure may be allowed to have had more than them
all.

In the next place, the Laws of Nature, of all Nations, and particularly our
own; all absolutely exclude the People from being Judges in the Case of their
King: For the first, It is the most Preposterous and Unnatural Inversion in the
World, that inferior Subjects should be invested with such a Power, as common
Sense will not admit to be Pedes elevabuntur supra Caput. part of the Oxford
Oracle. Vid. Baker.
lodged tny where but in the Supreme; they may as well invert the common
Course, the constant Order of unalterable Nature it self, expect the Sun and
Lamp of Heaven should no longer move in an Orb so high; but Stars of the
meanest Magnitude set up for the sole Dispensers of the day; and the simile for
ought I see is not so Foreign neither; for we find there is more than a mere
ordinary Analogy between that Harmonious Symmetry of the World, and such a
System of Government, as if that Eternal Protoplast, had found it most
agreeable for the frame of the Universe, which he the very God of Unity had
formed; as if the Institution of the one, were nothing less Divine, than the
Creation of the other. And for this, I dare appeal even to the Almighty, and
that with better Authority, than Mr. Harrington with his Ancient Prudence: The
God of Heaven, who by all, unless they be Barbarous And even Homer a Heathen
was of that Opinion. (...). Hom. Il. (...). Hos. Theog. v. 96.
Heathens, is allowed to be but one, and he himself is pleased to call Kings
his very Vicegerents here on Earth; and the very Polytheists of Old Rome, that
had their Gods for almost every day, as numerous as they say, the Modern
Romanist, in his Calendar of Saints; yet they among the many Deities they
adored, still lodged the Supremacy in one, and ascribed all the Government, all
the sole Supreme Power, to their Mighty Jove: For this he framed Genesis 1. verse
16.
one Sun to Rule by Day, and a Moon by Night: For this he Justified that
paternal Right, in one Man, which even their Aristotle, a Heathen Born, bred
under a Republic, reckons for a sort of Monarchy; But I confess such a sort of
Argument, can not be concluding with Men that will oppose Heaven it self, and
all the Harmony of its Creation, rather than be convinced, That their own
Models end commonly in Consusion, and are best represented in the Primitive
Chaos.

For the Second; Consult but the Imperial Laws, and the Codes of Justinian;
Laws that were Collected from other Nations, as well as made by their own, Laws
that their Solon and Lycurgus, with all their Attick Legislators; all the great
Republics of Greece, which these Seditious Souls so much extol, could never
have reformed; and you will find what provisions those make for the Supreme
Magistrates being the sole Judge: The resolutions of some of those Heathens of
the Royal Authority, their Humble Submission to the Supreme Jurisdiction; in
all Causes, and over all Persons, (as our Protestant Oaths have it;) one would
think should make the boldest of our Christians blush, that can run up
resistance, at the same time they are Sworn to submit and obey; these their
Laws, which for their equity have obtained even through the universe, these tell
us, That the Imperator solus and Conditor, and interpres Legis, Zouch. Element.
part 4.. 4. p. 103. and c. 1. 14. 12.
King is both the Maker, and sole Interpreter of the Laws; that what ever Quod
princi. placuit Legis vigorem habet, D. 1. 4. 1.
pleases the Prince has the Power, and efficacy of a Law; and that it is a Crime
equivalent to Sacrilegii instar est principis rescripto obviare C. 1. 23. 5.
Sacrilege it self, to resist a Proclamation, or Edict of their Sovereign, that
he himself is bound by no Law; and then I am sure cannot be judged by any; and
that he is In (...) Imperatoris excipitur fortuna, cui ipsas Leges Deus
Subjecit, Nov. 105. 2.
exempted from them, here on Earth; because Subject to none but the Judge of
Heaven.

Si summo dare urgetur, ad Regem provocato. Lambert in his Laws Edgar. 1. 23. 5.
And for fear least Arguments drawn from the Laws of Nature, and all Nations
should be insufficient, to convince men of such Seditious Sentiments; we'll for
Confirmation of the Third, Subjoin the Resolution of the very Lawyers of our
Land; and they tell us too, what the God of Heaven; and almost the Universal
Concurrence of all the Nations upon Earth have agreed in before; our Britton as
I Have shown before, has in effect with the very digest of the Imperial Law; made
our Statutes to consist in the Will and Quod principi (...) Dig. 1. 4. 1. The
words of Bracton Chief Justice in Henry the 3d's time. Rex and non alius debet
Judicare, and in another place. Illius est Interpretari cujus est Condere.
Pleasure of the Prince; only qualifies it with this Insignificant Restriction.
That it must not be understood of an Absolute Will and Ungovernable, but such
as is guided and regulated by good advice; and the Rules of Equity, and Reason;
and if this be a Warrantable Resolution, (and I warrant you the rankest
Republican will take his Authority to be good; should it in any place favor
their Anarchy; then it must be unavoidably concluded, that where the Law is the
Princes Britton that Bishop of Hereford; by order of Ed. 1. penned a Book of
Laws, tells us it is the Kings will that his jurisdiction and Judgment be above
all in the Realm.
Will; none of his People neither as aggregate, or Jndividuals, can be Judges
of its Violation; neither can it according to common Sense, without the
greatest Solecism, and Absurdity; be said, by him to be violated at all; for
where the Custom of the Kingdom (as it must be in all absolute Monarchies) has
placed the sole Legislative Power in that which is Supreme: There the same
Will, or Moral Action of the Sovereign, that breaks an old Edict; is nothing
else but an Enacting of a new; and the Common Objection, that our Republicans
Flourish withal against this, is, That then Murder and Sacrilege might be the
Laws of the Land, because perhaps it has been heretofore the pleasure of our
own Hen. 8.
Prince. But as such Observations are full of Venom, and Spite, so they are as
much impertinent, and nothing to the purpose; for whether our own old English
Lawyers had restrained the meaning Britton, and Bract.
of the Word WILL, to a WILL guided by right Reason and Judgment, no Person of
sober Sense, but must Imagine, that the very Principi placuit of the Romans,
was as much restrained to the Rules of Reason and Equity; and therefore their
Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, and Domitian, were as much Tyrants, and by their own
Authors so are termed, as Vid. Sucron. In. vitas.
if they had been bound by the strictest municipal Laws of a mixed Monarchy, and
as the People themselves to the very Penal Statutes of the Land; and therefore
for that Reason the very same Civil Sanctions of their Imperial Law, that allow
such a Latitude to their boundless Prince, abound too with this Restriction,
that still it becomes him to observe those Decet tamen Principem inquit Paulus
Leges servare quibus ipse solutus. D. 32. 1. 23.
very Laws to which he is not obliged: And for the spilling of Blood, or
Robbing of Churches, and the like unnatural enormities, which they say by the
Sovereigns being thus absolved might become Lawful: did not the very Directive
part of some of their Municipal Laws forbid them in it, the precepts of God and
Nature, the Unresistable Impulse of Eternal Equity, and Reason; to which the
Mightiest Monarch must ever submit, and themselves did ever own a Subjection;
those will always tie the hands of the most Absolute, from Committing such
Crimes; as well as the Common Lictors do the meanests people for being by them
perpetrated and Committed; and it is a great Moral Truth, grounded upon as much
Reason and Experience, That those dissolute Princes that did Indulge themselves
in the Violating the Divine Laws of God and Nature, could never have been
constrained to the Observance of our Human Inventions, the Municipal Acts of
any Kingdom, or Country.

And therefore I cannot but smile to see the Ridiculous Insinuations of some of
our Republicans, endeavoring to maintain that by such silly suggestions, which
they cannot defend with Sense and Reason; for rather than want an Objection
they will put us too suppose some Kings endeavoring to destroy their Subjects,
and alienating of their Kingdoms; and then put their Question, Whether the
People shall not Judge, and Punish them for it? but in this they deal in their
Argumentation against their King, as some Seditious Senates of late endeavored
to Impose upon him to pass Bills, by tacking two together: A popular
encroachment, with an Asserting the Prerogative: Just such another business was
bandied about, by that baffler of himself; that precious piece of
Contradiction, Will. Prin. Who tells us out of Bracton; That GOD, the Law, and
the Kings Courts, are above the King; where if you take all the Connection
Copulatively; it is not to be contradicted, because no King but will allow his
God to be above him, under whom he Rules; yet even there it may be observed,
that the Lower House, he so much Labored for, is not so much as mentioned. So
do these Sophisters in the Politick's here, proceed just like those Jugglers in
the House; they couple a supposititious piece of Premised Nonsense; and then
draw with it, a pretty plausible Conclusion; for what man can Imagine, if he be
but in his Wits, that his Monarch, unless he be quite out of them, and Mad,
would destroy those over whom he is to Reign, none but the Bosan in the
Tempest, with his Bottle of Brandy, was so besotted as to think of Ruling
alone; and setting up for a Sovereign without so much as a single Subject; so
that should these peevish Idiots, have their silly Supposition granted, still
they would be prevented from obtaining their end at which they aim, for first
if we must suppose all the Subjects to be destroyed; where would there be any
left to judge this Author of their Destruction? if they will suffer us only to
suppose the Major part, or some few certain Persons to besacrific'd to his
Fury, then still that Sovereign, that would destroy the most part, or some
certain number of his Subjects without Sense, or Reason, must at the same time
be supposed to be out of his Senses, and then no Law of any Land will allow the
People to punish a Lunatic: But if a King must be called a Destroyer of his
People only for letting the Laws pass upon such Seditious Subjects, that would
destroy him; which is all the Ground they can have here, for branding with it
their present Princes; and for which these exasperated rebels really suggest
it; then, in Gods name, let the Latin Fiat Justitia ruat Coelum.
Aphorism take place too: Then let such Justice for ever be done upon Earth;
and trust the Judgments of Heaven for their falling: Then let them deprecate,
as a late Vid. Paper of the Proceedings upon Armstrong his Outlawry.
Lady did, the Vengance of the Almighty, upon the Head of the Chief Minister of
the Kings; but let there be more such Hearts to administer as much Justice, and
the hands will hardly receive much harm for holding of the Scales.

And for that others silly supposition of these Seditious Simpletons, of a
Kings Alienating of his Kingdom; It Is a received rule among civil Lawyers, and
may be well among our own: That a King cannot in Law alienate his Crown; and
that if it were Actually done it were de Facto void; besides if the Subject was
freed in that Case, it would be the result of the Sovereigns Act.
they must suppose him at the same time, as simple as themselves that suggest
it; and could they give us but a single Instance, or force upon us any
President; all they would get by it, is this, That as their supposition was
without sense; so their Application would be nothing to the purpose; for such a
matter of Fact of their Kings would make him de Facto none at all: I know they
can tell us of one of our That alienation of King John was suppos'dto have been
an Act of State, and it has been adjudg'd particularly by particular
Parliaments, That even a Statute for that purpose made would be of no (...): It
was resolved (...) Scotland too.
own that lies under that Imputation, of making over his to the Moor: And of
others, that in the time of the Popes Supremacy, resigned themselves with
submission to the Holy See; for the first, the most Authentic Historians not
so much as mention it; and were it truly matter of Fact, that King had really
nothing to resign; for the Republicans of those times, were the good Barons
that Rebel'd; and had seated themselves in a sort of (...) before; in short if
it were solemnly done, it would look like the Act of a Lunatic; if not at all,
as is much more likely, their Historians Labor in a lie; and for the other, we
never had a Sovereign that Submitted the Power of his Temporal Government of
the state to the Pope's See: but only as it related to the Spiritual
Administration of the Affairs of the Church, and the Religion of the Times.

These sort of Suppositions have so much Nonsense in them, especially when
applied to Human Creatures, and more then when to Monarchs, that have commonly
from Birth and Education, more Sense than common Mortals; that there is not so
much as a Natural Brute, but will use what he can manage as his own, with all
imaginable Care and Discretion. How tender and fond are the most stupid
Animals? how do they most affectionately express that paternal Love for the
Preservation of their little Young? how abundantly do they Evidence that
Natural Posts. C. p. 113.
(...), with which Mr. Hunt gives us such a deal of impertinent disturbance?
and why cannot the King of a Country, whom the Civil and Imperial Sanctions
represent as the Princeps. Pater patriae est, D. 1. 4. 1. Atrocius est Patriae
parentem quam (...) occi dear, Cicero. in Philip. 2d.
Father of it too, be supposed to retain as much a paternal Care for its
Conservation? we do not find even in that their Free State of Nature, or that
Commonwealth of Wars, the Republic of unruly Beasts, where there is the least
Relation, or resemblance; tho perhaps they have power and opportunity, that
they delight to devour and destroy, and much less do they covet the ruin of
that, from which they can reap somewhat of Advantage by its Preservation, why
then should we fancy Human beings, and the best of Mankind Monarchs themselves,
whom the Almighty has made I Have said ye are Gods. Psalms.
Gods too, to be guilty of so much Madness and Inhumanity? Where do we find the
worst of Fools, designedly to destroy their Patrimony, though many times
through Ignorance, they may waste them? and that tho there were no Laws to
terrify them from turning Bankrupts, or punishing them for Beggars, when they
have embezell'd their Substance: Away then, Malicious Miscreants! with such
sordid Insinuation, such silly Suggestions against your own Sovereigns, which
your selves no more believe them likely to be guilty of, than that they would
set Fire to all their Palaces, and Sacrifice themselves and Successors in the
Flames.

But to Return to our Argument, they will tell us perhaps, What signify the
Sanctions of the Imperial Laws, and the Constitutions of an Absolute Empire to
a Commonwealth, or a Council of three States that are Coordinate, or at most
but a Monarchy Limded and mixed, and where whatever power the Supreme Magistrate
has, must have been first Conferred upon him by the People; where the
Parliaments have a great part of the Legislative, and their Sovereign in some
sense but a Precarious Prerogative? what signifies the Authority of a Britton,
or a Bracton, whose very works by this time are superannuated, who wrote
perhaps when we had no Parliaments at all; at least Hunt allows that himself
posts. p. 95.
none such as now Constituted? I will not insist upon in answer to all this to
show the Excellency of the Civil Institutions that obtain over all Nations that
are but Civilized: I wont prove to them because already done, That we don't
Consist of three States Coordinate in the Legislative; or that our Monarchy is
Absolute, and not mixed, as I shortly may: But yet I Will observe to them here,
Postquam populus Romanus Lege Regia in principem omne suum Imperium and
potestatem solum Contulit, ex illa non, sub diti sed etiam Magistratus ipsi
subiiciuntur. Zouch. Elem. p. 101.
That the Romans themselves, tho by what they called their Royal Law they
looked upon the power of the Prince to be conferred upon them by the people;
yet after it was once so transferred they apprehended all their right of
Judging and Punishing was past too. And for their vilifying these Ancient
Authors, and Sages of Law, who, did they Favor these Demagoges, would be with
them of great Authority, and as mightyly searched into, and sifted: Should I
grant them they were utterly obsolete, and fit only for Hat-cases, and
Close-stools, that they both writ before the Commons came in play, for their
further satisfaction I Will cite the same from latter Laws, not two hundred years
old, and that our selves will say was since their Burgesses began.

And therefore to please, (if possible) these Implacable Republicans, I Will
demonstrate what I Have undertaken to defend; from the several Modern
Declarations of our Law: For in Edward the 3d.
Edward the Third's it was resolved that the King could not be Judged: And why?
because he has no Peer in his Land; and it is provided by the very first
Sanctions of our Established Laws, by the great Magn. Chart. cap. 29. No Freeman
will we Imprison, or Condemn, but by Lawful Judgment of his Peers. Per parium
juorum Legale Judicium: And my Lord Coke tells us they are to be understood of
Peers of the Realm only when a Peer is to be tried. Comment upon the very
words. 2. Inst. which he more fully explains in's Comment, on the 14. Chap. of
Char. where he says pares is by his Peers or Equals, for as the Nobles are
understood by that word to be all equal; so are all the Commons too, ib. p. 29.
Where note the form of this very Charter runs all in the sole (...) of the King.
Charter it self, their Act of Liberty, they so much Labor in: that not the
meanest Subject can be Tried or Judged unless it be by his Peers and Equals;
much less so mighty a (...) that has none: and a Fortiori then with lesser
Reason by those that are his own Subjects, so far from being his Peers, or
Equals, that they are together his Inferiors, which has made me think many
times, these preposterous Asserters of so much Nonsense, these Seditious
Defenders of those Liberties they never understood, did apprehend by the word
Pares in the Law, not the common Acceptance of it in the Latin; but only the
abused Application of it, of our own English, only to our House of Lords: And
conclude the King might be Judged by those we commonly call PEERS, because they
sit in that Honorable House, and at the same to be Judged according to Magna
Charta, that all Judgments be per pares: But does not each Dunce and every
Dolt understand that the very Letter of the Law looks after this only, that
every Person be tried at the least by those that are of his own Condition; and
that in the Legal Acceptance of the Word, every Commoner of the Lower House,
nay every one of their Electors, is as much a Peer, as the greatest Person of
the House of Lords: In short, they must put some such silly Seditious
Exposition upon the plainest Letter, when they pretend to Judge their King, or
else from the very Law of their own Liberty they labor in, allow that their
King has no Judges.

In that Act against Appeals that was enacted in the time of Henry the 8th. 24.
H. 8. c. 12.
the very Parliament upon whom the People, and even these Republicans so much
depend, tells us even in the very Letter of that Law, That it is Manifest from
Authentic History and Chronicle, That the Realm of England is an Empire, That
its Crown is an Imperial one, That therefore their King is furnished by the
goodness of Almighty God, with an entire Power and Prerogative, to render and
yield Justice to all manner of Folk, in all Causes, and Contentions: This by
solemn Act is declared of their King, this Excludes the People from Judging of
themselves, much more their Sovereigns: This the Resolution of a popular
Parliament they would make even the Supreme; and this by them resolved, even in
Opposition to that Popery, these Panick Fools so much, and so vainly fear. Do
not the Books, the best Declarations of the Law, let us understand, that which
they against the Resolutions of all the Law it self, would so foolishly
maintain, that it was resolved in Edward the 4th's time, That the King cannot
be said to do any wrong, and then surely cannot be Judged, by his very People
for doing it, when impossible to be done? and was not this the Sense of Vid. 1.
Ed. 5. fol. 2.
all the Judges and Sergeants of the time, to whose Opinion it was submitted?
was it not upon the same Reason, a Resolution of Si Le Roy moy dissei sit pur
ceo que Le Roy en le ley ne poit moy disseisir il ne serra appell. disseisor,
mes jeo sue mis a petition a Roy. 4. Ed. 4. 25. 13.
the Law in Edward the 4th's time, that because the Sovereign could not be said
to injure any Subject; therefore the Law never looks upon him as a disseisor, a
disposesser of any Man's Right? and all the remedy it will allow you, is only
Plaint and Petition. Does not my Lord Coke himself, that in several places is
none of the greatest Assertor of the Right of the Sovereign, fairly tell us,
Coke Common. West. 1. 2. Inst. p. 158.
least it should be vainly feared they should reflect upon the King's own
Misgovernment, all the fault should rest upon the Officers and Ministers of his
Justice.

Does it not appear from the Stat. to pursue suggestious, 37. E. 3. c. 18. 38.
Ed. 3. c. 9.
Statutes of Edward the third, that notwithstanding the strict Provision of the
Charter, for the Trial by Peers, that the King was still looked upon as a Judge
with his Council and Officers to receive Plaints, and decide Suggestions; and
tho, that, and the subsequent of the next year provide against false ones; yet
it confirms still the power of the King, to hear and determine them whether
false or true? Have they not heretofore answered, touching Freehold, even
before their King and Council; and a Parliament Parl. Gloucester 2. Ric. 2.
only Petitioned their Sovereign with all Submission, that the Subject might
not be summoned for the future, by a Chancery Writ, or Privy Seal to such an
Appearance; but this they will say, was the result of the Sovereigns Usurpations
upon the Laws of the Land, of a King Richard the 2d. That did deserve to be
deposed, Brief History of Succession p. 7.
as well as the Articles of his Depositions to be read: Plato Rediviv. p. 116.
234.
a King that forfeited the executive Power of his Militia, for prefering
worthless People, and was himself of little worth; or as the most Licentious,
and Lewdest Libel of a longer date has it: Plato Rediviv. p. 116. 234.
a King that found Fuel for his Lust in all Lewd and uncivil Courses: Now tho
March. Needham, Merc. Polit. n. 65. Sept 4. 1651.
we have the Authority of the best of our Historians, for the good Qualities of
this Excellent, tho but an unhappy Prince; and who could never have fell so
unfortunately, had his Subjects served him more faithfully; tho Mr. Hollinshed
Hollinshed 3d. Vol. Chron. F. 508. N. 50.
tells us, never any Prince was more unthankfully used, never Commons in
greater wealth, never Nobles more cherished, or the Church less wronged; How Is
Annals p. 277.
and as Mr. How has it, in Beauty, Bounty, and Liberality, he surpassed all his
Predecessors; and Baker, the best among our Moderns says, there were aparent in
him a great many good Inclinations that he was only abused in his Youth: but if
he had been Guilty afterward in his riper Age of some proceedings these
Republicans had reason to reproach, I am sure he was Innocent of those foolish
Innuendo's those false and frivolous Accusations, for which they rejected him,
viz. for unworthiness, and insufficiency, Vid. Trussel in vit. R. 2.
when he never appeared in all his Reign more worthy of the Government, than at
the very time they deposed him, for being unworthy to Govern.

But whatever were the vices of that Prince, with which our virulent
Antimonarchists, would blast and blemish his Memory; yet we see from the
President Parl. Glocest.
that is cited, the Sense of his Subjects did not then savor so much of
Sedition, as insolently to demand it, for their Privilege and Birthright,
which without doubt, they might have pretended to call so, as much as any of
those, the Commons have since several times so clamored for with Tumult and
Insurrection; and was indeed more to be condemned, than any of those
Miscarriages, the Seditious and Traiterous Assembly, His deposers within the 25
of Ed. Coke. Treason.
that deposed the same Prince, did ever Object; for if their Freehold cannot be
called their Birthright, then there is hardly any thing of Right, to which they
can be born: And yet we see, that the King and his Council, had heretofore
Cognizance even of that, as it appears from the Commons Petitioning him against
it, and his Answer, which was, That tho he would remand them to the Trial of
their Right by the Law, and not require them there to answer peremptorily; yet
he did reserve the power, at the suit of the Party to Judge it, where by Reason
of Maintenance, or the like, the Common Law, could not have its Course; then we
may conclude, that the judicial power was absolutely in the King; and this was
also at a time, when this Richard the 2d. was but a Minor, no more than
thirteen years old, and so this his Answer, without doubt by the Advice of the
wisest of his Council, and the most learned of the Land.

And for this reason; (notwithstanding it is provided by that Chapter of the
Great Mag. Chart. 9. H. 3. c. 29. and Cap. 14.
Charter, none shall be Diseised of his Fre hold but by Lawful Judgment of his
Peers; tho the Right was tried before that sort of Statute, by common Law as my
Lord 2 Inst. page 49.
Coke observ's upon it; by the verdict of 12 Peers, or equal men,) yet still I
look upon the King to remain sole Judge in every Case whether Civil or
Criminal; for these Peers are never allowed to try any more than bare matter of
Fact, and the Sovereign always presides in his Justices to decide matter of
Equity and Law: And those The writ of Conviction was the same with an Attaint,
and that was by Common Law too. Coke 2. Inst. p. 130. Vid. 3. Inst. p. 222. and
1. Inst. page 294. 13. and tho this Judgment is given by no stat. yet there are
several Stat. that (...) penalty and that even in trespass where damages but
40. sh. 5. E. 3. Chap. 7. Vid. also (...). E. 3. c. 8. (...). E. 3. c. 4. 13.
R. 2. and several other Stat. in H. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8th. times about it.
very Laws to which he gives Life too; and whose Ambiguities he resolves,
themselves also sufficiently terrify the Jurors from pretending to give their
own Resolutions, by making them liable to the severe Judgment of an Attaint, if
their Verdict be found false, (i.e.) to have their Goods, Chattels, Lands, and
Tenements forfeited, their Wives and Children turned from their home, and their
Houses Levelled; and their Trees plucked up by the Roots; and their Pastures
turned up with the Plough, and their Bodies Imprisoned: A sort of severity
sufficient one would think to frighten the Subject from assuming to himself to
decide the judicial part of the Laws; and for this Reason, in all dubious
Cases, for fear of their bringing in a verdict False; they only find the Fact
specially, and leave the determination of it to the King in the Judges that
represent him.

And as this was resolved for Legal, even from the Common Usage and Custom of
the Land; confirmed as you see by several Acts of Parliament; so was it
maintained also by those very Villains that had subverted the Government it
self, and violated all the Fundamental Laws of all the Land; for when Lilburn,
a Levelling, and discontented Officer, a Lieutenant of Oliver's Army, was put
upon his Vid. Lilburn's Trial. 24. Oct. 1649. Printed the 28. of November 1649.
Page 3.
Trial for Treason, only for Scribbling against the Usurpation for which he had
fought; and as he boasted to the Bench, to the very butt end of his Musket;
against his Majesty at the Battle of Brainford; and the mutinous wretch only
Troubled and Disgusted because he had not a greater share in that Usurped
Power; for which he had hazarded his Life, and Fortune, when he came to be
pinched too, with that Commission of High Court of Justice, himself had helped
up for the Murdering of his Sovereign, and his best of Subjects; no Plea would
serve him, but this popular one, which the Lieutenant labored in most
mightily; that his Jury were by the Law, the Judges of that Law, as well as
Fact; and those Ib. p. 121.
that sat on the Bench, only Pronouncers of the Sentence, (and truly
considering they were as much Traitors by Law, as the Prisoner at the Bar; he
was so far in the Right, that his Jury were as much Judges as those
Commissioners that sat at the Bench:) yet even that Court only of Commissioned
Traitors, and Authorized Rebels, thought good to overruled him in that point,
and Iermin one of the Justices, just as Senseless in his Expression of it, as
Unjust and Seditious in the Usurpation of such a Seat in Judicature, when no
King to Commission him; In an uncouth, and clumsie Phrase, calls his Opinion of
the Ibid. page 122, 113.
Juries, being Judges of Law, A Damnable Blasphemous Heresy, never heard in
the Nation before; and says, It Is enough to destroy all the Law of the Land;
and that the Judges have interpreted it, ever That contradicts directly out of
their own Mouth the Doctrine of William Pryn, of his Parliaments Right to it
since there was Laws in England; and Keeble, another of the
Common-wealth-Commissioners, told him, 'Twas as gross an error, as possible any
Man could be guilty off; and so all the Judges even of a power absolutely
Usurped, and wherein they professed so much the Peoples Privilege, overruled the
Prisoner in his popular Plea.

It Is true, Littleton, as Lilburn observed Littleton Sect. 368.
to them, in one of his Sections, says, That an inquest as they may give their
Verdict at large, and special, so if they will take upon them the knowledge of
the Law, they may also give it general: But the Comment of Coke, their own
Oracle, upon the place, confirms the Suggestion I have made of Resolving it
into the King's Judges: For he says, it is dangerous to pretend to it, because
if they Coke Com. ibid.
mistake it, they run in danger of this Attaint; and tho the famed Attorney
General of those times, with his little Law, was so senseless as to allow it to
Lilburn in the beginning of his Trial; tho at another at Reading, in that time
of Rebellion, Prideaux. Liburn's Trial. page 17. Ibid. page 123
they made the Jury to be covered in the Court upon that account; yet you see
those even then the Justices of the Land, tho but mere Ministers of a most
unjust Usurpation, would not let it pass for Law: And the Refutation of this
false Position, is so far pertinent to our present purpose, as it relates to
prove the Peoples being so far from being qualified to be their Kings Judges,
that they can not absolutely Judge of the mere Right of a meum and tuum among
themselves.

Several other Instances, both the Books and Rolls abound with, that Evidence
our Kings the only Judges of the Law in all Causes and over all Persons, for in
the 13th. year of the same 13. R. 2.
Richard the Second, the Commons Petitioned again the King, that his Council
might not make any Ordinance against the Common Law; and the King Graciously
granted them; but with a salvo to the Regalities of the Crown and the right of
his Ancestors. The Court of Star Chamber, which the worst of times Abolished,
and my Lord Coke makes almost the It is the most Honorable Court, the Parliam.
excepted that is in the Christian World, of Honorable Proceeding, just
Jurisdiction; A Court that kept all England in quiet, Coke 4 Inst. p. 65. and
so it did till abolished by the Tumults of a Parliam.
best of Courts, had heretofore Cognizance of property, and determined a
Controversy, touching Lands contained in the Covenants of a Jointure, as
appears in the Case of the Audleys, Rot. Claus. 41. Edward the 3d. There the
King heard too a Cause against one Sir Hugh Hastings, for withholding part of
the Living of the poor of St. Leonard in York, as is Evident from the Roll. 8.
Edward 4. p. 3. And tho the Proceedings of this Court, were so much decryed by
those that clamor'd so long for its Suppression, till they left no Court of
Justice in the Land, unless it were that of Blood and Rebellion, their High
one; tho the King in his giving year was so gracious, that he made the very
Standard, An. 1641. page.
and rule of his Concessions, to be the very request of his People, and
gratified them in an Abolition of this Court, established by the Common Law
Coke 4. Inst. C. 5.
and confirmed afterward, per 3. H. 7. c. 1.
Act of Parliament; yet Cambden Britt. 130.
Cambden, our Historian, as well as our Coke, our Lawyer, could commend it for
the most Honorable, as well as the most Ancient of all our Judicatories; and if
they will have the Reason, Why it treated of Matters so high, as the Resolution
even of Common Law, and the Statute, it may be told them in the weighty Words
of their own Oracle; Because the King in Coke 4. Inst. p. 65. 63. ne dignitas
hujus Curiae vilesceret.
Judgment of Law, as in the rest, also was always in that Court, and that
therefore it did not meddle with Matters of ordinary Moment, least the dignity
of it should be debased, and made contemptible; and tho by the gracious
consent, or rather an extorted Act of Grace, the late King was forced to forego
it; yet the Proceedings of some Cases there, may serve to show what a power our
Kings had, and ought to have in all manner of distributive Justice.

Several other Citations I could here set down, to prove the Subjection of the
very Common Law, to the Sovereign Power; as Henry the Sixth superseding a
Criminal Process, and staying an Arraignment Verney's Case. 34. H. 6. Rot. 37.
for Felony: Henry the Seventh's that debarred the Beckets by decree, from
pursuing their suit for Lands, because the merits of the Cause had been heard
by the King his Predecessor, and also by himself before; but these will
abundantly suffice to satisfy any sober Person that does not set himself
against all assertors of his Sovereigns Supremacy. And then if Custom, and
Common Usage, which Plowden in his Commentaries, is pleased to call the
Common Law; lies in many Cases Subject to the Resolution of the Supreme
Sovereign; no doubt but the Statute, the result of his own It Is that which
gives them Life as I have shown before, and makes them any thing besides waste
Paper, And the Judicious Hooker in his politics, seems to be of the same
opinion, when he says, Laws take their force not from those that devise them;
but from the power that gives them the strength of Laws.
Sanction, must of necessity submit, and acknowledge a subjection to the same
Power, and that I think we have sufficiently proved already upon several
occasions, both from the Letter of the Laws themselves, and our little light of
Reason; both from Arguments, and The seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, had all
their Laws made by their 7. several Sovereigns, of which confuss'd number the
Confessor culled out the best, and called them after his own name, St. Edward;
so did also the other Saxon and Danes Kings their own; after theirs, as you see
in Lambert's Book of Laws.
Laws that have evidenced their own Resolutions to be reserved to the King; and
that we had Kings long before fore the Commons Commenced, Conven'd' or Concurred
in their assent to such Laws.

It Is prodigiously strange to me, that these mighty Maintainers of the Peoples
Legislative, and their Judicial Power, eeven over their own Sovereigns, cannot
be guided by those very Laws they would have to govern their Kings, thus you
shall see a Needham, a Nevil, or a Sidney amongst our selves, in all their
Laborious Libels, that the drudges of Sedition (who seem to verify the Sacred
Text, in drawing Sin it self with a Cart-Rope,) in all that they tugg, toil and
labor in; you (...) see that they cite you so much as a single Statute on
their side; or if they do, only such an one as is either Impertinently applied,
or as Industriously perverted: And in the same sort does the Seditious Scot,
Buchanan, and the rest of the Books of their discontented Demagogues); that
Omne malum ab aquilone.
Northern Mischief, that threatened us always with a Proverbial Omen, till
averted of late by the Loyalty of their latter Parliaments, that have atoned
even for the last age and the persidiousness, and Faction of the former) those
all in their Libels, hardly Name you so much as one single Law of their Nation,
to countenance the Popular Paradox, the pleasing Principle of the Peoples
Supremacy; which the poor Souls, when prescribed by those Mountebanks of the
State, must take too like a Common Pill; only because it is gilded with the
pleasant Insinuations of Natural Freedom, Free State, Subjection of the
Sovereign, Power of the People, and all the dangerous Delusions that lead them
directly to the designs of these devilish Republicans (i.e.) a damnable
Rebelion; whereas would they but submit their Senses to the Sanctions of the
Laws of their several Lands, their Libels they would find to be best baffled by
the Statute Books, as well as their Authors to be punished by them, for their
Publication. It Is strange, that should not obtain in this Controversy, which
prevails in all polemical disputes, that is, some certain Maxims and Aphorisms,
Postulates and Theorems not to be disputed; these determine our Reason even in
Philosophy and the Mathematics; and why should not the Laws then in Politics
too, and where they are positive? sure it is Impudence, as well as Capital
perhaps to oppose.

And yet we see these Gentlemen, of so little Law, to Labor so much in a
dispute that is only to be decided by it; what Authority is the singular
assertion of a Republican, or a page 21.
Plato Redivivus, that the House of Commons is the only part of the old
Constitution of Parliament that is left us; or the single sense of Trial. p.
23.. 2.
Mr. Sidney, that the Senate of England is above its Sovereign; against the
form of the very first Act of State that remains upon Record, the very Magn.
Chart. 9. H. 3. know ye that we of our mere will have given etc. Chart. Forest.
9. H. 3. begins also with a we will. Stat. Hiber. 14. H. 3. only a mere Order
of the King to the Son of Maurice his Judge there; the words we command you,
Witness my self. Note that was even concerning Freehold; and a Case of
Co-parcenary. The Stat. Bisex. 21. H. 3. tho concerning pleading, and Common
Law, but an Order of the King to his Judges; for the words are we ordain and
Command you. Stat. Assiza. 51. H. 3. The King to whom all these shall come
greeting. de scacc. the King Commands.
Charter these Democraticks adore; against the form of the following one of the
Forest, and Consult but the Style of the Statute Book, and all the Ancient
Acts, down to Richard the Second, and you will find not so much as one, but what
expressly points out in its Enacting part, the sole power of the Sovereign by
which it was Enacted; all in these repeated Expressions of Absolute Majesty. We
the Kings of England of our free will have given and granted; it is our Royal
Will and Pleasure, the King Commands, the Kings Wills; our Lord the King has
established, the Lord the King has ordained. And most of them made in the
manner of Edicts, or Proclamations, as in the Margin will appear, and tho it is
thought now such a piece of Illegality to be concluded by an Order of Council;
and even his Majesty's late command for the Continuance of the Tunnage, and the
Resolution of the Judges about that part of the Excise which expired; has by
some of our murmurers been repined at, tho by all Loyal ones it was as
cheerfully assented to; and as punctually paid; yet they shall see that the
People heretofore paid, such a deference even to an Edict of the Prince that
they nearly relied as much upon it as the Romans did upon their Imperial
Institutions; who as I before showed, looked upon it as a crime like to
Sacrilege but to disobey. And this will appear from an 31. Hen. 8. c. 8. Stat.
Mert. 6. The King our Lord providing, has made these Acts, 2d. Inst. p. 101.
Westminster. 1. 3. Ed. 1. 1. The King wills and commands. Stat. Gavelet even of
altering the writ, which they say cannot be done but in Parliament, Enacted by
the King and his Justices. 10. E. 2. Stat. E. 3. several say; we will, we
ordain so also several, R. 2.
Act of Parliament in Henry the Eighth's time; which provided; H. 8
that the Princes Proclamations should not be contemned by such obstinate
Persons, and opposed by the willfullness of froward Subjects that don't
consider what a King by his Royal Power may do; and all that disobeyed were to
be punished according to the Penalty expressed in the Proclamation; and if any
should depart the Realm, to decline answering for his Contumacy and Contempt,
he was to be adjudg'd a Traitor; and tho the Statute limited it to such as did
not extend to the Prejudice of Inheritance, Liberties or Life; yet the King was
left, the Judge, Whether they were Prejudicial or not; and these Kings Edicts
by this very Act were by particular Clause made as binding, as if they had been
all Acts of Parliaments; and that it may not be said to be an Inconsiderate and
Unadvised deed of the Parliament, to give the King such a Power; (tho it is hard
to say so of a Senate, whom the Coke 4. Inst. c. 1. Parl.
writ that convokes them says, they are called to deliberate.) To avoid that
imputation, I must tell them it was very Solemnly a Second time Confirmed
again, within three 34. H. 8. c. 25.
years after; and by that Power given to nine of the Kings Council, to give
Judgment against (...) Offenders of the former, and (...) this was repealed in
the following (...) of King 1. Ed. 4. c. 12.
Edward a Minor, and almost a Child, A time (wherein not withstanding there is
such a woe denounced against a People that have such a King;) the Subjects
seldom fail of Invading something of the Prerogative; yet still we see tho the
Law be not now in (...), plain matter of Fact, that there was (...) such a Law;
that our Kings (...) were once by express words of the Statute made as valid as
the very Act of State it self that made them so; that the Judicial Power of the
Prince was (...) less limited, and that (...) Libels Plato Rediv.
lie, as well as their (...) Tongues when they tell us, and would have us
believe, That (...) but our late King as well as the present (...) pretended to
so much of Prerogative, or had more allowed them by the Laws.

And let any one but leisurably examine, as I have particularly, the several
Acts of each King's Reign; and he will find that from this Richard the Second, to
whose time, the Style of the Statutes as you see was in a manner absolutely
Majestic down to King Charles the Martyr, That the form. 1. H. 4. H. 5. H. 6.
Ed. 4. (...). 3.
even all those are (...) in such Words; as will (...) the Commons (...) being
(...), and so much concerned in the Legislative, as these popular (...) have
(...) to persuade us their People are; for even they all run either in (...),
The * King with the (...) Then begins the other. 1. H. 7. H. 8. Ed. 6. Q. Mar.
Q. El. Jac. 1.
(...) of his Lords Spiritual, and (...), at the special Instance, and (...) of
the Commons; or The (...) by and with the Assent of his Lords Spiritual, (...),
and Commons; and as if the past Parliaments, (...) would have provided against
the (...) of a (...) Age, which they could hardly be thought to (...), since it
savors so much of almost (...) and Sedition, as if (...) Anoestors, had feared
least some of their prostigate posterity, seduced with the Corruptions of a
Rebellious Age, should impose upon the Prerogative of the Crown, with any such
Subtle (...) of their King's making but Will. (...) Power of Parliam.
one of the three States, and by Consequence conclude, as they actually did,
that the two being greater than him (...), could be his Judges, and their own
Sovereign's Superiors; why to prevent these very Rebels and Republicans, in
such Factious Inferences, did they, for two hundred years agon, in the first of
Richard the Third, Resolve what was signified by the three Estates of the
Realm: For say they, That is to say, the Lords Exact Abridgem. Fol. 117. p. 1.
H. 3.
Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons; and even long fince that, much more lately,
but in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in that Act of Recognition of her Right,
where they endeavor to advance her Royalty as much as possible they can, and to
make the Crown of this Realm as much Imperial, there they tell her, It Is WE,
your Majesty's most faithful, and Keeble Stat. 1. El. C. 3. and does not their
own Oracle tell them so L. Coke 4 Inst. C. 1. Parliam.
Obedient Subjects, that represent the THREE ESTATES of your Realm of England;
and therefore in King James, and Charles the First's time, when the Commons
began to be mutinous, and encroach upon the Crown; then they having with the
help of their numerous Lawyers, which were once by particular Act, excluded the
House; and H. 6.
if less had Sat in it, perhaps it might have been once less Rebellious too;)
those Gentlemen knowing too well the weight of Words; and what Construction and
Sense, Sedition and Sophistry can deduct 4. Inst. Stat. de Bigamis, concordatum
per Justiciarios. 2. Inst ibid. Stat. West. 2. 13. Ed. 1. Dominus Rex in
Parlia. mento suo Statuta edidit 2. Inst. 331. Stat. (...) agatis. 13. Ed. 1.
begius. Rex talibus Judicibus Salutem and tho some would not have it an Act of
Parliament, my Lord Coke says, it is proved so by the Books, and (...) Acts 2.
Just. page 487.
from a single Syllable, I am confident it was they contrived the Matter and
Mcthod so, as to foist in the Factious form of this; Be it enacted by the King,
Lords and Commons; for that is the General Style of the Enactive part of most
of the Statutes of those Times; and this was most agreeable with their mighty
Notion, of his Majesty's making but up one of the THREE; that so they might the
better conclude, from the very Letter of their own Laws, That the TWO States
which the Law it self employed now to be Coordinate, must be mightier, and have
a Power over their King whom the same Laws confessed to be but ONE; and the
Reason why the forms of their Bill. and the draught of the Lawyers, and the
Lower House, might be past into Act, without any Alteration or Amendments of
this Clause, was, I believe, from a want of Apprehension that there ever could
be such designing Knaves, as to put it in to that Intention, or such Factious
Fools, as to have inferred from it, the Commons Co-ordinacy: For the Nobility,
and Loyal Gentry, that (...) commonly the more Honesty for having the less Law,
cannot be presumed so soon to comprehend what Construction can be drawn from
the Letter of it by the laborious cavil of a Litigious Lawyer, or a cunning
Knave; and therefore we find, that those Acts are the least controverted, that
have the fewest Words, and that among all the multiplicity of Expressions, that
at present is provided by themselves, that have commonly the drawing of our
Statutes; themselves also still discover as many Objections against it, to
furnish them with an Argument for the Merits of any Cause, and the Defense of
the Right of their Clyent, at the same time they are satisfied he is in the
wrong: And for those Enacting forms of our Statutes, whatsoever Sense some may
think these Suggestions of mine may want; That some Seditious Persons got most
of them to run in so low, so popular a Style in the latter end of King James,
and Charles the first's time; such as Enacted (...) Jac. 1. C. (...). 6. Car.
p. 1. C. 19. 12. Car. 2. C. 25. (...). 2. 13. Car. (...).
only by the Authority of the Parliament, by the Kings Majesty, Lords and
Commons; yet upon the Restoration of Charles the Second, the Words, With the
consent of the Lords and Commons, were again revived; and afterward 13, 14.
Car. 2. C. 10. 19. Car. 2. 8. 25. Car. 2. C. 1. 25. Car. C. 9.
they bring it into this old again, With the Advice and Assent of Lords
Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons, according to the form of Richard the 3d. and
Queen Elizabeth, that resolved them to be the THREE STATES, and this runs on
through all the Acts of his Reign, and even in several of them the Commons
humbly beseech the King, that it may be so enacted.

I thought it necessary to bring home Buchanan and his Disciples in Scotland,
maintained the same Doctrine of the King's Coordinacy; and therefore their Acts
in the Rebellion too, ran in the Name of the three States; But when the King
was returned to his (...), and they to their Obedience, the old form was
retrieved, The King with advice and consent of.
to our present, tho most profligate time, as much Acknowledgement as possible
I could of my Kings Prerogative, from the Laws of our Land, and the very
Statutes themselves, because that some great Advocates for the power of the
People, some times pretend to plead for them too from Acts of Parliaments, tho
I think in this last, lewd and Libellous Contest against the Crown, that lasted
for about five year, in that Lustrum of Treason; there was but one that was so
laboriously Seditious, so eminently popular, as to endeavor to prove the
Peoples Supremacy from Rolls, and Records, and Acts of State, and for that
recommend me to the good Author of the Right of the Commons Asserted, tho I
should rather approve of such an undertaking, when endeavored to be done from
the tracing the dark and obscure tracts of Antiquity, and the Authority of a
Seldom, than the single Assertion of a Sidney, and the mere Maxims of some
Modern Democraticks, that have no other Foundation for their Establishments,
than the new Notions of their Rebellious Authors, and that ipse dixit of such
Seditious Dogmatists: But I am satisfied too, that this Gentleman who has
labored so much in vindicating the Commons Antiquity, and their constituting
an essential part of our Saxon Parliaments, did design in it much more an
Opposition of our Ancient Monarchy, and the Prerogative of the Crown, than a
mere clearing the dark footsteps of our Old Chronicle, and a real defense of
Matter of Fact, and the Truth: And this is too clearly to be proved from the
pestilent Pen-man's, P-tyts own Papers, that were published at such a time,
when there was no great need of such an Asserting the Commons Right, when
themselves were more likely to have Usurped upon the Crown, and (as Mr. Sidney
and his Associates would have it,) made themselves and the People Judges of
their own wrong: For to see such a task undertaken at a time, when we are since
satisfied such dangerous designs were a-foot, looks only like a particular part
of that general Plot and Conspiracy that has been since discovered, and that
all sorts of Pens were employed, as well as all Heads, Hearts, and Hands at
work, for the carrying on Mr. Sidney's OLD CAUSE, (as indeed all this
Gentleman's Works tended to,) for which the Almighty was supposed so often to
have declared and signalized himself: and illustrates only this, That there was
not any Person qualified for undermining of our Monarchy, either from his Wit
or Parts, Boldness or Courage, from his Virulency in Satyr, or his Knowledge in
History, from his skill in any Science, or Profession, but what some or other
of the most eminent was made Serviceable to this Faction, and contributed his
Talent to the carrying on the Design, according to the gift and graces that
they had in their several Abilities to promote it; neither can this Gentleman
think himself libelled in this Accusation, unless he would give his own works
the Lie; for who but him that had such a Design for the subverting our
Monarchy, would, at a season when the Succession of our Crown was struck at in
the Commons Vote; a Succession that several Laws of our Land have declared to
be Hereditary even by that of God? who but one so Seditious, would not only
have encouraged such unwarrantable Car. 2d. Speech to the late Oxford Parliam.
Proceedings (which was the late Kings own Words for it) in such an Assertion of
the Commons Right? but in that too brought upon the Stage several Arguments
from our History, several Presidents of our Sovereign's being here Elected by
their Subjects, when they might as well too tell us, That our present Sovereign
was so chosen, because the Question was put to the People upon his Coronation;
but yet this elective Petyt's, Right of the Commons, asserted from his Cleri
and populi (...)
Kingdom of ours, did this Laborious drudg of Sedition drive at too. Does he
not tell us William Rufus, and several others were Elected, that is, Henry the
First, King Stephen, King John; tho I am satisfied, that consent of the Clergy
and People, they so much rely upon, was nothing more than the Convention of
those Persons that appeared upon the solemn Coronation, or at least, the
Proclaiming of the King. Themselves are satisfied all our old Statutes clearly
confirmed the sole Legislative Power of the Prince, and therefore they will not,
when they are objected to them, allow them to be Statutes at all, because made
I suppose only by their King; but so my Lord Coke says, they said of the
Statute of Edward 4. Inst.
the First, which notwithstanding he calls an Act of Parliament; but yet
however we see that the Style of all other Acts of Parliament, put all the
enacting part in the power of the King, so that Mr. Sidney's making his People
and Parliament the Supreme Judges of their Kings violating the Laws, is only a
Position that opposes every Act in the Statute Book, from the Great CHARTER, to
the last grant of our late King CHARLES.

But our Author Triumphed, as he thought, over his Adversaries in forcing back
their own Argument upon his Foes; for says Mr. Sidney, if no man must be Trial
page 24.
Judge because he is party, then neither the King, and then no man can be tried
for an Offense against him, or the Law; I confess with such a sort of
disputants as are resolved to beg the Question; and take their Premises for
principles of eternal truth, you cannot avoid the Conclusion, tho it be the
greatest Paradox, and an absolute Lie; for he presumes the Parity of Reason,
and then concludes they are both alike Reasonable; he takes it for granted, the
People may judge the King tho party, as well as the King the People, who must
be supposed as much partial; A Sophism Logician, call the Petitio principi.
and that is truly just as if he had said, when we believe as they do, and what
then? Why then we shall be of their mind, ( i.e.) that it would follow the King
or his Judges, could not hang a Fellow for Felony, or this Author himself for
a Traitor to the State: Nay more, as the Gentleman has managed the matter, it
is made an Argument a Fortiori; for he supposes the Absurdity to be such; that
if the King in his own Case must Judge the People, and not the People the King
in theirs, that this Contradictory Consequence would be as much conclusive;
That the Servant entertained by the Master must Judge him; but the Master by
Page
no means must the Servant; or in the Metaphor of his own more Blasphemous
Sedition, The Creature is no way bound to its Creator, but the Creator it self
to the thing it has Created: and now all is out, and all the large Volume, all
his mighty Treatise, not to be finished in many years, is founded upon that
first Principle of all Republicans; The Peoples Supremacy, or as Mr. Vid. Paper
at his Execution. He has too that Old Seditious Aphorism used by Junius Brutus,
and all the rest of the Republicans, Singulis (...). Trial. p. 23. tho in the
next paragraph, he is no more than any of his Subjects.
Sidney says, the Sovereign being but a Servant to his Subjects; a Creature to
these God Almightys of the People the Creators of their King; truly this they
are resolved we shall grant; or as resolutely suppose we cannot Contradict, and
so put upon us their presumptive absurdities for our own; and make them the
Consequence of those Concessions that were never yielded; who taught this
Gentleman, who granted him that the Magistrate was the Peoples Creature, but a
Brutus in his Vindiciae, or that as a bominable a Book De This Gentleman seems
only to have translated that Authors own words, non populus (...) Magistratus
sed Magistratus prop (...) po ulum fuisse creatos.
jure Magistratuum? and for this must it follow that Filmer is so absurd, only
because he does not suppose the very pernicious principles of those very Rebels
and Republicans he endeavors to refute? It is an easy sort of a Conquest, and
you may soon prove your Foes to be De Jure Magist. Quaest. 5. p. 10. Edit.
Francf.
Fools too; if you will oblige them to maintain their own positions, from the
Contradictory Maxims of their Enemies they oppose; and this Colonel that once
was a Soldier, and in Arms for his Commonwealth; as well as a Polemical pen
man against the Monarchy, would soon have remained sole Master of the Field;
had the Measures of his Foe been forced to be taken from the Rules and Maxims
of the Enemy which he fought; and many would think the Man a little mad, that
could imagine two Armies that faced in their Fronts, to meet so as to stand
upon the same ground. It cannot be well effected without a penetration of body,
neither can Mr. Sidney conclude us in that absurdity, unless he would make us
mingle Principles; a thing perhaps as repugnant to our Nature, as that
praeternatural Coition of Matter; for have we not all the Laws of our Land on
our side? and that besides Sense and Reason, to whose determined sanctions even
those themselves must submit; for I look upon our Argumentative reasoning in
such matters to be somewhat like Belief; which all our Learned in the
Metaphysics will allow to determine it self upon demonstration, and Commences
knowledg'd; and a science; and so must our Positions at last in the Politics,
no longer pass for indifferent Notions or disputable Opinions, when they come
once to be ratified by some supreme Establishment, or unquestionable Authority;
for as the result of demonstration is some Theorem or Postulate, that requires
our assent, so are the Sanctions of the Supreme power some Statutes, or Laws
that Command our Obedience; as the one is proved, so the other Enacted, and let
any one Judge from the several we have cited, or any single Act themselves can
cite, whether all and every one do not expressly assert, or absolutely imply,
the Sovereign so far from being the Servant of the Subject, or the Peoples
Creature, that they many times maintain him to be 16. R. 2. c. 5.
under none but God; and in all places acknowledge him above all the People;
and is not the absurdity on their side, and a Contradiction even in Terms, when
they contend for the contrary?

And as that Author, of the Right of the Magistrate, and the like writings of
the most Eminent Republicans led on and seduced Mr. S. in some Points; so has
also so his predecessor, or Co-eval (for I think they lived in an Age) W. Pryn,
imposed upon him in others; and I am sorry to see Mr. S. that valued himself
upon his parts to rely upon that which that pest of the press placed so much
confidence in, and that are the words of Deum Legem and Parliamentum.
Bracton, where he says, as Mr. S. would have it, God the Law and the
Parliament are the Kings three Superiors: But even Pryn himself, the perverter
of all that was not for his purpose, does not deal so disingeniously as this
Gentleman in the Case; for he recites it more Exactly as it is in Bracton,
which is, the Kings Court instead of the Parliament, which in the time that
Ancient Author writ, very probably consisted only of his prelates and Lords; so
that if granted them, Pryn's Commons, and Mr. S. his People of England, are not
comprehended in the words of that old writer, and then besides it is the
opinion of some, that those words the Laws, and the Kings Courts; were not
originally in the writings of that Loyal Lawyer, who in several other places of
his works, carries up the Divine Right of his King, and that absolute Power of
his Prince, as high as any of the most Modern whom Postscript.
Mr. Hunt has represented and libelled, as first introducers of this new
Notion, this dangerous, and damnable Doctrine; for that grave Judge for above 4
or 5 hundred years agon; told us our Hen. the 3d's time Bracton. lib. 4. cap.
24. 5. Rex sub nullo nisi tantum Deo. and l. 5. tract. 3. non habet superiorem
nisi Deum; satis habet ad paenam quod Deu^ expectat ultorem.
King was under none but God; that he had none above him but God, and that he
had God alone for his Avenger; and it seems somewhat Improbable a person of his
Loyalty and Judgment should not only detract from the Supremacy of his
Sovereign, which he seems so much to maintain, but also in direct opposition to
what himself had asserted, and besides were they the sense as well as the words
of that Author, they are only true (as I have before shown) when they are taken
collectively and in a complicated Sentence, and so seems a sort of Sophistry
which the Logical heads call a fallacy in Composition: But yet from that does
Mr. S. conclude, That the power is Originally in the People, and so by
Consequence in the Parliament, only as they are their Representatives.

For my part, I cannot Imagine this Gentleman's large Treatise to be any thing
else but a Voluminous Collection, of all the Rebellious Arguments that were
published in our late War; for as in this little Paper at his Execution.
fiftieth part of it, (as he professes it to be) there is not one new Notion
but what is to a Syllable the same with the Papers of Pryn, and the Merc.
Politicus: out of the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, has he made a shift
to borrow, or else by chance very harmoniously to agree (...) the pernicious
Position, That our Monarchy is not only Limited and Mixed; (for that wont
content them alone) but that this Limitation has obliged the Sovereign to be
Subject to the Judgment and Determination of Parliament, for says that more
Ancient Antimonarchist, this Limitation Treatise of Monarchy, p. 12.
being from some body else, and the power conferred by the public Society, in
the Original Constitution of the Government, (and then he bethinks himself that
Kings too may Limit themselves afterward by their own Grants and Concessions;
which he is pleased to call a Secondary Original Constitution (i. e.) (if my
little Sense will let me Comprehend the saying of a Politician that has none at
all) somewhat like a Figure in Speech; the Countryman calls his Bull; used
when the Speaker cannot express himself Intelligibly: A Secondary Original,
sounds not much unlike the Nonsense of an Original Copy; or a second first,)
yet from this senseless Sophistry it must be concluded; that the Sovereign
being limited by this Original Constitution; or as they call it; After
Condiscent, and Secondary Original; what then? therefore every Man's p. 17, 18.
Imperium etsilatissime ex lege Regia propter August. latum, pateret, certis
tamen limitibus desinitum de jure magist. p. 29.
Conscience must acquit or Condemn the Acts of his Governor, and every man has
a Power of Judging the Illegal deeds of his Monarch. And so Mr. S. in almost
the same Language; As a man he is Subject to the People that made him a King;
That he received the Crown upon condition, and That performance is to be
exacted, and the Parliament Judges of the Particular Cases arising thereupon. I
cannot but observe to this Gentleman upon this, (who was always such a great
admirer of the So the Roman Senate when Augustus was not so much as present
freed him from all obligations.
Romans Commonwealth) what I hinted before was the Sense of the very Romans,
when according to their own Notion of Original Monarchy; the People of that
Commonwealth, first conferred their Power of Government upon a single
Sovereign; why, their very Laws tell us, That notwithstanding those Contracts
and Limitations, (of which there were very likely some expressed even in that
their very Celebrated, and Glorious The Lex Regia princeps legibus solutus est
l. princ. de legibus.
Law, that first made that Government Imperial,) yet when once it (...) so
Conferred, by that very Act, all Magistracy; (i.e.) all power of Judging that
the Subject had before was past over too: And were our own Monarch by the
Compact, and condiscent of his first Ancestors, such a precarious Prince as
they would make him; have not our own Statutes I have cited, long since
resolved his Crown to be Independent, and himself accountable to none but God?

And then abstracting from that Advantage we have of the Resolution of the Law;
Reason it self, against which our Republicans rebel too, that also will refute
the absurdity of such a Position; For first, where for God's sake would they
fix this their preposterous power of Judicial Process? if in some single
Persons, then the Concession of their own renowned Aphorism will fly in their
Face; for that allows the Sovereign to be much superior to Major singulis
Junius Brutus, Vindic. de Jur. Mag. Will. Pryn Parliam. Right. Buchanan. Sidney
Trial p. 23.
any Selected number of his Subjects; and they will not be such Senseless Sots
sure, as to say, That those whom themselves acknowledge to be altogether
inferior, should be invested with that Judicial Power, which is the highest
token, and (...) of Supremacy, if they will place it as Mr. Sidney forsooth does
in the Original power of the People, delegated unto Parliament, then should
that be granted them, when ever this Parliament is dissolved, if their King be
never so great a Delinquent, (for I think they may as soon make their King so,
as they did foolishly those that followed him in the late Wars, when the word
implies a Deserting, and the Law only calls them so Coke Littleton 291.
that adhere to the King's Enemies,) then I say, if their Sovereign be never so
much a Criminal to the State, upon such a Dissolution, they divest themselves
by their own Maxims of this power of Judicature, and so put it in the power of
the Monarch, or the Prince at any time to blast all his Judges in a moment, and
dissipate them all with the Breath of his Mouth; and therefore Mr. Sidney was
so wittily Seditious, as to foresee such a Consequence, and for that Reason
very resolutely does deny what some of our more moderate Republicans will
allow, That Trial page 26.
the King has a power of Assembling, and Dissolving a Parliament: But this
piece of pernicious Paradox, a Position so false, that some of them themselves
are ashamed to own, has been already refuted, and proved from the very Laws of
the Land, to be an absolute Lie, but our Author having placed himself, and his
People above the Law, tho (it was his hard fate to fall under it; and made the
Subject Superior to those Sanctions, to which themselves acknowledge none to be
so, but the Sovereign from whom they proceed, all the Satisfaction such a
Person can receive from the Statutes, must be from something of Reason, that
is, the result of them; and it is such an one as relates to their own Positions:
For they say, therefore the Sovereign is obliged to submit to the Laws of the
Land, because he accepted the Crown upon such an Obligation; and shall it not,
Seditious Souls! be as good a Conclusion, To say the People have passed away
the power of Assembling themselves, when they have passed their own Act for
being by their King Assembled?

Then in the next place, if this Original power of this People be delegated to
this Parliament, it would have been much to the purpose for some of them, to
have shown us from whence this People had this Original Power: Certainly, if
any, it must be derived from God, Nature, or somewhat that is Sovereign: But for
the Almighty; In all the sacred Texts, there is not a syllable of such a Legacy
left them, but abundance of the bequest of it that is made to Kings: For
Nature, there is nothing from it more evident, than a whole series of
Subordination, and that to single Sovereignty, (setting aside even the paternal
among Human Creatures,) almost to be made out among Insects and Animals, Bees
and Beasts. And if some King indulged this their People to appropriate to
themselves all the Supreme Power, (which we never heard of any of ours that
did; or to participate part of their Prerogative, which we know many Indulgent
ones of ours to their Parliaments have done,) then still this their power cannot
be Original, because it is derivative; and I dare swear no Prince ever granted
them a power of being Superiors, as they must be if they would Judge him, or
ever accepted a Crown upon that Condition, supposing it were as they would have
it, conferred: For the very Act of being such a Conditional King, would
absolutely make him none at all; and therefore those whom the Lacedaemonians
compounded withal to be regulated by their Ephori, were in effect not so much
as the Dictators of Rome, and so not to be reckoned to Reign as Crowned Heads,
or mentioned among those that we call our Monarchs.

In the third place, if by this Original Trial page 22.
power of the People, delegated to the Parliament, the two Houses are
constituted the Judges of their King, I cannot see how Mr. Sidney could avoid,
or any of his Associates can, this Grand Absurdity, and as great a Lie; that
the Parliament have a Natural Liberty, not only to Judge, but to lop off the
Sacred Head of their Liege-Lord, and Sovereign: For it is certain they can have
no more Authority than the People they represent; and it is as certain they must
have as much: Now this Original Power must be a Natural one, because not
derived from any grant; and then this Parliament of theirs must have an
Original Power by Nature, tho it be but to commit the most unnatural
Barbarities: I confess we had such an one, that upon the same Principles
proceeded to the perpetrating that most Execrable Treason, and the very
Villainy, that any time may be the Consequence of such Positions: A Parliament
which this good Author presided in, or very well understood; the Scandal of our
own Nation, and the shame, and reproach of our Neighbors: now I say, If this
his Original power of the People be delegated to this Parliament, as Mr. Sidney
says it is, then this Parliament has a Natural and Original Power of being
their King's Judges, because their People has it whom they represent; I confess
this is a Bar beyond the Seditious Doctrine of their Author in his Right of
Magistrates: For he is mighty sollicitous, least he should be misapprehended as
if he designed the common People should judge their Sovereign; De jure
Magistrate.
therefore tells us very carefully none but the subordinate Magistrates
themselves can Judge the Supreme; and their Brutus, that succeeded that
Assertor of Rebellion, says, such only as the Spartan Ephori, and the seventy
of the Israelites, Brutus.
the Centurions, or Equestres among the Romans; and if the People had any Right
to this Judicial power, those Miscreants more modestly place it among the most
eminent, whereas our brisker Assertor of this Anarchy makes it out, That
therefore our more eminent Memberships have this Original Power, only because
Communicated them from the meanest People; so that now we have a Parliament,
that has an Original, Natural, Liberty of the People, tho their very
Constitution it self, commenced from the very Grant, Grace, and Favor of the
King. I could never meet with any Record yet; that rehearsed these Privileges
of Parliament; But we have many extant, and Presidents even of the House of
Commons themselves, that their Privileges, and much of their Power proceeds
from the Liberalities of their Prince, more than this Natural Liberty of the
People; not to mention, that their very being was first the result of such an
Act of his Grace; for from whom, pray, had they that freedom of Speech, they
upon every Session desire by their Speaker, but from that King before whom they
are to Speak? who is it that fills their Chair, those that present him; or the
King, that accepts or disapproves whom they have presented? who is it that
gives them access to his Person; the Commons that desire it, or he from whom
it is desired? 2. Lastly, who impowers them to consent to a Bill; those that
supplicate his Majesty would be pleased to enact, or his Majesty that says, Be
it enacted? could this Natural Original power of the People be communicated to
their Representatives, the dispute about the Commons Right would be carried for
ever on their side; and we need not date their Original from Henry the Third,
or the Barons Wars, or from the Saxon Heptarchy it self; to be sure they then
had their Representatives; as soon as they had this Power, and this Power it
seems was as soon as they were a People: And by this Original Power, which they
delegate, for ought I see they may by the same rule, as well retain it, suffer
no Representatives at all, but assemble themselves, and exercise the
Sovereignty.

If the People delegate an Original power, and a Natural Liberty to this
Parliament; it cannot certainly be comprehended how these Parliaments as now
constituted, could commence by the Grants and Concessions of the Prince; and
yet all will allow, tho they disagree in the time, that they did begin at first
to be so Assembled by the Bounteous Permission of the King, and that all the
Privileges they claim, were the result of an entire Favor of the Sovereign,
and not the Original freedom of the Subject; if they will call that an Original
Power to send Representatives, it must be somewhat like that Author's Secondary
Original we so lately considered; and that tho they prescribe to it for this
seven hundred year, as well as they cannot for above four or five 100, still it
will recurr to this, That this first power was the Grant of the Crown. And
these prescriptions as themselves allow, being whenever they begun, the result
of the Sovereigns Bounteous Permission; I cannot see why those Immunities may
not be resigned to the same Crown, from which they were once received, or those
Franchises (for prescription it self in this case is properly no more) may not
be Absolutely forfeited, by those that at best can but be said to hold them on
Condition. I know the Common Law Favors a Prescription so far, as in
Inheritances, to let it have the force of a Right, when their cannot be made
out any other Title; but this I look upon to be of another Nature, when the
Original of what they prescribe too, by their own Concessions was the Grant of
their King, and even this Common Law; commonly in all its Customary Rules,
excepts the Prerogative of the King; nay this very Prerogative of his, by that
very Law is allowed to be the Principal Case of (...). Coke, (...). 344. B. The
Prerogative of the King is given by the Common Law, and is part of the Laws of
the Realm. 3. Instit. p. (...). Stamf. pl. Cr. 62. a Prerog. 5.
part of it.

I urge this because it is both apposite here, and a Case upon our late
Elections much (...), and to say as some (...), That such a Prescription cannot
be forfeited, proceeds from a confounding of the word in this Case, with that
Prescription; by which some of them have a Title to their Estate: for their
Common Objection about this their Elective power is, That the King may as well
deprive them of their Birthright: when this their Birth right might commence
by an Original Right, but the Power of this Electing must Necessarily, and
Originally first come from the Crown: But yet they know too, that this their
very Birthright, is in many Cases forfeitable by their own Act to the Crown;
and for their Burgage it self, should we abstract (...) an (...) Town (...) of
the King. Coke (...). 164. (...).
from that Elective power that attends it, nothing else but an (...) tenure of
their very King. And if in the Saxons time (as the popular advocates would
persuade us,) the Commons were called to sit in Parliament, it is certain they
could not come as Burgesses too, for all that Borhoe in their Toungue
signified, (if we can believe my Lord Ibid. Our (...) of Scotland had
Parliaments not above 700. years agon, and even their Republicans will allow
they had Kings long before, that called only the Preceres; as a worthy. Author
of theirs observes, Sir G. M. Jus. Reg. That their old Laws run just like ours
here; the Kings only Acts, and that their. (...) did not begin, till about 300.
year agon. Which makes it more likely that our own was not summoned much long
before; for tho they were different Kingdoms, yet Neighboring Nations, and
might nearly follow our Innovations, when (...) that must be liked by all
Subjects.
Coke) and from which the word Burgh was since derived: its signification was
only this. Those ten Companies, or Families, that were one another pledge; and
so should they prove it to us as clear as the Sun, as well as they have left it
much in the (...); still those their Commons could never be of those that had
any Right to come; but only such as the Grace of the King should call: and even
in Edward the first's time, those very Barons, (some say) that were only most
wise, were summoned by the King, and their Sons, if they were not thought so
prudent as their Fathers were not called to Parliament after their Fathers
death. Therefore since Prescription, since Parliament it self depended all
heretofore upon the pleasure of the Prince, I cannot see how the Subject shall
ever be able to make it his Original Right, and tho some are so bold as to say,
such a prescription cannot be forfeited or resigned by the Subject, resumed or
restored to the Crown; (for they must maintain those propositions, or else they
have no reason for their Murmering, since there has been none altered, or
destroyed; but what has been by Inquiry of the Kings Quo Warranto, or their own
Act of Resignation) yet sure if the Common Law did not favor the King in this
Case, Common Equity would, since those Priveleges were but the very Grant of
his own Ancestors: But if we must consider nothing but Mr. Sidney's Original
Power and Right, and all that lodged in his good People of England, it may be
their Birthright too to Rebel, they may and must Murder their Monarch, and that
by their own Maxims, when they think him not fit to Govern, or Live.

I have heard it often said, that the Members in Parliament represent the
people, and for that Reason are called their Representatives, but if this
Original Power which is delegated to them upon such a Representation; must
Subject their Sovereign, (as Mr. S. will have it; to these his Judges of the
particular Cases arising upon such a Subjection;) then they must even represent
their King too, and every Session of Parliament that he Summons; is but an
unhappy Solemnity, whom himself Assemblies for his own deposition: if such
positions should obtain, it is those that indeed would make the Monarch fearful
of Parliaments, and not those idle Suggestions of Mr. posts. p. 92.
Hunt; that the Weekly Pamphlets were endeavoring to make him forego them, and
it was this very opinion that promoted the last War, which he would not have so
much as mentioned.

Lastly, if this Original Power of the People be delegated to their
Representatives; this People that did so Communicate it, can at their pleasure
Quia qui mandatam Jurisdictionem suscepit, proprium nil habet, sed ejus qui
mandavit Jurisdictione utitur; Zouch. Elem. pars. 5. 4.
recall it, and exercise it themselves, for that is essential to the Nature of
a Communicated Power; for upon supposition of the peoples having such a Power,
it would be of the same Nature that their Kings is; (for Power of Supremacy
wherever it be lodged is still the same;) and you see that the Power which the
King has is often Commissioned to the Judges in his several Courts of Justice;
and yet I cannot see, how his Majesty by Virtue of such a Quamvis more majorum
Jurisdictio transfertur, meru^ Imperium quod Lege datur, non transit. D. 1. 21.
1. (...)
Commissionating of his Servants, does Exclude himself from the Administration
of those Laws, that he has only allowed others to Administer, or from a
recalling of that power to himself which he has only delegated to another, for
it is a certain Maxim in reason; that whatsoever Supreme does empower others
with his Authority, does still retain more than he does impart, tho I know it is
a Resolution in our Coke 4. Inst. c. 7. p. 71.
Law Books, that if any one would render himself to the Judgment of the King it
would be ofnone effect; because say they, all his power Judicial is Committed
to others; and yet even they, themselves will allow in many Cases their lies an
Appeal to the King.

But what ever was the Sense of my Lord (...) in this point, who has none of
the fewest Faults and failings, tho his Voluminous Tracts are the greatest ease
and Ornament of the Law, his resolution here is not so agreeable to Common
Equity and Reason; therefore I say in reason it must follow, That Mr. Sid.
people having but delegated their Power to the Parliament, still retain a power
of concurring with, preventing, or revoking of that power they have given but
in charge to their Representatives; and if so, then they can call them to an
Account for the ill exercise of that power they have entrusted them with; set
up some High Court of Justice again, (for upon this very principle the last was
erected) not only for the Trial of their King, but for hanging up every
Representative that has abused them (as they are always ready to think) in the
exercise of that Original power, with which he was by his Electors entrusted;
these sad Consequences which necessarily flow from this lewd Maxim, would make
their house of Commons very thin; and they would find but few Candidates so
ready to spend their Fortunes in Borough Beer, only for the Representing of
those that might hang them when they came home upon the least misrepresentation
of their proceedings: and these sad suggestions of the sorrowful Case of such
precarious representatives, are (...) Consequences, from the very (...) of our
Republican, even in those very Arguments that he uses for the subjection Trial
p. 23.
of his King; for if his King, (...) man must be Subject to the Judgment (...)
his People that make him a King, (...) he cannot be so Impudently (...) but he
must allow his Members of Parliament, that are much more made by them, by
Continual Election, and (...) very breath of their Mouth, (...) be as (...)
accountable to their Makers; for if (...) should recur in this Case, as he has
(...) other refuge, to the Peoples having excluded themselves from this (...)
Power once in themselves, by conferring it on their Representatives; (...)
farewell to the very Foundation of (...) Babel they would Build and Establish
then they fall even in the fate (...) their aspiring Forefathers, fall by the
confusion of their own Tongues, and like the rearers of that proud Pile; (...)
would have reached at Heaven and (...) Almighty; as these at his Anointed, and
the Crown.

For certainly by the same Reason that they cannot Judge and Punish (...) whom
they have Commissioned to represent them, because they have delegated and
transferred to them their (...) power; by the same Argument, and that a
fortiori, have they excluded themselves from their natural Power of being
Judges of their King, because they have conferred upon him the SVPREAM.

Neither can they help themselves here with their Imaginary and implied
Conditions upon which Mr. Sidney says, our Sovereign must be supposed to have
first accepted his Crown: For there never was any Representatives yet elected;
but as many Conditions and Obligations are employed and supposed, and by the
same Reason must be required and exacted; such as the serving their Electors
faithfully, the representing of their just grievances, the promoting the
Interest, and profit of the place they serve for; and if Mr. Sidneys good
People must be Judges of the Violation of any of these Trusts, (as they must by
the Maxims of their own making) then the Representatives, and the poor
Parliament fare as bad, and fall in the common fate of their King, into the
fearful Sentence of Mr. Sidney's own Words, That Performance will be exacted,
and revenge taken by those they have betrayed.

And for to show them that my Conclusions are grounded upon matter of Fact, as
well as Sense, and Reason, and not like their lewd Arguments, upon nothing but
some Factious Notions, and Seditious Opinions, I desire them to consider,
whether they did not themselves find it so, in several Instances. In the year
forty seven Mr. Sidney's Original It began Novem. 3d. 40.
Power of the People; in his own Sense, was in the Senate and Representatives
of that which we since call the long Parliament; but they having as
Rebelliously, as well as impudently, put the Sword into the Peoples Hand, that
had put their Original Power into the Parliaments, they found all that but a
Complement, they soon saw what an insignificant sort of Representers they had
made of themselves; and that their stout Electors, for all their buying of
their Burgesships with so much Bees, and Beer, would allow them to be no longer
such, 21. June 1647. Perf. Diurn page 16. 12.
than they relished their Proceedings: For to these their Representatives, they
send a more significant sort of a Representation, that of an Army, to tell them
their good House must be purged of such Members, as for Delinquency, Corruption
and abuse of the State ought not to sit in it: and to let them see that for all
Mr. Sidneys delegated Power, they retained enough not only to revoke their
Commissionated Authority, but to chastise those whom they had Authorized; They
prefer an Impeachment of High Treason against no less than eleven of their most
eminent Legislators; one of which, (for Hollis.
such is the remarkable Visitation of Providence upon the Heads of Traitors,)
happened to be a Person, whom (...) very King had impeached before; and which
nothing but their harder usage of their Hothams; tho but the just Judgment
Hollis, Hothants, Loves, and Carys (...).
upon such Perjured Heads, could so happily Parallel: For these Villains, when
once dipped in a Treason against their King, never left it seems; till they
committed another of as deep a dye against the People; they thought perhaps the
forswearing their Allegiance might be expiated with a breach of Covenant,
((...)) A single persidiousness, atton'd by being doubly Perjured, as if the
breach of two Negative Oaths, like a brace of Negatives among the Latins, had
affirmed their Fidelity; but this which is so remarkable, I could not but
observe, because it will atone for the Digression, in showing that the just
God of Heaven; as a more satisfactory Justice to their injured Sovereign, and a
severer Judgment on such Seditious Subjects, had destined those Heads that were
forfeited to their King to be severed from their Bodies by that People they had
served: But to return to those Rebels that made such pretty returns upon one
another; they were not only satisfied with threatening their Representatives
with a re-assuming their Original Power; but they actually did it in a
Remonstrance of Rebellion against their Representers, as well as not long
before in another against their King.

For so closely did they pursue their Suffragans in the Senate, not only
upbraiding them with ordinary (...), but fairly laying to their charge,
Treason, Treachery, and breach of Trust; Hist. Indep. page 49, 50.53.
neither would the bare charging them suffice, but they set up a Committee for
Examinations; which sent fairly one of the learned in our Law yet Living, to
Sir John Maynard.
the Tower, whose Confinement was the less to be pitty'd, since the result of
his serving them so much; and several other Lords upon the same Charge of
High Treason were committed to the Black-Rod, who had they adhered more Loyally
to their King, perhaps had never labored under this Tyranny of their Fellow
Subjects: But Mr. Sidney's Original Power of the People carried them further
(...), os the People.
yet: They draw up an Agreement as they called it, of the People, or rather an
Union of Devils; wherein it was resolved, they being weary of such (...): That
the Sitting Parliament should be Dissolved: That there should be another Pers.
Journal, 1699. Dugdale, 260.
manner of Distribution os Burrough's for better Elections; and that the People
from thenceforth were to be declared the Supreme Power; whereunto; that, and
all the future Representatives should be subordinate and accountable.

And here I hope, I have proved it home with a Witness, from matter of Fact, as
well as the force of Reason; that Mr. Sidney's placing his Original Power in
the People, made it impossible to be delegated to the Parliament any longer
than just as the People pleased, that this Position made every Member of it
daily run the danger of his Head, and that upon his Foundation it is
impracticable for any State of Government to be established: for to be sure,
the People will seldom be any longer pleased with those Delegates themselves
have empowred; then while they want a Power to reassume the same that they
delegated, it would puzzle almost Arithmetic, and a good Accountant, to tell
us how many Revolutions of Government, this confused Principle, of perfect
Anarchy, coufounded us with all: This Original power was delegated as Mr.
Sidney says, to the Parliament, and so it was indeed to the Long one in 49: But
there you see they pull it out of their Hands, and placed it in the Rump; but
that proved at last so unsavory, they could relish it no longer; and so the
Original Power forsooth is resolved into a Council of State, from that it runs
into Barebones Parliam.
the confiding Men of Cromwells, and then at last Centers in the Usurper
himself, so that in less than three quarters of a year, this Original Power of
the People was delegated to three several sort of Representatives: I need not
tell them how the People reassumed it from his Son, and left it just no where,
how the People retrieved it again, and lost it they could not tell how, how
they recovered it from the Committee, to whom it was lost, and then forced to
leave it at last to him, from whom 'twas first taken, their King: But this I
hope is sufficient to satisfy any Soul, that this Supreme Power when placed in
the People, will be always resolved into that part of it, that has the Supreme
Strength: That this Maxim of Republicans, Rebels against the very Parliaments
they so much admire: That it always ruins the very Collective Body of People,
in which these Democraticks themselves would place it, and resolves it self
into some single Persons, that by force or fraud can maintain Trial page 33.
it; and this made Mr. Sidney tell us he called Oliver a Tyrant, and acted
against him too; well might he look upon him as a Usurper, that Usurpt upon
their designed Commonwealth, as well as the Crown: I am much of his Mind, but
it was far from the result of any Kindness to his King: He saw his
Commonwealth could never be founded upon so false a bottom, no, not tho she
had been his Darling, and Dutch built; his beloved Low Countries, laboring
under a Magistracy, that Lords it with as much Power as that from which they
were delivered; For this his Original Power of the People must be as much
delegated to those that govern there, as well as it is inherent in any sole
Sovereign, that is the Governor; neither are any besides the best of their
Burghers admitted to Administration, so that even that State that comes nearest
to a Commonwealth, is at last but a sort of Aristocracy, (...).
which their Harrington condems for worse than Monarchy it self: And I believe
their Commons find the Impositions of their Burgo Masters as great and as
grievous, as ever were the Gabels of Spain.

So from what has been premised, this must be concluded, that since we see they
cannot punish, or Judge even their own Representatives, only their Suffragans in
an house of Commons; when they have delegated to them their Original power,
(which for once we will suppose them able to delegate) much less shall they their
Sovereign, tho they did, as they will have it, confer upon him the power that
he has, for the Members of the lower House represent only the Commons of the
Kingdom; whereas the Sovereign is in some Sense the whole Kingdoms
Representative. Since we have seen this Original Power of the People
wheresoever it has been delegated to have created nothing but Usurpation and
wrong; where can this Power be better placed, but in the King that can alone
pretend to a Right, and tho we are so unhappy, as to have presidents wherein
they can prove to us that their Representatives were once called to an Account
by the People that sent them; that is so far from proving that they have a
natural, or Original right so to do; that it shows the danger of such a
position that they may do it, and that when in the late Rebellion, they
presumed upon this their Right in Equity, they made it appear to be nothing
else but the power of the Sword; for in respect of a Right; they are really so
far from being able to censure their Representatives whom they send, that
themselves are punishable for meddling in those Parliamentary concerns with
which they have enrusted others; What force this has in the Case of their
Commons; holds a Fortiori in that of their King?

In the last place, give me leave to close this their Rebellious Argument of
their Monarch being accountable to the Majesty of the people, with some few
more Reasons against this Damnable Doctrine; that has within the Memory of man,
desolated and destroyed three Kingdoms: A Doctrine that confounded us in the
last, confused us in this; and will be Condemned by all Ages: A Doctrine that
places the Divine right in the People, and then indeed such an one as Mr. Hunt
makes it, Impious, Sacrilegious H. posts. p. 68.
Treasonable, Destructive of Peace, Pregnant with Wars; and what absolutely
produced the Civil one of England, and Sacrificed its Sovereign Head, to the
Fury of an Sidney's Trial p. (...).
Headless Multitude. This Principle is the very Basis upon which all their
Babel of Confusion, of a Commonwealth, of Anarchy; is all Built and Established:
And I shall never look upon it as loss, to have Labored in it so long, if we
can at last but undermine its very Foundation: And that is laid even by the
Libel of Mr. Sid. upon the Contract and Condition, upon which they will suppose
he received the Crown, which he must be made to renounce, if he does not
Perform when Accepted. And in answer to this we'll suppose for once what the
most Seditious Souls themselves can suggest, and that this part of the
Rebellious position, abounds both with Sense, Truth, and Reason; that our Kings
have but a Conditional bargain of it, which indeed would be but a bad one too;
and such I dare Swear as the Greatness of our present Sovereigns Soul would
hardly submit to, and if we'll but believe his own word, as firm as fate, that
never failed his Friends, and surely will not then be first violated for a
debasing of himself, and a gratifying of his Foes, that has told us, or
decreed, that he will not suffer His Majesty's Speech 22. May, 85. p. 5.
his Government, and his Crown to be Precarious: And I am apt to think that he
that stemn'd the Tide, the fierce influx of Blood and Rebellion, as well as
without a Metaphor withstood the noise of many Waters; and baffled the Billows
of the main, will hardly, when Seated at last in a Peaceful Throne; be
regardless of it is Ibid p. 4.
Right and Prerogative, which even his meritorious sufferings have deserved,
should we bate his Virtue, and Birth were not in the Balance. And it is much
unlikely that he that kept his Grandeur when a Duke of York, should dwindle
into that of Venice; and that too, when a King of Great Britain: It Is their
Doeg I confess that accepts upon Condition, it is their Duke with whom they do
Contract, our Crown as I have shown has been resolved an Imperialone, from the
Letter of its own Laws, and the very Statutes of the Land; Theirs from the very
Constitution it self Subject to the Senate, Ours from its Foundation RESOLVD
not to be Precarious, as well as now too, from the Resolution of its Prince.

But in answer to this position of our Republicans; I shall depone this as a
principle, that notwithstanding such a Contract upon Conferring the Supremacy,
the same cannot be Dissolved even by the Consent of all those that Constituted
it: I wont repeat to them, the Reason I have already urged from the Rex Legia.
Royal Law of the Romans; which one of their very Republicans says, was not
without Certis (...) Limitibus, nec sine Exceptione probata, jure Magist.
Quest. 6.
Condition, or Limitation; which if so, then we see that both Augustus, for
whose Establishment in the first true Imperial Throne of their Rebellious Rome
that very Law was first founded, as also the Emperor Vespasian for whom it was
again Confirmed; both these from all the Famous Historians of their Times,
unless we'll believe them, like the late Writers of the new Rome to be all
Legends too) both appeared absolute in their power, unlimited in their
Jurisdiction; notwithstanding those Conditions they will have Expressed in that
Law, neither did the People pretend to their deposition upon their Non
performance: Julius himself that was not absolutely preferred to be the Royal
Emperor, for he lived before that Law was made, yet was allowed such a
perpetual Dictatorship; as may be well resolved into what our Republicans
reproach with their present Sovereign, an Arbitrary Power, And he too whom the
Miscreant we before mentioned, says was Jure (...), quoth. nimis Multas dignitates
(...) ibid. p. 38.
justly Murdered; and why? only because he dignified himself too much (as if it
were a Crime for a King to be Great) even he was not deposed and dispatched by
the suffrages of the people; but by a Perjured band of Conspirators and
Assassinates in the Senate; and whom the very people Plebs statim a funere ad
domum Bruti, and Cassii tetendit, Cinnam Per (...) nominis occidet, caputque
prefixum hastae circumtulit, columna^ parenti patriae statuit, in scripsit;
(...) care per (...) jurare perseveravit in deonumerum relatum, percussoru^
nullus ficca morte obiit. (...). p. 51, 52.
too pursued for the Fact, and even adored their deceased Emperor tho Heathens,
and their Empire was not Hereditary, to the shame of some of our good Christian
Subjects that live under a Monarchy that is so, acquies'd more quietly under
their oppressions of their Lawless Emperors, then some of ours under the good
Government of their Gracious Kings, who as they have often promised, so have
still Governed according to Law: The depositions and Barbarous Butcherys of
some of the Roman Emperors, was never an Act of State, of the Citizens, or the
people; but the Force, and Fury of a Faction in the Army; (and it is with that
excuse I am sure our Presbyter with his good Excluded Members, would wipe his
mouth of the Blood of his Sovereign) for those were several times As (...),
Claudius, Galba, Vitelsius, Otho. Vid. Sueton.
set up by the Soldiers; and as soon pulled to pieces by those that had placed
them on the Throne, which effusion of Royal Blood was the clear effect of their
not claiming it by an Absolute Inheritance of that Blood Royal, for those
Adoptions they many times made, ware of little force against the salutations of
a Legion, and the powers of the Field, and therefore Unde Apparet ipsos etiam
Caesares Juridice damnari, and coerceri potuisse; de jure Magistrate. p. 38.
that Author when he says even those Caesar's were Legally, and justly
Condemned) as if the Romans too, had once their High Court of Justice) abuses
the world both with a Factious infinuation, and in the very matter of Fact.

In the next place, they must consider, that if there was such a Contract and
Agreement among the People to accept of such an one for their King upon his
performance of such Conditions; ((...) I am sure his Deposition or Censure in
our Kingdom were never formally annexed to the Penalty of the Bond for his
Nonperformance; neither can they show us in all their Charter of Liberties,
such a Conditional License to Rebel) yet yet still it must be supposed the
consent of every individual Subject, (which was somewhat difficult to be (...))
was required to such an Agreement, for upon the first Constitution of our
Government, it is certain we had no such Parliaments, wherein they could
delegate their Suffrages to some few Representatives: and then by the same
Reason we must have the Concurrence of all the particular Persons in the Land
when we would Judge of the breach of that Covenant, upon which all their
Ancestors were supposed to have accepted their King: And then I think from the
Result of their own Seditious Reasoning our Sovereign may sit pretty safely,
and he rule as Arbitrary as he pleases, when it must be carried against him
with a true (...), and not a single Subject left in the Land to befriend him
with his Vote.

For upon such a conferring off the Supreme Power, it must be supposed that the
several Subjects have bound themselves to one another, to suffer such an one to
be their Sovereign, and made a contract too with one another in some such
implied Sense, that A. confers his Right to Power and Government, upon B. as
Supreme Governor, upon Condition that C. does so too upon the same Person (now
to put it in the terms of our own Law) the Subjects A. and C. here are both
mutual Obligors, and Obligees to one another, and both Obligors to B. the
Sovereign Obligee: Now it is certain that A. cannot recall this power he has
conferred, on B. without the consent of C. his joint Obligor, but it must be
with a breach of Covenant to his Fellow Subject, as well as of Faith, and
contract to B. his Sovereign, and this mutual Obligation between two to a
third, will extend as well to two Millions: And I hope we may make at length
the terms of our Law plead Loyally, tho I Have heard an eminent Council at the
Bar, (but commonly for none of the best Clyents,) Assert Loyalty to be nothing
else but an adhering to the Letter of the Law, with this good (...), as if that
would contradict the common Acceptance of the word among the Royalists, who
make it to signify an Asserting the King's Prerogative, whereas in their Law
French, they would confine the word Loyalty to express nothing else but bare
Legality: And be it so, I believe they will be but little the better for the
quaintness of the Criticism; for I dare avow that he that will be truly legal
in their Sense, must be as heartily Loyal in ours, for nothing we see runs The
King's Prerogative part of the com. Law.
higher the Royal Prerogative, then that very Law by which they would run it
down.

But to come to the Nature of this political Contract, this Stipulation of
Monarchy as they would make it, which will be better expressed in the Language of
a Civilian, when the Subject it self is about Civil Government, and an Imperial
Crown: In this Case rhere is also a Convention (as they call it) of: two
Parties; the Subject, and he that is to be the Sovereign; one upon such a
contract, stipulates to Govern, the other to (...) Now in such Stipulations it
is a received Rule, that no man stipulates but for himself; D. 45. 1. 38.
and that there is no Obligation arises from any one's promising another Man's
Deed, so that every single Subject Alteri stipulari nemo potest, nemo
promitendo alienum factum obligatur. Zouch. Element. pars 3.. 8. Vid. Inst.
lib. 3. c. 19.
must in Person here (as I Have said) have made such a Subjection to that
Authority to which he submitted; if this their Convention and Contract with
their King can be supposed; and then by the same Rule every man must in his
proper Person come and retract his Obedience before this Right to Govern can be
absolutely Dissolved, tho it is the Opinion too of these sort of Lawyers, that
what is promised by Subjects to the public (which in a Monarchy is always
represented in the King,) cannot be revoked D. 50. 12. 3.
by them, no not tho they have reason to repent of their promise; and if this
shall hold him, tho without any Consideration, or Cause, and tho it be but of a
D. 50. 12. 1.
Gift to the public use, much more then will it oblige him in his promised
Faith, and Allegiance. But here in this Case, there is not only a Stipulation
between the Sovereign and every Subject, but also between the several Subjects
to one another; for it is a consent upon Condition among themselves, that this
Man transfers his Power to some single Sovereign, because the rest have, does
or design to do it, so that the Person upon whom the Supremacy is conferred, is
secured upon a double Obligation, both of that which is made among them all to
themselves, and that which to him is made by them all; and therefore that
Opinion of Mr. Sidney, of the Power of the People, being delegated to some
particular Persons, the Major part of which, can act for the whole Kingdom, is
even unreasonable according to the Notion of their own Hypothesis; For while he
supposes it a Natural Liberty, and Original Power that the People have; at the
same time he lays down a Position that destroys it: For it is Unnatural and
against Nature, (if they consider it,) that the major part, should determine it
against the Minor, and be taken for the consent and Approbation of the whole,
when it is to be turned by a single suffrage and one casting voice.

And this carrying it by a Majority is against the Nature of their Original
Liberty; for we see that even in all Seditious Assemblies, and tumultuary
Meetings; every Man would have every thing carried his own way, but the being
concluded by the Major part; has always been the result of some civil
Institution in the Government, that thought it reasonable things should be so
carried for an avoiding of Confusion and Disorder, so our Representatives in
Parliament are chosen by the Majority of their Electors; and they pass their
Bills when elected by pluralities of Voices; but this proceeds from President;
Regulation, Institution, Custom, and Law, and yet we see that many times,
notwithstanding these received Rules, and tacit Agreements, to which all have
submitted, they are loath in their Elections to stand to their own accord in
such Cases, and that those that have lost the day, or the Cause by some few
voices, are restless, tumultuary; and their natural Liberty that is in herent
in every individual, so prevalent, that what they have lost by Law, they
endeavor to compass by force or fraud, and from that has proceeded those
Riotous forcible Decisions of some of our Elections, those clan destine and
fraudulent ones of others, from that proceeded in our late Confusions even in
Parliamentary Vide perfect Diurnal.
Affairs; The Remonstrances of the Army, Excluded Members; the Impeachment and
Imprisonment of the Eleven Members, Prides Purge; The Peoples Agreement,
Abolishing of Lords House, and at last Olivers Dissolution; Hist. of
Independency.
for the Independent Faction prevailing in force, would by no means be
concluded by Law, the Presbyterian suffrages were all along the most numerous
in the Senate, and by all their Presidents in Parliament, must have carried
every Vote by the Majority: This the Independent that filled not above the
third part of the House found to their grievance, saw themselves still
out-voted by Law, and so be took themselves to their armed Suffrages, and their
Legislative Swords.

Now tho the plurality of Voices (tho against their Natural Power of the People
for they don't like it even in Parliaments now, since things are not carried
all to their liking,) may be allowed to determine the Debates in a great
Senate, convened by the Sovereign Power; yet it cannot be imagined that the
Majority here too shall carry it for an abolishing that very power that called
them; unless we can imagine the Supreme Power had summoned them on purpose to be
deposed; and that this politic BODY was Assembled, (as once they were too
sadly in the natural Sense) to cut off its Deliberaturi de arduis Regni, 4.
Inst. C. 1. Parl.
own HEAD; the Writ that summons them in our Parliament, is in order to
deliberate about the difficult Affairs of the Kingdom, and it would be a
difficult Business indeed, should it be by a casting voice, extended to a
debate whither they had a King.

And from these Reasonings and Suggestions (which I submit to Men of more Sense
and Reason;) I dare to draw this Conclusion, that even from their own
Principles; Their Contract with their King, or as Sidney says, The Condition
upon which he receives the Crown, he can not possibly be punished or deposed,
because it is almost impossible that every one of his Subjects should concur in
such an Act; and the Major part must by no means determine it, by their own
Maxims of Natural Liberty, even in affairs of lesser Moment. 2. Because it is no
Consequence, that because they have conferred the Supremacy upon some single
Person, that therefore they may reassume it too, tho it were forfeitable even
on Condition, which l've shown the Romans themselves, never pretended to, tho
their own De jure Magistrate. Quest. 6.
Democraticks tell us, their very Lex Regia was Conditional; and Dig. 50. 12.
2. D. 50. 12. 1.
their Laws which by all Nations are allowed the most equal resolve it; that
tho with them bare promises if made to private Persons were were not
Obligatory; yet when offered to the public they oblige, and that in a Monarchy
is always the King; and what then must it be when there is Oath made, Faith
pawned, and fealty sworn: And those Laws resolve it too, as reason must, that
when the Supreme Power was conferred on the Prince, all Magistracy was Zouch.
El. p. 101.
past over too, and in that lies all Judicial Power, and who then shall Judge
of those Conditions that forfeit a Crown but him that wares it? and thenthey'll
be but little the better for the Controversy, when a King cannot be deposed,
unless like a Richard the Second by his own consent.

I have taken this Course, as the best way for the Confutation of such
Principles; not that I can really grant them the Concessions I have made, for I
could as soon believe Mr. S. died a Loyal Subject, as be satisfied with the
positions he has lain down; but I therefore grant them their own Hypothesis,
that they may confute themselves, that they may see their own Babel of Anarchy
will not be built upon the very Basis and Foundation of those Foolish positions
they maintain; that the work never was, or will be carried on far, without
terminating as that of their Forefathers, in Confusion; (and by that they mean
perhaps a Commonwealth,) and have I hope in some Measure manifested, that even
by their own wicked assertion of the Peoples Divine, Natural and Original power
they cannot really pretend toany Right of Judging; Punishing, or deposing their
King, what force can do; we have both felt, and fearfully, to our Terror seen,
but in all Arguments of this Nature, the Question is of the Reason, and Right,
and not of any Fact that may be justified by wrong; and the refuting them from
their own Maxims, must be more effectually convincing, then the maintaining of
ours; for one opinion in Politics, is not absolutely destroyed, because some
Persons can maintain another; no more than the Systeme of Plolomy was presently
False, only because Copernicus had invented his for True; for the bare
contradiction, and Clashing of positions, convinces no more than the giving the
Lie, but when it is proved upon them in one, that even from their own
Principles and Premises, they cannot draw the very Conclusion they design; as
it was since in the other, that from their own Hypothesis they could not solve
all the Phrases, and Phaenomenons themselves would make to appear, then
certainly they must allow that themselves are in the wrong tho they will not
Confess their Foes in the Right.

And now having at lenght examined their Original Power of People; let us a
little consider how long, and from whence our Kings have had their Original. If
we must make words only instead of an Argument; and cavil about an Idiom in
Speech, (as some of their critical Contenders about this Origin of Kings have
very vainly, and as Foolishly quarreled at; then we must consult our
Dictionaries, and the Dutch Tongue; for without doubt till the Saxons settled
here they had some other appellation; and were only from them called Konyngs
and since Kings, but if we consider the Nature of the Government, it is that
which from the Greeks we call Monarchy, which from its own Etymology best
signifies and expresses the Sense that it bears, which is the Governing part,
and the Supreme power placed in the sole hands of some single Person, and then
the Queston will be only this, how long that has obtained in the World; by whom
first instituted, and in whom it first commenced? For the first; it is
undeniable that its Original was with that of the World, and God himself gave
it by the Name of 1. Genesis v. 28.
Dominion to his Adam he had Created, which in express Terms was given him
first over all the Living Creatures, and then over the 4. Genesis v. 7.
product of his own Loins, his Wife; and after that, (as if Providence did
design to prevent the dispute about the Precedence of Primogeniture;) it gave
in express words, a Superiority to Cain; that the younger should be in some
sense his Subject, that to him should be his desire, and that he should Rule
over him; from whence it was as soon Communicated to the Several Heads of the
Families that were the product of their Loins, and so succeeded in a sort of
subordinate Government according to the Antiquity of the Tribe, or Family. That
this was then such Authority, as we now call Kingly, is both nonsense to
assert; and as great a Folly for any to require that we should maintain, for
they may as well quarrel with us, when we say there were Kings of Israel, and
Judah, and yet cannot prove that there Courts and Revenues, were as Stately and
Great, as now they are in England and France; it is enough if the Government of
those Primitive times, was but Analogous to what we call Kingly now: And now
that we have brought it both to a right of Primogeniture and a Paternal Right
from whence will result the Divine; we'll consider what it is, Mr. Sidney and
his Advocates can say against it; and see if there be any such absurdities in
it, as they more Seditiously; then with any Sense and Reason suggest; first for
the right of Primogeniture, that themselves will allow; but it is only because
not able to contradict, and besides as they imagine, it makes for them, and
their Cause; for by that course of descent, they think our Asserters of a
Divine right, are obliged to deduce their Pedigree of their Kings form the
Creation of the World in a right Line; and therefore Mr. Vid. Paper at Execut.
Sidney says that such a supposition makes no King to have a Title to his
Crown; but what can deduce his Pedigree from the Eldest Son of Noah. But for
that absurdity which is truly their own, by supposing it ours, when it cannot be
truly deduced from the Doctrine and defense of a Divine Right; we shall answer
anon when we come to treat of the Paternal.

That Primogeniture had the Pre-eminence in the very Worlds Infancy; (if we do
but believe the word of God, which tells us, that himself told Cain, he should
Rule over his younger Brother; we cannot doubt of the truth of it, besides
Abraham's being a Prince, and having a Precedence to his Brother Lot, is also
there recorded; and Esau 25. Genesis v. 34.
selling of his Birthright, Condemned as a Contempt of that pre-eminence, to
which God, and Nature had preferred him; and which himself only disposed of when
he presumed he was upon the point to dye; and for his disregard of this
Privilege, was he punished too in the prevention of the C. 27.
Blessing, and which is perhaps the only Instance in Sacred writ where a Lineal
Descent, and the Succession was interrupted; and this too only occasioned by
his own Act. And we are expressly told the first born must not be disinherited,
no not for Private Affection. (...). 21. v. 15. If a man have two Wives, the
one hated the other loved; and the first born be of her that was hated, he may
not make the Son of the beloved, first born, before the Son of the hated that
is indeed the first born; but must give him a double Portion, because the
beginning of his strenght, and the Right of the firstborn is his, verse. 15,
16, 17.
And that God himself did appropiate this precedence to the firstborn, may be
gathered out ofall the History of the Old Testament, the only account that is
extant, and from which Authors gather all the Authentic Relation of the two
first Epooches and most Memorable Periods, or Interals of time, viz. That from
the First Period contained An. 1656. 2d. 1518. Secundu^ Intervallum a Varrone
Mythicum appellatur.
Creation to the Flood; and from the Flood to the first Olympiad ( i.e.) to
Ann. Mund. 3174. for the profane History of those times is accounted Fabulous;
and by Historians called so, and from those Sacred Oracles it will appear that
all their Kings of So Jehoram succeeded his Father Jehoshaphat, tho he had
several younger brothers, Chro. 21. v. 2. And after him Ahaziab his young Son,
because says the text all the Elder were slain. Ibid. Chap. 22. v. 1. Which
implies that they had succeeded if alive by Birth and Primogeniture.
Israel and Judah succeeded according to this Right of Primogeniture, or where
that failed by Numb. 27. v. 9.
Proximity of Blood; And as the Almighty Countenanced such a Succession; So
does Nature it self, which among Heathens was distinguished from the Deity; and
may be so amongst Christians too, if they consider it asthe Work and Order of
the Divine will, for if she shall decide it, she presumes the Eldest in years,
to be always the wisest too; and it is not Nature, but a chance preternatural
when it happens to be otherwise, for if we should conceive no disparity between
Brothers and Sons, then all Right and Superiority must be decided by Lot; but
Nature giving a precedence by Birth, makes Naturalist to call Primogeniture the
Sors naturalis: In the next place the Laws confirm it, and the Practice of most
Nations as well our own; so that when Mr. H, tells us the Succession to Posts.
p. 71.
the Crown, is of a Civil Nature, not established by any Divine right, he will
find; and must needs know that such a Succession by Primogeniture, or Proxiof
(...) Arist. de Rep. l. 1. c. 2. For every house says he was Governed, (and as
the Greek imply's) after the manner of a King by the Eldest in it.
Blood; even by almost all Civil Institutions is allowed the precedence, and
that even in the Descent of Common Inheritance, and Private Estates, and as I
have said before I look upon the Crown to have a stronger Entail and more
obliged to descend in a direct Line, if it were not from any Divine Institution
of God; but from a bare Human Policy, to prevent the Blood and Confufion that
attends always a Competition of disputable Titles, which will needs be the
result of any altered Succession; and what now do these Laws affirm, to which
Mr. H. must affix his descent of the Crown by his own words, when he says it is
of a Civil Nature; why the Civil and Imperial it is true differ from our own in
this, that with them he is looked upon an Heir, Heredis institutio nihil aliud
est quam ultima voluntas testatoris, Pacius Anal. Inst. p. 26. de hered. Inst.
Tit. 14.
that is left so by the Testator in his Will, and by them a Testamentary
Succession was more esteemed then a Legitimate and Lawful one; yet even that
implied there was one that was Legitimate or born so, and the Reason why they
relied so much upon Testamentary Inheritances was I Tit. Digest de. verb.
signif. l. 130. Quandiu possitvalere testamentum tamdiu legitimus non
admittitur, Tit. Dig. de diverse. Regis jur. l. 89.
believe because those were confirm`d by the very Yet even those their 12
tables and the Pretors Laws allowed a Lineal and Legitimate Succession.
Laws of their 12. Tab. which was their first and Fundimental; and therefore as
long as the Testamentary was valid they would by no means admit the Legitimate
one: But still even in those Testamentary donations, I believe they for the
most part (...) most of their Patrimony to the Eldest; as well as we see among
our selves, our Tenants in fee simple, that have as absolute a disposition of
it by Will; or those that have recovered against the tail, by fine or the like;
still leave their Eldest their Heir, tho Empowered to give it to whom they
please: And then for our own Law, the very Custom of the Realm; by which we
must be more immediately Governed; that makes the Doct. and Stud. l. 1. c. 7.
he E'dest as badg of his birthright shall bear his Fathers arms without
differrence, because more worthy of blood, Cok. Litt. p. 140. Non hominem, sed
Deum heredes facere asserunt. Cowels Instit. de Hered. Tit. 14. p. 120. Brct.
l. 2. c. 33. Britt. 118. 119.
Eldest Son the only Heir to his Ancestor, or else the next of Kin to the
Predecessor deceased; and that is the Reason an old Aphorism obtained even with
our own Ancient Lawyers, that expressly insinuates such an Hereditary
Succession, to be by Divine Institution, when they tell us that it is not
mankind but the Almighty makes them Heirs: I know that the saying more properly
refers to the Order or appointment of the Divine Will, that such an one shall
be the Firstborn, because it makes him to come into the World first; but if it
can be proved from the Text, as in many places it may, and in some we have
shown, that God himself in express Terms made the younger Subject, we may be so
bold to say that he instituted too such a Subjection, to be paid to the Eldest.

And now let us consider the paternal Right, which our Republicans so much
deride, which Mr. Sidney in ridicule Paper at Execut. page 32.
would force us to derive from the Eldest Son of Noah; which Plato Redivivus
would expose in the Empire of Reuben, the Brief History calls a new Notion of
the Brief p. 15.
present Age, and Mr. Hunt laughs at in Postsc. page 118.
the merry conceit of calling it the Court of King Adam, and King Father, it is
true the most Sacred and Divinest truth, may be made Ridiculous, only by
laughing at it, and the World has not wanted even such a Blasphemous Buffoon,
to burlesque the whole Bible; but I shall show them here as in the most proper
place, in what Sense those Fathers might be said to be Kings, and that the
Absurdities they suggest, are sar from any Consequences of such a Supposition:
And why for Gods sake must we be put to prove, (only for Asserting that the
first Man had a Monarchichal Dominion, tho it were at first over Beasts?) why
must we therefore make out too, that he kept up his Majesty after the manner of
our Kings? And that Adam in his Garden of Eden, in the first Year of the World,
had built him an House like a Solomon, that was hardly finished in Fifteen:
That he that had but Fig Leaves 1 Kings C. 7.
to cover him, had laid the Foundations of his Court in costly Stone, and
erected a Pile whose Porches and Pillars were of pure Caedar, and all the
Building built up out of Caedar Beams, they may as well expect we should make
out this too, (...) bring all the Forest of Lebanon to be laid out in a Palace
of Paradise: Is it not enough for us to maintain that the first Government in
the World was Monarchial, (when we can prove all the Dominion and Power was
imparted to a single Person, and when God himself seemed to make but that one
Man, to prevent even a possibility of a Competitor, and a Division of the
Sovereignty,) without being obliged to make the very Origin of Monarchy
adaequate to the Improvement of it, and that a Sovereign for almost seven
thousand year agon had the same Pompous and Imperial sway, that a series of
time, and a Revolution of Ages has settled in the King of Great Britain.

Many things are clear from Analogy of Reason, tho they cannot be demonstrated
to Sense; the naturalist and Chemical Operators may well conclude, that the
mineral Vermilion is made by some (...), Subterraneous heat, that (...) the
sumes of Mercury and Sulphur; in which Mines it is found, from their being able
to make the Cinnabar its Resemblance, by an Artificial (...) out of the Butter
of Antimony, in which is both Sulphur and Mercury, tho (...)
themselves were never working under ground, and in the Mines.

If we must be put upon such a piece of Impertinence, as the Postscript would
have it, to find out this King Adam's Court too; I Will just take the Liberty to
put them to just such another task, They will have their instituted
Commonwealth to Commence from the World's insancy, even before that of Israel,
before (...). p. 32.
that Moses as they say had divided their Land unto them by Lot, and turned the
several Tribes into so many Republics: And then let them tell me what sort of
a Republic it was, that the Patriarchs lived under, and were ruled by, where
it was that Abraham, and his Fellow Citizens consulted to make Laws for the
Benefit of the Commonwealth of his Family, so great that his trained Servants,
318 sought 4 Kings, where it was that Lot and his Herds-men, when they pitched
their Tents in the Plain, set up their Stadthouse, and commenced Burgomasters?
if in those days there was any Government purely Democratical, that is, (...)
Licentious, it must have been seen in the Cities and Towns, of those times,
some Sodom or Gomorrah, yet even Genesis c. 14. verse 2.
there the Text tells us, Bera was King of the one, and Birsha of the other;
let them tell us where Isaac when he settled in the Valley of Gerar, set up his
Servants for Senators, tho he was grown so great (since they will have it so,
in the Commonwealth of his Houseshold,) that a mighty King of those times,
Genesis C. 26.
whom the Text expressly calls so; Abimilech told him, that he was much mightier
than he, and the Philistines envyed and (...) him too for it: Let them tell us
how Jacob lived in the Republic of his Sons and Servants in Succoth, tho such
a numerous train, that they could venture to invade the City of the
Shechemites, inhabited by the Subjects of Hamor the Hivite, whom the Scripture
calls the Prince of the Country, and sure these Patriarchs Page 32.
were somewhat more than the ordinary Fathers of Families, as Plato would make
them, when their Forces were so great, and their strength so formidable, that
they sought Kings, and were (...) by Princes: And now let them prove that this
paternal Power of these One of their Republicans much countenances the Notion
of Kings being but Fathers, or Fathers Kings. Prisci Reges vocabantur
Abimilech, quod Hibraice sonat Pater meus Rex. Jun. Brut-Vindiciae Quest. 3.
Patriarchal Kings was no more than that of a Burgher in the Town of Amsterdam,
or that the Cities that were several of them then erected, and where the sacred
writ expressly says, Kings and Princes Reigned, that those were nothing else,
but as perfect Republics, as Venice, Geneva, or the united Provinces in the
Netherlands.

And cannot our Seditious Souls be convinced that this their Patriarchal Power
was Monarchical, unless we can prove every patriarch a Crowned King; should we
oblige them to make out their Commonwealths of those days after the same
manner their Modern ones are now Established, they would be put to find out in
those primitive times some general revolt of a Rebellious people from their
Lawful prince: For that was the first Foundation of their (...) Republic page
25, 26.
in the Low Countries, as Mr. Sidney himself will allow, tho against common
Sense and Reason he cannot let it be called a Rebellion: And also is it not one
thing to say a paternal Right was once Monarchical; but must it make all
Monarchs to Rule by a paternal Right? conquest of the Sword grounded upon a
good pretense of Right is what a great many Kings claim, by a long series of
Successive Monarchs, makes the Title of a great many more as much
unquestionable; and yet I cannot see, why Monarchy may not still be said to
have been first founded in a paternal Right, tho the claims to Sovereign power
since, in such several Kingdoms, and Nations where it is now Established, are
(...) as several sorts too, as there are Subjects that have submitted to be
governed by it.

It is a pleasant sort of Diversion to see Mr. Hunt Harangue out half of his
Treatise in an impertinent pains to prove the Father of every Family at
present, not to be the King of it, we would have granted it him quietly, and
the postulate should have been his own in peace, without raising upon his War
of Words, Postscr. p. 100.
and the thundering charge that he gives this Opinion, of puzzled, senseless,
vain, unlearned paradox: For once every parent shall not be a Crowned Head, and
every City but a Commonwealth of Kings: for that is all they must contend
against, and then what is the Contention, but just about nothing: but that
parents have nothing in them that is Analogous to a Monarchical power, that
they have no He that but curses his Father shall dye. Levit. C. 20. V. 9.
Right to govern those very Children they have begot, (as this Gentleman with
his mighty performances thinks he has perfectly proved;) that I think will be
found at last to be the greater paradox, if not a perfect Lie: For first the
very Deuteronomy. 2. verse 18.
Decalogue declares the contrary; And the command we have to Honor our Father
and Mother, implies an Authority that they have that requires Obedience, by the
Levitical, the Laws of the Jews, the Rebellious Son was to be stoned to Death,
and if the very Bible can call it Rebellion; Certainly it must suppose some
power, against which he could Rebel: And what does Mr. Hunt, who himself admits
of this, say to the refuting the very Objection that he raises, why he says
this was an unnatural severity permitted the offended parent, that is an
unnatural severity commanded by the very God of Nature: For all those their
Laws were so many Divine precepts for the regulating his own Theocracy, and the
very Text tells us this exemplary punishment of Dissobedience to parents, was
shown that Israel might fear, (i.e.) fear those parents in whom the Almighty's
Law had lodged such a power: and then if we consider it in the Abstract from
any positive Law of God, or Divine precept, if we look upon it in a pure
natural State, as the result of Generation; for all whatever the postscript
impertinently suggests with his (...), and all the distracted noise that he
makes with the procreation work being such an Act of Affection, and mere
impetus of Love, I cannot see, why by that darling work that delights Mr. Hunt
so much, the power of governing those very Children he has begot should be
superseded: The Gentleman among his many Melancholy moods, had it seems some
pleasant Fancies: For in effect he tells us no more than this, that Coition
being an Act of Love to the Mother, the Government over the Child that she
bears him, must by no means be called a power; and if this be not indeed a
puzzled, senseless Opinion, I submit to persons that abound with more sense,
and if it have the least shadow of a consequence, I will forfeit all my Right
to Reason, might it not be as well inferred too, that every Father that
chastises his froward Child, is an absolute Tyrant, because that sort of
severity savors of Anger, and fury, but the Generation work obliged him never
to exercise it, because that was an Act of extreme Love.

But besides that precept in the Decalogue, Honoring our Parents, is an
Eternal Law of Nature engraven in our Hearts, as well as it was in the two
Tables of Stone, and wherever there is a Natural Veneration; there is at the
same time an implied subjection, for those we always reverence most, to whom we
are most Subjected; I know there are inferior Objects upon which many times we
place our affection, and may in some sense be said to have for them an Esteem;
but that cannot be properly called Honor, but is better expressed by the Name of
Love; and this is that (...) that Friends have for one another tho they are
Equals, or Parents to their Children tho Subject to their power; but if we
consider the word Honoring it self, (which in all the Versions of the
Decalouge is still rendered so, as if it would remember us of the subjection we
owe to those we are commanded to Honor,) that very word it self implys Power
in the Person that is to be Honored, for if we abstract our selves from any
prepossessions and Engagements of Love, we still find we still Honor those
most, that are also most in power, thus our Nobility are respected by us as
Honorable, because they are in great places of Power and Trust: And our King
more Honored by us again, because the very Fountain of Power it self. And
lastly what strikes us more into a Venerable Horror of the Majesty of Heaven,
but that awful attribute of his being Almighty; so that uncorrupted Nature it
self from the Rules of Common gratitude obliges us to Honor our Parents, as
well as the express precept of the Divine will; and then by Consequence
subjects us to those whom we are required to respect so much and esteem; for
Nature as it never (according to the Maxim of the Naturalists Plato himself,
not the (...), allows those that (...) to Rule over what they have (...).
in Philosophy) is said to do any thing foolishly, or in vain; so neither will
it require any thing that is so, from others to be done; and therefore there is
no Natural Law that obliges us to Honor our Servants, and those that are
subjected to our Power; but the very Act it self would seem preposterous,
awkward, and unnatural.

And this agrees even with the very Vis and lex naturae semper in ditione
parentum esse liberos (...). Plin. Paneg.
notion of as Learned a Republican perhaps as ever published any thing in
Politics, for Aristotle that lived under a Commonwealth (tho he had less I
believe of its principles than our Seditious Souls that are Born Subjects to a
King, and sworn to be true to an Established Monarchy) he to Confirm his opinion
of the paternal Right, which in several parts of his Politics that Ancient
Heathen, that vast Body of the Primitive Philosophy is pleased to maintain when
he tells us that Families and Houses were at (...), etc.
first Governed after the manner of Kingdoms by the Eldest head in it, that
Cities were heretofore; as most Nations now are, under the Government of Kings,
(...), de Rep. l. 1. c. 2.
and then in another place in his Ethics more Expressly to this purpose,
plainly says, directly contrary to the Sense of Mr. H. and some of our
Democraticks that have adored some part of his Political Observations, (...),
Ethic. lib. 8. c. 12.
That an Empire or Monarchy, (or according to the Literal Greek) a Kingdom will
be a Paternal Government; and one would think the Authority of such Antiquity,
should at least have prevailed upon Mr. Hunt and his Historian, not to have
Libelled the Hypothesis for Novel or new; but agreeable to this his position,
does that wise Heathen define Honor, in the same Sense as I have Suggested
above, ( i. e.) that it does imply wherever it is paid a Power, and Subjection
in him that pays it; for he makes all his Honor, peculiarly, properly, in his
Aristot. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 7. and then again lib. 5. cap. 6. (...) are the
same that he expresses in other places by (...).
Politics to signify nothing else but Empire and Magistracy, and in other
places by those that are in HONOR; he understands the same persons, whom at
other times he dignifies with the Title and appellation of those that are in
POWER, which has made me many times think, that as the Romans received the
first rudiments of their Learning from the Greeks, so they might retain some
roots of their Language and mixed them among their own, as we see among our
selves those Modern Nations do at present that Correspond; and then we may
imagine (since their Sense and Etymology is not so wide and irreconcilable,)
that the Latinisms Timor and Timeo, were but borrowed from the Greeks (...) and
(...), for whom we fear we must Honor, and whom we Honourwe fear; I know that
it is but a sorry sort of reverence that is the result of our being afraid; but
yet we oblige our selves to pay it, tho it be but with reluctance; so that I
can confirm the position I laid down, and return to the very words of what was
first asserted, and that with none of the worst Syllogism in Logic, a sort of
Sorites, or Gradual Climax. i.e. Where ever there is any Natural Honor, there
always will be an awful fear, and wherever there is any thing of awful fear, it
is of somewhat what that has an absolute Power.

And then in my poor Apprehension, it is almost as natural an inference in the
Rules of Logic, from the proposition of A, being the Father of B, that
therefore he is his Lord and Master too, as it is in the Common Conclusion that
is made among Logicians, of B's being an Animal, from the Proposition, that he
is a man; for tho Dominion be not absolutely expressed in the definition of a
Father, yet it is so apparently Implied, that it makes an essential part of him
from the Closeness of the Connection; neither can Mr. H. overthrow the notion
with his Fruitless Labors about the sublimed Love that exerts it self in the
work of Generation, for it is not the bare procreation that Entitles the Father
to this Dominion; for then the Mother too would at least have as great a Power
over the Production, being as much contributory to its being produced, and for
some reason more Right and Jurisdiction over her Infant, as being the Fruit of
her own Womb; as being she, that Pater is est quem nuptiae demonstrant, D. 2.
4, 5.
determines it to such a Father, as she that has commonly the sole care and
concern of its Education; till it is grown more Adult and fit for to be formed
into manners by the Management of the Father; and therefore not only according
to the Maxim and Sanction of the Imperial Law, not only in a Civil and
Political Sense, Partus sequitur (...).
the Birth is said to follow the (...) but it holds good even in the State of
(...), and even in the literal (...) visible among Beasts: But that which gives
the Father a double Title to the (...) over the Child, is not only his being as
a Natural Agent, the first Spring that gives it Life and Motion, but also
because the Civil Sanctions of all Kingdoms and Countries, still (...) the
Fathers Heads of their Families; and from the Conjugal Compact that is made in
Matrimony, subjected the Wife to the Jurisdiction of the Husband; so that
whatever Power and Right belongs to her over her Infant, is like the acquest
that accrews to a Servant, or (...); which the Civil Law and our own Quicquid
acquirit filius, acquirit pa. tri suo, and servus domino. Inst. 2. 9. 1. Coke
Littl.. 172. Dr. and Stud. l. 1. c. 8.
Common too resolve, into the Power and Possession of the Master and Parent:
And then with what an Impertinent sury; with what an insignificant Folly does
the renowned Lawyer Labor and lay out his Lungs against Sir Rohert (...)?
Posts. p. 113.
In making him a Monster, and persuading Mankind to Sacrifice their Sons unto
Moloch, in depraving Human Nature worse than the Leviathan; I confess the
Furious fellow might as well fasten this upon that Loyal Persons position of a
Paternal Right, as they have several other propositions full of absurdity upon
the Doctrine of the Divine; which still have been nothing else but the dirt and
dust of their own raising; but is it a Crime at last with some of our
Rebellious Christians to become Loyal, because the Leviathan whom themselves
will make but an Infidel has lent them so many Lessons to learn them Obedience;
or is not a reproacht rather anough to make the boldest republican to blush,
that believes but a Deity, to see a Monarchy so well maintained even by a
Reputed Atheist? if the Asserters of a paternal Right concur with him in such
positions as render them good Subjects; I am sure these opposers of it, agree
with him in every point from whence they can draw but the least countenance for
Rebels. These Venomous heads the Spiders of the public, that spin their
Notions into Cobwebs, into such fine nonsense that they cannot hang together;
have here also that other good Quality of that virulent Creature, to suck up
all the Venom and Poison of Mr. Hobs, and prey upon the very principles of his
Corrupted Air, and the Infectious depravations even of Human Nature: his
Origination of Society out of Fear, his definition of Right to Consist in
Power, his Community in Nature, his Equality in persons; all the very
Contradictions of himself; reproaches of his Reason, the Opprobriums of his
Sense, the Pest and Plague of the People, are prized with our Republicans as
the Philosophers and the Schools do their propositions of Eternal truths; they
imbibe the Poison, and exalt, improve it too, they sublimate the very Mercury
of Mr. Hobs; and whereas he equals us only in a state of Nature, our Levellers
will lay us all Common, under the Enclosures of a Society, and the several
restrictions of so many Civil Laws.

But to what tends this their turning all the Power of a Parent into Tyranny;
as if a Father could not have an Authority over his Child, unless he be bound
to make it his Slave, as if the Chastisement of a Father could not Evidence his
Supremacy over his Son, unless like the Saturn of the Easterlings, he Sacrifice
him to the Fire, and torment it in the Flame. But this paternal Right of the
Father, must suffer by these Factious Fools, from the same sort of Inferrences
they bring against the Divine Right of their King, which may only serve with
some Loyal Hearts to confirm the great sympathy there is between them; for as
by the Law of Nature, a Father cannot be said to injure his Son, so neither by
those of the Land, can our Sovereign wrong his Subjects: For, say these
Seditious ones, your Divinest Monarchs by that Doctrine, can Hang, Burn, Drown
all their Subjects, (they should put in Damn too for once, since they may as
well infer from it, his sending them to the Devil: (but cannot common Sense
obtain amidst these transports of Passion? can they not apprehend a Father to
have any paternal Authority over his Family, unless he be able to Murder every
Man of it? The Civil Laws, the municipal ones of his Land, (if a Member of a
Society supersede such a feverity, and if a Patriarchal Prince must be
supposed, (as were several of old after the (...), then the Affection of
Potestas patris debet in (...) non atrocitate consistere D. (...). 9. (...).
a Father: And the Laws of Nature were sufficient to fecure the Son, or (...)
the Servant from any (...), but what some proportionable (...) so also, did
this Divine Right (...) Sovereign as entirely (...) the great Turk; yet the
(...) part of Decet princi pem leges servare quibus ipse solutus. D. 32. 1. 24.
those Civil Sanctions, to which the Divinest of them all would be (...), or at
least the precepts of the Divinity, their God under (...) they (...), that will
obliged them both (...) Justice, and Mercy, the two great Attributes of him
whom they represent.

But since they would make this Empire of a paternal Power so (...) in Reason,
let us see how it has all along (...) in the Letter of the Law; and if it has
there (...) been (...) upon as a Notion so (...) and (...). The most
illuminated Reason of our eminent (...), must submit to be much in the dark:
The (...) est civilum Romanorum nulli (...) homines talem potestatem habent.
Inst. 1. and 9.
Romans from the result of their Imperial Sanctions, looked upon themselves to
have such an absolute Power and Authority over their Sons and Daughters, that
they tell us expressly, it was a peculiar Prerogative, and privileged of the
Citizens of Rome, and that there was no other Nation that could Exercise such a
Jurisdiction, they could (...) for ever, by this Power Inst. lib. 21.9. Vid.
Pacii Anaiibid.
of the Parent, any thing that was acquired by the Son, and give it to any whom
they pleased, whereas it might have been an Argument enough of a paternal
Power, had they been but only usufructuaries, and the Dominion remained in the
Child; and such a Sense of Sovereignty do the Civilians express to reside in
the Father of a Family, that they gave him the same Appellation with that of a
King, and tell us by the name Appellatione Familiae etiam princeps familiae
Continetur Zouch. pars. 3.. 4. Dig. 50. 19. 196.
of a Family, the Prince of it is also understood; and tho Mr. Hunt tells us a
Story, out of the Cabala of the Jews Laws, and the Tract of Maimonides, that
they looked upon their Children (...) of Course, when they came to Thirteen; and
that then they could claim it as their right to be free. I must tell him from
the Constitutions of the Imperial, (that must be of more force among us, unless
we resolve still that even Christians shall Judaize,) that no Sons were ever
emancipated or emitted out of the power of the Parent, unless they could
prevail upon him for his own consent, that by no meanshe could be compelled
Neque natural liberi neque adoptivae ullo modo possunt (...) parents de
potestate sua^ eos dimittere Just. 1. 12. 12. Vid. Jul. Pac. ibid.
to it, and they had no freedom de Jure till their Fathers were de facto dead:
And tho (...) in his Comment on that part of the Institution, says, They became
sui Juris at 25 from their Manner and Custom; yet concludes the Law of Nature
obliged them still to their Parent, which no civil one could disanull: The Duty
that their D. 22. 3. 8.
Digests say, was due to this Paternal power, which they (...) almost as
Sacred, was expressed by the word piety, and a Ridley's part. 4. C. 2.
learned Civilian of our own laments, that there is no more provisions (...) in
our English Laws, for the Duty of the Child, and the protection of the Parent,
and with them so great was the crime of parricide, that they could not a long
time invent an adequate punishment, for such an unproportionable Guilt, tho
they had one for Treason against the Prince.

And tho our own Laws do not make the Paternal power savor so much of
Sovereignty, yet we shall see they sufficiently evince that the Parent has a
power very Analogous too it; whereas Mr. Hunt will not allow it to have the
least Relation, which remisness of our Civil Institutions might well proceed
from a presumption of our knowledge of the express command in the Decalogue, of
which the Romans were ignorant; tho we have no formal Yet Servants were
heretofore with us formally Emancipated, Qui servum Liberat inmercato vel hill
lumdredo Lanceam and gladium quae liberorum sunt arma in manibus ponat, Lex H.
1. 78. Lamb. p. 206. Vid. Bract. l. 1. c. 10. Flet. l. 1. c. 7. Lex AEthelst.
70. Lamb. p. 54.
Emancipation now in use, which does imply a power of Government, yet our old
Lawyer tells us still, that Children are in the power of their Parents, till
they have extrafamiliated them by giving them some portion or Inheritances; and
the Custody of them, while minors which (...) went to the King, upon the
presumption I suppose of his only ability to be a second Father, that was
settled in the Parent, both by Common Law and Statute: for there lay a good
action against any one for seducing a Man's Son as well as Servant out of his
power, which does imply that there is a power out of which he may be seduced,
and thus I have endeavored to show; the first Foundation of power to have been
in the Fathers of Families: And it signifies nothing, whither every Father of
it Reigns in it as a King now; and therefore Mr. Hunt his impertinence is
inconclusive, and part of his Assertion a plainly, Post. p. 98.
when he would infer, from the continuance of the Parents Authority over their
Children, together with the Sovereign power distinct, that therefore there was
never any Foundation of a Patriarchal power; for he might as well tell us, Si
aliquis filiolum occideret, ergalum and parents mortui, conjuncti^ re us est.
Lex Hen. 1. 79. Lamb. p. 207. And with this agrees the revived practice among
our moderns to bring Appeals.
That because we have no Parents now, but what are Subject to the Municipal
Laws of the Land, therefore there was never any Patriarch in the Bible, never
an Abraham, an Isaac, or a Jacob, that had an absolute Dominion over their own
Families; or none now amongst some Barbarous Nations, that have no other
jurisdiction but what is Paternal, the question is not what jurisdiction those
Parents have, that are Subjected to the Laws of a Civil Society, but what they
have by those of nature; and it is as absolute a lie; when he says, it is not
abated by the Sovereign power; for were it not; the Parent had a power over the
life of his offspring, as the Patriarchs had of old, and some Barbarous
Nations that are at present unciviliz'd.

And for the Statute of the 25, which 25. Ed. (...).
Mr. Hunt brings as an Argument against it, because (...) is not made by that
petit Treason, is as pertinent perhaps, as ifhe had told us, that every Father
of a Family, was not included in that of Edward the first, that settles the
Militia Ed. 1.
in the King: for sure it is not possible to suspect how they can be considered
asso many Sovereigns in the very Civil Sanctions that establish a much
more(...) Soveraignity, whose Supremacy in their several Families is founded on
the Law of Nature; tho we have seen that they are confirmed too by the general
Laws of Nations, and the Hypothesis favored from our own: But as it is
impertinently applyd to this purpose, so is it as falfely inferred from that
Statute; for tho Parricide be omitted, and the Judges by that act restrained to
interpret its extent from the paty of reason, or a Fortiori, Coke 3. Ins. p. 20.
yet no Man in hissenses can imagine that it was therefore omitted, because
there was no Relation of Subjection or Sovereignty between the Father and the
Son, when a Master, and a Servant are expressed in the very Letter of the Law,
when a Prelate and a Priest, a Husband and a Wife: And is it not against Sense
to imagine a Man has not as much Sovereignty over his Son, as over his Wife,
that sits always with him as his Equal, and to whom our Courtesy of England
gives the Precedence, and the Laws of the Land make but one, as well as those
of God; and if the (...) the Impetus of Love and Affection will supersede the
Servitude and Subjection: I think that by Mr. Hunt's leave is more abundantly
expressed to the Wife, especially in that point upon which he himself puts it,
the work of Generation:

And can it be imagined that even a regular, or secular Priest, whose
Subjection to his Primate, or Rector; is only the result of the Statutes of the
Society, or the resolution of the Common Law, can denote more Sovereignty, then
the Filial Obedience; required by the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations; the
citing this Statute of Edward, for having omitted the making Parricide
Petty-Treason; because it argues they had no opinion of the Sovereignty of the
Father, is the greatest Argument that they had; for since they have supposed a
Sovereign Power, (which from the suggestiing of such an Argument here
themselves do seem to allow, and tacitly to Confess) in those Authorities, the
Destroying of which is made Treason by this Act; they (...) conclude a greater
So, veraignty to reside in him that has really a GREATER POWER, then those that
in that Act are expressed; for were it (...) any impartial Person living. Whether
a Man has not a greater Power over his Son, then his Wife, or Servant, it would
soon be resolved that he has; he being empowered only from some civil
Constitutions to govern the latter, but the former from the Laws of Nature, and
Nations both; so that in Common Reason, and Common Equity, Parricide must be
concluded in the Chapter of Treason, according to the received Rule of Natural
as well as Artificial Logic; that every greater Crime must be Punishable by
that Law; that punishes a less of the like Nature; and the true Reason why in
this very Case the Judges do not make the like Conclusion from the Similitude
or Aggravation of the sin, is as my Lord Coke Chap. Treas. p. 20. Et pur ceo
plus semblable Treason, etc. 25. E. 3. c. 2. (...) p 1. Mar. Cap. 1.
Insinuates because the words of the Act it self declare, that nothing but what
is their (...) and expressed shall be (...) but even that very Act, foreseeing
they might have (...) several things that (...)
by the same parity of Reason might be included, does provide with a sort of
reserve, that at any time the Parliament might make it more Inclusive; and I
dare Swear had it it been proposed to any Session that has sat since the
Statute was first Enacted; whether by Parity, (...) was not fit to be made
Petty-Treason, not a man of Sense in the Senate, but would have consented: And
this Construction of a Parliament is what Mr. Sidney himself forsooth so much
relied upon; who if they will but put upon this branch of the Statute according
to his Paper at his Exec.
own words, a construction agreeable to Reason, or Common Sense must conclude
that he certainly is as much a Traitor that Murders his own Father; as the
Servant that kills his Sovereign Master, or a Priest that makes away with his
Lord the Prelate.

But besides if this Letter of our Law does not include the (...) of the Parent
in Petty-Treason; yet the (...) of my Lord 3. Inst. p. 20.
Coke upon this Case will go near to conclude it, for he says it is out of the
Statute (...), the Son serve the Father for Wages, Meat, or Drink, or Apparel,
and I cannot see how any Son, till he is Emancipated by (...), or Marriage, or
the like, can be said to be any other then his Fathers Servant and that for all
four; for as the Father requires of him filial Obedience, so he can, and they
Commonly do Command their Sons in the Offices of Servants, and that Arbitrarily
in whatsoever he pleases, and find him accordingly the forementioned
necessarys to the performance of his duty; and above all this, it is the
opinion of a good Historian, recorded by my Lord Coke; that before this Statute
Parricide 22. Ed. 1. Matt. Paris 874.
was Petty-Treason by the Common Law, and then what will become of Mr. H.
Triumphant Appeal to the Laws, as well as his impertinent applycation to
Reason; and before this Statute too, such a signal sign of Sovereignty was
supposed to reside in the Father of a Family: That it was Petty. Treason too Si
quis falsaverit sigillum domini sui de cujus familia fuit. Flet. l. 1. c. 22.
Britton. fol. 16.
to (...), or (...) the (...) or Signet of the Lord of the Family wherein he
lived; a Signature of Royalty indeed, and almosta mark of Majesty it self, and
the Reason my Coke 3. Ins. fol. 20.
Lord Coke resolves it into; their own omission of this Reasonable part of the
Statute, is so far from the Postscript impertinency, of the Parliaments opinion
against the paternal Power; that he says those Law makers could never imagine
that any Child could be guilty of such a sort of Barbarity, and seems to
insinuate the pretermission to have been the result of such a probable piece of
presumption; and that I remember was the very reason among the Romans, that
there was no punishment for such a sin as superseded a Sentence. They had a
(...).
Law supposed to be made in (...). Caesar the Dictators time against those that
attempted Majesty, and a severe one too besides its being Capital, Dig. ad.
leg. Jul. maj. l. ult. Vid. (...). and (...). l. 6. ff. d. pub.
to have his Goods confiscated, his Children (...), and his very Memory damned;
and one would think it might have served for Parricide too, but they (...) upon
that Treason so gross, such a Traitor so great, that for a (...) time he
superseded even the Invention of a Torment from his Insuperable quiet.

Mr. Hunt would do well, and like himself; that, is to (...) very Foolishly,
even from this too, that the Romans had once no Regard, no respect, for this
paternal Right, because the Punishment of Parracide was once left out of their
Laws; and yet at last that it might be no longer unpunishable only upon the
same presumption that there could not be found such Criminals; one Cnej.
Pompeius is said to have been the Author and Inventor of a Natural Punishment,
if possible, for a Crime, so unnatural; that is, as he had Rebelled against the
Laws of Nature in this his Crime; so he should Vid. Lex Pompeia. de Parricidiis
Inst. Lib. 4. Tit. 18. Par. 6.
be deprived while living of the benefit of all her Elements, and neither her
Heaven or Earth receive him after Death, but to be Buried alive with wild Beast
in a Bag, and set a floating in the midst of the Sea; whereas if they killed
any other Kindred or Relation, like Common Felons they were only punished by the
Cornelian Law: And now Lex Cornelia. de sicar. made by Cornelius Sylla. the
(...). ibid. 510.
by this time I hope I may with modesty maintain, whatever our mighty (...) do
say to disprove (...) that I Have shown the Paternal Power, in the beginning of
the World to have been patriarchal, and Absolute: And in all succeeding Ages to
have been sub ordinately Sovereign, in the respective Families, and several
Households in which the Parent does preside, and that asserted from the very
Civil (...) that establish a Supreme (...) Paramount; and some Measure
demonstrated this from the very Word of God; the course of Nature, Light of
Reason, Laws of Nations, and the Statutes of the Land.

And as I Have done with this paternal Right in Fathers, so I shall consider now
in the next place the Divine of my King; a Right that none but Republicans
dispute, none but Rebels will really oppose, and they deal with this Divine
Doctrine not so kindly as some Indians are said to do with the Devil, who paint
him most ugly and (...) only that he (...) be the more adored; whereas these
dress up somewhat of Divinity it self in the most frightful form, to make it
(...) and Contemned, they tell us it is Monstrous, Traiterous, Papal, Divelish;
(...).
and this is the (...) Varnish these Villains (...) over it, when all the while
the Colors are only of their own (...): This is their Trojan Horse that must
(...) Popery and Arbitrary Power, and carries Fire and Sword in its Belly; but
in these their aspersions as they (...) the Bible and (...) the very Book of
Life; that in several Vld. Romans c. 13.
places (...) to us the very Divinity of Kings, so they Libel the works of that
Learned Person they so much oppose; in a misrepresentation of his very
principles and positions about it; and then it is no difficult matter to render
an Hypothesis puzzel'd, senseless, and absurd, when with their own Pens they
put upon it the Nonsense and absurdity; for thus they deal injuriously even
with the dead, and disingenuously detract from the Learned dust of that Loyal
Subject Sir Robert Filmer. Thus Sidney says, Paper at Execut.
and endeavors to deduce from his Doctrine what was never lain down; that all
mankind was born by the Laws of God, and the (...) of Nature to submit to an
absolute Kingly Government, not restrainable by Law, or Oath: Thus the
Postscript will draw from it Posts. p. 959.
that it (...) such a Government to be Established by God and Nature for all
mankind; that it proves a Charter to Kings Granted by God Almighty; But such
(...) were barred from being so much as Evidence by the Dig. 22. 4. 2. D. 48.
2. 7.
Civil Law; they were forced to subscribe their accusations and be (...) if
their Falsehoods were detected, with a retaliation, and our own 37. Ed. 3. 18.
38. Ed. 3. 9.
Statutes of King Edward provided once against such false suggesters with an
incurring the like Punishment, they would have brought others to suffer; and
(...) pity but those (...) ones, or the like should be revived for the
prevention of Perjury; it would be no discouragement to good Evidence, tho
deterring to the bad; and these detractors and false Accusers of a person in
his principles, deserve in a Moral Sense as much Animadversion, as those
Perjured ones in the Civil? why did not Mr. (...) or the (...) their
subscription too? Why were they not so fair as to cite the (...) out of Filmer;
wherein these puzzel'd Senseless positions were asserted?

The Substance, the whole design of that Loyal and (...) piece, is only to
expose the Natural Liberty of the People, or as they would make (...) the
Subjects Divine (...) to (...) us the Royal Authority of the (...) before the
Flood, that Fathers were first, Kings of Families, that the People were not
concerned as far as can be learnt from the Scriptures in the choosing of Kings:
That Monarchy has been always found more excellent (...) Democracy, and popular
Government more Bloody (...): That People cannot Nemo Dominum suum judicet, vel
judicium proseret super eum cujus ligius sit, Lex Hen. 1. Lamb. 187.
(...) (...) or punish their Kings; That neither those of Israel or Judah were
bound by their Law, but were always (...), and that our own have always been so
too: This is the Substance that by all the acquaintance I have had with his
works, I could ever collect out of them, and as I remember from some particular
passages, he tells us, That he does not quarrel at the Privileges and
Immunities of the People, but only question whither they have them from a
Natural Patriarch: p. 6, ibid. p. 93.
Liberty, or the Bounty of the Prince; He tells us tho Kings be not bound by
the Laws, yet will they rule by them; and that they degenerate into Tyrants
when they do otherwise; where then is this Bugbear Arbitrary, Slavery, Misery,
the result of a Doctrine full of an easy Government, Freedom, and Felicity?
the most that can be gathered from him is, That Monarchys as well as other
Estates, do and ought to descend from some supreme Father, and common Ancestor,
and that there is some paternal Right, by which the several Kingdoms of the
Earth are Governed, although by the Secret Will of God, the long series of
time, the several Successions are altered and Usurped.

And then what must be meant by this Divine Right? but what is consistent with
the safety of the Subject, and the Will, and Intimation of the Almighty: That
God has made it part of the Decalogue, That Moses had it delivered to him in
his Tables on the Mount, that it is a positive Divine Precept, that all the
wide World should be governed by nothing else but a Succession of absolute
Kings, (and as they would make every Monarch,) by a Divine Entailment of
perpetual Tyrants: these are only the Conclusions of rage, and transports of
those that are (...) and prejudiced against such a Notion or opinion, the rants
of our implacable Republicans, that are pleased with nothing that recommends a
Monarchy, no tho it be the very Bible, and the Book of the Almighty: Cannot
those silly Souls that are transported out of Sense conceive that there is a
difference in Assertion to say, That Monarchy is by Divine Right; and that
every Monarch Rules by the same Right Divine; then indeed we should run into
Sidney's Absurdities of making every Rebel that could but reach at a Crown, a
Cromwell, or a Monmouth, as much a Divinity Monarch, as our best and Lawful
Sovereign; tho it must be granted that those Successions even of Lines, that
have for a long time descended lineally, do intimate to us somewhat of the
Divine Will that it shall so succeed, and even the paternal Successions in this
sort of Royal Government, was given us for our Instruction that God approved of
it from the time he gave the Children of Israel and Judah their first Kings,
who throughout all the History of the Bible, succeeded from Father to Son: but
that which garbles, and really grieves our Republicans, is that even the Divine
Right of Monarchy it self can be Asserted, that we have so much as the
Intimation of the Will of God, any Reason to conclude from his Word, that he
has given the Approbation to the Kingly Government, any preference to Monarchy
it self, they quarrel at the very Bible for mentioning so much as a King or
Prince; and they would make the version Libel the Original, when it makes a
Melchisideck the King of Salem, or Hamor the Hivite; Prince of the Country,
they would have their INDEX too, and expunge a whole Chapter of Genesis Genesis 14.
for talking of ten Kings besides Abraham, and make all the Old Testament an
entire Apocripha that does but mention a Monarch: And for this, Plato Redivivus
page 23.
Plato tells us plainly, that Moses made them all Commonwealths, Numb. 16.
and that afterward over those they called Kings the Sanhedrim, and
Congregation of the People did preside, tho the Text tells us, Moses was King
in Jesurun; and so the King it seems made it a Commonwealth.

These Rebels to the Majesty of their King, are as refractory to what the
Divine Majesty has approved, they damn the very History of the Creation, and
the Original composure, and Constitution of Nature, because it once made a
Monarch in a single Man, and has puzl'd them to find out any more of Adams
Common wealth but among his Beasts, they Curse the Dispensations of Providence,
for preserving a Monarchical Government throughout the Universe, and has left
them nothing but two or three Rebellious States, they condemn the deluge for
not destroying Noah too; but left so much of Regal Authority to remain in the
Ark, this makes them when they are perplexed with the pesterings of some Loyal
Positions, to put us upon deducing Hunt post.
our Kings Pedigree from Adam, or as Mr. Sidney says from the Eldest Son Paper
at Exec.
of Noah, the Foolishness and unreasonabless of their Postulates, the
ridiculousness of those demands, I cannot better answer to my Satisfaction, or
theirs, then by sending them to St. John's Coll. in Oxford: I Will promise them
there, if they will be but pleafed, there they shall see even the most
everlasting Line drawn down from the Garden of Eden to White Hall, from the
first Adam to their present Sovereign K. James, and if they don't like the
Heraldry, let them dispute it with the Painter; I cannot tell how to gratify
the Impertinence of their demands, but with as pleasant a message.

But if a Man can be serious among such Buffoons; I must tell them it is one
thing to say that Noah and Adam Ruled by a Right Paternal, and another that
every Monarch must have the same Paternal Right from Adam and Noah: It Is one
thing to say that God approved of Princes to Govern, and another that he
appointed to every Prince the same Right of Government, the form of Regal
Government I hope from the Royal Authority of the Patriarchs may be Justified
to be of Divine Institution; tho the Succession of the whole series of
Succeeding Sovereigns, be not resolved all into the same Title; I can tell them
of not only an absurdity, but a plainlye would be the Consequence of such a
position; for then there must have been no Battles Fought after the Flood, no
Berosus the Priest of Belus talks of ten Kings of Caldea before the Flood.
Ten Kings in one Chapter of the Testament, none of that long Catalogue of
Egyptian Princes, and in truth at present but one Universal Monarch in the
World; tho that some Learned, and Laborious Heads do too industriously
sometimes attempt to deduce from Scripture by the Almighty to have been once
designed, and Babel for the seat of such an Empire; For it would be a great
piece of Paradox indeed, and a greater of Impertinence to persuade such
Seditious Authors, there was ever any thing of an Universal Empire designed,
that will not allow there was ever a particular one Established; That tell us no
general revolts of a Nation can be called Rebellion, and then I am sure Trial
page 26.
they must maintain, that there is no particular Supremacy, from which the
generality of the Subjects can be said to Reble; but Mr. Sidney borrowed this
pretty Position too from that pernicious piece that was published about the
Rights of Magistrates, for that tells us too, De Jure Magistratuum: sic Dani
Christiernum, etc. sic Sueci Sigismundum; But this Author extends it too to
absolute, Hereditary Kingdoms, as well as Mr. Sidney. Sic Scoti (...), and
perpetuo carcere damnarunt, rectius, audeo dicere, (...) fuisse, si meritas
paenas (...) eam exercuissent. D. Jure Mag. p. 47.
That the Danes imprisoning their King Christien, to his dying day; the Swedes
rejecting their Sigismund, for his persisting in the Romish Religion, were no
Rebels; I confess their Monarchys admitting so much mixture of Democracy, may
make the people there to have a greater power in public Administrations; but
certainly cannot well extend to empower them to subvert the very public Weal
it self, which must be said to consist in the supreme head of it, the King; and
tho they will separate his Person, from that public political Consideration,
and say they may maintain the Monarchy, tho they depose such a particular King,
this will not mend the matter, for those that have a power to reject ONE
Prince, are as much empowr'd to refuse to Elect another; and then the result of
it must be this, that our Republicans will admit no more of a particular Empire
then a Universal.

In short, those that had but the least Inclinations to be Loyal, and did but
Love, and like, an Established Monarchy; that were not resolutely resolved to
Rebel against the Light of Nature as well as the Resolution of the Laws, would
soon see, and be satisfied of the Solid Reasonableness, the Innocent Truth of
these three several Propositions I have so lately Labored in. First, that
Primogeniture obtained by the Institution of the Almighty and his continued
Approbation in the Bible; both in Paternal descent and Regal ones; and that the
Laws and Practice of Nations have confirmed it in both since; and that home to
our Doors. Secondly, that Paternal Right and Power, by the same Authority of
the Almighty has been preferred, by the Laws of Nature Maintained, and by the
Civil Sanctions of all Nations Confirmed. Thirdly, that Monarchy or Kingly
Government isso far of a Divine Institution, as it has received from God By me
Kings Rule.
himself an Express approbation; as it has been Intimated to us from the Worlds
Creation; and its first Regulated Establishment, as it is Constantly Visible
from all the Phaenomenons of Unalterable Nature; and as it has been Continually
transmitted to posterity by the special Appearances of providence for its
preservation.

And Last of all, let me but only subjoyn the Excellency of this truly ancient,
venerable, and divine Form of Government, a Monarchy; and then the many
Mischiefs that attend the popular one, a Democracy; and then let the most
prejudiced and partial person judge, not only which of the two has been always
reputed most Eligible; but which of them he himself would most affect to Choose:
Sir Walter Raleigh, as Learned an Headpiece perhaps of the last Age, as any
that he has left behind him in this, a Person rather prejudiced against
Monarchy; than bigoted for it, no such Court-Favourite as the Merc. polit.
Mercury makes of Salmasius, A Dirty Dissolute Parasite of Kings, and Pander of
Tyranny; this Learned History of the World, cap. 9.. 2.
Historian lets us know, That the first, the most ancient, the most general and
most approved Government is that of one Ruling by just Laws called Monarchy;
and whatever wits our more modern Commonwealths-men pretend to be; this
Gentleman; that was more sage than the wisest of them, does not make paternal
Right such a ridiculous thing as they would represent it; but tells us, that in
the beginning the Fathers of Nations were then the Kings, and the Eldest of
Families the Princes, and of such an Excellency is its Form, that it is the
clear result of unprejudiced Reason, and most agreeable to the sense and
security of Mankind: For as the natural Intellect it self (by which I mean bare
humane understanding) when, in the infancy of the World, people were guided
more by their own Fancies, and the Paternal Power, which then was all the
Regal, from the tenderness it might be supposed to have toward those that were
their natural issues as well as their civil subjects, had indulged vice, and
been less rigorous in Executing impartial Justice on Offenders; whereby people
were left more at Liberty, I say Nature then, and Necessity it self, made them
find the Inconvenience even of too much Toleration; and made even the most
foolish fellows apprehend as well as the wise, that the Condition of reasonable
men would be more miserable than that of brute beasts; that an Inundation of
Anarchy and Confusion, would overwhelm them more than the first Flood, Did they
not, by a general Consent, submit to Government, and obey those that were set
over them to Govern? For they found that when they were most mighty to oppress,
others might in time grow more so, and do them as much mischief: And those that
were equal in their strength, found themselves equally dangerous and
mischievous one to another; and that the most unbounded Licenciousness proved
always, to some or other, the most miserable Bondage and Slavery. And this
natural Reason inclined them too to acquiesce under those Monarchical Forms,
that were then the Government of the Times, and which the Israelites themselves
desired in a more special manner, though they were forwarn'd of its Absoluteness,
and told by Samuel, that it would be Tyranny it self: for the same necessity,
convenience, reason, and natural instinct that persuaded them, to submit to
Government in General, did also suggest to them the Excellency of Monarchy in
Particular: For as by want of all Government, their reason told them they could
not long possess any right, and that Liberty being only a License to do what
they list, and so left nothing to be wrong: So the same reason suggested, that
these their Rights were best defended, and soonest decided by some single
Person, that was Supreme, than when a Multitude had the Supremacy; for in that
there being so many suffrages as there are men, accordingly there might be so
many several interests and factions; which must both hinder any sudden
determination, as well as make the sentence liable to more partiality and
injustice, when it is determined. This made the Senate of Rome so tedious
always in its determinations, and the people as uneasy and unsatisfied in
their Decrees: Their Praetores, Quaesitores, Judices Quaestionum and selecti,
some of them having Sigon. de Jud. l. 2. c. 4. and de Jure Romans lib. 2. c. 18.
under them no * less than an hundred Commissioners, might be said to confound
Causes instead of determining them. Their Agrarian Laws that were made for the
Division of their Fields, most of them having been given by Romulus, and the
rest of their Kings, resolved their rights to them with Justice and
satisfaction to the people, while their Kings Reigned that gave them, and were
the sole Judges of their own Laws.

But when they were confounded into a Commonwealth, and the Senate set
themselves to decide the divisions of their Commons, and their Fields; what
Seditions, Confusions, and Unsettlement did they create? So that the Reasonable
presumption there is, of a more Equitable and speedy distribution of Justice
from a single Sovereign, because supposed to be less prejudiced, and less
unable to be prevailed upon by favor or affection, may very well be thought to
have recommended at first, a Monarchical Form, and afford us now as much reason
for the retaining it.

In the next place, A King being a perpetual Heir to the Crown, insomuch that
the Politic Laws suppose him never to dye, and when in a natural sense he
does, the Crown still descends to his immediate Successor: This will make him
(...) to preserve the Rights of it inviolate, and perpetuate the same
Prerogative to his Posterity: Whereas the people, in all their popular (...),
administer only for years, or at most for Life; and what should hinder them
then from defrauding that Public, whose Administration they must either soon
quit, or at last leave to those to whom they no way relate. I allow in most
such Communities, there is commonly special provisions made by their Laws, that
an abusing that power, with which they are entrusted, or a robbing the
Commonwealth of part of its Revenue, shall be punished with some grievous Fine,
or perhaps made Capital; for which the Romans had their several rules and
regulations for their Magistrates and men in Office: But there being so many
ways to be injurious to the Public, that can so easily, by those that
administer its affairs, be kept private and concealed; it must certainly be
concluded, that those that have an Hereditary Power of Public Administration,
as all Kings, and they alone have, that their Interest obliges them to preserve
its rights inviolate, from an unwillingness, that nature it self will implant
in them, to injure their own Sons, Successors and Posterity. Whereas the same
Interest, which certainly is the most powerful Promoter either of good or evil,
will incite Senators in a Commonwealth more industriously, more seriously to
endeavor to serve them selves. It is the most prodigious piece of Paradox, to
see some of our Seditious Republicans to rail at Ministers of State, and Mr.
Sidney of all Men had the least reason to have reflected for his Sufferings
upon those that sat on the Bench, with the rest of the Rabble of his
Democraticks, who of late in these tumultuous times have talked of nothing less
than the punishing of those that held the Sword of Justice, threatened Vid.
Baker. page 146. Rich. 11.
them with the Fates of Tresilians, Fulthorps, Belknaps, with the Gallows,
Fines and Imprisonments; whereas these two were only punished in the Reign of a
King, wherein they actually rebelled and deposed their Prince; but were they
the worst of Men that officiated in Public Administration under their King,
such Republicans have the least reason to find fault, when always in their
Usurpations the greatest Fools as well as Knaves have been commonly preferred:
What more Illiterate Blockheads did ever blemish a Bench than some of those
that sat upon it in our Rebellion? and for that consult the Trial of Lilburn
they Arraigned, where you will find a clamorous Soldier silence, and baffle them
with his Books, and invert the Latin Aphorism in a litteral sense, by making
the Gown yield to the Sword. And for their Villainy, let Bradshaw alone: And for
that only be the best of Presidents. The very Beggars and Bankrupts of the
Times, that bawled most for Property, when they had hardly any to a penny or a
pin, were set up to dispose of the peoples Fortunes and Estates. Princes, as
they are above all Men, so generally make those their Ministers that excel
others in Desert or Virtue, because their persons are to be represented by
them: And they may as well imagine a King would crowd his Courts with Clowns, to
show his Magnificence, as fill his Judicatories with Fools or * Qui aliquod
munus gerere debent, virtutis habita ratione eliguntur. (...). Orat. pro
Monarch.
Knaves to distribute his Justice. It Is enough for an Oceana, an Oliver, or a
Commonwealth to set up such ridiculous Officers; Brutes beneath the Ass in the
Apologue, that will not so much as be reverenced for the Image they bear: but
even the best of Common Men, whenthey are raised to some supreme Government,
prove like Beggars on Horseback, unable to hold the Reins, or riding off their
necks; the wisest, in their own ordinary administrations, prove but foolish
Phaetons when they are got into the Chariot, set all in combustion and
confusion: The not being born to Govern, or educated under the Administrations
of a state, makes them either meanly submissive in the midst of their Grandeur,
or insolently proud of their Office, which renders them as ridiculously Great;
whereas Princes from an Hereditary VIRTUE, (that consists always in a MEAN) or
their nobler Education that instructs them in the Mode, preserves them too from
running into the sordid absurdities of such Extremes.

Many of such like preferable Conveniences might be reckoned up, that make a
Commonwealth less Eligible; but for Confirmation of it, it is better to have
recourse to matter of Fact: When did their Rome ever flourish more than under
the Government of their Kings? by that it was Vid. Tacit. l. 1. p. 1. Lucius
Florus, p. 1.
Founded, by that it was most Victorious, and with that it always fell. Romulus
himself first gave them their Religion and their Lact. de falls. rel. l. 1. c.
22.
God, as well as the Government; and, with the assistance of his Numa, brought
them to observe some Ceremonies which the Trojans had taught them; under whom
did their City Triumph more, both in fame, riches, tranquillity and ease, than
under the Empire of Augustus? And one would think that when the Controversy
upon his coming to the Crown was then in Debate, it should have been decided by
the two famous Wits of their time, in their Dialogue, Maecenas and Agrippa: It
was submitted to their determinations, and we see what was the result, A
MONARCHY. Vid. Orat. Maecenat. pro Monarch.
And that preferency of this most excellent Institution themselves most
evidenced, when upon all Exigencies and Difficulties they were forced to have
recourse to a Dictator, whom all Writers agree to have differed only from a
King in the sound of his Name, and the duration of his Office, the very
Definition Dictator quoniam dictis ejus totus parebat populus, Romans Antiq. p.
170.
of his Name implying, that all were bound to obey his Edicts: he had his
Magister Equitum, an Officer, in effect the same with the Praefectus Vrbis,
which under their King was his Mayor. And after that rash Rebellion of theirs
against Royal Government, after so many Revolutions of Tribunes, Triumvirs,
Quaestors, AEdils, Praefects, Praetors and Consuls, were never at rest or
quiet, 'till they were settled again in their Caesar's. Themselves know best,
what the Sedition of Sylla and Marius cost them, how many lives of Consuls and
Senators, besides the blood of the Commons: Let them consult Plutarch, and see
the bloody Scene of Butchery and Murder. Pray tell me, mighty Murmurers! in
which was your Rome most blessed, or suffered least, with the bloody War
between Caesar and Pompey, or the settlement of it in Julius himself? Did it
not bleed and languish as much with the Civil Wars of Augustus, Antony and
Lepidus, as it flourished when reduced to the only Government of Octavius? And
would it not have been much better, had those succeeding Emperors been all
Hereditary, when we find, that for the most, the Multitude and Soldiers were
the makers and setters up of the bad, and the destroyers and murderers of the
best? It Is too Otho, Vitellius, Heliogab. they set up. Alexand. Aurelianus,
Probus they murder d.
much to tell you the story of our own Chronicles, as well as their Annals, how
happy our Land was for a long time in a Lineal Descent of Hereditary Kings, how
miserably cursed in the Commonwealth of England, what blood it cost to establish
it, what Misery and Confusion it brought us, when unhappily established?

And as an Argument that the Romans flourished most under those Emperors, see
with what Veneration their Imperial Sanctions speak of their power;they make it
Sacrilegii instar est, etc. C. 1. 23. 5.
Sacriledg to disobey it; they made the very memory of those that committed
Treason against them to be rooted out, the very Quisque vel cogitavit. C. 9. 8.
5.
Thought of it they punished with as much severity as the Commission; all his
Children, Servants, and whole Family were punished, though unknowing of the
Crime. They punished those with the same severity that Conspired against any
Minister of State, because relating to the Imperial Body, and that if they did
but think of destroying them; and even those that were found but the movers of
Ibid.
Sedition were Gibbeted or Condemned to their Beasts. And as Dig. 48. 19, 38.
those Laws made all the Sanctions of all Princes Sacred and Divine, so do our
33. Ed. 3 10. H. 7. 16.
own declare the King capable of all Spiritual Jurisdiction, in being Anointed
with Sacred Oil; by which they give him all power in Ecclesiasticals too, to
render his Person the more Venerable, and call the Coke Litt. Sect. 1. fol. 1.
B. The Possessions of the King are called Sacra Par trimonia.
Lands of the 1 Inst.
King like the Patrimony of the Church, Sacred: Prince and Priest were of old
terms Synonimous, and signified the same thing. The Jews and Egyptians had no
Kings but what exercised the Offices for a long time, of the Priesthood too,
with which they then alone made the Monarchy mixed; and of this even Justin. l.
16. 36.
Justin can tell us in one of his Books: And for making their Monarchy more
Divine, did Romulus and Numa, the Founder of their Religion as well as of Rome,
Officiate in it sometimes too. So much did the Fathers of old prefer Monarchy
to a Popular Praestat regem Tyrannum habere quam nullum, p. 182.
Government, that Sir Walter Rawleigh tells us of the saying of St. Chrysostom,
that recommended even a Tyrant before no King at all; and that is (...) with a
Sentence of Tacitus, who tells us, If the Prince be never so Tacit. Lib. 1.
Praestat sub malo principe esse quam nullo.
wicked, yet still better than none: And for that of a Commonwealth, it was as
bravely said by Agesilaus to a Citizen of Sparta, discoursing about Government,
That such a one, as a common Cobbler would disdain in his House and Family, was
very unfit to Govern a Kingdom. In short, all the Presidents that Mr. Sidney
has given us, of the Romans driving out their Tarquins, of the French rejecting
the Race of Pharamond, of the Revolt of the Low Countries from Spain, of the
Scots killing James the Third, and Deposing Queen Mary, are all absolute
Rebellions, were ever Recorded so in History, and will be Condemned for such by
all Ages. He should have mentioned for once too, the murder of our Martyred
Sovereign, for to be sure he had the same sense of that upon which he was to
have sat. But if any thing can recommend their Commonwealth, it must be only
this, That it cannot be so soon dispatched, it being a Monster with many Heads;
to which Nero's Wish would not be so cruel, That it had but one neck, to be cut
off at a blow. The clamor this Republican made against Monarchs in general,
was, whatever he suggests, applied to our own in particular, when he tells in
the very same Page, of the Page 23.
Power of the People of England; and though he exclaims, and all others do,
against this Arbitrary Power of Kings, it is certain themselves would make the
People as Arbitrary: The Question is not, whether there shall be an Arbitrary
Power, but the Dispute is who shall have it, there never was, nor ever can be a
People governed without a Power of making Laws, and that Power (so long as
consonant to reason) must be Arbitrary, for to make Laws, by Laws; is Nonsense.
These Republicans, by confession, would fix it in many, and the Multitude; in
Aristocracy it is fixed in a few, and therefore in a Monarchy must be settled in
ONE.

CHAP. VI. Remarks upon their Plots and Conspiracies.
AND now that they may not think I have foully Libelled them in a
Mis-representation of the dangerous Principles of their Republicans, I Will be so
fair as to prove upon them too, the natural product of their own Notions; and
that is, the Plots of the same Villains as soon as they have been pleased to set
up for Rebels.

And these will appear from Chronicle and History, the Records of Time, and the
best Tryers of Truth; these will not be falsified with Reflection, but be
founded upon matter of Fact: And of these, this will fall in our way as the
first.

About the Year 1559, there was promoted in France, a Plot and Conspiracy
against their King, and that founded upon the same pretext; so many of ours
have been of late in England, that is, Religion, but truly fomented by what has
been always the spring, the very fountain of Blood and Rebellion, discontent
and disgust toward the Government: For upon the death of Henry the Second, and
the Succession of Francis his eldest Son to the Throne, the Princes of the
House of Bourbon, thinking themselves neglected and despised, thrust out of
Office and Employment at Court, and finding the Family of the Guises still
preferred, whom they always as mortally hated, resolved to revenge themselves
upon the Crown, (that is) to turn Rebels. Of these Vendosme and Conde were the
principal Engagers, and drew in the two Castillions, the Gasper de Collign, and
Mr. D' Andelot.
Admiral and his Brother, who for the removal of the Duke De Montmorency, their
relation from that Court, to which he had preferred them, were as full also of
resentment against the Crown, as those that came to engage them with an
invitation to invade it; and after all their several seditious Assemblies,
after all the many Meetings they had made, after all the Treasonable
Consultations they had held, no design was looked upon by them more likely to
prove effectual, than the making themselves Head of the Hugenots. And so hot
were they upon this Project, the pursuit of another kind of Holy War, (that
among our modern Crusadoes has been nothing else but a Religious Rebellion)
that notwithstanding the coldness of the King of Navarr, they drew in most of
the Protesting part of France to be truly Rebels, for the sake of their
Seducers, while they made them believe they had only engaged themselves to
fight for the Religion of those they had so wickedly seduced: And so conducing
then were the principles of a Republic to a Rebellions Plot, that one Alias
Godfry de la. Bar.
(...) that was forced to turn Renegado to his Country, for Misdemeanors
committed in it, and fled to Geneva, as a Sanctuary for Sedition, after he had
lurked there like a concealed Criminal abroad; upon his Return sets up for an
open Rebellion at Home, after he had layn so long in the lake, the sink of
Democracy; you may be sure was well instructed how to resist a Monarch. He soon
blows the coals that could easily keep up the Blood of the warm Princes that
was already set so well a boiling: Him they pitch upon as the fittest tool to
work out their design; and in my conscience, coming from that Commonwealth,
the Statsemen judged not amiss, when they took him for an able Artist. With his
help, and their own, it went so far, that Moneys, Men and Ammunition was
provided; and a Petition drawn for a Toleration of Religion, though indeed but
a Treacherous vell to cover their Intended Treason, which was to seize upon the
Young King, upon his denial of what they knew he would not grant; surprise the
Queen that still opposed them; and put the Guises to the Sword, whom she
favored. But the Court being advised of the Conspiracy, had retired to the
Castle of Amboise; and so far did they prosecute their Plot, that their
Petitioners were admitted into it, though their Armed Accomplices that were
without, were compelled to fight for their Lives; which Renaudie, with the rest
of the Ringleaders of them lost; and the Rabble to save theirs, was forced to
fly. To renew another about the end of this unhappy War, were published those
Treasonable Tracts, De jure Magist. and Brutus his Vindiciae: With another as
pernicious a piece, a Dialogue composed (as pretended) by one Eusebius
Philadelphus: Libels that exposed Majesty to the Public, like a piece of
Pageantry, only to be looked upon, and shouted at. Vid. Heylin's Hist. (...).
page 68.
This was the praeliminary Plot, and an unhappy prelude to a long and bloody
Civil War, fomented first by the fury of a Faction that set up for Rebels; only
because not favored (as they thought) sufficiently by the Court, and then
seconded even to an Assaulting of the Crown in the Siege of Paris, and almost
the Subversion of the Monarchy, as some Learned Historians surmise, from the
secret Emissaries of the Republic of Geneva. I need not touch on the
particulars in which the fatal War at last was forced to terminate; it is too
much to tell you 'twas in a torrent of Blood: And what was worse, that of most
of the Protestants, whom a transported Faction First engaged to fight for
Religion, when their own real Quarrel was only a revengeful resentment against
the Court, and the Crown; and whom a Holy Commonwealth, the Republic of
Geneva, still animated against the Kingdom of France.

It was upon the Preaching up of these principles by their Ursinus. Pareus.
Professors at Hydelberg, and their Inculcating that old Aphorism of Trajan,
when he bid his Centurion draw his Sword in his Defense, Si been prome si male
con tra, me stringito.
if he Governed well; but if ill, then Against him: A saying that is Registered
in every Piece that I have yet seen published by a Republican; as if in it were
founded their very Bottom and Basis of all Rebellion. Building upon these
Positions, and the dangerous Doctrines of Democraticks, the Divines of Germany
Invited the Palatine Princes, and others of the Empire, to promote the
Rebellion in France; and Casimir, second Son of the Elector, was sent to
accompany Conde into that Country.

Instigated by these principles, in Suevia and Franconia, Sleid. Com. fol. 57.
forty thousand Peasants took Arms, under Muncer their Leader; Rebelled against
the An. 1575.
Princes of the Empire, who were forced to raise all the Force they could to
suppress them, they were so bigoted, as to refuse Pardon when offered; but in
the Battle were Beaten; five thousand six hundred Slain; their Captain fled,
but being found out, was Beheaded. In the Year 1535, John of Leyden, a pitiful
Tailor, possessed with such Seditious positions, had got together such a party of
People, that at last they possessed them of part of the strong City of Munster,
set up Senators of his Sect, taught the People to put down the Magistrates, and
establish New Commonwealths; they burnt Churches, spoiled the Suburbs, till
the Bishop they Banished, Besieged them, forced an entrance by Assault, took the
Leaders, and hung them in Iron Cages on the City Towers.

From these Doctrines were the flames of Civil War kindled in Flanders, and
Tumults and Disorders their daily practice; for at Valenciennes they would
commonly rescue the Prisoners of the State, when condemned to dye by Legal
process; force the Officers to fly for their preservation; and with a number of
two thousand break open the Doors of their Common Goal, knock off the Shackles
of those that were in it, and so send them to their several Dwellings. The like
happened at Antwerp, upon the Execution of one Fabricius a Priest. From these
principles it was, that about the Year 1565, that these Hollanders, 9 of their
protesting Lords, not at all Officers of State, convened at Breda, drew up a
form of an Association, which they called too, their Covenant (and what has
been since so well copied by our English Rebels) which they all Subscribed,
and sent about by their Emissaries, through all the several Provinces for
Subscription.

And as from these Principles, these Tumults and Disorders; Leagues and
Covenants were created in the Low Countries: So followed also from them, an
entire Defection from the Crown of Spain, and a Rebellious Revolt of the United
Netherlands. For though Mr. Trial p. 25.
Sidney would impute it only to the Tyranny of the Duke of Alva; yet by his
leave they were in Rebellion before ever he was sent, and perhaps was therefore
designed for the reducing them to Obedience, because of his austerity and cruel
disposition; for Rebels that resolve commonly to show no Mercy, are not
reducible to their Allegiance, but with as much severity, I will grant them,
that by this Rebellion they laid the foundation for the flourishing of the
Protestant Religion in their new erected Commonwealth: Nay, and will pray that
it may long there flourish, as well as under our own Monarchy at Home. But yet
I cannot find from all the Divinity of the Bible, or the Schools, that Blood
and Treason, Murder and Sacrilege (all which were the result of that Defection)
could be sanctified into the doing God good Service, or for the sake of his
Gospel; nay, though it were for an Apostatizing from Paganism it self, which my
Charity will not permit me (though some Peoples fury may transport them) to
bring it in competition with Popery, and the Professors of the same God and
Savior. That the Protestant Religion is a promoter of such Seditious
practices, none but besotted Pagans, or bigoted Papists will assert. But why
in France, and these Parts of the Netherlands, by such Sedition it was
promoted, my little reason will resolve into nothing less, but that in those
Parts it was chiefly propagated by the Emissaries of Geneva, a pure and perfect
Republic; who, at the same time they infused the principles of a sound
Religion, insinuated too the positions of their Seditious Politics, and
mingled Poison, not with common Meat, but their very spiritual Food: For Luther
sure will be allowed the Name of a Reformer, as well as, and before Mr. Calvin;
and yet we see the Protestant Religigion flourisht under his way of propagating
it, without any Rebelling for it, unless from that See of Rome, from which it
wisely Reformed. It was that very thing endeared it to the Princes of the
Empire; and I believe reconciled them to receive it the sooner, when they found
nothing in it of the positions of a His Book burnt, even by the Sorbonist, at
Paris, A. D. 1610.
Mariana, and the principles of a Society of Seditious Jesuits, that could
subject the Civil Government so much to the Ecclesiastical, as to make an
Excommunicated Prince, like a Branded Cain, to be killed by every one he met;
or the Doctrine of our too severe Calvinists, that can make every Town a
Lacedaemon; set up their Ephori, even in every Monarchy, and make all Kings
accountable to their People.

And this will appear somewhat probable from the next Historical Account we
have of the effects of the principles of these Democraticks, which is in that
of Knox of Scotland, a Fellow as Factious and Seditious, as Humane thought can
Imagine, or his own heart could have wished; a Fellow that had the Misfortune
(which he called Happiness) to carry War and Confusion wherever he went. We had
several Protestants of our own Nation, fled from a real Persecution of our
bigoted Queen, to Vid. Troubles at Frankfort, Edit. Ann. Dom. 1642.
Frankfort, a Town in Germany, and there lived quietly, with submission toward
the Supreme Magistrate, till this Geneva Gentleman no sooner arrived, but he
sets all in Combustion; is accused of High Treason Sanderson's History of King
James, p. 15.
toward the Emperor, for comparing him in Print (in some of Mr. Sidney's
Similitudes) to a Tarquin, Nero, Caligula; for which he was forced to fly the
Town, and Post away; to what could only bear with as well as breed such Vermin,
the Lake or their Commonwealth of Italy.

Aboutthe Year 1558, the Queen Regent of Scotland, when the Reformation was but
in the beginning, as a special Act of Favor, for so it must be called, because
then, not only contrary to her own Religion, but the Law of the Land, allowed
the Congregators (which were Conventiclers then too, as well as now, because
the general Worship established, was not theirs) the Bible in their own
Language. But they no way contented with an Act of Grace from the Crown, and
Instigated by this Incendiary; this Scandal of the Reformation, Knox, that had
taught them, they might Demand with their Swords, what was denied them by Law;
fell a reviling her, even for such a signal favor; and when she sent for some
of the more furious of the Faction, they came all, attended with a multitude of
Favorites and Force, that for her Preservation she was compelled to Command
them to depart: And the best of Governors might well fear the worst from such
an audacious Assembly: but this was so much the more offensive to them, only
because they were Commanded to offend her less, that they thronged into her
Privy Chamber, threatened her with their Arms, till she was constrained to
pleasure them against Law.

And as they then menaced a Force, so they afterward made it good with as much
violence; for away they went, pulling down Monasteries, and St. Andrew's Scone.
Sterling. Edeuburg, etc. (...) page 123, 124.
Churches; and seconding their Sedition with what could only succeed it,
Sacrilege, that is, from Traitors to their Sovereign, to be Rebels to their
God. And this by that Sanctified Beast, that invited them to debase themselves
to Brutes, to be divested of Humanity, was called, a Purging of the Temple; as
if our Savior Christ had countenanced an Extirpation of the Religion of some
Christians: But though the Queen at last granted them the free and public
exercise of their Religion; though at last she only begged the private use of
her own, that was by such Seditious Subjects, thought a boon too great to be
begged, by their Sovereign; they Protest against it, Preach against it, Print
against it, and Assault her House of Worship; break the Wax Candles, with the
Windows of her Chapel; force their Queen Regent to fly to Dunbar, and then as
fairly Deposed her for being fled; though at the same time they professed against
her Deposition. And if we'll believe a Loyal, and Learned (...), p. 31.
Author, they proceeded so far in their petulant piece of Reformation, that
they Religiously Reformed the very Petticoats of the Queen, and the Ladies of
the Court, which they looked upon as too fine for the plainness or simplicity
of the Kirk: How near our present Pretenders, that have taken Arms for the
Protestant Religion, will tread in the steps of their Reforming Predecessors,
must be Collected from the Precedents they give us of their being but
Implacable Republicans; especially when we have nothing now to be Reformed
(...) what they denied to the Grandmother of our present Sovereign, that their
King himself shall not be (...) to exercise by himself the Religion he
professes, at the same time he Protests to defend all his Subjects in the
established Profession of theirs. The Actions of the late Rebel Scot, of the
last Age, they say, squinted like their Argyle that headed them, working one
way, when they professed to design another; and they might have had as much
reason to distrust the Promises of his late Declaration, the Sincerity of his
Son, that succeeded him, even in a Rebellion.

In the Year 1565, when the Queen of Scots was married to Henry Stewart Lord
Darnly, The Rebel-Lords instigated from the Preachings and Principles of this
Knox, the Ferguson of his Age, who railed at the Government, and reflected upon
the King; betook themselves to Arms, and brake into open Rebellion: Lord
Darnly, upon this Match being proclaimed King, marched against the Rebels, who
fled into England; and though through Intercession this Rebellious Business was
Reconciled, yet within two Years after, the King was barbarously Butchered and
Dispatched; but by whom, because their Historians do not agree in it, can be
only best determined by Conjecture; and must probably lie at their Doors that
could Rebel against their Sovereign in an open War, and then (sure) as likely
to set upon Him in a secret Affassination; especially when their Principles
instructed them in both; and their Preachers had made the Murder of their King,
an Oblation to their God: And besides, when they rebelled also against
Bothwell, the Queens second Husband too, as well as the first; whom they forced
to fly into Denmark; seized on the forsaken Queen; secured her in an Isle of
Lochlevin.
Island; compelled her to resign her Crown; and if we'll credit an Authentic
Sanders. History of K. James page 52.
Historian, were not so well satisfied with her Resignation of her Sovereignty,
but that they consulted too to deprive her of her Life; and very likely to have
prevented her loving Cousin Elizabeth in England.

Upon the same Principles the same Seditious Daemocraticks proceeded against
her Son and Successor, that was after ward our own Sovereign, K. James, then a
young Prince about 12 Years old, whom they Vid. Spotwoods Hist. p. 323, 324.
seized at Ruthen, carried in Triumph and Constraint to Edinburgh; from which
he was forced to contrive an Escape, which he made by the Means of Colonel
Stewart a Captain of his Guards; but shortly afterward An. 1503.
(incited by the Seditious Insinuations of their Geneva Principles brought them
home fresh, hot, and reeking with Blood and Rebellion; by one Melvill that had
come from thence but a few years before, to supply not only Knox's stock of
treasonable Positions, but to succeed him in his Place of an implacable
Incendiary, his Predecessor expiring a Year or two before he came over) by this
Factious Fellow's and his Associates Seducements; did I say, shortly after the
Earl of Gowry, conspire against the King and break out into an open Rebellion,
which he deservedly suffered for, with the loss of his Head. Then is this
succeeded by Bothwells Rebellion; who had contrived to seize the King at
Halyrood-House, but unsuccessful forced to fly, and returning better assisted,
the second time effected, what only he designed at first: But the King escaping
to Sterling, Bothwell is pronounced a Rebel by the States, but yet is so well
befriended by these Disturbers of all Kingly Government, that they gave him the
very Moneys they had collected for their beloved Brethren in the Republic of
Geneva; by which, with other Assistances, they enabled him to fight his King in
the Field. Then is that succeeded with a second of the Gowry's, the Son of him
that rebelled before, where they contrived to get the King to dine in their
House at Perth, seduced him up into some higher Chamber, and there left him to
the mercy of an Executioner, from which his Cry, and the timely Assistance of
his Servants only rescued Him. These were the Confusions, Distractions, and
even Subversions of some States that were occasioned by the restlesness of
Implacable Republicans, Emissaries of Geneva, throughout France, Flanders,
Scotland, and Germany: You shall see now in the next place what disturbances
they have created us here in our own Isle, what Plots and Conspiracies their
Principles have promoted in England, as if in that expostulatory Que regio in
terris, etc. Virg. AEneid.
Verse of Virgil, there was no Region upon Earth but what must be filled with
their diffusive and elaborate Sedition.

Queen Elizabeth was no sooner settled in her Throne, but they as seditiously
endeavored to subvert it; They libelled her Person, set their Zealots
tumultuously to meet in the Night, invading Churches, defacing Monuments, and
so full at last of the Rebellious Insolences of that Italian Republic, to
which they commonly repaired to receive Instruction, that her Majesty thought
fit to hang up Hacket, with a half dozen more of them, as dangerous Subjects to
her Sovereign Crown and Dignity. In a Speech to her Parliament dissolved, An.
1585, and of her Reign 27, She declared them dangerous to Kingly Rule, vid.
Holingshed and Stow.


When King James, who succeeded her, came to our Crown, did these Malcontents
that had molested him so much in Scotland, disturb his Government here too, as
much. Melvil, that Northern Incendiary, was as busy with his Accomplices here
too, to set Fire to Church and State, and for that purpose published several
Libels against both; for which (being then at London) he was sent to the Tower:
And so far had those darling Daemagogues insinuated themselves, that the Hydra
of a Popular Faction began to show its fearful Faces, in the very first
Parliament of his Reign, though 1 Jacob 1.
in that they had so fully formerly recognized his Right: For in some of those
several Sessions of which that consisted, one of the Seditious Senators had the
Confidence to affirm in the open Assembly, Fowlis Hist. page 65.
That the giving the King Moneys might empower him to the cutting the Members
Throats; an Insolency that some of our Modern Mutineers upon the same Occasions
have Vid. Printed Votes H. Com. That the giving the King Money, etc.
as seditiously expressed. King James Dissolved that Parliament, called
another, and that as Refractory as the former, which instead of answering the
Kings Request, draw up their own in a Remonstrance, Vid. even Rustworth. C
(...) p. 40. c. 16. E.
second it with a Protestation for Privileges; representation of Religion and
Popery, intermedling with his Match of Spain, and several Affairs of State; so
that he was forced to dissolve that Politic Body too, and soon after suffered
a Dissolution of his own Natural one, dying under the Infirmities of Old Age,
and leaving behind him an old Monarchy rather weakened with Innovations of
Republicans, with the worst of Legacies to his Son and Successor; A
discontented People, an Empty Purse, with a Costly War, into which he was not
so much engaged, as betrayed.

And now we are arrived to what all the Stirs and Tumults of our Seditious
Souls, our discontented Daemocraticks in the Reign of King James, did aim at
and design, the Destruction of the Monarchy, which they could not accomplish
till this of King Charles, in that they never left till they laid such a Plot,
that at last laid all the Land in Blood, and made an whole Kingdom an Akeldama:
For that they first quarreled at the Formality of his Coronation, because in
the Sacred Part of it, the Prayer for giving him Peter's Key, was first added:
This some silly Sots suggested to savor of Popery though, it struck purposely at
the very Popes Supremacy it self. For that they begun to Tax their King for
taking his Tonnage without an Act, and yet refused to pass one, that he might
take it by Law, unless he would accept of it in Derogation of his Royal
Prerogative, for Years, or precariously, during the Pleasure of the Two Houses,
when most of his Ancestors enjoyed it for life. Turner and Coke led up the
dance to Sedition, and reflect upon their King in their Speeches: The Commons
command his Secretary Office and Signet to be searched, and might as well have
rifled his Cabinets too: They clamor against his favoring of Seminary
Priests, though he had sent home the very Domestics of the Queen, and that even
to a disgust to France, and a rupture with that Crown: They upbraid him for
dissolving Parliaments, though grown so insolent, as to keep out the Black-Rod,
when he came to call them to be Dissolved, though their King (notwithstanding the
provocations) assembled another as soon, and that though he had the fresh
President of the then King of France, That had laid aside his for a less
presumption: Thus they called all his Miseries and Misfortunes, Misgovernments
and Faults, when themselves had made him both faulty and unfortunate. They
accuse him for favoring the Irish Rebellion, though the first disorders in
Dublin were, by his diligence, so vigorously suppressed; their Goods confiscated,
their Lands seized, their Persons imprisoned, and such severities showed them
by his Commissioners there, that two Priests hang'dthemselves, to prevent what
they called a Persecution. The Scot Mutinies, upon the King's restoring the
Lands to the Church, of which, but in the minority of his Father, it had been
robbed; assail the Ministers in the Church, in the very administration of the
Sacrament, because according to the Service Book: Protest against their King's
Proclamations; set up their four Tables at Edinburgh (that is) their own
Councils in opposition to their King's: Hamilton had promised them as
Commissioner to convene an Assembly; they come and call a Parliament by
themselves; which, though dissolved, they protest shall sit still, then desperate
in a Sedition, break out into open War, Invite Commanders from abroad, seize
Castles at home, agree to Articles of Pacification; and then break all with as
much Perjury. Lowden their Commissioner sent to propose Peace: At the same time
treats with the French Ambassador for War; bring their Army into
Northumberland and Durham, and prey upon those Counties they had promised to
protect; while the Parliament at London will not give their King leave, or the
Citizens lend a penny for opposing those that came to pull him out of his
Throne. At the Treaty of Rippon, they quarrel with their King for calling them
Rebels, that had invaded his Realm; the Commissioners of the Scots conspire
with the English, who then fall upon Impeaching his Privy Counselors; and the
unfortunate Strafford suffers first, because so ready to Impeach some of them;
and they make that Treason in a Subject, against the King, which was heard,
known and commanded by the Sovereign. Then follows Lawd, a Loyal, Learned
Prelate, and that only for defending his Church from Faction and Folly: As they
posted the Straffordians, and repaired in Tumults to their King, for the Head
of that Minister of State; so Pennington with his pack of Aprentices,
petitioned against the Bishops and the Pillars of the Church: Then Starchamber
must down, High Commission be abolisht: Forest bounds limited, yet all too
little to please, when the Irish Rebellion followed, to which the Scots had led
the Dance; no Moneys to be levied in England for suppressing it, till the King
had disclaimed his power of Pressing Soulders, and so disarmed himself; that
is, he was not to fight for his defense, till they had disabl'd him for
Victory: They quarrel with him, because he would not divide among them the
Lands of the Irish before they were quelled and subdued, at the same time they
had quite incapacitated him to Conquer and Subdue them. Then Acts must be past
for Annual, Triennial, and at last, perpetual Parliaments: And whereas the Law
says, The King never Dies, they made themselves all Dictators more Immortal:
They were summoned in November, and by the time that they had sat, to May,
they had made of a Mighty Monarch, a mere precarious Prince: And in August
following, supposing he had sufficiently obliged the most Seditious Subjects
(which I think he might Imagine, when he had made himself no King) he sets out
for Scotland, to satisfy them as much there, while the Senate of Sedition,
that he left to sit behind him, resolved it self into a sort of Committee of
Conspiracy, and that of almost the whole House; made a Cabal among themselves,
to to cast off the Monarchy, which the Knaves foresaw could not be done but by
the Sword, and therefore cunningly agreed to second one another, for the
putting the Kingdom into a posture of Defense against those dangers abroad,,
which they themseves should think fit to feign and fancy at home. To carry on
their Plot against the Bishops, they put in all probability that lewd Leighton,
upon writing of his Plea, which was, Bring out those Enemies and slay them
before him; to smite those Hazaels under the fifth Rib: For which in the
Starchamber he was Fined and Imprisoned; but for his Sufferings, and the
Dedication of his Book to the Commons, they Vote him Ten thousand pound. Upon
the Kings return from his Northern Expedition, which was to procure Peace only
with a show of War, they having had a competent time for Combination and Plot,
were arrived to that exalted Impudence; that notwithstanding he was received
with Acclamations from all the common People of the Kingdom, the People whom
they were bound to represent, the welcome from his Parliament was to present
him with Remonstrances; and Petitions (which against his very express order
they Printed and Published) of such sort of Grievances; that sufficiently
declared they were grieved at nothing more than his being their King. They put
upon his Account the thirty thousand pounds they had paid the Scots, for
Invading England; that is, they gave them the Moneys for Fighting of their
King; and then would have had the King paid his own Subjects for having against
him so bravely Fought: They should for once too have made him responsible, and
his Majesty their Debtor for the two hundred thousand pounds they paid the same
Fellows at Newark to be gone, whom with their thirty thousand pounds they had
invited in before: They should have made the King pay for his own purchase, and
answerable for the Price the Parliament had set upon his Head. This seemed such
an unconscionable fort of Impudence, that their hearts must needs have been
Brass, and seer'd as well as their Foreheads in offering it: An Impudence that
none but such an Assembly were capable of: Impudence, the Diana of these Beasts
of Ephesus, the Goddess of all such designing Democraticks Aude aliquid
brevibus (...) and carcere dignum si vis esse aliquid, Juvenal. Satyr.
that to be somewhat, in the true sense of the Satyrist, must defy a Dungeon.
These their Petitions they seconded with Tumult and Insurection; sent the
Justices of Peace to the Tower, only for endeavoring to suppress these
Forerunners of a Civil War, when they had taken the Liberty to Impeach some of
the King's best Subjects for Traitors, yet denied their Sovereign to demand
their Members that had committed High Treason. About the twenty eighth of
January, 1641, they humbly desire the Sovereignty; and their Petition that
BEGUN, Most Gracious Sovereign; ENDED only in this, Make us your Lords; for
they 1st. demand the Tower of London. 2ly. All other Forts. 3ly. The Militia;
and they should have put in the Crown too. The stupid Sots had not the sense to
consider, or else the resolved blindness, that they would not see, that those
that have the power of the Army must be no longer Subjects, but the Supreme
power: The King, you may be sure, was not very willing to make himself none,
and might well deny the deposing of himself, though he after consented, even to
this for a time; but what he would not grant with an Act, they seized with an
Ordinance; and though they took the Militia, which was none of theirs, by Force
and Arms, yet Voted against their King's Commission of Array that was settled
upon him by Law; they force him to fly to the Field, and then Vote it a
Deserting the Parliament; they necessitate him to set up his Standard at
Nottingham, and then call it a Levying War; they Impeach nine Lords for
following their King, and yet had so much nonsense, as to call them
Delinquents, which the Vid. Com. Lit. 1 Jnst. p. 26. B. For adherencv to the
Kings Enemy without the Realm, the Delinquent to be attained of High Treason.
Law says none are but what adhere to his Enemies: they send out their General,
fight their King, and after various events of War, force him to fly to the
perjured Scot, to whom they had paid an hundred thousand pounds to come in, and
were glad to give two to get out; and for that they got the King into the
bargain: An Act of the Scot that was compounded of all the sublimated Vices
that the Register of Sins, or Catalogue of Villainies can afford; feigned
Religion, forced Hypocrisy, Falsehood, Folly, Covetousness, Cowardice, Perjury
and Treason; for upon his refusal to Sign their Proposals, they tell him the
defense of his Person in the Covenant, must be understood only as it relates to
the safety of the Kingdom; and upon the English profering them the Moneys, they
would prettily persuade him, that the promise their Army made him for his
preservation, could not be kept; because the Soldiers and the Army were
different things, and the Army might promise what the Soldiers might refuse,
and were unwilling to perform. But this purchase of their double Perjury was
punished with as much perfidiousness; their Army got into their hands for
nothing; the poor Prince, the Parliament thought they paid for too dear: And as
that Seditious Senate sought their Sovereign in the Name of King and
Parliament, so now the Soldiers of Fairsax set themselves to fight the Senate,
for the sake (forsooth) of the Parliament and Army: Good God! Just Heavens!
that could visit such Vipers, such Villains, in the same villainy they
committed; and make such Seditious Hypocrites suffer by as much Treason and
Hypocrisy. Their Agitators menace the King with Death and Deposition; they
make him their Prisoner; move in the House their non-addresses; make it Treason
to confer with their King; set up an Ordinance for his Trial, and there
Sentence, that against which Treason could only be committed as a Traitor to
the State.

And here then, With what face can the Faction justify such a Barbarous
Rebellion, or accuse their King for the beginning of the War? Yet such a sort
of Seditious Democraticks does our Land afford: Vid. Trial, p. 26.
Sidney says, Such a general revolt of the Subjects can not be called a
Rebellion: And Plato Redivivus, p. 167.
Plato, Our Parliament never did as they pretended make War upon the King. Till
such persuasions are rooted up out of their Rebellious hearts as well as they
are in them, no Prince under the Heavens can protect himself from such resolute
Rebels as will destroy all Subjection in the World, and make the blackest
Treason our own Civil War but a prudential act of State, and even of Loyalty it
self; the Ibid.
rescuing the King only out of those Men's hands that led him from his
Parliament: But do not they tell us even by his own concession in one of their
Votes, That it was the King that was seduced; and must it not be the King too
that they would reduce; and by what means, why therefore they say they take up
Arms; and did they design to command their Bullets and Ball not to meddle with
the King that was only seduced, but only to take off the evil Counselors that
were his Seducers? I confess, could they have promised his Majesty so much, he
might have took them for good Gunners, but must still have believed them bad
Subjects that would have put it to the venture: But with this Gentleman it
seems it was a sort of proclaimed War of the King's, to take that Ibid.
unfortunate resolution of seizing the five Members: Most Factious Fool! did
the King rebel against his Subjects, only when he came to seize actual Rebels,
whom himself desired only to be Tried for Treason, and that of the deepest dye;
for inviting in a Foreign Foe, the Scots, must not the Parliament without the
King be the Supreme power, if the King can be said to Rebel against the
Parliament? but this Republican that expressly makes them Ibid. 168.
Coordinate, may as well call them Supreme; for these Gentlemen paid off the
King for his unfortunate resolution, and declare that his coming to their House
was High Treason: And well might the King shift for himself, when they had made
his Majesty reside in the House of Commons. Prithee for thy senses sake, who
levied War first? those that seized upon the King's Forts, Magazines, Towns,
Ships and Revenues, levied Soldiers; or the King that had nothing of Military
left him but the power, and not a single Company of Horse or Foot that he had
raised: It was the twentieth of October, 1641. they brought the Trainbands into
the Palace Yard, to protect themselves; that is, to terrify their King: It was
the eighth of January, 1641. that forty thousand of the Inhabitants of London
put themselves in Arms, to fight fifteen hundred of the King's Horse, that were
to come and surprise the City; the one were actually Armed, the other never
came or designed to come: They riggout the Navy on March the 2d. the King's
Militia is seized, and new Lieutenants set by their Ordinance, the (...) of
March, 1641. and on the twenty third of April they denied him entrance into his
own Garrison at Hull; the tenth of May the Citizens are Mustering twelve
thousand Men in Finsbury Fields; the King does not summon his Yorkshire
Gentlemen till the twelfth of May; did not grant out his Commission of Array
till the twentieth of June, when they had sent out their Orders and Proposals
for Men and Horse, Money and Arms, the tenth; did not set up his Standard at
Nottingham till after the twelfth of August, when their Parliament had raised
their Army the seventh of July: And this Vote of their King's being seduced by
wicked Counsel, from which this Sediious Daemagogue would infer the King
declared to them War before, was made on the twentieth of May, which was after
they had seized his Forts and Militia, his Shipping and Navy, and Mustered
their Citizens in the Field. And a Month before the King sent out his
Commissions of Array, and above two Months before his Standard was set up. That
this is exactly truth, Consult even the Exact Collection: And whether this
Seditious assertion be not a Devilish lie; but your own Breast: And as they
begun this War of Weapons in their House, so they did that of Words too; and
invading the Prerogative before the least breach of Privilege. One Vid. Baker,
p. 435. A. D. 1625.
Turner a Physician, under a pretense of reflecting on Buckingham, abuses the
best of Kings: Cook, amongst other Invectives, says openly, It was better to
dye by a Foreign Foe, than be destroyed at home. These were but preludes to
the Liberty the licentious Villains took afterward, when Martin declared to the
House, So Plat. Red. p. 117.
That the King's Office was forfitable; when Vid. The Royal, and the Royalist's
Plea, printed, A. D. 1647.
Sir Henry Ludlow said to the same effect, That his Majesty was not worthy to
be King of England: And Prideaux was at last come to make his Speech there, for
Abandoning Monarchy; it was so early too that they were so forward to Usurp
upon the Crown, that even in this Year, 1625. they offered to search the King's
Signet Office, and examined the Letters of his Secretary of State; all this was
offered at in the very first Parliament that he summoned, all of which the King
complained to them of by Vid. Lord Keeper's Speech to the Parliament, A. D.
1625.
Finch then the Lord Keeper, as things unwarrantable and unusual; they
prosecuted too Buckingham with the more violence, only because the King had
told them, That he acted nothing of public Employ without his special Warrant;
That he had discharged his trust with fidelity; That he had merited it by
desert, and that it was his express Command for them to desist from such an
unparliamentary disquisition: And for my part I cannot apprehend, how according
to common sense and reason both in this case and Strafford's that succeeded;
they could make those Traitors to their King, of whom their King declared they
had never betrayed their trust: It was such a sort of Treason against their
King, which their King knowing and approving did not think High Treason, and
the person against whom it could only be committed, apprehending no Commission
of it at all. But those Statesmen were so unhappy as to live in an age that
made Treason as unlimited as ever it was before Edward the 25. Ed. 3d.
Third, and which for all his 1. Mar.
twenty fifth, and the first of Mary, restrained Treason to conspiring against
the King, and the Laws of all the World makes it a Crime only of Lex Julia
Inst. 4. 18. 3d.
Laesae Majestatis, they could bring it now to a levying War against the
Majesty of the Merc. Polit.
People. A hard fate for many Ministers of State, that are sacrificed
sometimes, only for serving too well.

But these proceedings against the King were long I hope, before the King
proceeded only to take Traitors out of an House of Commons; this was
seditiously done in twenty five, the other not lawfully attempted till forty
one. And judge now malicious Miscreants! where, when, and by whom were the first
provocations given to discontent, and who were the first Agressors in a
barbarous and a bloody Civil War? Why don't they tell us too our present
Sovereign invaded first the Rebels in Scotland, and those that (...) at Lime?
The next age may as well be brought to believe this, as the present that. All
that their best Advocates (unless absolute Rebellious) can urge in their
defense, is, the Parliament seized only upon the King's Forts, for fear he
should fortify them against the Parliament: very good, that is, they first made
War upon him, for fear he should make War upon them; that is the English trick
of it: And I can tell it them in a Spanish one too; so Gondamor got Raleigh's
Head he told them, not for the mischief he had done them, but for that which he
might do. But had not the Laws provided so particularly for the King, this
would be madness and cruel injustice even among common Subjects; reduce us both
into Hobs's his state of nature and his fear, to kill every one we meet, for
fear of being killed; or set our Neighbors House a fire, for fear it should
catch of it self and consume our own.

And now be witness even the worst and the most warm Assertor of a
Commonwealth; in this case be for once what you so much affect, Judge between
you and your King. The King had his Court of Starchamber constituted by 4
Institutes, c. 5.
Common Law, and confirmed by special Reg. Hen. 7.
Act of Parliament: The Commons they send up a The 9th of June, 1641.
Vote and Bill for suppressing it: The High Commission was established by the 1
El. c. 1.
Statute of the Queen, the Commons come and would put it down with a The ninth
of June, 1641.
Vote: The Court of Wards and Livery, the tenures of which were even 4 Inst. p.
192.
before the Conquest, and drew Ward and Marriage after it; was established by
particular 32. H. 8. c. 46.
Act; the Commons clamor to have it suppressed, which to please them is done.
The King had several privileges that belong to the Clerk of his Market,
confirmed by ancient 4 Inst. c. 61
Custom, and Ed. 1. Hen. 8. R. 2. H. 5.
several Statutes, abolisht by the Parliament in the Year 1641. The Chart.
Forest.
King had the Courts of his Forests, his Judge in it constituted of old by
Writ, then by 27. H. 8. c. 24.
Letters Pattents: This was a grievance which was never before, and therefore
must, and was suppressed with the rest: The Magn. char. c 29. and their Petiton
of Right.
Law required no person was to be Imprisoned, or put out of his Lands but by
due course and custom: None to be adjudged to Death but by the Law established:
they Dug. view. p. 68. 19. April
confined several of the Kings Subjects, send the Bishops by order of the House
to the Tower; and by special Bill attaint Strafford; and Behead Laud 10. Jan.
1644.
with an Ordinance. Resolved by all the Judges in Queen Elizabeth's time, that
to levy War to remove evil Counselors is High Treason against the King; they
past a Vote; May. 20. Exact Coll. p. 259.
that the King was seduced by evil Counselors against whom they levied War to
remove. There is a 12. H. 7. c. 1.
special Statute that says expressly that the Subjects that aid the King shall
not be molested or questioned: They published their Declaration, 17. May. Ex.
(...). p. (...).
That it was against the Laws and Liberty of the Kingdom to assist the King,
that the Sherriff of the County ought to suppress them: The Coke Lit. p. 164.
Law makes those Delinquents that adhere to the King's Enemies: they 20. May.
Vote those that serve him in such Wars Traitors by a Fundamental Law: The Ed.
2.
Statute provides that the Parliaments should assemble peaceably; they by
particular order bring Horse and Foot into the Palace Yard. In short, The
Parliament first seizes the Militia, against an express 7. Ed. 1.
Act that settled it solely on the King: The King sent out after his Commission
of Array, for which he was empowered by 5. H. 4.
Act of Parliament: The Parliament order the raising an Army against the K.
declared Treason by special 25. E. 3.
Act: The King then Summons his Subjects to his assistance at 5 July, 42.
Exact. Coll.
York, and comes and sets up his Standard at Nottingham, and for that was
warranted by the Laws of the Land, and 1. Ed. 2. de. mi. litibus, 7. Ed. 1.
several Statutes of the Realm.

I have taken this pains both to prove that bloody War, that general Revolt, to
be a plain Rebellion; and that the War it self was begun by those that were the
only Rebels, the Parliament; because you see that both those positions have
been laid down among our Sidney's Trial, p. 26. Plato Redivivus, p. 167.
Republicans; either of which should it gain credit, is enough to run us again
all into Blood: And both together as false as Hell, and can be the Doctrine of
none but what is the Author of all Sedition; the Devil.

These were the Plots which they practiced upon that poor Prince, whose
Sincerity was always such, that he could not suspect in Nature such a sort of
designing Villains; nor humane Wit, well imagine such ungrateful Monsters, that
for their King's continual Concessions to better the Conditions of his
Subjects, should still Plot upon him to render his own the worse. Here we saw
what all these Positions, Principles, Practices; all their Preaching, Praying,
Printing did tend to, and terminate in; the People enslaved, the Monarch
murdered, the Government undermined: But as these Maxims of our Democratick's
were destructive to our Monarchy, and produced (as you have seen) those Plots
and conspiracies that subverted it, so shall we see by subsequent Events, and
be informed from as much Matter of Fact, what I have heretofore insinuated,
only from the force of Reason, that the same Principles after they had set up
their Commonwealth, made them Plot too upon one another.

When the Parliament had imprisoned their King, whom they bought for a Slave,
confined him with a merciless Cruelty at Holdenby-house, then a Castle and
Garrison; and by that Act made him no more a Monarch, but a Prisoner of War;
themselves no more his Subjects, but his Masters and Sovereigns; the Parliament
having had so far the End of their Plot upon the King, now the Army take their
Turn to Plot upon the Parliament, who when they had made their Monarch
accountable to their Memberships, might as well sure expect by their Servants
to be called to account. The Parliament when they had wrested the Sword out of
the King's Hand, knew themselves the Supreme Power, and were as certain they
could as soon send him packing with his Supreme Right: The Soldiers now are
sensible that the Members of the Army have that Sword in their Hand, which the
Parliament took out of the King's, and see no reason why they may not make
themselves the Supreme Parliament; (for this their Original Right of the People
over the Magistrate, will always I warrant you, be appropriated to that part of
it that has an Actual Power) and that they found, for Cromwell conspires with
his Adjutators, who (like provoked Beasts) begin to be warmed into a perception
of their own Strength; which even when a Horse comes to know, to be sure, he will
throw his Rider: For this he fools his Fellow-Senators with a Suggestion of his
readiness to suppress any Soldiers Insurrection, at the same time that he set
them on to rise. The Parliament had plotted by Subscription and Petitioning, to
advance their Power upon the King; their humble Servants the Soldiers now
subscribe, petition that the Parliament would be pleased to submit to their
Power, send to the Good Houses at Westminster the Histor. Independ. p. 27.
Representation of their Army, that they (forsooth) were the Delinquents now,
and that they be speedily purged of such Members as for Delinquency were not to
sit there: They make eleven of them Traitors, Ibid.
impeach them of High Treason to the Army, when both Impeachers, and Impeached,
had forfeited their Heads to the King: They had Counterplotted this with an
Ibid.
Ordinance of the House for the Disbanding the Army; but the Army found they
had a more fearful Ordnance for them in the Field; they had under their Command
the Militia of the Camp, and so resolve to command that too of the City: The
Contrivance for this is first Fairfax his Remonstrance, to which the Commons
Ibid. p. 40.
submit; but for that the Apprentices that had served them before against their
King, come now in as Ibid.
tumultuous a manner, and frightn'd them into a Flight to the Army, that so
their City might retain its Militia. The Westminster-men that stayed, plot
against the Men at Windsor that were fled, call in the Members that their Army
had impeached; for this the Ibid. p. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
Soldiers sign an Engagement, send a Remonstrance, and themselves as soon
conspire to follow; march toward the City, draw up at Hownslow-heath; send
their General with a Party to make a new Parliament, or patch up the old. To
prevent the Personal Treaty with the King, they drew up their Agreement of the
PEOPLE, resolved on their Votes of Non-addressing, which recalled, they again
re-extorted, rejected the Lords for refusing to Judge their King, whom having
dispatched, there remained the Rump, that is, the remnant of the Commons; the
Creatures, or rather Created Council of an Army, and all the late flourishing
Democracy of the long Parliament and the two Houses, turned into a perfect
Oligarchy of Officers: And all what those Devils had possessed themselves of by
Treason before, torn from their hands by a Legion of worse, with as much
Treachery and Plot.

And one would think that all Plotting, that all conspiring should have been
over now; but you shall see that the same principles that prevailed upon the
Rebels to ruin the Monarchy, and run it into a Republic; that promoted the
Army to destroy the then Democracy, and so set up their own Oligarchy; did also
incite a single Usurper among those few to set up for himself, and turn it into
true Tyranny: Their own positions first placed the Supremacy in the Parliament;
because the two States were greater than the King that made but one: The Army
places the supremacy in their Sword, because it was greater in the Field than
the two States in the House; and then comes Cromwell and settled the supremacy on
himself; because the sole Commander of all the Army: his success at Dunbar, and
the routing of the Scot, did so much his business, that there could remain but
little opposition of a Rump; and a Man that is made by a weaker power but once
a General, can soon make himself by his own strength the Generalissimo; he had
formerly been so prevalent as to procure Petitions, Addresses, Remonstrances,
for the establishment of that patched piece of Parliament (and all our
Metaphysics will allow, that what can create, can as soon annihilate) he found
his Omnipotency in this point, he knew he had set them up against all Right,
and therefore had the more to run them down without Wrong, and that as he did
design, so he effected too. It was indeed a Parliament of Soldiers, and he
served them like a General, only by signifying to them to Disband, and they not
daring to deny, determine their sitting to be on the fifth of November
following: But he not willing to tarry so long a Servant to those he could
command to obey; those that would not so soon Disband; he comes and Cashiers by
April, 1653. and with his Lambert and Harrison sends packing that everlasting
Parliament. And now here is the result of their principles in a second Plot
upon themselves, and a new model of Government; for the former they had
abolisht was but the Government of a few, an absolute Oligarchy, though they were
pleased to call it the Commonwealth of England, as if it had been but
Democratical, when not the tenth part of the People were represented by those
Administrators; but so they had the confidence to call them a Parliament too;
but their words had commonly as much sense in them as their actions had
Loyalty. But Oliver having Plotted them out of all, had now no great need of
any Politic Plot for himself: It would puzzle now our Politicians to tell me
where at this time was their Sidney's Trial, p 23.
Supreme original power of the People, their natural Liberty, and that
Delegatory right they are to communicate to Representatives: There was no King,
no Parliament, no Rump, and as yet no Protector: The Disciples of Mr. Sidney's
Doctrine must say, forsooth, The Supreme Power was then in the People; (but as
the Devil would have it) Cromwell had got the supreme strength: Strength and
power I confess, are mighty different, and just distinguished by the same
Metaphysics the Scots put upon the King at Newark, when they would persuade
him, The Army was one thing, and the Soldiers of it another; but if this People
had then the supreme power, why did they not assemble themselves into a
Parliament, since there was no Writ from above to call them to the Assembly?
But our History tells us, Oliver called it, and what for? why say our
Republicans, That the People might confer upon him their supreme original
Power, which he could not assume without their consent; very good: So Cromwell
was willing this supreme power should be settled upon him by Parliament;
therefore he calls the Parliament; i.e. gives it the supreme power, and they in
common Civility could not avoid to give it him again: But where but a grain of
sense settle this Supremacy, in him that called them to assemble, or in those
that were assembled at his call; I confess, if the cunning Canary Birds could
but contrive, as once they did design, such a rare Parliament, that like the
Bird of Asia, should rise from the ashes of it is Ancestors, we might have one
then, not only long, but everlasting.

But even this, though then, attempted to have been enacted, would have been but
Nonsense and absurd, and sit only to have past in that Parliament which he
called; who made many Oliver's first Parliament made the silly Acts about
Marriages.
Laws just as ridiculous, for thosethat have a power to dissolve themselves, by
the same reason would have a power to summon another, and then must is sue out
their Writs either before their dissolution, or after; if after, then it is
without authority, and by no part of the Government; and if before, then a new
one must be summoning before the old is dissolved; and if the Writs should be
but of force from the time of dissolution, the Country Electors must be said to
be convened by the supreme Authority that is dissolved. Cromwell and his
Conspirators foresaw they would be confounded with such absurdities, and they
found themselves plunged into as much confusion; and then, pray, what did they
do with this Sidney's supreme original power that they did not know what to
make of, or how to use, though it lay upon their hands? why, they surrender it to
a single person, from whom they thought they had it, and so the Usurper had his
design

The next Plot was, how they could play the Knaves to get that Power again,
which they thought they had parted with like Fools: Cromwell was cunning enough
to hold what he had gotten, and never parted with it but with his Breath; though
the Levellers, the Anabaptists and Fifth-Monarchy Men conspired for
Insurrections, and Lambert himself left little undone to supplant him. But when
his Son succeeded, whose silliness only made him not sit so long a Usurper,
they soon found opportunity to set him aside: As they had pleased Oliver with
making him a Protector.
Mock King, so he to pleasure them had mocked them with an The other House.
House of Lords: And Richard's first Parliament, being made up of most
Commonwealthsmen, fall foul upon that new Constitution which was indeed as
filthy, they take themselves, without the Protector and that other House, to be
the Supreme Power: Lambert and Fleetwood that first upon the Principles of
these Rebels and Republicans had promoted the Affairs of the Father, fall now
to Plotting upon the same grounds of LIBERTY (which with Daemocraticks is to do
what they list) to depose his Son; and it is no wonder that those should fail in
their Faith to a Rebel, that had revolted from their Prince: For this therefore
they have freequent Meetings at Wallingford House, and the Parliament seeming
as uneasy under him as they, and they as uneasy under the Parliament, they
send Desborough to get its dissolution to be signed by the Protector; at the
same time they make their Messenger to dissolve it by themselves. Richard signs
it, and presently after is forced to his own Resignation, and that to just no
Body; and all is brought to what all such Principles and Practices always tend
to, perfect Anarchy and Confusion: The Protector here quarrels with the
Parliament and the Army, the Parliament with the Army and Protector, the Army
with the Protector and Parliament; till at last they leave us neither
Parliament, Protector, or Army.

When they had brought the Government to be just no where, Richard having been
Plotted upon to resign to just no Body, some of the rebel Rump, with Lenthal
their Speaker, Lambert their Officer take it up as Scavengers do a piece of
Silver they find in the kennel, or dropped in the street; these by the Army are
declared a Parliament, because they resolved themselves to be so first, and the
People at present could not tell where to find out another; the secluded
Members offered to run in too, but were Fools for their pains, and repulsed
with as much violence; for they might well have foreseen and imagined, that
those that threw them out before, had their Swords in their hands still, and to
be sure were much rather for their room than their company; and that they
found, when they set their Soldiers with their Swords drawn to keep them out,
and their most Legislative Arms soon suspended them from the meddling in the
making of Laws.

Thus re-instated and established into that Oligarchical Tyranny that first
turned off all Monarchy, and took off the King's Head, and this
re-establishment of the most desperate Rebels confirmed with the approbation of
the Army; one would have thought their very Master, the Devil, could never have
undermined or made them again to miscarry. But yet so it happened; for these
Principles of our Republicans, having made all obedience merely precarious, and
utterly defaced the Doctrine of the Gospel, to be subject for Conscience sake,
as well as repealed the Oaths of Allegiance that required them to be so by Law:
Why now, they were left at liberty, and truly did as licentiously practice; the
(...) any frame themselves had established, and that too, before they had
considered what to set up. I will not insist for it here, upon the Insurrection of
the Cheshire men, and the business of Booth, which by my little light of
reason, and the not unlikely Remarks to be made from the least History I have
read, was really a design to supplant this restored Rump: Headed by one of the
most eminent of the secluded Members, that probably in mere revenge resolved
upon a Free Parliament; that is, because they had not the Freedom to sit with
them that secluded them: But that Plot which gave them the lift again now, was
that of Lambert himself that had lifted them into the Saddle; where himself
designed they were not to sit long: For Oliver, having taught him the way to a
Protectorate, as well as ('it is thought) promised him in it a Succession, was
resolved to leave nothing unessay'd to settle himself in that power, to which
he once thought he should otherwise succeed: and being Commissioned by these
Masters he had made, and sent to suppress this Presbyterian Insurrection, which
he did with success; he found it too the most seasonable time to carry on his
design, and so carresses his Soldiers into a Seditious Tumultuous Petition for
a General to be set over the Army out of the Soldiers themselves, for these
Swords-Men could not relish that the Gown, the Speaker, a Lenthal (that then
looked like the Generalissimo) should Lord it over Arms, that is in English, be
above their Lambert. The Men of Westminster made a shift to keep up so much
Courage as to make this Remonstrance dangerous to the Commonwealth, and Vote
the Commissions of the Wallingford Men to be void: But Lambert, that had
shuffl'd so well, and pact his Cards with Oliver, knew how to play them now as
well for himself; and therefore as Hist. Indep. Pt. 4. p. 66, 67.
Cromwell had turned them out of the House before, he comes and keeps them from
getting in, insomuch that when Lenthal came to the Ann. Dom. 1653.
Palace Yard, he could see nothing but Lambert and his Soldiers set to keep
them out; and so the Rumpers retreat again, are put out of possession of all,
Lambert left an absolute Generalissimo, sets up his An. Dom. 1659. Oct. 26.
Hist. Indep. Pt. 4. p 68.
Committee of safety, in which to be sure himself must sit as President.

In the next place they fell a Ploting to get themselves in, that had been so
often at in and out; and for this they put up Petitions for a free Parliament
from all Parts: (...) runs down to Portsmouth, which Revolts, and those that
were sent to reduce it turn Renegadoes; Lawson and his Fellows in the Navy
declare against the Committee; Fairfax favors the Rump, and raises Forces, and
they fell secretly to the Listing of Soldiers in Cornwall and the Western
Counties; and 'twas time then for this Council of Safety to look to save
themselves: but nothing frighted them more into the readmission of the Rump,
but the unresistible march of the mighty Monk; that Fabius of our Isle, that
like the Roman Cunctator, restored us our King by his prudential delays, for
these Rumpers (...) returned again into the House, were far enough from
declaring for a free Parliament, which they still cla mour'd for so much when
they were shut out: Nay, they would not so much as suffer the secluded to sit
among them now neither, till the good General came and settled them himself;
and now, though all the Villains were in again that had begun the War, unless
such as died in the Rebellion; though they saw all the sad effects and confusions
they had brought upon the Kingdom; yet so far were the Rebels from remorse,
that they justify by Baker's Chron. p. 694.
Vote the War with his Majesty, and past two more out of a perfect Plot and
Design to keep the Royalist from being returned in the Parliament, that was to
ensue their Dissolution; but Dissolved they were, and that in effect by the
good General; and their Plotting Votes against the Royalist and the
Restoration proved as illusory and vain.

Thus the Principles and Positions of these discontented Democraticks, and
implacable Republicans, made them still uneasy under those very Establishments
they set up, confounded them so, that they did not know how to please
themselves, but still kept Plotting one another Ruin and Destruction. The King
was by miracle restored, whom Heavens by its repeated Providence had preserved;
and one would have thought such a signal signification of the concern God
himself had for so good a Government, should have made even the Devil himself
despair to undermine it, when founded even by a divine fate; and to destroy the
Monarchy, looked like a Design to circumvent the Almighty. But no sooner was
our Sovereign Seated in his Throne, but they Plot again to pull him out.

And the first was that of Venner and his Fift-Monarchy Men; their Leader a
silly Cooper that had lived sometime in New England, but come home, set up a
Conventicle in Coleman street, and made their consult of Conspiracy in the very
place they came to pay their Devotions, endeavoring to reconcile as near as
they could their very Religion to be Rebellion.

On Sunday the sixth of January, the 1660.
day before they designed their excursion (as if the Sabbath were to sanctify
Sacrilege, and atone for Blood) they lingered it out a little too late in
their Assembly; so that their Landlord, a little Jealous, listening at the door,
perceives through the chink that this Godly Convention were doing the very work
of the Devil; and instead of their Sighs, Groans and Tears, and such harmless
spiritual warfare; their Sword of the spirit was turned all into steel, and all
Arming themselves with Back, Breast and Headpiece, of which he gives notice to
some Officers; but they in a little while after issuing out, march through
several parts of the City, killed some of the Watch, repelled a Party of the
Trainbands, and so marched through Aldersgate to a place nere the City, called
Cane Wood. But on the Wednesday morning after they return to renew their
Rebellious design; they divided themselves into Parties, and about Leaden Hall
fought it out obstinately, and too stoutly with the Trainbands: But some of the
Guards, Commanded then by the Duke of York (and now our present Sovereign, whom
Heaven protect to defeat all Rebellions) with the General and his more
disciplined Soldiers soon made them give ground and retreat, and at last run
away in as much confusion. Colonel Corbet routs another Party of them about
Wood-street; and such inveterate Villains had the Preaching these Principles
rendered them; that when they were broken and dispersed, they would refuse
Quarter; sixteen or seventeen being taken, were at the Old (...) Tried,
Convicted, Sentenced, five or six Pardoned, andthe rest Executed.

In December was detected another 1662.
Plot and Conspiracy carrying on: One William Hill, one of the Accomplices, or
a pretender to be so, discovers it. A Plot they had of confounding the Rogues
(as they called it) at Whitehall, imparted to him by one Baker, one of Oliver's
Yeomen of the Guard, upon presumption that he would side with them, who brings
him acquainted with the rest of the Conspirators; their Design was with four or
sive hundred Men to surprise the Castle of Windsor: Riggs, one of the
Conspirators told him of the Arms lodged in Crutchet Friars, that five hundred
had been dispersed, that they designed a desperate assault on Whitehall (...).
Will. (...). (...) prefixed to their Trial.
to deliver them from the Tyranny of that Outlandish Dog, for so they called
the King: That (...) was to be their General; that all other Officers were
agreed on; that the Tower was to be betrayed to them; Letters dispersed to
amuse the People with a Massacre from the Papists, one of which, on the Trial
of the Conspirators, was produced in the Court; they told him they determined
to rid themselves of King, Queen, Dukes, Bishops, all should go one way (as
they called it) and the Insurrection was to be on the Lord Mayor's Night: Upon
this Discovery one Tongue and five more were Arraigned, of which one Phillips,
and Hind confessed the Fact on their knees at the Bar, were pardoned, the other
four Convicted, Condemned and Executed.

In March, 1663. a Plot was Discovered in the North of England; the principal
Contrivers of it being imparted to the King, were secured from proceeding
further. And in 1666. when the King returned from Windsor to Oxford (the
Pestilence being abated, though the Plague and product of their Pestilential
principles remained as raging.) Another Conspiracy of discontented Officers is
detected, for Conspiring the Death of the King, Plotting the surprisal of the
Tower, Firing the City: They had two Councils sitting, one in London, to issue
out all Orders upon the place; and another in Holland, that assisted them with
Instructions; the third of September was sworn to be the day of Design, for
which eight several Persons were Sentenced, and suffered Death. In the same
Year the Rebellion broke out in Scotland at Pentland Hills, where the
Covenanters fought the King's Forces, and were defeated.

In 1675. the late Lord Shaftsbury, a Person eminent even in the late
Combustions, and the Civil War; a person that was but just before preferred by
his Prince, notwithstanding the many Services he did to the Rebels, and an
actual being in Arms for the Parliament: But he thinking himself too little
obliged by the Crown, that had never deserved the least obligation, Plots for
the Dissolution of that Parliament, that as it had settled, so preserved the
very frame of the Government from being dissolved; and because he could not
compass it from the King, contrives that it should pass current, that it was
Dissolved of course, because Prorogued for fifteen Monhs, contrary to the Acts
of King Ed. the Third, that required one to assemble, once at least in twelve:
The Duke of Bucks is made to move it in the House, seconded by Shaftsbury,
Salesbury and Wharton, and for that all four sent to the Tower; but however had
dispersed the Design so far, that the Stalls were all covered with Papers and
Pamphlets to prove them Dissolved, which had it been then effected, had only
reduced us to those Confusions that the unhappy Dissolution in four years after
did unfortunately bring about.

In March, 1679. the same Incendiary, the Beautefeu of both Kingdoms, contrives
a most silly, canting, ridiculous Speech, and said to be spoken by Shaftsbury
in the House of Lords; the Vid. The whole, in an (...) Account (...) the
Proceedings in the Parliament at London, 1679.
substance of it being a declaiming against the Sufferings of Scotland; many
Copies of which were as Seditiously sent thither, and so animated and incensed
the zealous Scots, that they soon after set upon the Bishop of St. Andrews,
barbarously Murdered him; and our Seditious Senate, the Lower House, seconding
that Lord's Speech with a Remonstrance against Lauderdale, they soon resolved
for open Rebellion; and that they begin at Ragland in Scotland, where they come
and Proclaim the Covenant, burn Acts of Parliament, attacked Glascow; but the
result of that was, that by Bothwel Bridge the Rebels were defeated, all running
away upon the playing of the King's Cannon in a perfect Rout and Confusion.

At the Sitting of the late Parliament March, 1681.
at Oxford, there was some intimation given the King of a Plot and Design to
have seized his late Majesty, and kept him confined, till by that he had been
made complyant to pass the Bill of Exclusion; his Majesty was so far satisfied
of it, that he Dissolved them as suddenly, and so frustrated the Design. This
was proved afterward upon Oath, at a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer at
the Trial of Vid. Coll. Trial, p 1. 9.
Stephen College the Joyner, at Oxford, who was sworn to have imparted it to
the Evidence, and that he rid down for that purpose thither Armed; for which
and several other Treasonable contrivances he was Arraigned, upon full Evidence
Convicted, Condemned, and accordingly there suffered.

That Plot being prevented at Oxford by the Providence of God and the Kings;
the Faction still pursued the Conspiracy, for which many Consults were held at
the late Lord Shaftsbury's House; which upon suspicion was searched, and
himself, upon Information and Evidence to the King and Council, was seized; the
result of which was, they found a Paper in his own (...), Entitled, An (...).
Proceedings at the Old Bailey. 24. Novem. 1681.
Association, the Plot and Design of which was, that since they could not
Exclude the next Heir of the Crown by Bill and an Act of Parliament, they would
get Subscriptions, to do it among themselves; that is, set their Hands and
Seals to a Rebellion; for the concluding Clause was absolute Treason, and
obliged them to Swear Obedience to their Fellow Subjects, and that they would
Obey the Major part of Members after the dissolution of the Parliament; for
this he was Indicted, as also for designing to compel the King to pass the Bill
at Oxford; for conferring with Booth, Hains, Smith, and other of the Evidences,
in Treasonable Consults; for saying, The King ought to be Deposed, and, that he
would never desist, till he had brought England to a Commonwealth: All
agreeable to the very Principles he professed, to the Practices and Designs he
had before Engaged in, and the Discoveries of his Treasons that have followed
since; but the Grand Inquest being pact by Papilion a Partial Sheriff, and
composed of Jurors as much prejudiced, the Bill of Indictment was brought in
Ignoramus; an apparent Rebel acquitted, and carried off in Triumph with the
Shouts and Shoulders of the Rabble.

In July, 1683. was Discovered the bottom of all these Preliminary Plots and
Conspiracies, in the Design of the most barbarous Butchery of the best of
Kings, our late Sovereign, Charles the Second, with the Assassination of his
Royal Brother, our present Sovereign: For this they had engaged in the
Consults, Men of all sorts of Conditions, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Lawyers,
Malsters, Olymen, Clergy and Lay; the first Contrivance was, for Assassinating
the Royal Brothers as they past by the Rye, the House of one Rumbald, coming
from New Market: but Heaven turned a Judgment even into an act of Mercy for
their Deliverance; and the Fire happening there, made them prevent the Rebels in
their return. Then the Playhouse was proposed to be the Shambles for this
Butchery, and several other places, but the Conspirators disagreeing in their
Approbation, hindered its execution so soon; upon the Discovery of one Keeling,
an Accomplice, touched with remorse, or apprehension of danger: All the
Conspirators fly, from whom Shaftsbury, that Arch-Rebel, was before Vid. Lord
(...) Trial, Sidneys, etc.
fled; some were afterward found out, came in for Evidence, upon which several
were afterward Convicted and Executed.

At the Trial of my Lord Russel, the very Morning he was Arraigned, the Earl of
Essex, Committed for the same Conspiracy, whether out of sense of Ingratitude
to his Royal Sovereign, by whom he had been preferred to the highest station of
a Subject, even that of being his Viceroy, or whether out of fear of his fate,
and fearful of an Ax, dispatched himself with a Razor: For Defaming of the
Government the next Plot is to make this a Murder of State, and one Braddon,
out of Seditious industry, deals with one Edwards a Schoolboy to Testify, he
saw a Hand throw a Razor out of the Window; with this matter well managed,
King, and Council, Sir Henry Capel, and then the whole Kingdom must be canvast
for; and he having an Indefatigable Desire to fasten a Scandal on the
Government, as well as an Impudence not to be baffled or defeated, to solicit
the business farther, one gets Speak, a known Favourer of any thing that is
Factious, a warm spark that would be soon hot in any such pursuit, to lend him
a Letter of Recommendation to a Country Knight, but with both their bold
fronts, they could put no such bad face upon the business: for it was
Discovered to be the basest Design the most malicious Miscreants could
undertake, and they both Tried upon an Feb. 7. 1683.
Information of High Misdemenor, and Subornation, (that is) the Pimps to
Perjury, for which one was Fined one thousand pounds, and the other two.

To second this Unsuccesful Plot, about Christmas last they disperse the
December. 1684.
most Divilish and Malicious Libel that Falsehood and Folly could Invent, leave
it at the doors of the Loyalists; and its Design the same with those Suborners,
to fasten a Murder upon the late King, our present one, and some Ministers of
State, with such silly Insinuations, as of themselves do defend them from that
Villainy they would affix; first, from their being then walking in the Tower;
and can the most Factious Fool Imagine? Can but bare Humane Sense be so silly,
as to think the Contrivers of such a supposed (...) would be present at its
Execution, and look upon it as the likeliest way to keep it private, was to
appear in it publicly? Preposterous Sots! Do not contradict the best Evidence,
that of Common sense, though you would the Coroners: Another is, from the
Discovery of one Haly, that was found Murdered, to be the Warder, in whose
House the late Lord of Essex lay, upon which the Libeller in a long, tedious,
impertinent Discourse, Iasinuates the probability of that Fellow's being
dispatched, for fear of telling Tales; but how does Heaven infatuate those
Fools that it would destroy? The (...) perjured Wretch is forced to beg the
World Pardon, in his own Postscript, and to tell us the truth, in spite of his
design to lie; that this Unfortunate Fellow that was found Dead, was none of
this Warder that he meant, and that only the similitude of the Name made the
mistake, then from the disagreeableness of Bomeny's Testimony with the other
Informant, because not verbatim he says the same, therefore they must be both
(...): Seditious Sot! Why so senseless too? Will not Common reason for that
very thing, confirm them both to be the more truth, for when there is a
Conspiracy, to make Affidavit of a lie; there they can soon confer, and
commonly do too agree in words as well as substance, and sense might well
suggest, they had learned their Lessons pretty perfect, upon such a verbal
Agreement: But this Masterpiece of most Malicious Plot, was with more
sublimated Malice, contracted into a Compendium, only that it might be
propagated the sooner, spread the farther when in short, of which Condensed or
Abstracted Treason, the Spirit and Essence of Sedition, one Danvers was
Discovered to be the Author; a Villain, whom the Devil in Design, could not
render more vile, an Anabaptist for Profession, an Officer of Olivers, for
Rebellion, and now a Fugitive, for fear of Apprehension; for whom a Warrant was
issued out, Posted, published in the Gazette, and an Hundred pounds proffered
for any to take him.

As these late Plots and Conspiracies were contriving all along in England, so
did the Scots carry on the same Treason: Argyle, an Hereditary Rebel, that
seemed to have his Soul and Treason from Ex traduce, being attainted by the Law
of their Land, for a Factious Explanation of the Test, and though Justly
Sentenced to Suffer, yet the Government that had given him his Estate, had no
design upon his Life; makes his Escape out of Prison, in which in effect he
enjoyed his Liberty before, gets over into Holland, confers with our English
Fugitives, then sends Letters from. thence to the Scots, to incite them to
Rebel, some of which were Intercepted upon Major Holms, and known to be his own
Hand, Spence and Castares, his own Emissaries Confessing the Correspondence
they had with their Rebel Friends in England; and the Cochrans, Melvil, Baily,
are found to have been here in England, and Agitating the Conspiracy, for
which, upon full Evidence, the said Robert Baily was December. 24, 1684. (...).
Discoveries in Scotland, Printed by (...) late Majesty's Command; as also, the
Account come out in this King's Reign, by Order of the late, Printed by
Authority.
Convicted, had his Arms Expunged, himself Hanged, and his Body Quarterd.

But notwithstanding all this Evidence, as clear as the Sun, and all their
deeds of Hellish darkness brought into as much light, as the Lamp of Heaven it
self affords: Their infatuated Fools were still so much blinded and besotted,
as to represent it all for a Plot of the State, only for involving some of them
in a Conspiracy; and the King must be presumed to design upon himself, only to
trepan them into Treasonable Designs: For this, several Letters are dispersed
into the Country, some of which being Intercepted, were found to be one Sir
Samuel Bernadiston's, a wealthy Citizen, whose Estate, with a great deal of
Money, and as little Wit, served only to make him more wickedly, and less
wisely Seditious; for nothing but the pride of a Purse, or the not valuing of a
Fine, could have made a Man guilty of so much Folly, at a Season when they were
in an hot pursuit of an Hellish Conspiracy, and the Blood Vid. His Trial for
High Misdemcanor, at Guild Hall, London, Feb. 14. 1683/4.
of those that had suffered for it, hardly cold: For he lets them know that the
Protestant Plot is confounded, quite lost, that the Evidence of it, the Lord
Howard was to be sent to the Tower, and that all the Prisoners that lay there
for the same, were discharged; that Sidney that Suffered for it, was Pardoned;
that Braddon that was Fined for it, was no farther Prosecuted; all rank Lies,
as well as lewdly Seditious: And though his kind Council was pleased to
mitigate the Information, as if the Malice was not so apparent; that will not
mince the matter; for though the circumstances, and the plain matter of Fact,
make it the most malicious piece of Faction (...), yet moreover, the very mass
of his Blood was tainted with as much malice, and his very Relations actual
Rebels, and in Arms against their Sovereign; our Sir Thomas Bernadiston being a
Colonel of a Foot Regiment of Rebels, at the Siege of Colchester, which I can
make appear from an old Map of the Siege, where he may see his Father or his
Brother, Firing upon his Majesty's Subjects. But these Factious Papers being
proved upon him from his own Hand, and the Testimony of his Servant that
Superscrib'd them; they found him Guilty without going from the Bar, for April
14, 1684.
which, in the King's Bench, he was afterward Fined Ten thousand Pounds to the
King, Bound to be of the Good Behavior during Life, and to be Committed till
'twas paid.

But after all, as if they did endeavor to silence their own Advocates in
their Defense, and that Impudence it self might not endeavor to smother their
secret Conspiracies, they break out into that open Rebellion, for which they
had Conspired, and Invade the Kingdom, as if they designed only to prove the
Plot: For in April, 1685. Argyle lands, with Men and Ammunition brought from
Holland; in one of the South-West Isles of Scotland, called Yyle, or Ila, and
their seizes all the Arms, Horses, Men, and other Necessaries to make up an
Army, some of his Heretors come in for Assistance, with some few of his
Dependants and Relations, of which of the most note, were his Sons, and one
Achinbreck, of which Name there is a Castle or Town near those Isles: For a
Month or two they kept Sailing about Boot, Cantire, and the rest of the Islands
thereabouts, sometime landing, then setting out again: But about the nineteenth
of June, the Lord Dunbarton having notice that the Rebels had past the River
Levin, above Dumbarton Town, and taking their way toward Sterling, overtook
them in the Parish of Killerne, but being late in the Evening, did not Attack
them; but by the Morning, the Rebels were marched off toward the River Clyde,
which on the seventeenth they past, but pursued by the King's Forces, and
Cochran carrying them by mistake into a Bogg, they soon disordered and
dispersed: The late Argyle was set upon in his flight toward the Clyde, by two
of Greynock's Servants, receiving a Wound on his Head, dismounted his Horse,
and ran into the Water, where a Countryman felled him, so the Soldiers carried
him to their Commander, from thence to Glascow, and then to Edinburgh: Among
these Rebels, were several of the blackest Conspirators of England, that were
fled for the same, Rumbold himself, the Malster at the Rye, by whose House his
late Majesty was to be Murdered; as also one Captain Ayloff, mentioned in the
King's Declaration, were both there taken; Rumbold fought desperately, and
Ayloff so despaired, that he ripped up his Belly. Rumbold was afterward Arraigned
for Invading the Kingdom with the rest of the Rebels, had Sentence as in Cases
of High Treason, and was accordingly Jun. 29.
Hanged and Quartered; and the next day the late Lord Argyle, their
Arch-Traytor, Jun. 30.
Beheaded.

And now that their Plot might be proved as plain in England too: About the
beginning of June, Monmouth landed at Lime in Dorsetshire, of which he possessed
himself, having with him three Ships, brought into Town about two hundred Men;
some of the Seditious Souls, and as silly, of the Country, ran in to his
Assistance; upon falling of the Tide (as it is thought) they made an Excursion
upon the Sands, to the Town of Bridport, which they entered by the Backside,
and surprised in it, Mr. Wadham Strangways, one Mr. Coker, and Mr Harvey,
Officers for the King, the two former they killed, wounded the latter, seized
some Horses, and went back to their Quarters at Lime, where while they lay
there, a Party of the King's met some of the Rebels, had a Ran counter, killed
about twenty three, and made them retire: From thence they march toward
Taunton, seizing all the Horses they could meet with; no Gentleman of Note came
in to their Assistance; Trenchard, being clapped in the Tower for a Traitor in
the Conspiracy, but escaped Hanging for want of an Evidence more, which the Law
required, is said to have run into the Rebels, having ran from the King's
Messenger before, and if so, proves his Treasonable part in the Plot, which
none of his Party would believe, by turning an absolute Armed Rebel. About the
twentieth of June, Captain Trevanion, Commander of some of his Majesty's Ships,
found a Dogger and a Pink os the Rebels Ships lying at the Cob of Lime, forty
Barrels of Powder, Back, Breast and Head-Pieces for ten thousand Men in the
Town, which were all secured, and his Grace the Duke of Albemarle sent into it
three Companies: The Rebels rambl'd about Glassenbury, in Somerset, and some
part of Wiltshire, Plundering, and taking all the Horse they could, and calling
in as many Foot: And both these Invaders, to publish themselves Rebels in
Print, as well as Arms, put out their Declarations, of their King's being an
Usurper, and a Tyrant; that had Succeeded to the Crown, by all the Laws of God
as well as Man: One William Disney, Esquire was taken with his Wench in his Bed,
and Monmouth's Declarations Printing in his House; Tried for the Treason in
Southwork, upon full Evidence found Guilty, Sentenced, and accordingly June,
29. 1685.
Executed. And the June. 25. 1685.
Parliament it self, by special Act, Attaint James Scot for a Rebel, and a
Traitor, set Five thousand Pounds upon his Head, and by another Bill, make the
Asserting the Plot of his Legitimacy, High Treason: The Rebels for some time
continued forraging and rambling about the Western Counties, Wilts, and
Somerset: At Wells they say they Plunderd and defaced the Church, that had
escaped the Fury, even of the last Rebellion; out of the Sacred Chalice they
Drank the prophanest Healths, and upon its very Altar sacrificed Women to their
Lust; but This being but Report, I don't rely on. From Wells they went to
Bridgwater, there Fortifying themselves a little; but finding the L. Feversham
come up to them, and more Forces of the King's following, they resolved to
surprise him in his Camp; marched accordingly in the Night, and by two or three
in the July 6.
Morning set upon him, whom yet they found ready to receive them, the late L.
Gray, Commanding their ill managed Horse, was soon disordered, and ran away;
the Foot fought it desperately, but at last defeated by the King's Cannon and
Horse, were slain about two thousand. The late Lord Gray was July 7.
taken in Disguise at Ringwood about the Borders of Dorsetshire, and secured by
my Lord Lumley; and the late Duke of Monmouth, the next Morning met with in
some Covert thereabouts, and put into the same Hands: Manmouth on the July 13.
Monday after, with his Associate Gray, was brought to the Tower, and the
former the following July 15.
Wednesday, on the Hill Beheaded.

By this you have seen the very Basis, the Foundations upon which they build
their Principles, somewhat shaken, and I wish I could with modesty say, utterly
undermined: I have set my Shoulders to the work, and had I the strength of some
Sampson, would pull down their Pillars, confound the Babel these Rebels have
built, though I were sure to fall and be buried in its Ruins. By this you have
seen the Multiplicity of their Plots, so Hellish, and so many, that like the
Devil (that Seduces our Democraticks into such Damnable Designs) their Name is
Legion; but of those Devices the Almighty, who always was, will ever be the
Detector and Confounder: And here I profess by that Heaven (which I only beg to
Bless my poor Endeavor against the Designs of Hell) that nothing but a sincere
hatred of their pernicious Principles, and a certain Assurance of the truth of
all these Conspiracies they have promoted, has put me upon this undertaking, to
refute the Folly and Falsehood of the one, as well as represent that Bloody work
and Wickedness of the other. If they will condemn the warmness of my style, which
Postcript to the History of the Association, Printed for Janeway, London.
one has already Libelled as hot, let them but give me leave to be as zealous
for the promoting of good Principles, as the vilest of their Villains, the most
venomous of their Vipers have been, for infecting us with the poison of bad:
Let me be allowed to write as affectionately for my Sovereign, while he is
Seated in his Throne, as their Faction did most furiously against him, when by
Rebellion they had pulled him out; and for this, be pleased but to remark a
little matter of Fact: For the first, Has not Hunt (whom even they would make a
moderate Man) Libelled his Antagonists with the Name of Post. p. 94, 69, 70,
83, 93.
Base Caitiffs, Traitors, Knaves, Betrayers of the Peoples Right, Wicked,
Impious, Sacrilegious, Monsters, and Mad? Does not an Inconsiderate Coxcomb,
that sets himself up for a Considerer, call his Opposers, Considerations
Considered, p. 1, 5, 14.
Arrogant Fools, silly Knaves, Ruffians, Trislers; besides his Nonsense and
Pedantick terms of Insensatus Galata, and Effrontery, with all the Controversy
managed in the style of a Carman, or the blessed Language of the Bawds at
Billingsgate: And yet these (I Will assure you) with the Party, all applauded
(...). For the second, consult but the Papers of that prosligate Villain, the
Penner of the Political Mercury, and see how the meanest Traitor treats his
Exiled Sovereign, and Majesty it self; Young Scot, (...) Interest of Young
Stewart, Merc. Politicus, Number. 62. Number. 64. Number. 67. Number. 79. Number. 115.
accursed Family, Little Queen, their cursed foul and bloody House, its Name
odious in Chronicle, Young Tarquin, Perkin Warbeck, pretended King, King of
Beggars, Royal Puppet, the Grand Tyrant, the Great Pyrate; And so barbarous
were these Beasts in their Reflections, that he represented his Banished Prince
(whom themselves had put to those unhappy necessities) for a Clipper and a
Coiner in the French King's Court: Is not this Virulency now? this Venom? and
that of such a Villainous Viper, to whom the Old Serpent, the Devil himself
would be an Antidote? and all this even against God's Vicegerent? Is not the
dust of such a Damnable Democratick, enough to pollute the Land wherein it
lies? and of which the Grave will be ashamed when she comes to give up her
Dead: These are the Barbarities, Hunt would not have so much Post. p. 89.
remembered, that is, not abhorred, and which I cannot forbear to mention and
remin'd, to let the present Age see, to what an Acme of Villainy the preceding
was arrived, to let the Faction be forced to remember, what they so labor to
forget; for what they can so hardly be brought to detest, is also as difficult
by repetition, to be rendered too detestable: These Printed Treasons, that have
been so long out of the Press, may well want a New Imprimatur, when they are
brought to believe they were never in it: To this pass of the Politicus's would
our Protestants, Domestics, Packets, Advices, Courantiers, Janeway's, Care's,
Vile's and Curtise's, all have come, and a Nevil now, that abhors the thoughts
of a COMMONWEALTH, as Plato Redivivus, p. 209.
Circumstances are now, would be their Needham (I warrant you) when a Civil War
had Banished again the best of Kings, and one that writ his Brief History of
Succession, not long since, only to make our Monarchs Elective, would then have
told us, that Vid. History of the Succession, writ by Merc. Politicus, Number
64, 65.
All from the Conquest were perfect Tyrants, that Richard the Second's Blood
ought rather to have been spilt on a Public Scaffold, than by a Private
Assassination in Pomsret Castle, and that Charles the First was Executed as a
Traitor; and so given us in just such another Catalogue.

How can our Seditious Souls think themselves hardly dealt with, in those late
Loyal Animadversions that have been made upon their lewd Libels? or, What
severity now has the Observator (that Learned piece of Loyalty) expressed in his
Pages, which their own Papers have not deserved, and heretofore, in a barbarous
manner, even to the best of Kings and Subjects shown: and as they cannot
condemn him, or any other honest Heart, for exposing (in the most severest
manner) the Principles and Practices of these dangerous Democraticks, since
they dealt so severely themselves with their Sovereign, and all Assertors of
his Monarchy; so neither can such discommend him, or any other, for such
seasonable Remarks on their Pretensions to CONSCIENCE, and as rigorous
Reflections on their Men of MODERATION: the two tender points (they say) must
not be medl'd with, or, at most, but gently touched on.

The very Suggestion flies in their Faces, and upbraids the Faction with the
same proceedings against one another; for this famous Political Mercurial
Scribler lets us understand, that Merc. Politicus, Number. 59. July 24. 1651.
The Presbyterians pretended Principle of Conscience, is no competent Plea in
his behalf, for then this Plea and Pretense might serve to Justify the late
Tyrant, and all his Cavalry; it might Justify Ravillac, for Murdering Henry
the Fourth, Faux, Catesby, and the rest, for the Powder Plot; not a Pritst or
Jesuit but has the same Pretension, nor shall there be any Traitors in all
Ages hereafter: Away with this Clergy Pretense, not to be named once among
Christians, but exploded as the very Pest of Civil Society. And I pray mark
only the Godly Preacher to the Parliament Sermon Preached to the Parliament,
November 5. 1651.
I have desired in my Prayers to GOD, for the opening of Men's Eyes to see, that
the same Spirit of CONSCIENCE, which lay in the polluted Bed of PAPACY, meets
them in the profaned Bed of PRESBYTERY; that The highest Godlinesses, and the
highest Wickednesses, are those that are most Spiritual; that The Fornications
and Sorceries of this Whore are then greatest, when most Mysterious; that She
is able to bewitch those that have attained to a great degree of Spirituality:
To this purpose, I have represented the same Spirit which dwells in PAPACY,
when it enters into the purer Forms of PRESBYTERY, as fuller of Mystery, so
fuller of Despite and Danger; so far the good Man, for Conscience Plea: And
now, if you please, to tell you their sense of the TRIMMER and MODERATE Men of
their Times. Merc. Politicus, Number. 63. August 21. 1651.
No sort of Men can be more dangerous, than those Phlegmatic Souls, of the
MODERATE MIDDLE Temper, who, whilst they pretend to be of a Party, are not able
to concoct those reasons of State, that are absolutely necessary for its
Preservation: Men of this Humor may do well in a Civil War, where the
differing Interest may be reduced to agree in one third; but when they are
stated in as vast a contrariety as God and Belial, Light and Darkness, Liberty
and Slavery, then those Men are like Sand without Lime, neither good in the
Foundation, nor fit for the building of a Republic; such Interests are best
preserved when like Mathematical Points, in the Extremity of Latitude, they are
placed at the remotest distance, admitting no intermedial mixture of Affections
with any things, Persons or Pretenses, that may have but the least Collateral
Relation to the opposite Party: And then for their MERCY to the Dissenters of
those Times, and the matter of UNION. Merc. Politicus, Number, 59.
But perhaps, the sparing of the Traitor, may he a means, to reconcile those of
his own Opinion, and bring them to an UNION with the Commonwealth; Why? Let
them, in the first place, take shame to themselves, by an Acknowledgment of
their Offenses: Let their Repentance be as loudly, and openly profes'd in the
Pulpit, as their former Follies; and then afterward, it is possible, there may
be an UNION, but an UNION, carried on upon any other terms, speaks only some
Clerical Design, under a specious outside. And Case's Sermon before the
Court Martial, London, 1644.
Case, Discoursing about MERCY, to those that had Fought for their King, whom
he makes all Unpardonable Murderers, nay, though they had not killed a Man; for
says he, Though God forgive Sin against himself, yet he commands his Deputies,
not to pardon Trespass against the Public State, as in the case of Murder,
for even PREPARED and PROJECTED Murder, God makes incapable of Civil Mercy;
for here the Delinquent has killed as much as in his power to kill; it was his
purpose, he (...) killed, though the Patient be not killed, and the Design and
Intention should Hang him. God deliver us from the Mercy of such Casuists, the
Government and Rule of such unreasonable Men, that whilst they exclaim against
Idols, commit Sacriledg; while they condemn others for want of Moderation in
their Censures and Animadversions, Satyrize and Libel even one another most
Immoderately: These are the hardships in which they think they are most
grieved, and yet those the very points in which they have shown themselves the
most rigorous, and oppressed better Subjects than themselves, with a greater
grievance.

This is my sense of their Writings, and for the opinion of others, about my
own, am as little solicitous; I am satisfied of my own Integrity, and wish I
could be as well assured of theirs; the Statuimus quod omnes (...) Regni
nostri, sint Fratres conjurati ad Monarchiam nostram pro viribus suis
pefendendam, Lex. Gal. Conq. 59. Lamb, p. 171.
Defending of the Right of the Crown, I am sure, is no more than to what I am
Sworn, and their laborious Drudgery, to detract from the Prerogative is
perhaps, but a Learned Expedient of being more Elalaborately PERJURED. As I
ever (...) that Royal Line, which I always looked upon to be unalterable, and
which none now but Rebels or Republicans will endeavor to Interrupt, so I
shall ever as much Revere this NAME and FAMILY of STEWART, in which the truly
Lineal Descent of our Crown was as entirely united and preserved: A Name that
will be Sacred to Posterity, as well for the short Succession it is too sadly
like to leave us in England, as well as the long Series of Successors, that are
to be numbered in the Catalogue of the Scots; and it is with regret that we are
like to reckon of it but two Royal Pairs, of JAMES, and CHARLES: A Name, that
none but a Monster of Mankind would have made Mere. Politicus, Number 62, 79.
odious and accursed, which maugre their own Rebellions has made our Islands
Blessed: And lastly, a Name which even Rebels might Revere, for so long and
lasting a Succession in Scotland, and that in both Kingdoms, now there is but
one left. And for that Impostor, which some poor Souls, as silly, as seditious,
would feign have put upon us, and set up: Consider but the sad success two such
Presidents and just as pretty Projects, met with in the Reign of Henry the
Seventh: Consider how unsuccesful this present Attempt proved, which terminated
in the ruin of all its Undertakers: Consider but the Folly, as well as the
Wickedness of such an undertaking, which could it have met with success, must
have been but by the Blood of the present Age, and an entailment of it to
Posterity; too dear a purchase, only to make us the Scorn and Derision of the
Word, Traitors to our King, and Rebels to our God.

What I Have done, has been in satisfaction to my self, without design of
Applause; my Duty to my Sovereign, without insisting on desert, my Resentment
against Rebels, without fearing of their force, for then I desire to fall, when
so good a Government cannot stand; my Misfortune from them would have been the
best of Fate, and my very Foes the most Friendly and Obliging. I have scarce
Breathed under a Usurped Government yet, and should hardly have been brought to
begin now, to be subject to an Usurpation: If in these Essays, I have done the
least Service to my Sovereign Lord, or his Liege Subjects, I shall look upon it
as having answered the Ends of my little Studies, both toward God, as well as
Man; for there is seldom a good Subject that makes a bad Christian, and I have
always observed the greatest Atheists among the Rebellious. If (whatever
sincerity I pretend) they will upbraid me still for that itch of Writing, I Will as
sincerely protest to them, they have cured me of the scab, and thank them too
for being my Physicians without a Fee: They themselves have superseded all
future Animadversions of my Pen, by being able to make no farther progress in
their VILLAINY, I truly profess, never more to refute their bad PRINCIPLES, till
they can find out worse, and as heartily promise, never again to be their
Plague, till they can Invent a more Hellish PLOT.

FINIS.

