ACT Approving of the good Services done by the Town of Glasgow, Shire of
Argyle, and other Western Shires in this Conjuncture, with a return of the
Thanks of the Estates to them.
AT Edinburgh, March 28. 1689.
The Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, Taking into their Consideration,
that by the sending of the standing Forces into England, the Estates were
destitute of that Guard and Defense, which was proper and necessar in this
Conjuncture, and that several persons, well affected to the Protestant
Religion, at the Diet of the Meeting of the said Estates, having repaired to
this City of Edinburgh, from Glasgow, the Shire of Argyle, and other Western
Shires, did at the Desire, and by Warrant of the Estates, put themselves to
Arms, and since have so continued Watching and Warding, under the Command of
the Earl of Levin, and demeaned themselves soberly and honestly, and been
Active and Instrumental to prevent Tumults, and to secure the Peace and Quiet
of this Meeting, and Place; and there being now some Scots Regiments arrived
here, under the Command of Major General Mccay, The Estates Do therefore hereby
Declare, That what is past, was good, acceptable and seasonable Service, and do
approve the same; and hereby Gives Order to the said Earl of Levin to Disband
them, and allows them to return with their Arms to their respective Homes, and
do return their Thanks to the persons who have been employed. Extracted out of
the Records of the Meeting of Estates, by me,

JA. DALRYMPLE, Cls.

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year 1689.


