AN ACCOUNT OF Queen MARY's Methods For Introducing POPERY, And procuring a
PARLIAMENT To Confirm it.

Seasonable to be published in this Time of Imminent Danger. AND Dedicated to
the Right Honorable the EARL of SHAFTSBURY.

LONDON, Printed for John Gay, at the Flying-Horse between St Dunstans Church
and Chancery lane in Fleet Street, 1681.

TO THE Right Honorable ANTHONY EARL of SHAFTSBVRY, etc.
My Lord,
IT is (I confess) a great presumption to prefix your Lordships Name to so
small a Treatise; but since the Design of it is to inform all true English Men
of what Ways the Papists used in endeavoring to bring their Religion into
England, that they may be prevented in all their Designs; I hope your Lordship
will pardon this boldness in me. And, my Lord, I believe the English Nation,
have so great a Reverence for your Lordship, that they will the better esteem
this Piece for your Lordships Name being set before it; because they will
imagine that none durst have presumed to have laid it at your Feet, unless it
were agreeable to your Sentiments.

My Lord, I think nothing of this kind was ever yet printed, which was a great
Motive to me to publish it; who am

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant T. S.

AN ACCOUNT OF Queen MARY's Methods For Introducing POPERY.
SEveral Persons of great Worth and Learning have already given Account of the
great Cruelties that have been Exercised by Papists on Protestants, an some
particularly have wrote of the Dismal Condition of the Reformed Christians in
Queen Mary's days; but none have yet, as I remember, acquainted the World with
the Methods Queen Mary used to introduce Popery, which was at her coming to the
Crown in a fair way of being Extirpated. And Considering that the discovering
of a Rock on which some have formerly split, may be of great use for others to
avoid it, I have undertaken to give you this Following Account.

Henry the Eighth, King of England, having left the Kingdom of England in great
peace and in a fair way to shake off the burdensome Yoke of Rome, Edward the
6th his Son succeeded him, and Prince so hopeful, that in six years time he had
almost perfected the Good Work begun by his Father King Henry, but unkind death
snatched him away on the 6th of July 1553, in the 16th year of his Age, whose
death was much lamented throughout the Nation; most people Prophetically
Presaging the misfortunes which were coming on them. After which the Duke of
Northumberland caused his Daughter the Lady Jane to be Proclaimed Queen, but
her Reign lasted only ten days; for the Council turning to the Lady Mary in the
latter end of July 1553, caused her to be Proclaimed Queen of England in London
and other parts of the Realm; upon which she removed from her Castle of
Framlingham toward London, and being come to Warsted in Essex, on the
Thirtieth of July the Lady Elizabeth her Sister, with a Train of a Thousand
Horse, went from her place in the Strand, to meet her. On the Third of August
the Queen rode through London to the Tower, where she set free Steven Gardener,
late Bishop of Winchester, and restored him to his Bishopric. On the Fifth of
Agust Edmond Bonner late Bishop of London, Prisoner in the Marshallsey, and
Cuthberd Tunstal, the Old Bishop of Durham, Prisoner in the King's Bench, had
then Pardons and were restored to their Sees.

On the Twelfth of August the Queen made an open Declaration in Council, That
tho her Conscience was staid in Matters of Religion, yet she would not restrain
or compel others, otherwise then as God should put into their Hearts to embrace
that Religion she was in; which she hoped would be done by putting of Godly and
Virtuous Men into Livings to Preach the Word of God.

Upon this all Parties hoped for a Tolleration to Worship God their own way,
but the Papists presuming upon the Queen being of their Religion, openly
commended their own Religion, and reproached the Reformed: So that on the
Thirteenth, one Bourn Canon of Paul's, Preaching at Paul's Cross, not only
Prayed for the Dead, but Declared that Dr. Bonner Bishop of London, (late
restored and then in presence) for a Sermon by him made four years before on
the same Text, and in the same place, had been unjustly cast into the
Marshallseas; which speech so offended the people, who had a great Veneration
for the good King Edward, that a great disturbance arose and a Dagger was
thrown at him, but he with much difficulty was conveyed into Paul's School by
Mr. Rogers, whilst Mr. Bradford stepped into the Pulpit and appeased the people.
This being repeated to the Queen, she makes another Declaration, That she would
have all her Subjects live in Amity, and charged them not to use the words
Papist or Heretic.

Shortly after, all the Bishops which had been deprived in the time of King
Edward the Sixth, were restored to their Bishoprics, and the new removed; also
all Beneficed men, that were married and would not renounce their Religion,
were put out of their Livings, and others of a Contrary Opinion were put into
their room.

These men, when restored, urge the Queen to re-establish Popery, whom she
answers, That she designs nothing more, yet must act with so much caution as
not to inflame her Reformed Subjects. In the mean time private Cabals were held
by the Queen and some of the most vigorous Papists, and after several
Consultations it was fully resolved that Popery should be suddenly restored.

On the Nineteenth of August, John Duke of Northumberland (who professed
himself a Protestant in King Edwards time, and persuaded the King to declare
his Daughter the Lady Jane his Successor) was tried and condemned for High
Treason, and on the Two and twentieth executed; and at his death declared
himself a Papist, and to have been so always (by which you may note what
Temporizers Papists are, who can seem to be any thing for Interest.)

Now things seeming to be a little settled, the Queen thinks it convenient to
make another step toward Popery, which is by a Proclamation to prohibit
Preaching; it being certain that when man is ignorant, he is ready to embrace
any Novelty; not being capable of considering whether it be good or evil. Many
Censures past upon this Proclamation, but none durst openly testify their
resentment, for fear of being clapped up; and though the Queen seemed to carry
all things fair, yet some of the wisest of the Reformed (being sensible that
Persecution was coming on them) held several Consultations, but their
Consciences will not let them rebel against their Sovereign; yet on the
Fiftteenth of September Archbishop Cranmer courageously declares against the
Mass, of which Bonner makes use to Inflame the Queen against him, and within
two or three days Cranmer and Latimer are sent to the Tower; upon it several
Reformed Christians fly beyond Sea.

The Queen, who had all this while contented her self with being Queen, by
Proclamation, seeing thing something settled, proceeds to her Coronation, which
was accordingly splendidly performed on the last of September. After which she
discharges a Tax, published a general Pardon, but interlac'd with so many
Exceptions of Matters and Persons, that very few took benefit of it; and those
that did were by the Commissioners assigned to compound with them, despoiled of
Offices and Estates.

Soon after this Justice Hales was Imprisoned, for that at a Quarter Sessions
in Kent he gave charge upon the Statutes of Henry the Eighth and Edward the
Sixth, in Derogation of the Primacy of the Church of Rome, which was a high
ingratitude in the Queen; he having in King Edwards time refused to sign a
Warrant for Disinheriting the Lady Mary and Lady Elizabeth.

On the Tenth of October, the Queen summons a Parliament, and Members are chose
by force and threats in some places, and in others those employed by the Court,
did by violence hinder the people from coming in to choose; in many places false
Returns were made, and when the Parliament met, some were violently turned out
of the House. Several Bishops were thrust out of the House of Lords for not
Worshipping the Mass, and soon after imprisoned.

On the Third of November Cranmer was arraigned in Westminster Hall, and found
guilty of High Treason (which by the way note was only for not Worshipping
Mass, tho other things were alleged against him) and was condemned to die.

After which an Act was made for repealing the Law made by King Edward touching
Religion (see what a Parliament can do when one is picked out for the purpose)
then they passed another Act for preventing affronts to Popish Priests, who
then began mightily to appear. Then another Act was passed for preventing
unlawful Assemblies, which was meant the meeting of the Reformed Protestants.

The Queen having brought things to this point, begins to show her self more
openly, and publicly declares her resolution of being reconciled to the Sea of
Rome, and accordingly sends Cardinal Pool to the Pope for his Blessing and
Directions; but he was stopped by the Emperor as he was on his Journey, but the
Queen sending to the Emperor to desire him not to hinder, Cardinal Pool went on
his Journey.

In the mean while Gardener at home proposes to the Queen the several methods
for rooting out the Reformed Religion, which are excepted of, but not put in
execution, till other necessaries are dispatched; viz. the match with Prince
Philip of Spain, which Match the House of Commons disliked; alleging that it
would bring England under a foreign yoke: and since the Commons cannot be
persuaded to consent to it, the Parliament is Dissolved) the constant practice,
when they would not do what they thought destructive to the Nation) and a new
one picked out (by the former methods) to agree to the Match; they were such men
as could be bribed to do any thing the Queen would have them, for there were
1200000 Crowns sent from Spain to corrupt them. They Confirm the Marriage, set
up the Mass, and concur with the Queen in all Acts for Persecuting the
Protestants; but thanks be to God we are not now in danger of such Parliaments,
peoples understandings being every where enlightened, and the whole Nation
sensible of what will be the Consequence of such Parliaments who shall concur
with a Popish King, for destroying the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of
those that are of the Protestant Religion. A Religion which authorizes not
Murders and Rapines, that teaches the way to Heaven, by Meekness and Humility,
by Loyalty and Faithfulness to their Prince, and Love to one another. But on
the contrary, the Popish Religion pretends to Convert people by Gaols, Fire,
and Faggot. The first Instance of which in this Queens Reign is Cranmer,
Ridley, and Latimer (Three Reformed Bishops) being adjudged Heretics and
condemned to die. After which follows the burning of Rogers a Minister, Hooper
and Farrar, two Bishops, and Bradford another Minister.

On the 25th of July 1554, Prince Philip comes to Winchester, attended by
several Nobles who were sent to Spain to fetch him; and on the 25th the
Marriage was solemnized there. An infinite number of Papists of all Countries
came over with him. The King and Queen send for Cardinal Pool from Rome, who
being come, his Attainder was taken off, and he makes a Speech to the
Parliament, exhorting them wholly to the Mother Church, upon which they desire
pardon, and repent of their former errors, and profess themselves ready to
abrogate all Laws prejudicial to the Sea of Rome; upon which he gives them and
the whole Nation Absolution. In March the Queen delivers up all the Abbey Lands,
and leaves them to the disposal of the Pope and his Legate; so that by this
Gentlemen may see what they are to expect from a Popish Prince, viz. to have
all their Estates taken away, their Families ruined, and even suffer the loss
of their Lives at his pleasure --

Soon after this Ridley, Latimer, and Cranmer, are burnt, with Thousands all
over England, the repetition of who they were and where executed, I shall not
trouble you, since published at large in Fox; I shall only beg every honest
Englishman who is willing to serve his God in Peace, and enjoy the Privileges
which God and the Laws has given him, to consider how sad the change of the
present Religion and Government would be, when it shall lie in the power of the
Pope to order the Destruction of Protestants, and a Popish Prince think himself
obliged to execute such his Holiness Orders; when we who are freeborn
Englishmen, should be Priest-ridden, when those that will not rack their
Conscience to save their Estates and Lives, shall be murdered. For such and
much worse, will be certainly the consequence of Popery, since all their
Learned Authors do publish, That every man is obliged to Convert or Confound
Heretics; and it is by that name they style us. Let us reflect a little upon
the late Designs of the Papists, Was not the Scene of Converting England to be
laid in blood, of even the King himself (who has been so favorable to them)
as well as of all the Protestants in England? Nay they intended to have cut off
even the Duke himself, upon whom they built all their hopes, if he should not
absolutely hold his Crown from the Pope? What care ought then to be taken for
preventing the Designs of such men, how diligent ought we to be in
Counterplotting, how Industrious ought we to be in choosing good Members for
Parliment, who if bad can make such a Figure in altering the Government, and
bringing the Country to Destruction? How ought we to amend our Lives and live
answerable to Gods great Mercies hitherto bestowed upon us, and send up our
Hearty Prayers that God would continue his Majesty's Life to us, and Destroy
and Confound all his and the Nations Enemies, and give a Blessing to the
Endeavors of the approaching Parliament, that the fears of the people may be
quieted and a hearty Union between his Majesty and the Nation may be fully
completed?

FINIS.

