I7 R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Concerning Diligences raised, and not perfected in the late King's Reign.
Edinburgh, The Fourteenth of February, 1685.
THE Lords of Council and Session Considering, that during the Reign of His
Sacred Majesty of Blessed Memory Charles the Second, and since His Decease,
before the Tenth of February instant (when Our Sovereign Lord King James the
Seventh was proclaimed) there was Summonds, Letters, Hornings, Captions,
Inhibitions, Arrestments, Loosings of Arrestments, Publications of
Interdictions, Precepts, Brieves, Charges to enter Heir, Charges of Law
borrows, Suspensions, Advocations, and other Writs and Diligences raised, and
which was not at all, or not fully Executed and Perfected before the said Tenth
of February: And seeing there is no Interruption in the Royal Authority, and
that all Persons concerned may be informed, and cleared of any Scruple some may
have, concerning the Execution and Effect of the same. Therefore the Lords of
Council and Session do Declare, that they will allow and sustain the said
Summonds, Letters, and all other Diligences foresaids whatsoever, with all that
has followed, or may follow thereupon, in the like way and manner, and to have
that Force and Effect as if the same had been perfected, and received their
full Effect and Execution during the Life and Reign of Our late Sovereign. And
that all Persons concerned may have speedy notice hereof, They Ordain these
Presents to be Printed, and Published, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh.
Extracted out of the Books of Sederunt, By me

Geo. Mckenie, Cler. Regr.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.


