AVON A; OR A TRANSIENT VIEW Of the Benefit of making RIVERS Of this Kingdom
NAVIGABLE.

OCCASIONED By observing the Situation of the City of SALISBURY, upon the
AVON, and the Consequence of opening that River to that City.

Communicated by Letter to a Friend at LONDON.

By R. S.

Sola est fiducia Nilo. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for John Courtney
Bookseller in Sarum, 1675.

A Transient view of the benefit of making the Avon by Salisbury, and other
Rivers of this Kingdom Navigable.
Communicated by Letter to his Friend at London.
SIR,
TO maintain that Correspondence (of so very great satisfaction and advantage
on my part) begun betwixt us, I shall give you an account of something I met
with in my way homewards from your great City, having nothing else ready at
present; But by the next, I shall entertain you with some not inconsiderable
observations made about these parts, and some very useful experiments, now
almost perfected.

I am sure you remember, that the Inhabitants of Salisbury obtained an Act for
making their River Navigable; but, as if that had been enough, they have
hitherto spent all their first vigor in discourse; But now, at my return, as
if they meant to proceed effectually, they talk of nothing, but of procuring
subscriptions for raising Money; of agreeing with some able Person to undertake
the work; And the Mayor and Commonalty of the City, have taken forth a
Commission under the Broad Seal, to empower them to go on with it: So that if
they could not agree, it is probable some short time may give beginning to the
work; which, because I have some affection for, I shall give you my thoughts of.

The Avon (you must know, having its Spring in the North-parts of Wiltshire,
holds on a course from North to South, of about Twenty Miles, by Vp-Avon,
Enford, Amesbury, and by Stratford under the Old Sorbiodunum, to New Salisbury,
upon its approach to which City, diverse small Channels are derived from it; by
which, part of it is conveyed through most of the Streets: The residue, in a
large Bed, passes on the West Side of the Town; and having run the whole length
of the City and Close, it receives at the South-West Angle of the Close, the
Wily, and the Nadder: The former of which, rising about Warminster, and passing
by Heytsbury, and receiving several Rills by the way, meets with the Nadder
about Wilton; and from thence, they both pass toward Salisbury, and join with
the Avon at the place before named.

The Avon increased by these two Rivers, (either of them near Twenty Miles
distant from their first Springs, before this their last confluence) runs under
Harnham Bridge, (which is that we pass over in our way to the City from the
Western-parts) and within two or three Furlongs, receives another not
inconsiderable River, from the North-East, at a place called Muttons Bridge;
(betwixt which two Bridges, all those several Rills which the City had borrowed
out of the Avon, are returned again into its Channel) with the access of which,
and several others in its course afterward by Downton, Forthingbridge, and
Ringwood in the New-Forrest, it runs on to Christ-Church (about Twenty Mile
from Salise) and there discharges it self into the Sea.

Whoever shall consider the largeness of the River here at this place, and the
continual increase of it in its passage to the Sea, will rather wonder, (as I
have often done) that no benefit has been hitherto made of it, then any ways
doubt, that it is able to answer the greatest they can reasonably expect from
it: it reflecting very much upon the Inhabitants of this place, That when
Nature had so opportunely provided a sufficiency of Waters, They should be so
much wanting to themselves, as not to afford those Waters a convenient Channel.

But, what you and I talked of the other day, of the several Genius's of Ages,
may have place here: And therefore, without being too severe to the discretion
of this particular place, we shall be contented to charge this long oversight,
upon the Genius of the foregoing Ages; which, its evident, was not so quick and
active in apprehending the means of improving what lay before them, as the
present is: as is daily seen, not only in the great advancements of Art, and
useful knowledge; in the improving of our Lands, etc. but in the same kind too:
As appears by the many Acts lately passed for making several of our Rivers
Navigable; diverse of which are since prosecuted to effect; A searching,
thriving Genius; reserved for this present Age to wait on, and perfect that
Felicity which the past Calamities, it has safely emerg'd out of, will make it
at last seem worthy of, and set off with a greater Luster: if our own supiness,
in not laying hold on those opportunities it offers, suffer it not to escape
us; since the particular Genius of every Age, (moving on upon the same Wheel
that time does) being once passed, is as irrevocable as that time that
presented it; both of them as they enter, so passing off together. And this is
it may possibly awake the Inhabitants of this place, to endeavor to make a
further use of the opportunity of their Situation, and not to sit down any
longer contented with that little contrivance, which pleased their Ancestors so
very much, of cutting those Channells I mentioned but now, and making but this
only use of the Avon, To keep their Streets clean. But to endeavor to improve
it to those nobler advantages, which the bounty of the River will most
certainly afford them.

For, to doubt of such advantages to be made by making such Rivers as this is,
Navigable, (as at my being here, some Gentlemen living thereabout in the
Hill-Countrey (as they call it) did) is but a piece of stupidity as is not
worth a refuting; it being all one, as to question whether Navigation be
advantageous or no? Therefore, as when things evident from sense and experience
are denied, we supersede arguments, and bid our adversaries only to make use of
their senses, and confute themselves: So here, let any one who thinks
otherwise, but only look about him, and observe the vast disproportion between
the wealth of such places (otherwise equal) which are open to drive a Trade by
Sea, and those which are bound up within the Land, or, which is all one, the
difference betwixt the Estate of a Tradesman and of a Merchant.

But there is more advantage to those places, which being seated far within the
Land (as this is) do enjoy the benefit of Commerce by Sea, by some Navigable
River, then to those Port-Towns which are seated in some Creek or Bay only,
and are (as I may call it) Land-lock'd, having no passage up into the Land but
by Carriages; as we see in Poole and Lynn, in Dorset, and in a number of other
Port-Towns of like Situation in other parts quite round the Island: For such
places, though the Sea brings in commodities to them, yet they can neither
without great charge convey those commodities higher up into the Land, nor,
without the like charge, receive the Inn-land commodities to export again:
Whereas, Cities seated upon Navigable Rivers far within the Land, look like
some Noble Exchange of Natures own designing; where the Native and the
Forreigner may immediately meet, and put off to each other the particular
commodities of the growth of their own Countries; the Native (as a Merchant)
receiving the Foreign Goods at the first hand, and exchanging his own for them
at the very place where they are made, or grow; or at most, going no further to
it, then to his ordinary Market.

And, as there is more of profit in such a Situation, so there is of Health
and Pleasantness; for we know, That Scurvies, Quartanes, and other lingering
Diseases, are more frequent near the Sea, then higher within the Land, where
the Air coming to us from the Neighboring Plains, Fields, and Woods, is more
sprightly and stirring, and brings along with it the peculiar Health and
Amenities of those places it came from: Whereas, the Inhabitants nigh the Sea
must be content to take (as we use to say) one with the other; And, as they enjoy
the benefits which flow in upon them thence, so must they abide its
inconveniences too: But in such Scituations as this, all the advantages of the
Sea are fully and equally enjoyed with those places seated nigh it, and only
the injuries left out. And (if there be any thing in so slight a Remarque) the
Situation of those places far within the Land upon some River, or in draught
of the Sea, seems to carry more of State; when the Inhabitants, being removed
at a distance, (as in London, Antwerp,) and the wealth of the Sea waits on them
at home, then when they go forth and attend it on the Shore.

But it is not so much the pleasure, or Healthiness of a place that usually
takes the Common Inhabitant, much less its Situation in point of Honor (as we
may call it) as the profit and advantage he shall find in it. And this, as the
Inhabitants of Salisbury in patticular may assure themselves of, so may you and
I, and the whole Kingdom, look upon this, and all other of like Nature, as upon
works of a National and Public Emolument: for when so many considerable places
shall be enabled to look out toward a Trade at Sea, our strength in Shipping
and Mariners will be increased; Numbers of Lazy and Idle Persons set on work;
And that Royal Trade of Fishing, of so vast concernment to these Kingdoms, for
which His Majesty has laid such excellent Foundations, will be very much
advanced from the Number and Quality of Persons in and nigh those places. (and
all almost such Rivers in their course to the Sea) who, from the opportunity of
their Situation, will see themselves so much concerned, for their own benefit,
to pursue those public ends, which are inseperably woven their private ones.

And here, give me leave to take a view, as they who having gained the top of
some Mountain do, of a fair, but distant Landschap toward which they are
Traveling; whose extremities, though they appear faint, shady, and confused;
And the particular objects seem broken; undistinguished, and blended together;
yet the vastness of them is not the less considerable from that Indistinction,
(it being rather an access and reputation to Greatness, then any diminution to
render it indesinite) of the future Glory, which the effecting the present
design of making our Rivers Navigable, will undoubtedly advance this Kingdom
too: I would not have you think me too confident in saying thus; for all the
past and present experience of the whole World, will bear witness, of what
infallible consequence Navigation is to Opulence, Greatness, and Empire: And
that, as those People who Trade by Sea, shall always more abound in Wealth then
the Inn-landers, so if a contest happen between two such People, the Maritime
People shall always be of greater ability to maintain the Ware-And (the virtue
of the People, and of their Chiefs, being otherwise equal) shall in fine
prevail.

Look back then upon the Phaenicians, elder than Storv, (for they flourished in
the Fabulous Age) and you will find them great in themselves, and greater in
their Descendants and Colonies; powerful even to a Proverb; the extent of the
Tyria Maria, being as vast, as the bounds of the then known Sea; To all which,
the dread of their Power gave Law and Name: And that one City Tire, sustaining
the whole force of the Chaldaean Monarchy for thirteen years* when in its
oppugnation by Nebuchadnezzar. Every Head was made Bald, and every shoulder was
Peeled: (by carrying those Materials which filling up the Seas that divided the
Island on which Tire stood, from the Continent, enabled him to make his
approaches by Land) abounding in all the plenty the Neighboring Regions and
Islands could afford them; in exchange for their famed Tyrian Purple: whilst in
the mean time, the Mountainers, and Hill-Country Gentlemen of Syria (like their
Posterity the present Wild Arabs) were forced to live upon the dry revenue of a
barren desert; their expeditions being chiefly undertaken against the next
Neighboring Flocks and Herds; and instead of clothing themselves in Vests of
Silk, and Purple; acknowledged themselves, in this only, obliged to the
Indulgence of their Clime, which affording them Sun enough, might excuse them
from wearing any.

Look next upon the Issue of the contest betwixt those two famous Cities,
Athens and Sparta, in the Peloponnesian War; when, the Spartans, who lived upon
the revenue of their Lands, those Lands being wasted, were utterly disabled any
longer to maintain the War; nor could they, by all those difficult habits of
Sufferance and Frugality, buy up their Fortunes; But to the till then unknown
dishonor of the Spartan Name, which upon the strength of a peculiar
Discipline, had bore it self up for four hundred years, were enforced to sue
for an unworthy Peace: Whereas the Athenians, their Territories being in like
manner wasted by the Spartans, and their City blocked up toward the Land,
lived, during that restraint, in all plenty; and recovering themselves by their
Trade at Sea, carried over the War to the Spartans Dominions, and prevailed
over them in despite of virtue.

The same is evident from the different abilities of the Romans and
Carthaginians in the second punick War; for, though the Carthaginians had
bought the first Peace of the Romans for two Thousand two Hundred Talents, to
be paid in Twenty years; of which, a proportionable quantity was paid before
the breaking out of the Second War; And though, in the same intervall, the
Romans unjustly extorted other Twelve Hundred Talents (upon pretense, that some
preparations which the Carthaginians made for the recovery of Sardinia, were
intended against Rome) and consequently, at the beginning of the Second War,
the Romans were as much richer then the Carthaginians, as the access of those
Sums could make them; And the Carthaginians (besides the loss of those Sums,
being also in that interval, exhausted by a dangerous War against their
Mercenaries) were so much poorer then otherwise they would have been; yet in
that Second War, the speedy growth of the Carthaginian Wealth by their
Sea-Trade, sufficiently appears; When Hannibal, carrying over the War into
Italy, brought it before the Gates of Rome; and when, had the virtue of the
Carthaginians been equal to that of the Romans, or of their own General,
affording him those necessary supplies which were in their power to have
yielded; Rome had been inevitably lost; and the Senate waited upon Hannibals
Triumph: When contrariwise, the Romans, whose Revenue came from the Fruits of
their Ground, were reduced by that War, to such extreme want, that they were
not able to redeem their Prisoners taken at Cannae, though at that time they
were in so great want of Men, that they were enforced to enroll their
(Praetentati) Boys in their Legions; and to borrow Eight Thousand Slaves of
their Masters, to be paid for when the War was ended. This, Cato well observed
in his usual Close, Deleatur Carthago! And the Senate fulfilled in their
Decree, to remove Carthage higher up into the Land; for, it was not Carthage
that the Romans dreaded, but its Navigation; which had twice raised that City,
greater out of its ruins; and would at length have given the Empire of the
World to Carthage, and made Rome Tributary, had not its Twelve-miles removal
from the Sea, founded an Inland-Carthage, which could no more be dreaded. And
conform to this, you cannot but have observed, That the constant custom of a
prevailing power over its Emulous Adversary, is, To reduce the number of its
Vessels.

I need not name Venice to you; Their own Proverb will tell you what made them
Rich (Il bianno and il nero (cive Pope and cottone) vanno futto Venetia ricca)
White and Black (viit Pepper and Cottin, those inconsiderable small Wares) have
made Venice Rich: And you may then tell your self what made them potent.

The most admirable instance of this, are the Hollanders; by whose Navigation
it came to pass (says Grotius) ut Batavorum inter arma foelicit^^, non alicnam
m^do pacem, sed and suam vinceret. That the felicity of the Netherlanders in
the midst of War, did not only exceed that of the Peace of others, but of their
own.

But you will ask me, To what purpose is all this, since every body
sufficiently knows it? I confess, the truth is so evident, that I ought to ask
Pardon for telling you over what all the World acknowledges; But you will
certainly excuse me, when you shall consider, That notwithstanding this
confessed evidence, yet most Men know it to no purpose, refusing to guide
themselves by that knowledge: Either out of a dull heavy temper, which
restrains them within the ancient narrow Bounds which their Forefathers have
cast up about them; as if they knew and did all that was ever possible to be
performed; (which is the Common Error of the Vulgar) and that to advance any
further, and to pass over those Bounds, were a Trespass, and a true
Transgression: Or out of a ridiculous Pride, (the error of many of a better
rank) which the wiser of our own, and other Nations justly deride us for,
accounting it beneath a Gentleman, to employ himself about any other thing, but
the contriving how to pass away his time the most vainly and unprofitably he
can; running counter thus to all the wiser parts of Mankind; who, truly
sensible of the brevity of Life, and the long atchievments of Knowledge and
Art, did from those very reflections, quicken and excite their industry; and by
a generous impatient ardour, made that very infelicity a step to virtue; by
husbanding that inestimable, but wasting treasure of time, to the utmost
advantage: Whereas we, on the contrary, not knowing how to employ our time,
find it to be tedious to us; and complain of the length of those hours, which
all the knowing World lament for their Brevity, and accuse only of too much
Wing: And therefore, finding our time to lie upon our hands, and to press us as
a heavy Burden, we study only how to spend it: And to this purpose, (and not
for Diversion, after some more then ordinary intentions of the Mind, but as our
sole business, worthy to take up all the Man, and the whole grand affair of
Life, we pursue follies; and add to the already too speedy course of our Hours,
a more momentary flight by those swifter vanities; which upon that account, we
celebrate for the most excellent Pastimes; as having by them, attained the
utmost End of all our endeavors and deep contrivances. To have yet further
shortened and reduced our Span; and made our Age more nothing then it was, by
passing its time away most insensibly and to no purpose: As if a worthy
employment, either in any ingenuous (though Manual) labor by which Art might
be advanced, which the greatest Monarch of the Earth, the Grand Seignior
refuses not; Or the promoting such public works as these, for the good and
honor of our Country; or the vouchsafing to descend to reap the benesits
accruing by them, by Traffic and Commerce; which the Princes of Italy
themselves, disdain not; but think the so employing their Vessels, to be
altogether as well as to Fight with them; (and by which means the Italian
Gentry do (at least) preserve their ancient Patrimony) were not far more
generous, then either to be Idle, or to become Slaves to our Vices, in doing
the dull sensual Labors of Intemperance; and so commit the charge of all other
business to our Servants, and reserve to our selves only, the greater trouble
of our own undoing.

Whether it be any of these, or whatever else it is that thus emasculates and
befools us, It will not be thought impertinent, by remembering the Bravery of
the Tyrian, the ancient Spartan and Athenian Fate and Glory; Carthage even
near conquered, The fear of Rome; The noble Duration and Grandieur of Venice;
And the Opulency of the Hoghan Moghans, to endeavor to awake us to the laying
hold on those Opportunities which are before us; viz. The easy work of making
all our Rivers, capable of it, Navigable; which when we shall have finished,
and given our Island more Shore then Nature has afforded it, (the Sea, not only
as now compassing, but entering us) That safety from without, which our most
advantageous Situation already gives us, of being of difficult approach to its
Enemy, and of easy descent for the Native, will be far more assured by the
vast increase of our Shipping; which surrounding this our Island by their
Wooden Walls, will afford it a protection greater then its own; A safety beyond
what the Oracle promised Athens; and will be, and confer, that Glorious Impress
which incloses His Majesty's Coins, (and may it always His Septer!) Deus and
Tutamen.

Our safety from within too will be more assured: For People too numerous for
the place that bred them, become, through want of employment, Poor, and
consequently discontented, restless, and unquiet; As Spirits in depauperated
Liquors, grow iejune, and acid, exalting the terrene faculent parts: But as
those Spirits, by the affusion of some more generous Body, grow more benign,
sedate, and temperate; so the Poor and Idle, being put upon a full employment,
their Melancholy eager Spirits will convert all their powers on that; and be
saded with the bounty of that employment; and the wealth that will wait on it:
Which mutually advancing each other, the employment first begetting wealth, and
then that wealth a greater employment, shall establish (what Art could never
yet find out, nor Nature in particulars did ever yet perpetuate) a
constantmotion, excited by it self, and by it self continued and advanced:
Which inceslantly moving on, and like a glorious Torrent, gathering New force
and vigor from its progress, shall raise up a power and Felicity,
indeterminate, and boundless as the Causes which built it up; so far exceeding
any of theirs we have before named, as the diversions of our Island, enlarged
by those vaster Shores which our industry shall lay open, are, to the single
Haven of one City, Tire or Carthage; Athens or Venice; Or to the narrow Shores
of a Province or two: So that we shall no more need to reckon up the Examples
of others, when we our selves shall be the Greatest; nor to remember their
Felicities, but to attend our own; and that Opulence, Grandieur Empire which
will undoubtedly follow it.

And having thus gained to our selves Safety and Plenty; and a Power able to
assure them to us, and be the warranty of those Blessings, we may then have
leisure to attend those further noble Superstructures, which so firm and safe
Foundations will assuredly sustain.

Knowledge will be advanced; for when our selves shall have more fulfilled that
leading part of the Prophecy, Multi pertransibunt, That infallible Oracle which
gave it forth, will complete the following one, Augebitur Scientia. For when
the whole Book of Nature shall be laid open, and the Story of her written over
all the Face of the Earth, be made more legible, That Truth, which the World
has in vain hitherto attempted, and sought out of the dark Cells of
Contemplative Philosophers, (in which Pits she has been hitherto buried) will
then emerge, and manifest it self, when the Conceptions we imagine, and frame in
our selves, of those umbratile Schematismes, those very ways, and viewless
paths, which Nature signs and moves in, shall follow and be agreeable to the
same real Truths of those her ways in things, which our long, and most accurate
Observation and Experience, shall first discover in those things, scattered
throughout the whole extent of her Dominion; and not, when we shall first make
Worlds of our own, and giving New Phanatick Laws to motion, shall endeavor to
make Nature obedient to Scheme; and obtruding it with the greatest earnestness
and Pride imaginable upon others, shall permit none else to them in quiet; but
shall arrogate to our selves the sole authority of being perpetnal Dictators
both to Men and Nature. And then, those Noble Persons, whom the inadverting
part of the World vainly censures, for their so carefully treasuring up, the
many little (as such esteem them) and mean Occurrences of Nature (as if there
were any thing in the design or conduct of her Actions, mean; and but of small
regard; and that the most obvious; every-days wonders, did not discover a
Wisdom, high, and removed, to the utter dishonor and confusion of ours; and to
the astonishment and highest veneration of all persons, but only of the unwise
Man who does not well consider it; and of the Fool, who will never understand
it) shall receive the full, though late honor due to their Merit; when
Posterity, by disposing together those scattered Leaves of Natures Oracles,
gathered up by the diligent Observers over all parts of the World, and
deposited with those Candidates of Wisdom, shall have established those great
and general Truths, which all those dispersed particulars shall consent in, and
bear witness to; And, as with fit materials, shall have erected that August
Temple of Science; but slowly, and by degrees, as is the procedure of Nature in
her own Operations, when she designs any thing firm, glorious, and permanent.

And, as Knowledge, so will be Arts further advanced; not only by importing
those of the product of other Countries, (a Negotiation not so much heeded, as
perhaps were fitting) but the active part among us, will be encouraged to
confer new Donatives on the World; which they may as yet attempt with some
unwillingness: For, since those (properly) Mechanic Arts, which with greater
Power, Speed, and Felicity, perform the Operations of many, by making use of
other Aids then the immediate Hands of Men, may receive yet further
advancement; but being advanced, since those Multitudes of Hands, with which we
already too much abound, will be then un-employed, whose helps are now
requisite; Those noble Inventors, whose sole End is the good of Mankind,
imagine they should* fail of that great End, when by purchasing to themselves,
the honor due to inventing and cultivating such helps, they shall defraud the
necessitous; whose necessary subsistence depending upon their immediate Labor,
to excuse their Labor, were to take away their Bread: Whereas, when our many
Hands shall be otherwise employed, all helps will be acceptable; and the
inventers of them receive their due Honors, not blasted with the Curses of the
Indigent.

I know you will be apt to smile at this, as a Fancy only; But let me ask you,
how many Thousand Pens are excused since the Art of Printing was invented, and
our Libraries are no longer Manuscripts? Which therefore must necessarily press
in for a Livelihood among other Arts, and overtook those Professions. How many
poor Families would starve, if the invention of Sawing Mills were not (as out
of Charity) suspended? But to go no further for an instance then this very
Salisbury; Some few years part, the mode of drawing Wire, otherwise then by the
Hand was brought into that City, by some from London; How did the poor Men of
that Profession (the Common Wyer-Drawers) suffer by that Intrusion? Who, as Men
whose Country some potent Enemy had possessed, being cast out of their
Employment, were enforced to seek out New Labors, or starve upon their Old,
not being able to work to their Masters so cheap as the Engine could: Which
process, how obvious was it to have been found out sooner? Or, for want of
invention, how easily might it have been had from the famous Mersennus? who
reported it as the practice of his Country many years ago?

And the same will at all times fall out, when the unassisted Arms of Men shall
contend with the force of Engine; which latter therefore being preferred, shall
exclude the former; and the Invention, though worthy of all Honor, yet
unhappily approved to use, shall become a Grievance; and engrossing all
Employment into some Engines Dead Hand, must awake the Laws in defense of the
oppressed to wrest it out thence, and arm it self anew against that second
Mortmain.

But (having first made way for the innocent use of such Aids, and when to
those Aids, we shall add our own diligence (as some other Nations do) we shall
not be obliged to envy the Industrious; but managing our Labors with as few
Hands as any, and as great a diligence, shall have no cause to complain that
others can afford the proceeds of their Labors at a cheaper rate then we, and
under-sell ours, to the impairing and discouragement of Trade; but shall find,
that ours will yield us as full returns as theirs, whenever we shall bring as
sufficient Aids as they, and an equal industry.

What remains to be achieved, (if what went before were not abundantly so too)
will be Honor and Glory: For when Navigable Rivers shall be the Bounds of
Villa's; and of those the Ocean; and of it, the utmost extent of Nature; The
opportunity of those Scituations will excite the more Generous among us to
invade those its furthest Borders; and in particular, that forlorn Company of
Supernumeraries, who by a kind of Fatality are become a Proverb to the World,
and ranked among the other indigent Grandees of our Neighbor Nations (the Dons
of Spain, the Minsieurs of France, and the Barons of Germany, the younger
Brothers of England, if they bring a virtue equal to their Poverty (and their
Parents may do well to train them up eminently to the First, since they endow
them sufficiently with the latter) will have a large Scheme open to exercise
that virtue in; by discovering, and planting those many yet unknown, and
uncultivated Regions of the World; (for we are yet Strangers to those vast
Southern Tracts, nor do we know the amplitude of those Continents whose Shores
we inhabit) and by reducing Salvage People to Humanity and Religion; not by
those ways the Spaniards heretofore took in the Indies, who by their incredible
ravages, having rendered themselves, and for their sakes, Heaven it self,
abominated to the Indians, (for being courted to embrace our Religion, whose
reward they were told, was the same Heaven that the Spaniards pretended too;
the Poor Wretches refused the Condition, and would not accept of Heaven in the
Company of the Spaniards) observed an ill Method to persuade them to that
Religion which was the Way to that End which they at first had taught them to
abhor. Nor (as you remember we observed with Indignation out of Ligon's History
of the Barbado's) as our own Countrymen do there (and our Brethren in diverse
other places) who refuse to make any Negro a Christian, least they should loose
the Slave; defacing at the same time that Christianity in themselves, which
they refuse to the Negro's; and converting all that loud zeal, and those famous
pretenses of compassing Earth and Sea, for gaining Proselytes to Heaven; to get
poor Heathens to work their Plantations; and resolving still to keep them such:
Most unhappy Wretches! condemned to a first heavy thraldom here, and (as far as
in us lies) to a second intolerable one hereafter. From which, though their
present Owners, (for whose sakes only these poor Wretches seem to breath)
believe, that they could present them with the only effectual means of their
deliverance, yet, not to sustain the damage, by their Conversion, the hazard of
the 30 pieces (the usual price of a Man Negro, and the fatally preferred one to
a rejected Savior) they withold it from them; and refuse to offer them a
Redeemer from either Bondage; as altogether minding, instead of Religion, and
the Gospel, the Planting of Tobacco only, and Sugarcanes.

But, when these our more generous Colonies, shall have prosecuted Nobler Ends,
more beseeming Men and Christians; and propagated that Religion and Humanity
abroad, which they shall have first Planted at home in their own Bosoms; They
shall be no more a burden to themselves and their Relations, but an Honor to
both, and to their whole Nation: Their Names shall be Registered among those of
the Noblest Order and Sense of Mankind; Columbus, Americus, Magellane, Drake,
Rawleigh, Smith, etc. And by subduing the minds of Men, more then their Bodies,
shall be enobled with as great, but far more innocent Triumphs than Cortes and
Pirarro for the Conquests of Peru and Mexico; In defect of Patrimony and Lands
here; new Coasts, and unknown Regions shall submit to them, and bear their
Names: And, instead of owing all their Reputation to some Ancestors expiring
Merit, they shall gather fresh Honors from their proper virtue, and become the
Sons of their own Fortune.

As for that particular place, the Consideration of which, first led me to this
Remarke: Whenever the present, or the future Inhabitants of Salisbury, by
understanding the advantage of their Situation, shall have converted the Avon
to more proper uses, becoming so Noble a River, then those very little ones it
now serves for; They will then reap the true benefit of their descent from the
Old dry Hill where their City was first seated; and shall celebrate their Names
and Memories, who shall eminently lead on, and advance the work, with their
Churches Magnificent Founder, the famous Richard Poor; or their Canonized
Osmund. The Adventurers and Subscribers, besides the Honor of being Registered
for the promoting so noble a work, will find a fuller and more certain return
for their Moneys, then had they purchased Land; or employed it at Interest; or
any other known way amongst us.

The Merchants Company will not only be such in Name, but will be truly such,
when they shall receive and export their Goods by Water at their own doors; and
not, as now, make Voyages by Land to distant Haven Towns, and embark all their
Merchandises in Carts. The Magistrates will not need to put in practice any of
their former petty ways of relief (as some call d them; but others, Grievances)
as their New-Brew-house, and Leather-Tokens, etc. nor be enforced to burden
the Inhabitants with more Monthly Rates then there be Months in the year;
when they shall be able to set all their Poor sufficiently on work; the
employment of the place, being rather like to want Hands to manage it, than any
Indigent Person want employment. And generally, all conditions of Men, in, and
nigh the place, will share in the benefit the River will afford them; And the
City which depends now for its subsistence, upon an Inn-land Trade, and the
Western Road, will acquire the Reputation of a Port; and in the Catologue of
the Cities of this Kingdom, be ranked with Bristoll.

FINIS.

