THE LAWS and ACTS OF THE FIRST PARLIAMENT, Of our most High and Dread
SOVEREIGN, CHARLES THE SECOND, By the grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.

Holden at Edinburgh the First of January, 1661.

By a Noble Lord, John Earl of Middleton, Lord Cleremont and Fettercairn; His
MAJESTY'S Commissioner for holding of this Parliament, by virtue of a
COMMISSION under His MAJESTY'S Great Seal of this Kingdom:

With the special Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament.

Extracted and Collected from the Records of Parliament, by Sir ARCHIBALD
PRIMEROSE of Chester Knight and Barronet, Clerk to His MAJESTY'S Council,
Registers and Rolls.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAjESTY,
Anno Dom. 1661 CVM PRIVILEGIO.

CHARLES Ye 2d BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING OF SCOTLAND ENGLAND FRANCE and IRELAND
Defender of ye faith
^^uch not my Anointed GOD SAVE THE KING

FEAR GOD

HONOR THE KING

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE portrait of Charles II

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal English blazon or coat of arms of Charles II

NEMO ME IMPVNE LACESSET decorative border The LAWS and ACTS made in the first
PARLIAMENT of our most High and Dread Sovereign, CHARLES the Second, by the
grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith.
Began at Edinburgh, the first day of January, 1661.
I. ACT concerning the President and Oath of Parliament.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty GOD, to compassionat the troubles and
confusions of this Kingdom, by returning the Kings most excellent MAjESTY to
the exercise of that Royal Government, under which, and its excellent
constitution, this Kingdom has for many ages enjoyed so much happiness, peace
and plenty. And it being upon good and important considerations, an inviolable
practice in this Government before these troubles, that the person nominate by
His MAjESTY, to be His Chancellor within this Kingdom, did of right, and as due
to his place, preside in all Meetings of Parliament and other public
Judicatories of the Kingdom, where he was present for the time. And His MAjESTY
now considering the great advantages, do accress to the public good of His
Subjects, by the due observance of such ancient and well grounded Customs and
Constitutions, and the prejudices that do accompany a change thereof: Therefore
His MAjESTY, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, does
Declare, That the present Lord Chancellor, and such as hereafter shall be
nominate by His MAjESTY, or His Royal Successors, to succeed in that place; and
in case of their absence, such as shall be nominate by His MAJESTY, are by
virtue and right of the said office and such nomination respective, to preside
in all meetings of His MAJESTY'S Parliaments or other public Judicatories of
the kingdom, where they shall happen to be present, and that they are now and
in all time coming to enjoy this privilege. And in discharge of this trust,
they are at the first down-sitting of every Parliament, to administer to all
the Members thereof the Oath of Alleagiance, whereof the tenor follows;

I, for testification of my faithful obedience to my most gracious and
redoubted Sovereign, CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Affirm, testify and declare, by this my solemn
Oath, That I acknowledge my said Sovereign only Supreme Governor of this
Kingdom, over all Persons and in all Causes; and that no Foreign Prince, Power
or State, nor person Civil or Ecclesiastic, has any Jurisdiction, Power or
Superiority over the same: And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all
Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers and Authorities; and shall at my utmost power,
defend, assist and maintain His MAJESTY'S Jurisdiction foresaid against all
deadly, and never decline His MAJESTY'S Power nor Jurisdiction, as I shall
answer to GOD. With this addition, And I shall faithfully give my Advice and
Vote in every thing shall be propounded in Parliament, as I shall answer to GOD.

Likeas His MAJESTY, with advice foresaid, does hereby Rescind and Annull all
Acts, Statutes or Practices, as to the President or Oath of Parliament, which
are prejudicial unto, or inconsistent with, this present Act, and Declare the
same to be void and null in all time coming.

II. Act and Acknowledgement of His Majesty's Prerogative, in the choice of His
Officers of State, Counselors and Judges.
THe Estates of Parliament, considering the great obligations that do ly upon
them from the Law of GOD, the Laws of Nations, the municipal Laws of the Land,
and their Oaths of Alleagiance, to maintain and defend the Sovereign Power and
Authority of the Kings MAJESTY, and the sad consequences that do accompany any
encroachments upon, or diminutions thereof: Do therefore from their sense of
humble duty, Declare, That it is an inherent privilege of the Crown, and an
undoubted part of the Royal Prerogative of the Kings of this Kingdom, to have
the sole choice and appointment of the Officers of Estate, and Privy
Counselors, and the nomination of the Lords of Session as in former times,
preceding the year, 1637. And that the Kings Sacred MAJESTY and His Heirs and
Successors, are for ever, by virtue of that Royal Power, which they hold from
GOD Almighty over this Kingdom, to enjoy and have the full exercise of that
Right. And therefore, the Kings MAJESTY, with advice and consent of His Estates
of Parliament, does hereby Rescind and Annull all Acts, Statutes or Practices
to the contrair, and Declare them to have been undutifull and disloyal
invasions upon the Royal Prerogative, and to be void and null in all time
coming.

III. Act asserting His Majesty's Royal Prerogative, in the calling and
dissolving of Parliaments, and making of Laws.
THe Estates of Parliament now conveened, by His MAJESTY'S special Authority,
considering that the Quietness, Stability and Happiness of the people, do
depend upon the Safety of the Kings MAJESTY'S Sacred Person, and the
maintenance of His Sovereign Authority, Princely Power, and Prerogative Royal.
And conceiving themselves obliged in conscience, and in discharge of their
duties to Almighty GOD, to the Kings MAJESTY, and to their Native Country, to
make a due acknowledgement thereof at this time; Do therefore unanimously
Declare, That they will with their lives and fortunes maintain and defend the
same. And they do hereby acknowledge, that the power of Calling, Holding,
Proroguing and Dissolving of Parliaments, and all Conventions and Meetings of
the Estates, does solely reside in the Kings MAJESTY, His Heirs and Successors.
And that as no Parliament can be lawfully kept without the special warrant
and presence of the Kings MAJESTY, or His Commissioner; so no Acts, Sentences
or Statutes, to be past in any Parliament, can be binding upon the people, or
have the Authority and force of Laws, without the special Authority and
Approbation of the Kings MAJESTY or His Commissioner, interponed thereto, at
the making thereof. And therefore the Kings MAJESTY, with advice and consent of
His Estates of Parliament, does hereby Rescind and Annull all Laws, Acts,
Statutes or Practices that have been, or upon any pretext whatsoever, may be,
or seem contrair to, or inconsistent with, His MAJESTY'S just Power and
Prerogative abovementioned, and Declares the same to have been unlawful, and
to be void and null in all time coming. And to the end, that this Act and
Acknowledgement, which the Estates of Parliament, from the sense of their
humble duty and certain knowledge have hereby made, may receive the more exact
obedience in time coming, It is by His MAJESTY, with advice foresaid, Statute
and Ordained, that the punctual observance thereof, be specially regarded by
all His MAJESTY'S Subjects, and that none of them upon any pretext whatsoever,
offer to call in question, impugn, or do any deed to the contrair hereof,
under the pain of Treason.

IIII. Act asserting His Majesty's Royal Prerogative, in the making of Leagues
and the conventions of the Subjects.
THe Estates of Parliament, considering that the maintenance of His Majesty's
Authority and Royal Prerogative, in and concerning the making of Leagues and
the conventions of the Subjects, is not only a necessary duty of the people,
but of singular advantage to their happiness and peace: And that their
Predecessors wisely foreseing the good and benefit thereof, and the prejudices
and miseries that inevitably did accompany the neglect of the same, did
therefore by many several Acts and Laws, assert the Kings Prerogative and
Authority therein; and particularly by the hundred and thirty one Act of the
eight Parliament of King James the sixth, it is Statute and Ordained, That none
of his Highness Subjects of whatsoever quality, state or function, presume to
convocat, conveen or assemble themselves for holding of Councils, Conventions,
or Assemblies, to treat, consult and determine in any matter of State, Civil or
Ecclesiastic (except in the ordinary Judgments) without His MAJESTY'S special
command, or express license, had and obtained thereto, under the pains made
against such as unlawfully convocats the Kings Leidges. And by the twelfth Act
of the tenth Parliament, holden the tenth of December, one thousand five
hundred and eighty five, It is by His MAJESTY, with advice of His three
Estates, Statute and Ordained, that no Leagues nor Bonds be made among His
Subjects of any degree, upon whatsoever color or pretense, without His
Highness or His Successors privitie and consent, had and obtained thereunto,
under the pain to be holden and execute as movers of Sedition to the breach of
the Peace. And now finding that the due observance of these Laws, might have
contribute much to the preventing of these confusions and troubles, which in
these late times have almost ruined both the Kings MAJESTY and all His loyal
Subjects: Therefore His MAJESTY, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, does revive, renew, ratify and approve these Acts abovementioned,
and Ordain the same to be punctually obeyed in all time coming, conform to the
tenor thereof, and under the pains therein contained. And Declares, that any
explanation or gloss, that during these late troubles has been put upon these
Acts, as that they are not to be extended against any Leagues, Councils,
Conventions, Assemblies or Meetings, made, holden or kept by the Subjects for
preservation of the Kings MAJESTY, the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, or for the public good either of Kirk or Kingdom, are false and
disloyal, and contrair to the true and genuine meaning of these Acts: And
therefore His MAJESTY, with advice foresaid, does Discharge, and for ever
Annull the same, and all Acts and Practices that have been in pursuance thereof.

V. Act asserting His Majesty's Royal Prerogative in the Militia, and in making
Peace and War, etc.
THe Estates of Parliament, considering the great happiness that this Kingdom
has for many ages enjoyed, under the princely Government of their Royal Kings;
who by the special blessing of Almighty GOD, have reigned over them, in so long
and an unparalled series of Royal descents; and the obligation thereby lying
upon them, in conscience, honor and gratitude, to own and assert the Royal
Prerogatives of the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, which the Kings MAJESTY
holds from GOD Almighty alone. An to vindicat the same from these invasions,
which by the malice or specious pretexts of ill affected persons, and the
confusions and disorders of the late times, have been made upon it, Do
therefore Declare, That the power of Arms and making of Peace and War, or
Treaties and Leagues with Foreign Princes or Estates, does properly reside in
the Kings MAJESTY, His Heirs and Successors; and that it was and is their
undoubted Right, and theirs alone, to have the power of raising in Arms, the
Subjects of this Kingdom, and of the commanding, ordering and disbanding, or
otherwise disposing thereof; and of all Strengths, Forts or Garrisons within
the same, as they shall think fit; the Subjects always being free of the
Provisions and Maintenance of these Forts and Armies, unless the same be
concluded in Parliament or Convention of Estates. Likeas the Kings MAJESTY,
with advice and consent foresaid, does hereby Declare, That it is, and shall be
high Treason to the Subjects of this Kingdom, or any number of them, more or
less, upon any ground or pretext whatsoever, to rise or continue in Arms, to
maintain any Forts, Strengths or Garrisons, to make Peace or War, or to make
any Treaties or Leagues with Foreign Princes or Estates, or among themselves,
without His MAJESTY'S special Authority and Approbation first interponed
thereto; And does discharge all His MAJESTY'S Subjects to offer upon any
pretext whatsoever, to attempt the doing of any of these things hereafter,
under the said pain of Treason. And in further detestation of such unlawful
and unwarratnable practices, the Kings MAJESTY, with advice and consent of His
Estates of Parliament, does hereby Rescind and Annull all Acts, Statutes,
Ordinances or Deeds, past or done in any Parliaments, Conventions, or other
Meetings whatsoever, or any otherwise, in so far as they are, or may be
contrair to, or inconsistent with, this present Act; and Declares the same
(dispensing with the generality, and holding all the particulars as verbatim
herein inserted) to be void and of no force nor effect in time coming.

VI. Act annulling the pretended Convention of Estates, kept in the year, 1643.
FOrasmuch as the power of calling of Parliaments, or Conventions of the
Estates of this Kingdom, has always been, and is an undoubted privilege of
the Crown, and does soly reside in the Kings MAJESTY: And that notwithstanding
thereof (among the many other invasions, which during these late times, have
been made upon the Royal Prerogative) a pretended Meeting and Convention of the
Estates was called and kept at Edinburgh, in June, one thousand six hundred
forty three, without any warrant from the Kings MAjESTY: And the Estates of
Parliament now conveened by His Majesty's special Authority, having taken into
their consideration the indiction, reasons and grounds of the calling of the
said Convention, do find that the said pretended Convention of Estates,
notwithstanding of all the specious pretexts made for the same, did meet, and
conveen, without any lawful Warrant or Authority; And therefore the Kings
MAjESTY, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, does Declare the
same, with all that was done therein, void and null, and Rescinds and Annuls
all Acts or Deeds whatsomever, ratifying and approving the same.

VII. Act concerning the League and Covenant, and discharging the renewing
thereof without His Majesty's warrant and approbation.
FOrasmuch as the power of Arms, and entering into, and making of Leagues and
Bonds, is an undoubted privilege of the Crown, and a proper part of the Royal
Prerogative of the Kings of this Kingdom, and that in recognisance of His
Majesty's just Right, the Estates of Parliament of this His most ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, have Declared it high Treason to the Subjects thereof, of
whatsoever number, less or more, upon any pretext whatsoever, to rise, or
continue in Arms, or to enter into Leagues and Bonds, with Forraigners, or
among themselves, without His Majesty's special Warrant and Approbation, had
and obtained thereto, and have Rescinded and Annulled all Acts of Parliament,
Conventions of Estates, or other Deeds whatsoever, contrary to, or inconsistent
with, the same; And whereas during these troubles, there have occurred diverse
things, in the making and pursuance of Leagues and Bonds, which may be occasion
of jealousy in and betwixt His Majesty's Dominions of Scotland, England and
Ireland. Therefore, and for preventing of all scruples, mistakes or jealousies
that may hereafter arise upon these grounds, The King's MAjESTY, with advice
and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does hereby Declare, That there is no
Obligation upon this Kingdom by Covenant, Treaties or otherwise, to endeavor
by Arms a Reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England, or to meddle with
the public Government and Administration of that Kingdom. And the King's
MAjESTY, with advice and consent foresaid, does Declare, That the League and
Covenant, and all Treaties following thereupon, and Acts or Deeds that do or
may relate thereto, are not obligatory, nor do infer any obligation upon this
Kingdom, or the Subjects thereof, to meddle or interpose by Arms, or any
seditious way in any thing concerning the Religion and Government of the
Churches of England and Ireland, or in what may concern the Administration of
His Majesty's Government there. And further, His MAjESTY, with advice and
consent of His Estates, does hereby Discharge and Inhibite all His Majesty's
Subjects within this Kingdom, that none of them presume upon any pretext of any
Authority whatsoever, to require the renewing or swearing of the said League
and Covenant, or of any other Covenants, or public Oaths concerning the
Government of the Church, or Kingdom, without His Majesty's special Warrant and
Approbation; And that none of His Majesty's Subjects offer to renew and swear
the same, without His Majesty's Warrant, as said is, as they will be answerable
at their highest peril.

VIII. Act against Papists, Priests, and Jesuits.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, that the public contempt of, and disobedience
to, lawful Authority, (though covered with the most specious pretexts) is
always accompanied with great confusions and provocations, to the dishonor of
GOD, and ruin of the People; And that thereby occasion is offered to wicked
and ill affected persons, of all sorts, upon one pretense or other, to subvert
Religion, and pervert the Duty and Allegiance of the Subjects; Whereof there be
too sad evidence, by the increase of Popery, and the number of Jesuits,
Priests, and Papists; which have of late, and do now abound in this Kingdom, in
far greater numbers then ever they did under the Government of His Majesty's
Royal Father and Grandfather, of blessed memory. And His MAjESTY, being
desirous to trace these His Royal Ancestors, in a due and vigorous prosecution
of these many excellent Laws made by them, against the Saying of Mess, and the
stay and resset of Jesuits, Seminary and Mess Priests, and Trafficking Papists,
within this Kingdom: Does therefore, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, command and charge all, and sundry Jesuits, Priests and Trafficking
Papists, that none of them presume hereafter to Say Mess within this Kingdom;
And that within a month after the publication hereof, they remove forth of the
Kingdom, under the pain of death: And sicklike, His MAjESTY, with advice and
consent foresaid, does command, charge, and inhibite all His Majesty's
Subjects, of what quality or degree soever, that none of them presume to hear
Mess, resset, supply, entertain, furnish meat or drink, nor keep intelligence
nor correspondence with any Priests, Jesuits or Trafficking Papists, under the
pains contained in the Laws and Acts of Parliament made in that behalf. And to
the end that this Act may receive the more exact obedience and prosecution, His
MAjESTY, with advice and consent foresaid, does hereby command all Sheriffs of
Shires and their Deputes, all Magistrates of Burghs, and other public
Ministers of the Laws, to make exact enquiry and search in their several bounds
and jurisdictions, and to apprehend all such Jesuits, Priests and Trafficking
Papists, as they shall find within the same, after the last day of March next
to come; and to commit them to the next sure Prison, there to remain till they
receive due punishment, according to the Laws: And also, that with all possible
diligence, they send in to the Parliament, or in case of their not Sitting, to
His Majesty's Privy Council, the List of such persons within their bounds, as
are known, or suspected to be Papists; that course may be taken with them,
conform to the Laws of the Kingdom: And hereof, the Sheriffs and Magistrates,
and their Deputes are to take special notice, as they will be answerable at
their highest peril: Likeas, His MAjESTY considering how dangerous it is that
Children be educat by persons popishly affected, do therefore, conform to
former Acts of Parliament, appoint that children under popish Parents, Tutors
or Curators shall be taken from them, and committed to the education of some
well affected and religious friend, at the sight and by order of His Majesty's
Privy Council: And Ordains publication hereof to be made at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and other places needful.

IX. Act approving the Engagement, 1648. and annulling the pretended
Parliaments and Committees kept thereafter.
FOrasmuch as in the year one thousand six hundred forty and eight, the
Estates of Parliament of this Kingdom, and His Majesty's good Subjects therein,
from the sense of their duty to Almighty GOD and the King's MAjESTY, did
cheerfully undertake and concur in an Engagement, for relief of His late
MAJESTY of glorious memory, from His imprisonment, and for His restitution to
the Royal Government of His Kingdoms. And the Estates of Parliament, now
conveened by His Majesty's special Authority, taking that Engagement to their
consideration, do find it to have been an Honorable, Just, Necessary and
Seasonable Discharge of that indispensible Duty, whereunto this Kingdom, and
the Subjects thereof, are by the Law of God, by the Law of Nature and Nations,
by the municipal Laws of the Land, by their Alleagiance, and by all the
strictest bonds of Conscience and Honor, obliged to the most Sacred Person,
and Royal Authority of their King's MAjESTY. And therefore, Our Sovereign
Lord, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, does Ratify and
Approve that Engagement for His Majesty's relief and restitution to His Royal
Government. And does Declare, that as it was a most noble and pious Testimony
of the Loyalty of His Majesty's good Subjects of His ancient Kingdom; and of
their affection and zeal to His Majesty's Person and Government: So His
MAjESTY, for Himself and His Successors, does assure, that They will always
retain a grateful resentment thereof; And have appointed these presents to
remain upon Record, for the due honor of these persons who did engage therein,
and of their posterity for ever.

And whereas the necessity and justice of this undertaking, with the interest
this Kingdom had in His Majesty's Person, by the honor of His Royal Birth, and
by these many and singular Acts of Grace He had lately conferred upon it, might
justly have claimed a ready concurrence of all the Subjects; Yet there wanted
not some, and even such, whom not long before, His Majesty had obliged by
marks of His Royal Favor both of honor and profit, who made it their work to
disappoint and oppose the same: And for that end, having gathered some mutinous
Commons and others, who by a few seditious Ministers, had been preached into an
open Rebellion they in the month of September one thousand six hundred forty
and eight years, without any lawful Authority, (and not giving the Oath
mentioned in the Commission of Parliament: without which, it was expressly
provided, they were not to have access to, nor place in, the Committee) did
usurp to themselves the name and power of a Committee of Estates; and having
by their own Edicts, declared all such persons as had given testimony of their
duty and loyalty to the King, to be incapable of being Members of Parliament,
or of having voice in the Elections to the Parliaments. They then, without any
lawful Authority, called a Packt meeting of Parliament, to consist only of
persons of their own stamp and faction: who accordingly met in January, one
thousand six hundred forty and nine years: and assuming to themselves the
Sovereign Authority and Government of the Kingdom, intended to establish and
fix the power in their own persons for ever. For which purpose, having
publicly declared against that necessary and just Engagement, for His
Majesty's relief and restitution to His Royal Government: Having approven all
the oppositions and risings in Arms against the same, and by Oath solemnly
engaged themselves to a constant adherence thereunto: Having for their
assistance called in the Usurper Cromwell, and a part of his Army: Having by
public engagement, given up the Honor and Safety of this ancient Kingdom to
the English; and declared, that His Majesty should be obliged to Ratify that
unworthy Act, before any Treaty were with Him for His relief: Having given
order to their Commissioners, to Protest against any agreement betwixt His
Majesty and His Subjects in England, in the Treaty at the Isle of Wight:
Having, so far as in them lay, weakened and dissolved the common Alleagiance of
the Subjects to the King's Majesty, by proclaiming His Right to the Crown, with
base restrictions and limitations, and pressing the Subjects against their
consciences, to subscribe the same: Having disowned His Majesty's interest in
the Quarrel betwixt them and the English, who had invaded this Kingdom, merely
to destroy His Majesty's Interest in it: Having taken the lives of some, and
forced others of His Majesty's good Subjects, of best quality, to fly to
Foreign parts for their safety: Having fined, confined, imprisoned and seized
upon the livelihood of many: Having put disgraceful characters and
incapacities upon all who had witnessed any affection to His Majesty's
Government: Having unjustly pronounced, and with cruelty executed Sentences of
Forfeiture against the lives and fortunes of such as from conscience of their
duties, did oppose them: Having in their public Meetings, appointed, that the
innocent wives and children of these, who offered to vindicate His Majesty's
Authority, should be seized on, and transported to Foreign Countries: Having
once and again solicit their Brethren in England, that such of this Kingdom,
as (for ventering their lives for the King) were then prisoners in England,
should be still kept prisoners, as Pledges of the Peace: Having thrust out of
the Offices of State, places of Judicatory and public Trust, all such as were
willing to engage for His Majesty's relief and restitution to His Government,
and put such in their places, as did oppose the same: Having laid on, and
raised, great exactions and sums of money from the people, and employed them
for their own uses: Having seized on His Majesty's Revenews, and bestowed them
upon themselves, and such others as were in open Opposition and Arms against
Him: Having also seized upon the Properties and due Rights of the Subjects, and
the Patronages by Law secured unto them: And having, by these and many such
like Acts, endeavored to perpetuate themselves in their usurped Power, they
prorogated the Meetings of their pretended Parliaments from time to time,
substituting some of their Trustees, for carrying on of their designs in the
while. And the Estates of Parliament, having taken these proceedings unto their
serious consideration, Do find, that there was no Law, nor lawful Authority
for the Meetings of these pretended Parliaments and Committees of Estates; But
that the persons, meeting therein, did without any lawful warrant, and in
contempt of His Majesty's Authority, usurp the power to themselves.

And therefore, the King's Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, does Rescind and Annull these pretended Meetings of Parliament, and
Committees above mentioned, and all other Meetings of any pretended Parliaments
or Committees flowing from the same, and all Acts, Deeds and Treaties, done by
them or their warrant: Execepting always all such Acts as were past in any
Meeting of Parliament, or Committee of Estates, authorized by His Majesty's
presence, and are not inconsistent with this present Act. And also Declares any
Ratification, which thereafter was past, of those Meetings and Acts, to have
been void from the beginning: Except in so far as is expressed in the Indemnity,
Declarations and Provisions after mentioned. Yet, notwithstanding of all these
provocations, the King's Majesty, from His innate goodness, being more desirous
to reclaim His Subjects to their duty by Acts of Mercy, then to reduce them by
their too much deserved Censure, Does, of His mere favor and grace, with
advice and consent foresaid, Indempnifie all such persons, who sat and acted in
these pretended Parliaments and Committees, or who acted in order thereunto, or
by virtue of, and in obedience to, the same, To be in all time coming,
unquestioned in their lives and fortunes, for these their actings; Excepting
such as shall be excepted in a general Act of Indemnity, to be past by His
Majesty in this Parliament.

And forasmuch as the Ordinar Courts of Justice, did sit and act by Warrant of
these Meetings, the Kings MAjESTY, for the good and ease of the people, does
with advice foresaid, Declare, That none of the Acts, Decreets or Sentences,
given by these who sat as Lords of Session, or as inferior Judges within this
Kingdom these years, nor no Execution following thereupon, are for want of
lawful Authority to be questioned: Whereanent, His MAjESTY, with advice
foresaid, by these presents dispenses. And also, His MAjESTY, considering that
by a pretended Act and Commission, from the said pretended Meetings or
Parliaments, Augmentations were granted to Ministers, Kirks were divided, new
Kirks were erected, and Lands from one Paroch to another, dis-joyned and
annexed; and diverse other particulars decerned, in relation to the Plantation
of Kirks: which Commissions, one or more, though they had no lawful Authority,
but in themselves were and are null. Yet His MAjESTY, being desirous to give
all due encouragements to the Ministers of the Gospel, does, with advice and
consent foresaid, Declare, That all Acts, Decreets and Sentences, pronounced
and given forth by the said Commissioners, and all Executions thereupon, are
and shall stand valid in time coming, except such as upon the complaint of any
party, shall be found to have been unjustly or exorbitantly pronounced and
decerned. The determination whereof, is hereby referred by His MAjESTY, with
advice and consent foresaid, to the Commission for Plantation of Kirks, to be
established by His Majesty in this present Parliament; that they after hearing
of parties, and consideration of particulars, may take such course for
altering, annulling or allowing of what was done by virtue of the said
Commissions in the years, one thousand six hundred and forty nine, and one
thousand six hundred and fifty, as they shall think just, conform to the
standing Laws and Acts of Parliament, preceding the year one thousand six
hundred and forty nine; and Ordains process upon supplication to be summarly
granted, parties always being cited, and that without any reduction. As also,
with power to the said Commissioners to be appointed, upon the dependence of
the said complaints and process, to discharge execution upon the foresaids
Decreets in whole or in part, as they shall find just, ay and while the matter
may be determined by them. And forasmuch as by a pretended Commission for the
Exchequer, diverse Infeftments, Gifts and others, were past in the foresaids
years, one thousand six hundred and forty nine, and one thousand six hundred
and fifty; His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Declares, That all such Gifts,
Infeftments and others, are and shall be valid, excepting always new Gifts and
Dispositions of Lands and others, granted and past to His Highness prejudice,
and such other Gifts as upon the complaints of parties, shall by His Majesty's
Treasurer and Commissioners of Exchequer, be found to have been unjustly
granted or past, in prejudice of prior Gifts under His Majesty's Hand, though
not past in Exchequer. And whereas by a pretended Act of the foresaid pretended
Parliament, entitled, Act abolishing the Patronages of Kirks, all Patronages
and Presentations of Kirks, whether belonging to the King or any Laick Patron,
Presbyteries or others, were discharged, and all Acts, Gifts and Rights,
granted thereanent, Rescinded. And yet nevertheless, it was thereby declared,
That the taking away of the Patronages, should not prejudge the Patrons Rights
to the Teinds, nor weaken his Infeftment wherein the same is contained. And
that the Teithes of the Kirks, whereof the Presentations were abolished, should
belong hereritably to the Patrons, and be inserted in their Rights and
Infeftments in place of their Patronage, with power to the Patron to dispone
upon the said Teinds, in manner and with the exception contained in the said
Act. And notwithstanding that the foresaid Act and whole Parliament be declared
null; yet nevertheless, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, does by these
presents Declare, That it shall be lawful to Laick Patrons or Heretors, to
agree with the beneficed persons for Tacks or Rights of Teinds, belonging to
the said beneficed person, according to the Laws of the Kingdom; with this
provision, that the said Tacks, shall be no ways prejudicial to the Stipend
and Maintenance of the Ministers and persons to be presented, according as the
same has been already modified, or shall be modified in time coming; and that
notwithstanding of any Acts or Statutes made in the contrair. All which Acts,
His Majesty, with consent foresaid, by these presents Discharges; And in like
manner, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Declares, That as to such persons
who are presently in possession of Kirks, pertaining to the said Laick
Patronages, the said persons and Ministers shall, during their service, claim
no right nor possession to the Teinds of their said Kirks and Parochins, other
then they had formerly before the making of this Act; they having always a
sufficient maintenance allowed and granted to them, according to the Laws of
the Kingdom.

X. Act condemning the Transactions concerning the Kings Majesty, whilst He was
at Newcastle, in the years, 1646. and 1647.
THe Estates of Parliament, considering the many sad and dangerous consequences
that do accompany the neglect and contempt of lawful Authority; and that among
the other Judgments, wherewith it pleases Almighty GOD to visit such who
resist the Powers, and oppose the Commands of those entrusted by Him, as His
Vicegerents, for the Government of His People, they are ofttimes left to their
own counsels, to do that which highly provokes GOD to wrath, renders themselves
justly odious to the world, and hateful to their posterity. Whereof there is
too doolfull an experiment in an Act of the printed Records of Parliament, of
the sixteenth of January, one thousand six hundred and forty seven, entitled,
Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the Kings Majesty's Person.
Which being now taken into consideration, The Estates of Parliament do find and
Declare, That it was carried on, and concluded by a prevalent party, against
the judgment of many of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects; And that it is a most
sinful, disloyal, and unworthy Act, contrary to the will and commandment of
GOD; contary to all Laws, Divine and Humane; contary to the Duty and
Alleagiance of Subjects; contrary to all the rules of Justice, Honor,
Gratitude and Humanity; and highly reflecting on the honor of this ancient
Kingdom, and the reputation of His Majesty's good Subjects therein. And
therefore, the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, does hereby Annull and Condemn the same for ever: And Ordains it to
be expunged out of all Records, and never to be remembered again, but with due
abhorrence and detestation.

And the Estates of Parliament, conceiving themselves obliged in conscience, to
make the truth of this business, and the manner of the carrying of it, known to
the World, for the just vindication of this Kingdom, and His Majesty's dutiful
and loyal Subjects, who otherwise may seem to be comprehended and concluded in
it. They do therefore, from their certain knowledge, Declare, That even in that
Parliament (from which many of His Majesty's good Subjects were debarred, for
their affection and adherence to His Majesty's Service and Commands) there was
a considerable number of worthy Patriots, of all Estates, who, at the passing
of that base Act, gave a public testimony and dis-assent from it, which is
here Recorded for their due honor; and for which, their memory will in all
ages receive a famous celebration. And that there were diverse others, who, upon
the pretexts of Reformation and assurances of the Safety of His Majesty's
Person, being inveigled, were in the simplicity of their hearts drawn along for
the time: But shortly thereafter, being convinced of their error, did embrace
the first opportunity to expiate the same, by freely hazarding their lives and
fortunes in the year one thousand six hundred and forty eight, to reedeem His
Majesty from these restraints and dangers, which by that impious Act He was
driven into. And therefore, His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, does
Declare, That the Act of Parliament foresaid, of the sixteenth of January, one
thousand six hundred and forty seven, is not to be looked upon as the Deed of
the Kingdom, but as the Act of a few disloyal and seditious persons, who,
having upon specious, but false pretenses, screwed themselves into the
Government, did by force of Arms, keep the same; and from the conscience of
their own guiltiness, being afraid of the justice of His Majesty's Government,
did violently carry on that Act. And in further owning thereof, did, in the
said year, one thousand six hundred and forty eight, rise in Arms, in
opposition to those who endeavored to restore His Majesty to His Government,
and to relieve Him from the imprisonment and hazard He was then lying under, as
the natural effects of that unworthy transaction, so justly hereby condemned.

And for the further clearing of the sense of this Kingdom, as to that base and
treacherous Act, and the aspersions, which have been thereupon raised, as if
there had been previous Transactions and Bargains of Money for carrying on of
the same, The Estates of Parliament Declare, They do abominat the very thought
of any such thing; and that if at any time hereafter, there shall be discovery
of any such wickedness, (which they are confident GOD Almighty will in His
Justice bring to light, (if it be true) and wherein they earnestly entreat the
concurrence of all His Majesty's dutiful and loyal Subjects) The persons
guilty thereof, shall without mercy be pursued as the vildest of Traitors, and
shall be incapable of the benefit of any Act of Pardon, Oblivion, or Indemnity
for ever.

XI. Act for taking the Oath of Alleagiance, and asserting the Royal
Prerogative.
OUr Sovereign Lord, being truly sensible of the many sufferings and sad
confusions, that His dutiful and loyal Subjects have been brought under,
during these troubles; and desirous, that His Royal Government, in it is due
Administration, may be refreshing and comfortable unto them; And conceiving it
necessar for that end, and for the honor and advancement of His own Service,
the welfare and happiness of His Subjects, and the peace and quiet of this
Kingdom, That the places of public Trust (which be the Channels and Conduits
by which His Majesty's Government is conveyed unto His People) be supplied and
exerced by persons of known integrity, abilities and loyalty. Do therefore
Declare, That it is, and will be, His Majesty's Royal care, that those whom
(according to the undoubted Right of the Crown) He has, or shall think fit to
call to His Councils, or any public employments, shall be so qualified; And
that for the full satisfaction of all His good Subjects, and for removing any
scruples or jealousies, can arise upon this account, they shall before their
admittance to, or exercise of, any such Trust, give such public testimony of
their Duty and Loyalty, as may evidence to the world, they are such as the
Kingdom and all honest men and good Subjects, may justly confide in. And
therefore the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, Does Statute and Ordain, That all and whatsoever person, or
persons, who are, or shall be, nominat by His Majesty, to be His Officers of
State, of His Privy Council, Session, or Exchequer, Justice General, Admiral,
Sheriffs, Commissars, and their Deputes, and Clerks, and all Magistrates and
Council of Royal Burghs, at their admission to their several Offices, and
before they offer to exerce the same, shall take and swear the Oath of
Alleagiance, hereunto subjoyned. And also, that all other persons who shall be
required by His Majesty's Privy Council, or any having Authority from them,
shall be obliged to take and swear the same.

And since all the troubles and miseries that have overspread this Kingdom, and
almost destroyed all religious and civil, all public and private interests,
these twenty years bygone and upwards, have arisen and sprung from these
invasions, that have been made upon, and contempts done to, the Royal Authority
and Prerogative of the Crown, His Majesty conceives Himself obliged, both for
His own Royal interest, and for the public interest and peace of His people,
to be careful to prevent the like for the future. And therefore, His Majesty,
with advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that all persons, who are, or shall
be, called to any public Trust, as said is, shall, beside the taking of the
Oath of Alleagiance, be obliged before they enter to their Offices and Trusts,
to assert under their hand writing, His Majesty's Royal Prerogative, as is
expressed in the Acts past in this present Parliament, and in the manner hereunto
subjoyned: Certifying all such, as, being required, shall refuse or delay to
take the Oath of Alleagiance, they shall not only thereby render themselves
incapable of any public Trust, but be looked upon as persons disaffected to
His Majesty's Authority and Government; and such as shall refuse, or delay to
assert His Majesty's Prerogative, in manner underwritten, shall from
thenceforth be incapable of any public Trust within this Kingdom.

Follows the Oath of Alleagiance.
I For testification of my faithful obedience to my most Gracious and
redoubted Sovereign, CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Affirm, testify and declare, by this my solemn
Oath, That I acknowledge my said Sovereign only Supreme Governor of this
Kingdom, over all Persons and in all Causes; And that no Foreign Prince, Power
State or Person Civil or Ecclesiastic, has any Jurisdiction, Power or
Superiority over the same: And therefore I do utterly nenounce and forsake all
Foreign Power, Jurisdictions and Authorities; and shall at my utmost power,
defend, assist and maintain His Majesty's Jurisdiction foresaid, against all
deadly, and shall never decline His Majesty's Power and Jurisdiction, as I
shall answer to GOD.

Follows the Acknowledgement of His Majesty's Prerogative.
FOrasmuch as the Estates of Parliament of this Kingdom, by their several Acts
of the eleventh and twenty fifth of January, last, have, from the sense of
their humble duty, and in recognisance of His Majesty's just Right, Declared,
That it is an inherent Privilege of the Crown, and an undoubted part of the
Royal Prerogative of the Kings of this Kingdom, to have the sole choice and
appointment of the Officers of Estate, Privy-Councellors, and Lords of Session;
That the power of calling, holding and dissolving of Parliaments, and all
Conventions, and Meetings of the Estates, does soly reside in the Kings
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors: and that as no Parliament, can be lawfully
kept, without the special warrant and presence of the Kings Majesty, or His
Commissioner; So, no Acts, nor Statutes, to be past in any Parliament, can be
binding on the people, or have the Authority and force of Laws, without the
special approbation of His Majesty, or His Commissioner, interponed thereto at
the making thereof; That the power of Arms, making of Peace and War, and
making of Treaties and Leagues with Foreign Princes or States, or at home by
the Subjects among themselves, does properly reside in the Kings Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, and is their undoubted Right, and their's alone; And that
it is high Treason in the Subjects of this Kingdom, or any number of them, upon
whatsoever ground, to rise or continue in Arms, to maintain any Forts,
Garrisons or Strengths, to make Peace or War, or to make any Treaties or Leagues
with Foreigners, or among themselves, without His Majesty's Authority first
interponed thereto; That it is unlawful to the Subjects, of whatsoever quality
or function, to convocat, conveen or assemble themselves, for holding of
Councils, Conventions and Assemblies, to Treat, Consult and Determine in any
matters of State, Civil or Ecclesiastic (except in the ordinary Judgments) or
to make Leagues, or Bonds, upon whatsoever color or pretense, without His
Majesty's special consent and approbation had thereunto; That the League and
Covenant, and all Treaties following thereupon, and Acts or Deeds that do or
may relate thereunto, are not obligatory, nor do infer any Obligation upon this
Kingdom, or the Subjects thereof, to meddle or interpose by Arms, or any
seditious way, in any thing concerning the Religion and Government of the
Churches in England and Ireland, or in what may concern the Administration of
His Majesty's Government there; And that none of His Majesty's Subjects, should
presume, upon any pretext of any Authority whatsoever, to require the renewing
or swearing of the said League and Covenant, or of any other Covenants or
public Oaths concerning the Government of the Church or Kingdom; And that none
offer to renew or swear the same, without His Majesty's special warrant and
approbation, etc. I do conform to the Acts of Parliament aforesaid, Declare,
That I do with all humble duty acknowledge His Majesty's Royal Prerogative,
Right and Power in all the particulars, and in the manner aforementioned; and
that I do heartily give my consent thereto, by these presents: Subscribed by
me, at

XII. Act concerning the Judicial proceedings in the time of the late Usurpers.
FOrasmuch since the year of GOD, one thousand six hundred and fifty one, the
late Usurpers did take upon them to establish Judicatories, superior and
inferior, within this Nation; as Judges for Administration of Justice, in place
of the Judicatory of the Session formerly established by Law, Commissioners for
the Admirality, Sheriffs of Shires, Commissars, Justices of Peace, and other
inferior Courts. In which Courts, the people did in name of the Usurpers, or
under the notion of the Keepers of the Liberties, prosecute and defend their
several Causes and Interests, these many years past. And His Majesty,
considering that the matters agitate, pursued and concluded, were for the most
part, things of course, belonging to the ordinary Judicatories formerly
established in this Kingdom; and being unwilling that the people should be put
to any further trouble, where Matters have been acted, and Cases determined,
according to Law: Therefore, His Majesty, with consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Declares, That all and whatsoever Acts, Interloquiters, Decreets
and Sentences, made, pronounced and given forth by the said Courts, superior
and inferior, with all execution thereupon, and all execution by Horning,
Inhibition, Caption, Comprising, Poynding and others, to have been, and to be,
valid, and stand in full force, notwithstanding of the unlawfulness of the
Authority, by which these Courts were held, and the execution used: But because
the Judges or Commissioners for Administration of Justice, did sometimes
proceed in an arbitrary way, contrair to Law and Justice; and at other times,
many of them being strangers and ignorant of the Law, did proceed unwarrantably
and unjustly betwixt parties. Therefore, His Majesty, with consent foresaid,
does Declare, That whatsoever person or persons, has any just reason to
quarrel their Acts, Interloquiters, Decreets and Sentences, they are hereby
warranded and allowed to do the same, without any Reduction or Suspension,
within the space of one year, next after the down-sitting of the Session: And
if parties complainers be Minors, within the space of year and day, next after
they shall attain the age of twenty one years complete, Parties always being
lawfully cited thereto. And if any person or persons, be charged under the pain
of Horning, Suspension shall be granted to them upon Caution, or if they be not
able to find Caution, super cautione Juratoria. And if it shall be found, that
the Complainer does, without any just ground, unnecessarly vex the party
complained upon, in that case, the Lords of the Session are hereby authorized,
to determine the parties damage, and charges to be paid by the unjust
Complainer. Likeas, all Decreets before the said pretended Commissioners for
Administration of Justice, whether given in absence, or parties compearand, are
hereby allowed to be brought in question, revised and recognosced, in manner
foresaid. And whereas there be many Processes as yet depending undecided, upon
Summons and Letters raised in the said Usurpers names, the same Processes
shall be all wakned in His Majesty's Name, and be put to a final close by the
Lords of Session, as if they had been intended from the beginning, in His
Majesty's Name and Authority. And whereas, any Acts or Decreets have been made
or given forth in the Admiral Courts, or any other inferior Courts, the same
may be brought in question before the Lords of Session, in the same form and
manner as was formerly established by the Law and Practick of this Kingdom.

And forasmuch as the said Usurpers, did from time to time, nominate and
appoint Commissioners of Exchequer, having the same power to pass all sorts of
Writs, Signators and others, and to discuss Processes and Suspensions, in the
same manner as His Majesty's Treasurer and Commissioners, appointed by His
Majesty, had power to do; Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and consent
foresaid, for the good and case of His people (under the provisions
underwritten) does Declare, all and whatsoever Writs, Gifts, Signators of
whatsoever nature and quality they be of, past and exped the Privy great and
quarter Seals respective, or past according to pretended Orders for the time,
when there were no Seals, to be of full force and effect; Providing always,
that where any Signators were past in Exchequer under the Usurpers, and the
Composition paid, and yet not past the Seals, the same shall be presented and
past in Exchequer, de novo, if there be reason therefore, without any
Composition; and where Resignations only have been made upon Procuratories in
the Usurpers time, Signators may without new resignation pass thereupon. It is
also provided, that this Act be no ways extended to new Gifts of Lands, Teinds
and others, past to the prejudice of His Majesty, nor to Gifts of Bastardie, or
ultimus Haeres, unless the same be of new ratified and approven by His
Majesty's Treasurer and Commissioners of Exchequer, nor to any other Gifts,
Confirmations, Charters upon Resignation, where the said Gifts, Confirmations
and Charters were made and granted, in prejudice of any person or persons, who
had former Rights granted unto them by His Majesty, or His Royal Father of
blessed memory, under their Seals, or past their Royal Hands. And generally
providing, that all and whatsoever Gifts, Grants, Commissions, Charters and
other Writs whatsoever, past in Exchequer, and through the Seals in the
Usurpers time, and all and whatsoever Acts and Sentences pronounced and given
forth by them, shall, and may, be called in question at the instance of any of
the people, who may pretend to have been unjustly wronged and prejudged
thereby: And that upon complaints to be given in to His Majesty's Treasurer and
Commissioners of Exchequer, wherein they shall have power to determine, as they
shall think just and reasonable.

XIII. Act and offer of Forty thousand pounds Sterling, to be paid to the
Kings Majesty yearly, during His lifetime, by this Kingdom.
THe Estates of Parliament, taking to their consideration, the great happiness
this Kingdom has in former time enjoyed, under the Government of His Majesty's
Royal Ancestors, with the miseries and bondage, which by the neglect and
contempt of the Authority, and commands of His Royal Father of blessed memory,
it has groaned under, during these twenty three years troubles. And that the
Kings Majesty, has been graciously pleased (notwithstanding of all the
provocations given to Himself and His Royal Father) to evidence His affection
and favor to this His ancient Kingdom, comforting and reviving it, by the
Rays of His Royal Government and Authority, under the protection of which, the
just Liberties, Freedom and Interest of this Kingdom, and the Subjects thereof,
are, and can only be, secured; Do with all humble duty, thankfulness and
sincerity, acknowledge His Majesty's unparalled Grace and Goodness. And that
as their happiness does depend upon the Safety of His Majesty's person, and
the establishment and exercise of His Royal Authority and Greatness: So this
Kingdom, will be ready at all occasions, to offer their Lives and Fortunes
against all deadly, in every cause, wherein His Majesty's Person, Authority,
Prerogative, or Government may be concerned. And seeing, for the due
establishment of His Majesty's Authority, and settling and securing the peace of
this Kingdom, His Majesty may have occasion for some time, to raise and keep
some Forces within the Kingdom; and that the late troubles, will at present,
necessitate a greater expense, for support of the Royal Government then
formerly, and that His Majesty has signified His resolution, not to raise any
more Sess; Therefore, and from the due sense of their duty and obligations, the
Estates of Parliament, Do in name of this Kingdom, make humble and cheerful
offer to His Majesty, of a yearly Annuity, of Forty thousand pounds Sterling,
during all the days of His Majesty's lifetime; which they pray may be long and
prosperous, that this Kingdom may have further occasion, to let the world know,
they do above all things, hate the very thoughts of disloyalty, and that no
people under Heaven, can express more duty and obedience to the Authority and
Commands of their Sovereign, then they are, and will be ready to do.

XIV. Act for raising the Annuity of Forty thousand pounds Sterling, granted
to His MAjESTY.
THe Estates of Parliament, in pursuance of their Act, of the date the twenty
two day of this instant; whereby they have made offer to His Majesty of the sum
of Forty thousand pounds Sterling yearly, during all the days of His
Majesty's lifetime, toward the entertainment of any such Forces as His Majesty
shall think fit to raise and keep up within this Kingdom; or otherwise toward
the defraying of the necessary charge of His Government, according to His Royal
pleasure; Appoints and Ordains the said sum of Forty thousand pounds Sterling,
being Four hundred fourscore thousand pounds Scots money, to be raised, levied,
collected and paid, in manner underwritten; viz. Ninety six thousand pounds
Scots thereof to be raised yearly off the Inland Salt and Foreign Commodities
aftermentioned; To wit, threescore twelve pounds Scots upon ilk Tun of Spanish
Wine, Renish Wine, Cannary, Malvesie, and all other Wines of the like kind;
forty eight pounds money foresaid, upon ilk Tun of French Wine, and twelve
pennies money foresaid, upon ilk pint of Vinegar; six pounds upon ilk Barrel of
imported Soap; forty shillings upon ilk Boll of Foreign Beysalt, and Salt
upon Salt, Linlithgow Measure; twenty shillings upon ilk Boll of imported
White-salt, and fifteen shillings upon ilk Boll of Inland Salt, measure
foresaid: But prejudice nevertheless to the present Tacks-men of the Foreign
and Inland Salt, during the time set to them by the Commissioners of Excise, to
exact the Rates therein mentioned: twelve pennies money foresaid, upon ilk
pound of Tobacco, imported by the Natives of this Kingdom, from the Tobacco
Plantations, and three shillings upon ilk pound imported thence by Foreigners.
Item three shillings upon each pound of Tobacco, imported by the Natives of
this Kingdom, from any other place then the foresaids Plantations, and six
shillings upon ilk pound imported by Foreigners; twelve shillings upon ilk Ell
of Cloth imported into this Kingdom above six pounds the Ell, and six
shillings upon ilk Ell of imported Cloth at or below six pounds the Ell; six
shillings the Ell upon all sort of imported Searges; three shillings upon ilk
Ell of Castilians, or other imported worstead Stuffs whatsoever; three
shillings upon ilk Ell of all sorts of imported hair Stuffs whatsoever; three
pounds twelve shillings upon the Piece of ilk Baver-hat; one pound six
shillings upon ilk Demy-baver and Vigon, and twelve shillings upon the Piece of
all other sorts of Hats imported into this Kingdom; one pound sixteen shillings
upon the dozen of all imported worstead Stockins; twelve shillings upon the
pair of double Stag-gloves; six shillings upon the pair of single Stags and
Cordivans; three shillings upon ilk pair of Kids, Sheep and Lamb Leather, and
all other sort of Gloves; one pound sixteen shillings upon ilk Trunk of the
largest size; one pound four shillings upon ilk Trunk of middling size; twelve
shillings money foresaid upon ilk Leather Male of the largest size; six
shillings upon ilk Leather Male of middling size, imported into this Kingdom,
and one shilling, all Scots money foresaid, upon the pound value of all other
Foreign Commodities (except the particulars after excepted) to be paid by the
Retailer: that is to say, The first Buyer of the said Commodities from the
Importer or Salt-maker of Inland Salt, or by the said Importer or Salt-makers,
for what they shall either make use of themselves, or sell out in Parcels. Item
twenty shillings upon ilk Horse; eighteen shillings upon ilk Cow, and two
shillings money foresaid upon ilk Sheep imported into this Kingdom, to be paid
by the Importer thereof. The particular ordering and regulating of the which
Excise of the Commodities abovewritten, is hereby remitted to the Commissioners
of Excise, who are to put the same in Farm or Collection to the best avail.

Provided always, likeas it is hereby expressly provided, that the Foreign
Commodities aftermentioned; viz. All Salt employed upon Barrell'd fish, whether
transported out of this Kingdom or made use of within the same; All Pitch, Tar,
Cordage, Cork, Nets, Iron, Copper, Brass, Tinn unmade, Potashes, Oil, and all
other ingredients for Soap; all Flax, Hemp and Hops, untwined Silk; all
Materials for dying; all Deals, Trees, Stings for Coupers, Knapl, Wainscot,
Planks, and Oak-wood whatsoever for shipping; all Barrelstaffs or Materials
whatsoever for fishing; all Suggars brought from the Plantations in
Scots-bottomes; all unfined Suggar, brought from any place: As also, all
Materials for Manufactures, as Spanish and Sigovia Wool and others, are and
shall be free of any Excise imposed by virtue of this present Act.

And the remainder of the foresaid four hundred fourscore thousand pounds Scots
money, being three hundred eighty four thousand pounds, to be raised out of the
Bear, Ale, Aquavitae and Strongwaters, at the rate of two merks Scots upon ilk
Boll of Malt, brewed and sold within this Kingdom; three shillings money
foresaid upon ilk pint of Aquavitae or Strongwaters not made of Malt, brewed
and sold within this Kingdom; six shillings upon ilk pint of Foreign Aquavitae
or Strongwaters, and twelve shillings upon ilk Barrel of imported Bear: And
what this imposition shall be short of the quota of Excise, imposed upon the
several Shires and Burghs by the List underwritten, the same to be supplied by
the said Shires and Burghs, in lieu of the Malt brewed in their own houses, in
manner after-mentioned. Likeas, it is hereby declared, that the said several
Shires and Burghs shall be, and are by these presents liable in the payment of
the respective Monthly proportions underwritten, viz. The Sheriffdom of
Edinburgh principal (the Town of Edinburgh and pertinents excepted) in the sum
of two thousand six hundred threescore four pounds, Scots money foresaid,
monthly. The Town of Edinburgh, comprehending Cannongate, South and
North-Lieth, with the whole pendicles and pertinents, in the sum of three
thousand seven hundred thirty two pounds. The Sheriffdom of Haddingtoun, and
Burghs within the same, in the sum of one thousand six hundred fourscore
fifteen pounds. The Sheriffdom of Berwick, comprehending the Bailery of
Lauderdaile and Burghs within the same, in the sum of six hundred ten pounds
sixteen shillings. The Sheriffdom of Roxburgh and Burghs within the same, in
the sum of seven hundred fourscore four pounds sixteen shillings. The
Sheriffdom of Selkirk and Burghs within the same, in the sum of one hundred
fifty three pounds ten shillings. The Sheriffdom of Peibles and Burghs within
the same, in the sum of one hundred thirty seven pounds ten shillings. The
Sheriffdom of Lanerick and Burghs within the same, ( Glasgow excepted) in the
sum of nine hundred threescore eight pounds eight shillings. The Town of
Glasgow, in the sum of one thousand seven hundred forty four pounds four
shillings. The Sheriffdom of Dumfrieze and Burghs within the same, in the sum
of five hundred threescore sixteen pounds. The Sheriffdom of Wigtoun and Burghs
within the same, in the sum of two hundred four pounds twelve shillings. The
Stewartrie of Kirkcudburgh and Burghs within the same, in the sum of three
hundred forty eight pounds. The Sheriffdom of Air and Burghs within the same,
in the sum of one thousand six hundred threescore fifteen pounds sixteen
shillings. The Sheriffdom of Dunbartoun and Burghs within the same, in the sum
of one hundred fourscore fourteen pounds. The Sheriffdom of Bute and Burghs
within the same, in the sum of fifty seven pounds. The Sheriffdom of Renfrew
and Burghs within the same, in the sum of four hundred fifty seven pounds four
shillings. The Sheriffdom of Stirling and Burghs within the same, in the sum of
nine hundred twenty pounds eight shillings. The Sheriffdom of Linlithgow and
Burghs within the same, in the sum of seven hundred fourscore nineteen pounds
four shillings. The Sheriffdom of Pearth and Burghs within the same, in the sum
of two thousand three hundred threescore fourteen pounds sixteen shillings. The
Sheriffdom of Kincairden and Burghs within the same, in the sum of three
hundred threescore three pounds twelve shillings. The Sheriffdom of Aberdeen
and Burghs within the same, in the sum of two thousand five hundred and
eighteen pounds nineteen shillings. The Sheriffdom of Bamff and Burghs within
the same, in the sum of three hundred fourscore seven pounds three shillings.
The Sheriffdom of Innerness and Burghs within the same, in the sum of six
hundred fourscore fourteen pounds eight shillings. The Sheriffdoms of Elgin and
Nairn and Burghs within the same, including that part of the Paroch of
Ferin-tosh, which pertains to the Sheriffdom of Nairn, in the sum of five
hundred thirty six pounds four shillings. The Sheriffdom of Cromarty and Burghs
within the same, in the sum of thirty pounds. The Sheriffdom of Argyle and
Burghs within the same, in the sum of one hundred fourscore thirteen pounds
sixteen shillings. The Sheriffdoms of Fife and Kinross and Burghs within the
same, in the sum of four thousand fourscore eight pounds eight shillings. The
Sheriffdom of Forfar and Burghs within the same, except as is after excepted,
in the sum of one thousand fourscore four pounds four shillings. The Town and
Paroch of Dundee, with the Miln and Miln-lands thereof, in one thousand one
hundred threescore two pounds four shillings. The Sheriffdom of Sutherland and
Burghs within the same, in the sum of threescore twelve pounds twelve
shillings. The Sheriffdom of Kaithness and Burghs within the same, in the sum
of one hundred thirty three pounds four shillings. The Sheriffdoms of Orknay
and Zetland and Burghs within the same, in the sum of one hundred fourscore
thirteen pounds sixteen shillings. The Sheriffdom of Clackmannan and Burghs
within the same, in the sum of two hundred forty two pounds two shillings. The
Sheriffdom of Ross and Burghs within the same, in the sum of two hundred and
four pounds.


And if the Excise imposed upon the Inland Salt and Foreign Commodities, shall
exceed the foresaid sum of ninety six thousand pounds, appointed by this Act to
be raised off the same, then the superplus to be employed and made use of, by
such as shall be entrusted by His Majesty with that affair, for the relief of
such Shires and Burghs, as they shall find to be overburdened, or
disproportionat by the foresaid List. And for the better and more speedy
inbringing and payment of the said three hundred and eighty four thousand
pounds, the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, nominates, appoints, and ordains the persons underwritten, to be
Commissioners within the respective Shires and Burghs for regulating, ordering
and uplifting of the said Excise; viz.

Edinburgh.
For the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh principal, the Town of Edinburgh and
pertinents excepted, (...) Lord Ramsay, Walter Lord Torphichen, James Lord
Forrester, Sir James Fouls of Collingtoun, the Lairds of Haltoun elder and
younger, Sir John Wanchop of Nidrie, Sir Alexander Dalmahoy of that ilk, Sir
John Nicolson of Poltoun, Sir James Dundas of Arnistoun, Sir John Couper of
Gogar, Adam Cunningham of Woodhall, George Fouls of Ravelston, Sir John Fouls
his son, Mr. John Young of Leny, Mr. Robert Prestoun of Prestoun, Patrick
Hamiltoun of Prestoun, Sir William Murray Master of work, Mr. Lawrence Scot of
Bavilla, James Boyd of Temple, Sir Robert Murray of Cameron, Mr. Alexander
Fouls of Ratho, Sir John Smith of Grothill, Edward Edgar of Peper-milne, John
Biggar of Wolmet, (...) Doby of Stainie-hill, Mr. William Little of Over
Libertoun, Sir John Gibson of Adestoun, Mark Kerse younger of Cockpen, Mr.
Robert Dalgleish of Louristoun, Sir Thomas Thomson of Dudinstoun, Sir William
Murray of Newtoun, Henry Elphingston of Calderhall, (...) Ramsay of Whythill,
Thomas Craig of Rickertoun, William Murray of Long-harmistoun, Alexander
Calderwood in Dalkeith, the eldest Baily of Musleburgh for the time being.

For the Town of Edinburgh, the Magistrates and Council for the time being.

Haddingtoun.
For the Sheriffdom of Haddingtoun and Burghs within the same, William Earl of
Roxburgh, John Earl of Haddingtoun, John Earl of Tweddal, Alexander Viscount of
Kingstoun, John Lord Belhaven, Sir Robert Douglas of Blaikerstoun, (...)
Hepburn of Wauchtoun, (...) Ruthven of Dunglass, Sir Peter Wedderburne of
Gosfurd, Frances Kinloch of Gilmertoun, Mr. Alexander Hay of Baro, Mr. John Hay
of Aberlady, Mr. Cornelius Inglis of East-barnes, James Lawder Baily in Dunbar,
William Seatoun Provost of Haddingtoun, Sir James Hay of Lindplumb, Sir Robert
Hepburn of Keith, George Cockburn Tutor of Ormestoun, Sir Thomas Hamiltoun of
Prestoun, Sir Alexander Morison of Preston-grange, John Seatoun of
Saintgermans, Sir James Durham of Luffness, George Hoom of Foord, (...)
Leadingtoun of Saltcoats, (...) Hepburn of Smeitoun, (...) Baily of
North-Berwick, Alexander Cockburn.

Linlithgow.
For the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow and Burghs within the same, William Duke of
Hamiltoun, George Earl of Linlithgow, Walter Lord Torphichan, Sir Archibald
Stirling of Carden, Thomas Drummond of Rickertoun, Sir James Stewart of
Kirkhil, Mr. Archibald Campbel of Kinpount, Mr. John Fairholm of Craigiehall,
William Sharp of Houstoun, Robert Hamiltoun of Dechmond, Sir Robert Drummond of
Meidhop, George Drummond of Carloury, James Dundas of Mortoun, Mr. John Stewart
of Ketlestoun, Mr. Thomas Hamiltoun of Parklie, Mr. John Hay of Woodcockdeal,
Mr. Andrew Keir in Borroustonness, Mr. James Hamiltoun of Westport, Thomas
Hamiltoun of Bathgate, Patrick Murray of Levingstoun, Mr. William Sandilands of
Hilderstoun, Alexander Levingstoun of Craigingall, such of the Magistrates of
Linlithgow for the time being as are not Brewers, Archibald Wilson in
Queensferry.

Pearth.
For the Sheriffdom of Pearth and Burghs within the same, James Marquess of
Montrose, John Earl of Athol, James Earl of Tulibardin, Patrick Earl of
Kinghorn, David Viscount of Stormont, James Lord Drummond, James Lord Couper,
David Lord Lour, David Lord Madertie, Thomas Lord Ruthven, James Lord Rollo,
Patrick Mr. of Gray, Mungo Murray of Gairth, Sir John Drummond of Burn-bank,
Sir John Moncrief of that ilk, John Campbel of Glenurquhay, Sir John Chisholm
of Cromlicks, Sir James Drummond of Machany, Sir Thomas Stewart of Gairntullie,
Sir William Stewart of Innereytie, Sir George Prestoun of Valefield, Sir Robert
Nairn of Strathourd, Sir William Graham of Braco, Sir James Merser of Adie, Sir
Gilbert Stewart of Pilcaik, Robert Murray of Abercairny, Alexander Meinzies of
that ilk, Thomas Meinzies of Inchaiffray, Patrick Graham of Inchbraikie, Mr.
John Nairn of Muckersie, Robert Meinzies of Glassie, Robert Buchannan of that
ilk, Mr. David Kinloch of Bandoch, Henry Stirling of Ardoch, John Kinloch of
Gourdie, George Hay of Kirkland, George Hay of Balhousie, Lawrence Oliphant of
Bacheltoun, William Murray fiar of Ochtertyre, Patrick Raitray of Craighall,
John Campbel of Fordie, William Blair of Kinfains, Robert Murray of Buchantie,
William Ogilvie of Mury, David Drummond of Innermey, Henry Murray of Lochlene,
Andrew Tosheoch of Monivaird, George Graham of Monzy, Patrick Stewart of
Ballenhane, Mungo Graham of Gorthy, Robert Campbel of Glenlyon, Alexander
Robertson of Strowan, Alexander Stewart of Fosse, John Nairn of Seggiedene,
John Blair of Edblair, John Stewart of Sheirglass, Alexander Robertson of Lud,
John Henderson of Brabster, Duncan Robertson of Auchleikis, John Stewart of
Belnakeilie, Andrew Small of Dirninean, Alexander Robertson of Douney, James
Ogilvie of Muretoun, Peter Hay of Leyes younger, Patrick Hay of Pitfour
younger, Donald Robertson of Belnacraig, (...) Spalding of Askintullie, Mr.
John Patterson of Benchellis, William Prestoun of Valefield younger, Mr. Hugh
Moncrief of Tibbermalloch, Sir David Carmichael of Balmedie, Hugh Mitchel of
Kinkarrochie, John Robertson of Fornocht, Mr. John Drummond of Lenoch, James
Gourlay in Culross, the Provost, Baylies, Dean of Gild, and Treasurer of
Pearth, for the time being, the Baylies of Culross for the time, Gilbert
Campbel of Keathick, John Graham of Balgown, Sir Lawrence Oliphant of Gask,
George Campbel of Crunane, Gilbert Ramsay of Bamff, William Murray of Keillor,
Mitchel Balfour of Pirmaden, (...) Campbel of Glenampil, James Gray of
Balligerny, Thomas Turnbull of Bogemilne, William Kinmont of Hill, Alexander
Lindsey of Evelick, George Murray of Tibbermure, Mr. Alexander Malloch of
Cairnies, William Moncrief of Kintullo, Mr. John Moncrief of Culfargie, John
Moncrief of Easter-Moncrief, Sir William Auchinleck of Balmano, William Bruce
of Fingask, Robert Graham of Cairny, Patrick Butter of Gormak, Sir Alexander
Blair of Balthiack.

Roxburgh.
For the Sheriffdom of Roxburgh and Burghs within the same, William Earl of
Roxburgh, John Earl of Haddingtoun, (...) Earl of Lothian, (...) Lord
Cranstoun, Sir Archibald Dowglass of Cavers, Sir Gilbert Elliot of Stobs, Sir
William Scot of Harden, Sir Gidcon Scot of Haychester, Sir Thomas Ker of
Cavers, Robert Ker of Gaitshaw, Robert Ker of Crailinhall, Henry Mackdowgal of
Mackcairstoun, John Rutherfoord of Edgerstoun, Mr. Gilbert Elliot of Craigend,
Patrick Scot of Thirlestain, John Ker of Elishuch, James Linlithgow of
Drygrange, William Ker of Sunderlandhall, Henry Ker of Lintoun, John Turnbul of
Minto, Robert Pringle of Stitchel, John Scot of Gorrenberry, Robert Ker of
Graden, Robert Scot of Harwood, Robert Pringle of Cliftoun, Mr. John Scot of
Langshaw, Alexander Done of Newtoun, Gavin Elliot of Grange, Andrew Ker of
Littledain, and Patrick Done John Rutherfood Provost of Jedburgh, and John
Rutherfoord Baily.

Selkirk.
For the Sheriffdom of Selkirk and Burghs within the same, John Murray of
Philliphauch, Thomas Scot of Whitslaid, Sir Thomas Ker of Fairnely, the Lord
of Whitebank elder, John Riddel of Haining, William Scot of Sintoun, William
Scot of Hartwood-myres, William Scot of Tushelaw, John Murray of Eschesteil,
John Scot of Woll, Patrick Murray of Helmburne, Thomas Scot of Todrig, John
Scot of Langhop, Andrew Scot of Bowhill, Mr. John Angus and Robert Elliot in
Selkirk.

Lanerick.
For the Sheriffdom of Lanerick and Burghs within the same, William Duke of
Hamiltoun, (...) Earl of Carnwath, (...) Lord Fleming, Sir James Lockhart of
Lee, Sir William Bailie of Lamingtoun, Sir Robert Hamiltoun of Silvertounhill,
William Lindsey of Covingtoun, Sir Thomas Hamiltoun of Prestoun, Sir James
Murehead of Lachop, Sir William Weir of Stane-byres, Sir James Hamiltoun of
Orbestoun, Gavin Hamiltoun of Raploch, James Hamiltoun of Dalel, Sir Walter
Stewart of Allentoun, Alexander Hamiltoun of Haggs, John Ballentyne of
Corehouse, Sir James Carmichael of Bonnietoun, James Hamiltoun of Woodhall,
Thomas Stewart of Cultness, James Stewart of Turrens, William Inglis of
Eastsheil, Alexander Meinies of Culterawes, John Roberton of Earnock, Mr.
Archibald Fleming of Fairne, Mr. ARchibald Roberton of Bedlay, Claud Bailie of
Baigbie, William Lindsay of Belstain, Robert Chancellor of Sheilhill, William
Bailie of Littlegil, James Murehead of Bradysholme, John Weir of Clouburn,
James Cleland of that ilk, Samuel Lockhart of (...) Mr. John Hamiltoun of
Grene, Walter Lockhart of Kirktoun, James Hamiltoun Commissar of Lanerick, Mr.
Henry Scot of Mosfennane, and James Threipland of (...) two of the Magistrates
of Lanerick for the time being, and two of the Magistrates of Rutherglen for
the time being.

For the Town of Glasgow, which is excepted out of the Sheriffdom of Lanerick,
the Magistrates and Council for the time being.

Drumfries.
For the Sheriffdom of Drumfries and Burghs within the same, Robert Earl of
Nithisdail, James Earl of Queensberry, Gavin Earl of Carnwath, James Earl of
Annandail, William Lord Drumlangrig, Robert Fergusson of Craigdonnoch, James
Hunter of Ballagen, Sir Robert Murray of Glenmure, Robert Dalel younger of
Glenie, James Crightoun of St. Leonards, Robert Maxwel of Cairnselloch, Gilbert
Richart of Barskinning, William Douglas of Mortoun, James Johnstoun of Corcheid
younger, Sir James Johnstoun of Westerhall, John Irwing, Provost of Drumfries,
James Greir Tutor of Lag, Ambrose Johnstoun of Podein, John Scot of Newburgh,
Christopher Johnstoun of Burnegleif, Hugh Sinclair of Inglestoun.

Air.
For the Sheriffdom of Air and Burghs within the same, William Earl of
Glencairn, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, Hugh Earl of Eglintoun, John Earl
of Lowdoun, William Earl of Drumfries, James Lord Kilmares, Alexander Lord
Montgomery, John Lord Machline, (...) Lord Creightoun, Allan Lord Cathcart,
William Lord Boyd, John Lord Bargenie, William Lord Cochrane, William Master of
Cochrane, Sir Robert Montgomery of Skelmorlie Baronet, Sir David Cunningham of
Robertland Baronet, John Blair of that ilk, Sir William Moor of Rowaland,
Robert Montgomery of Hessilheid, James Dunlop of that ilk, David Montgomery of
Langshaw, Robert Ker younger of Kersland, John Cunningham of Bedland, David
Boil of Kelburne, John Montfod of that ilk, Sir Hugh Campbel of Cesnock, Sir
James Dalrimple of Stair, John Chambers of Gaitgirth, John Cochran of Ochiltry,
David Boswel of Auchinleck, James Crightoun of St. Leonards, David Blair of
Adamtoun, James Crightoun of Castlemains, Gilbert Ritchie of Barskimine, (...)
Cunningham of Privick, William Campbel of Glaisnock, (...) Kennedie of Culen,
(...) Mure of Achindrain, (...) Kennedie of Kirkmichael, Thomas Kennedie of
Balterssan, (...) Boyd of Trochreg, James Crawford of Ardmillon, and (...)
Kennedie of Cragoch, the Provost and Baylies of Air for the time being, and the
Provost and two first Baylies of Irwin for the time being.

Dunbartoun.
For the Sheriffdom of Dunbartoun and Burghs within the same, (...) Lord
Fleming, Sir John Colquhoun of Luss, John Naper of Kilmahew, Robert Hamiltoun
of Barnes, Sir Humphrey Colquhoun of Balvey, William Bontin of Ardoch, John
Semple younger of Fulwood, Aulay Mackaulay fiar of Ardincapill, Archibald
Stewart of Scottistoun, James Fleming of Oxgang, Mr. James Fleming of Baloche,
Major George Noble, Walter Watson, John Cunningham, Robert Watson, and John
Smollat Burgesses of Dunbartoun.

Argyle.
For the Sheriffdom of Argyle and Burghs within the same, the Lord of
Glenurquhay, Sir Dougal Campbel of Auchinbreck, Donald Campbel of Barbreck, Sir
James Lawmont of Inneryne, Alexander Macknachtan of Dunderave, Archibald
Campbel of Kilmun, Sir Hugh Campbel of Caddel, John Mackdowgal of Dunolichie,
Colein Campbel of Lochnazel, Duncan Stewart of Apyne, Murdoch Macklean of
Lochbowie, Hector Macklean of Corloisk, Archibald Campbel of Glencarradel,
(...) Mackdonnal of Largy, Hector Mackaleister of Loup, Colein Maclauchlan
Captain of Inshconnel, Archibald Campbel Factor of Ila, Dougal Campbel of Bail,
Duncan Campbel Baily of Kintyre, the Provost and Baylies of Inverary for the
time being, and George Campbel.

Fife and Kinross.
For the Sheriffdoms of Fife and Kinross and Burghs within the same, John Earl
of Crawford Lindsey Lord high Treasurer, John Earl of Rothes President of the
Council, (...) Earl of Kelly, (...) Earl of VVeymes, (...) Viscount of
Stormont, (...) Lord Balgony, (...) Lord Sinclair, (...) Lord Burghly, (...)
Lord Melvil, William Scot of Ardross, Sir Philip Anstruther of that ilk, Sir
Thomas Gourlay of Kincraig, Sir David Auchmouty of that ilk, Sir John VVeymes
of Bogic, Mr. Alexander Mertein of Strainery, Sir Alexander Gibson of Dury,
Patrick Lindsey of VVormestoun, Sir John Lesly of Newtoun. (...) Young of
Kirtoun, Sir Henry VVardlaw of Pitrevy, Sir James Hacket of Pitfirrin, (...)
Arnot of Fairny, Mr. David Balfour of (...) Andrew Murray of Pitlochie, Sir
Andrew Ramsay of Abbotshall, William Pitcairn of Forfar, (...) Lindsey of
Dowhill, Alexander Bruce Brother to the Earl of Kincairn, (...) Lindsey of
Mouth, John Ramsay of Brackmont, (...) Lindsey of Kirkforfar, James Clerk of
Pettincrief, Alexander Bruce of Broomhall, Andrew Carstairs Burgess of St.
Andrews, William Simson Burgess of Disert, John Williamson Burgess of
Kirkaldy, George Turnbull Burgess of Couper, Alexander Black Burgess of
Anstruther Easter, Peter Oliphant Burgess of Anstruther VVester, James Moncrief
Burgess of Crail, David Seatoun Burgess of Bruntisland, Thomas Thomson Burgess
of Innerkeithen, Robert Cunningham Burgess of Kinghorn, Peter Walker Burgess of
Dumfermling, Thomas Peacock Burgess of Kilreny, and Walter Airth Burgess of
Pettenweyme.

VVigtoun.
For the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun and Burghs within the same, James Earl of
Galloway, Alexander Lord Garlies, Andrew Agnew appearand of Lochnau, Thomas
Dunbar of Mochrum, Patrick Mackdowald of Logan, William Stewart of
Castilstewart, Uchtrick Mackdoual of Freuch, William Gordoun of Craichlaw, Sir
James Dalrimple of Stair, David Dumbar of Baldon, Alexander Macculloch of
Ardval, John Murray of Brughtoun, John Howstoun of Drummastoun, William Stewart
of Egirness, George Stewart of Tuderghie, William Macguffock of Alterry, Thomas
Stewart of Glentark, Richard Murray of Brughtoun younger, John Macculloch of
Myrtoun.

Stewartry of Kirckudburgh.
For the Stewartry of Kirckudburgh and Burghs within the same, Robert Earl of
Nithisdail, James Earl of Galloway, Robert Viscount of Kenmure, Alexander Lord
Garlies, John Lord Herris, John Lord Kirkudburgl, Robert Master of Herris, John
Herris of Maybie, Sir James Murray of Babertoun, David Macbrair of Newark,
William Maxwel of Kirkhouse, Mr. Alexander Spotswood of Sweetheart, Mr. Thomas
Hay of Lands, James Maxwel of Braikenside, Roger Gordoun of Troquhen, William
Gordoun of Schirrirners, Mr. William Gordoun of Earlestoun, Robert Maxwel of
Orchartoun, William Mackleland of Collin, George Maxwel of Munshes, Richard
Murray of Broughtoun, Alexander Mackghie of Balmackghie, William Greirson of
Bargaton, John Corsan of Sannick, Gilbert Brown of Kempiltoun, John Dunbar of
Machirmore, John Mure Tutor of Cassincarie, Patrick Mackie of Larg, Andrew
Herroun of Kiruchtrie, and John Ewart of Mullack, the Provost and Baylies of
Kirkudburgh for the time being, and the Provost of Newgalloway for the time
being.

Peibles.
For the Sheriffdom of Peibles and Burghs within the same, John Earl of
Traquair, John Earl of Tweddal, the Lairds of Blackbarronie elder and younger,
William Murray of Stainhope, Sir John Vaitch of Daick, John Vaitch his son,
Sir Michael Naesmith of Possa, Sir Robert Murray of Skirling, Robert Hunter of
Polmude, William Horsburgh of Horsburgh, Walter Murray of Halmyre, Adam
Murray of Cardon, James Geddes of Kirkurd, John Murray of Romano, Mr. John
Dickson of VVitsleed, Alexander Bailie of Flemingtoun-milne, Mr. John Hay of
Haystoun, George Tait of Pirne, Mr. William Burnet of Cringeltie, George Brown
of Scotstoun, William Brown of Stevnson, James Lawson of Cairnmure, William
Goven of Cardrona, (...) Hamiltoun of Caldcoat.

Bute.
For the Sheriffdom of Bute and Burghs within the same, William Duke of
Hamiltoun, Sir James Stewart Sheriff of Bute, Dougal Stewart his son, Hector
Bannatine of Beams, Ninian Stewart of Kilcatten, Ninian Stewart of Ashboag,
John Stewart of Ardinho, John Hamiltoun Baily of Arran, William Hamiltoun of
Coats, James Stewart of Kiniwhinlick, and John Glask of Branser, the Provost
and Baylies of Rothsay for the time being.

Stirline.
For the Sheriffdom of Stirline and Burghs within the same, William Duke of
Hamiltoun, James Marquess of Montrose, (...) Earl of VVigtoun, James Earl of
Callender, (...) Lord Fleming, James Lord Forrester, Alexander Levingstoun
Nevoy to the Earl of Callender, Sir William Levingstoun of VVestquarter, Sir
Robert Elphingstoun of Quarrel, Normand Levingstoun of Milnehil, Mr. Andrew
Oswald of Dalderse, John Rollo of VVoodside, William Bruce of Newtoun, Thomas
Elphingstoun of Catherhal, John Murray of Polmais, James Seatoun of Touch, Sir
John Rollo of Bannackburne, Sir Charles Erskin of Alva, William Stirline of
Herbertshire; Alexander Monro of Bearcrofts, Sir James Levingstoun of Kilsith,
(...) Hamiltoun of Pardewie, John Stirline of Bankel, Sir George Stirline of
Keir, Sir Mungo Stirline of Glorat, (...) Buchannan of that ilk, Alexander
Glass of Coltinghoofe, Sir John Stirline of Carden younger, Walter Leckie of
Deshors, John Leckie of that ilk, Alexander Cunningham of Bowhan, and Mr.
Alexander Nairn of Easter-Greenyards, the Provost Baylies, Dean of Gild, and
Treasurer of the Town of Stirline for the time being.

Bamff.
For the Sheriffdom of Bamff and Burghs within the same, William Earl of
Marshal, (...) Earl of Findlater, Walter Ogilvy of Boyne, Sir John Gordoun of
Park, Sir Alexander Urquhart of Dunlugus, William Innes of Kinermonie, Mr. John
Abercrombie of Glassock, George Gordoun of Thornbank, Alexander Garden of
Troup, James Innes of Auchrosk, Sir Alexander Abercrombie of Birkinboge,
William Dalgarno of Blackwater, and Alexander Ogilvie of Kempcairn, The Provost
and Baylies of the Town of Bamff for the time being, and the Baylies of Culen
for the time being.

Sutherland.
For the Sheriffdom of Sutherland and Burghs within the same, (...) Earl of
Sutherland, George Lord Strathnaver, (...) Lord Rae, Alexander Lord Duffus,
Robert Gordoun of Langdail, Sir Robert Gordoun of Embo, Robert Gray of Skibo,
Robert Gordoun of Carrol, Hugh Macky of Scowry, Angus Macky of Melnies, John
Sutherland of Clyne, William Gordoun of Dalphollie, the Provost of Dornoche for
the time being, and Alexander Gordoun Burgess there.

Clackmannan.
For the Sheriffdom of Clackmannan and Burghs within the same, Henry Bruce of
Clackmannan, Sir Charles Erskin of Alva, Mr. Robert Bruce of Schanbodie, John
Nicolson of Dillicultrie, David Bruce of Kennet, William Stirline of
Herbertshire, Mr. Thomas Naper Baily in Allaway, Patrick Burn of Sheirdel and
John Keirie in Allaway.

Elgin.
For the Sheriffdom of Elgin and Burghs within the same, Alexander Earl of
Murray, Alexander Lord Duffus, James Grant of Freuchie, Sir Robert Innes of
that ilk, Thomas Mackeinie of Pluscardin, Sir Robert Innes of Muirtoun, James
Brodie of that ilk, Robert Cuming of Altar, Walter Kinnaird of Cubin, Sir
Alexander Innes of Cokstoun, Sir Robert Dunbar of Grainghil, John Stewart of
Newtoun, Alexander Dowglass of Speiney, Alexander Tulloch of Tannachie, David
Dunbar of Dunfail, George Innes of Caldcoats, John Grant of Ballandolloch,
Patrick Grant of Achehangin, William Grant of Cardels, James Grant of
Achernick, the Provost and two Baylies of the Burgh of Elgin for the time
being, the Provost and eldest Baily of the Burgh of Forres for the time being,

Innerness.
For the Sheriffdom of Innerness and Burghs within the same, the Earl of
Murray, the Earl of Seafort, James Grant of Freuchie, Lauchlan Mackintosh Uncle
to the Lord of Mackintosh, John Forbes of Cullodin, Hugh Fraser of Belladrum,
Alexander Mackintosh younger of Connedge, Hugh Fraser of Foyer, Donald
Mackintosh of Oldourie, Mr. Roderick Mackeinie of Kilmure, Alexander Graham of
Drynie, Sir John Urquhart of Cromarty, Alexander Dunbar of Kennedfield, Kenneth
Mackeinie of Coul, Roderick Mackeinie of Davachmaluake, Roderick Mackeinie
younger of Ferburn, Colein Mackeinie of Reidcastle, John Cuthbert of Castelhil,
Eune Mackpherson Tutor of Cluny, Sir Norman Mackleod of Kernary, John Grant of
Garthinmore, Mungo Grant of Cunnigars, James Grant of Sheuglie, the Provost and
Baylies of Innerness for the time being, James Anderson and Robert Innes in
Forterose, the Provost and one of the Baylies of Dingwel for the time being.

Cromarty.
For the Sheriffdom of Cromarty and Burghs within the same, Sir John Urquhart
of Cromarty, Alexander Urquhart of Kinnudie, Alexander Clunes Baily of Cromarty.

Renfrew.
For the Sheriffdom of Renfrew and Burghs within the same, Hugh Earl of
Eglingtoun, James Lord Kilmares, Alexander Lord Montgomery, George Lord Ross,
William Lord Cochrane, William Master of Cochrane, the Lairds of Houstoun elder
and younger, the Lairds of Blackhal elder and younger, Sir Patrick Maxwel of
Newwark, Sir George Maxwel fiar thereof, Sir James Hamiltoun of Orbistoun,
Alexander Cunningham of Craigains, (...) Pollock of that ilk, Sir John Shaw
younger of Greinock, Cornelius Crauford of Jordanhil, the Lord of Bishoptoun
younger, Alexander and John Poterfields elder and younger of Duchel, Patrick
Fleming of Barnchano, George Howstoun of Johnstoun, John Maxwel of Blackestoun,
Archibald Stewart of Scotistoun, John and James Maxwels elder and younger of
Southbarn, James Brisbane of Serviland, Matthew Brisbane of Rosland, Sir Adam
Blair of Lochwood, Andrew Sempil in Renfrew, Robert Pollock of Milnburn, the
Baylies of Paislie for the time being, and James Dunlop of Howsil.

Aberdeen.
For the Sheriffdom of Aberdeen and Burghs within the same, Colonel George
Keith of Aden, Alexander Frazer elder of Philorth, Sir John Gordoun of Haddoe,
Sir John Forbes of Watertoun, Sir John Keith Knight Marshal, Sir James Baird of
Achmedden, Robert Irwing of Fedderet, George Gordoun of Coclarachie, John
Gordoun of Blelack, Alexander Fraser younger of Philorth, Alexander Keith
younger of Ludquhairn, John Udnie of that ilk, Major George Keith of Knock,
Alexander Bannerman of Elsick, (...) Bannerman his son, John Gordoun of Fechil,
Lieutenant Colonel Forbes of Fouls, John Seatoun of Thorntoun, Alexander
Straquhan younger of Glenkinidie, Frances Frazer of Kinmundie, (...) Erskin of
Pittodrick, Alexander Erskin of Rothnie, Alexander Lumsdaine of Carnday,
Colonel John Fulertoun of Dudwick, John Meldrum of Hattoun, and John Gordoun of
Auchleuchries, the Provost, Baylies, Treasurer, and Dean of Gild of Aberdeen
for the time being, the Provost and two Baylies of Kintore for the time being,
John Johnstoun Baily of Inverurie, and William Ferguson younger Burgess there.

Ross.
For the Sheriffdom of Ross and Burghs within the same, Kenneth Earl of
Seafort, Sir George Mackenie of Tarbit, David Ross of Belnagonie, John Monro
younger of Foulis, David Ross of Pitcalnie, William Ross of Grunord, Walter
Innes of Innerbrekie, Hector Douglas of Muldarg, Hector Mackenie of Assint, Mr.
Thomas Mackenie of Inerlael, Sir William Sinclair of May, William Sinclair of
Dunbeath, Sir George Monro of Culkairn, and James Hay Burgess of Tain.

Kincardin.
For the Sheriffdom of Kincardin and Burghs within the same, William Earl of
Marshal, John Earl of Middletoun, Robert Viscount of Arbuthnet, Alexander Lord
Halkertoun, and in his absence Alexander Master of Halkertoun, Alexander
Straton of that ilk, Sir John Keith, Alexander Bannerman of Elsick, and (...)
Bannerman his son, David Ramsay younger of Balmayn, Sir James Straquhan of
Thorntoun, Sir Robert Graham of Morphie, Sir Alexander Burnet of Leyes, Sir
Frances Ogilvie younger of Newgrange, John Barklay of Johnstoun, Colonel Henry
Barklay of Knox, Arthur Stratoun of Snadoun, (...) Falconer of Glenforquhar,
Robert Keith of Whitriggs, William Rait younger of Halgrein, Andrew Wood of
Babignie, (...) Allerdes of Allerdes, Sir James Ramsay of Benholme, Sir
Alexander Carnagie of Pittaro, Andrew Arbuthnet of Fiddes, Mr. William Ramsay
of Woodstoun.

Caithness.
For the Sheriffdom of Caithness and Burghs within the same, (...) Earl of
Caithness, Sir William Sinclair of Mey, William Sinclair of Ratter, William
Sinclair of Dumbeath, John Sinclair of Brims, (...) Murray of Pennieland, David
Murray of Clairden, Robert Monro of Borlome, Alexander Sinclair of Telsten,
David Sinclair of Dune, Mr. James Innes of Sandsaid, James Sinclair of Assere,
Frances Sinclair of Stirkaike, Walter Innes of Ortoun,

Orkney and Zetland.
For the Sheriffdoms of Orkney and Zetland and Burghs within the same, (...)
Earl of Mortoun, Colonel John Stewart of Newwark, James Stewart of Gramsay,
Hugh Halcu of that ilk, Robert Stewart of Burgh, Mr. Patrick Graham (...) James
Batkie of Tankerness, Patrick Monteith of Egilshaw, Hugh Craigie of Gairsey,
Patrick Blair of Little-Blair, Archibald Stewart of Borough, George Smith of
Rapness, John Sinclair of Quandail, James Sinclair of Skalloway, Andrew Bruce
of Munis, William Bruce of Soundburgh, Mr. James Mouat (...) Gilbert Nivin,
(...) Chein of Eslemont, and Robert Hunter Factor for the Earl of Mortoun.

Forfar.
For the Sheriffdom of Forfar and Burghs within the same, ( Dundee excepted)
James Earl of Buchan, Patrick Earl of Kinghorn, James Earl of Southesk, (...)
Earl of Airlie, John Earl of Dundee, Robert Viscount of Arbuthnet, James Lord
Ogilvy, George Lord Brichan, David Lord Lour, James Lord Couper, Sir David
Ogilvie son to the Earl of Airlie, Sir James Ogilvie of Newgrange, John Ogilvie
of Balfour, Sir John Carnagie of Boysack, Sir Alexander Erskin of Dun, John
Lindsey of Edgle, John Wood of Bonnytoun, John Graham younger of Fentry, David
Fothringham of Pourie, John Garden of Latoun, David Erskin of Carboddo, William
Fullertoun of that ilk, Mr. Robert Hay of Dronlaw, John Ogilvie of Pettenves,
Sir John Carnegie of Boniemune, James Scot of Logie, Peter Young of Seatoun,
Walter Graham of Duntroun, James Durham younger of Omachie, Patrick Lion of
Bridgtoun, William Lion of Eastergill, Henry Mauld of Melgum, William Gray of
Innerichtie, John Fothringham of Dunun, John Ogilvie of Peil, Patrick Wentoun
of Strickmartine, James Crightoun of Ruthven, David Neavoy of that ilk, John
Scrimger of Kirktoun, John Hunter of Balgay, Sir Alexander Wedderburn of
Blackness, Mr. Patrick Yeaman of Dryburgh, Mr. James Kid of Craigie, Peter Lion
of Cossans, Peter Blair of Dunkeny, David Carnegie of Craig and Robert
Arbuthnet of Fyndourie, two of the Magistrates of Forfar, Breichen, Montrose
and Aberbrothick, for the time being.

For the Town of Dundee, comprehending as said is, the Magistrates and Council
for the time being.

Berwick.
For the Sheriffdom of Berwick and Burghs within the same, Sir Archibald
Cockburn of Langtoun, James Hoppringle of that ilk, John Home of Blaccader, Sir
James Home of Eccles, Sir Robert Douglas of Blaikerstoun, John Home of
Prandergaist, George Ramsay of Idingtoun, Mr. Robert Sinclair of Longformacus,
George Home of Kaimbes, Robert Home of Kimerghame, Archibald Douglas of
Lumsdaine, John Ker of Westnisbit, Patrick Boge of Burnhouses, Alexander Home
of Linthil, Robert Home of Bogend, Mr. John Home of Bellita, Mr. Thomas Ridpeth
of Fulfardlies, and the two Baylies of Lawder for the time being.

Nairn.
For the Sheriffdom of Nairn and Burghs within the same, Sir Hugh Campbel of
Caddel, John Grant of Moynes, John Hay of Lochlow, Hugh Ross of Kilravock,
Thomas Dunbar of Grange, Alexander Campbel of Urchney, Alexander Dunbar of
Booth, John Sutherland of Kinstairie, Hugh Hay of Brichmony, Colin Campbel of
Delneyes, John Ross of Braidley, Hugh Ross younger of Clava, two of the
Magistrates of the Burgh of Nairn for the time being.

With power to the said Commissioners or major part of them, to take trial of
what Malt is brewed and sold within their respective divisions, and to order
the collecting and raising of the Excise thereof, at two merks upon the Boll;
and to raise the remainder of the proportion imposed upon each respective Shire
and Burgh, which shall not arise by payment of the foresaid two merks upon the
Boll of Malt, and of the rates imposed upon the other particulars above
mentioned, brewed and sold or imported as said is, from the respective Shires
and Burghs in lieu of the Malt brewed in their own houses; and that according to
the rule of the valuations as the same were apportionat before August last. As
also, with power to the said Commissioners to meet and conveen at such times
and places as they shall think fit, and to choose their own Conveeners (who is
to administer an Oath De fideli administratione to the remanent Commissioners
at their first meeting, and take the same himself) and to appoint their own
Collectors, and other Officers, except the Clerk, who is to be named by the
Clerk of Register, and to modifie necessar Fees for the said Collectors,
Clerks, and other Officers, and to sub-divide themselves for the more speedy
and equal ordering of the said Excise. With power also to them to establish
Offices of Excise (at which Offices, the whole Brewers are hereby required to
make their Entries, at least once every month, of their weekly brewing) and by
Miller, Maltman, Oath of party, Witnesses, or any other lawful manner of way
to disprove the Entries given in, and to impose Fines upon the persons whose
Entries shall be so disproven, not exceeding the double of the value of the
Malt concealed, and to discern and determine in all cases and debates, relating
to the said Excise within their respective divisions; and for that effect to
use all lawful manner of probation as said is: And ordains general Letters to
be direct gratis upon the said Commissioners, their Decreets, at the instance
of the respective Collectors; or otherwise with power to the said
Commissioners, to poynd and distreinie upon their own Decreets, quarter upon
the Deficients, or imprison their persons till payment be made of the sums due
by them, as well principal as expenses; and which expenses the said
Commissioners are hereby empowered to modifie. And it is hereby Declared, That
there shall be no necessity to apprize the Goods of the Deficients at the
Market Cross, but that it shall be lawful to apprize the same, at the nearest
Paroch Church. And sicklike it is hereby Statute and Ordained, That the
Commissioners of the respective Shires and Burghs shall be, and are obliged to
pay in their respective proportions of the said Shires and Burghs to such as
are, or shall be appointed by His Majesty, to receive the same at four terms in
the year, viz. Whitsunday, Lambmesse, Mertimesse, and Candlemesse, by equal
proportions, beginning the first terms payment at Lambmess next, for the three
months of May, June, and July, immediately preceding the same: And which
Commissioners, are by these presents empowered to put in execution the whole
forementioned Orders and Instructions, for raising and inbringing of the said
Excise for their relief. As also the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of
His Estates of Parliament, gives power to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, to nominate and appoint Commissioners of Excise in the respective
Shires and Burghs upon the death or inability of any of the Commissioners
abovenamed.

XV. Act Rescinding and Annulling the pretended Parliaments, in the year 1640,
1641, etc.
THe Estates of Parliament, considering that the Peace and Happiness of this
Kingdom, and of His Majesty's good Subjects therein, does depend upon the
Safety of His Majesty's Person, and the Maintenance of His Royal Authority,
Power and Greatness; And that all the miseries, confusions and disorders which
this Kingdom has groaned under, these twenty three years, have issued from,
and been the necessary and natural products of these neglects, contempts and
invasions, which in and from the beginning of these troubles, were upon the
specious (but false) pretexts of Reformation (the common cloak of all
Rebellions) offered unto the Sacred Person and Royal Authority of the Kings
Majesty, and His Royal Father of blessed memory. And notwithstanding, that by
the sacred Right, inherent to the Imperial Crown (which His Majesty holds
immediately from GOD Almighty alone) and by the ancient constitution and
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; the power of convocating and keeping
Assemblies of the Subjects; the power of Calling, Holding, Proroguing and
Dissolving of Parliaments, and making of Laws; the power of entering into
Bonds, Covenants, Leagues and Treaties; the power of raising Arms keeping of
Strengths and Forts, are Essential parts, and Inseparable privileges of the
Royal Authority and Prerogative of the Kings of this Kingdom: Yet, such has
been the madness and delusion of these times, that even Religion it self, which
holds the Right of Kings to be Sacred and Inviolable, has been pretended unto,
for warrant of all these injurious Violations and Encroachments, so publicly
done and owned, upon and against, His Majesty's just Power, Authority and
Government; By making and keeping of unlawful Meetings and Convocations of the
people; By entering into Covenants, Treaties and Leagues; By seizing upon, and
possessing themselves of, His Majesty's Castles, Forts and Strengths of the
Kingdom; and by Holding of pretended Parliaments, making of Laws, and raising
of Arms for the maintaining of the same: And that not only without warrant,
but contrary to His Majesty's express Commands. And although the late Kings
Majesty, out of His mere grace and respects to this His native Kingdom, and the
peace and quiet of His people, and for preventing the consequences, which such
a bad example and practice might occasion, to the disturbance of the peace of
His other Kingdoms, was pleased in the year, one thousand six hundred and
forty one, to come into this Country, and by His own presence, at their
pretended Parliaments and otherwise, to comply with, and give way to, many
things nearly concerning the undoubted Interest and Prerogative of the Crown,
expecting that such unparalled Condiscentions should have made His Subjects
ashamed of their former miscariages, and the very thoughts thereof, to be
hateful to them and their posterity for ever. Yet, such was the prevalency of
the spirit of Rebellion that raged in many for the time, that not content of
that peace and happiness, which even above their desires, was secured to them;
nor of those many Grants of honor and profit, by which, His Majesty
endeavored to endear the most desperate of them to their duty and obedience,
they then, when His Majesty had not left unto them any pretense or shadow of
any new desire to be proposed, either concerning themselves or the Kingdom, did
most unworthily engage, to subvert His Majesty's Government, and the public
peace of the Kingdom of England: For which purpose, having joined in a League
with some there, they, for the better prosecution of the same, did assume unto
themselves, the Royal Power, kept and held Parliaments at their pleasure; by
the pretended Authority of which, they laid new exactions upon the people
(which in one month did far exceed what ever by the Kings Authority had been
raised in a whole year) levied Arms, sent out Edicts, requiring obedience unto
their unlawful demands; and with all manner of violence pursued such as out of
duty to His Majesty's Authority opposed them, by fines, confinements,
imprisonment, banishment, death, and forfeiture of their posterity; and with
their Army thus raised, invaded His Majesty's Kingdom of England, and joined
with such as were in Arms against His Majesty there. And thus maintaining
their usurped power, and violently executing the same against all Law,
Conscience, Honor and Humanity, have made themselves instruments of much loss,
shame and dishonor to their native Country, and have justly forfeited and
favor they might have pretended to, from His Majesty's former concessions. And
forasmuch, as now it has pleased Almighty GOD, by the power of His own right
hand, so miraculously to restore the Kings Majesty to the Government of His
Kingdoms, and to the exercise of His Royal Power and Sovereignty over the same,
The Estates of Parliament do conceive themselves obliged, in discharge of
their duty and conscience to GOD and the Kings Majesty, to employ all their
power and interest, for vindicating His Majesty's Authority from all these
violent invasions that have been made upon it, and so far as is possible, to
remove out of the way, every thing that may retain any remembrance of these
things, which have been so injurious to His Majesty and His Authority, so
prejudicial and dishonorable to the Kingdom, and destructive to all just and
true interests within the same. And considering, that besides the unlawfulness
of the publict Actings during these troubles, most of the Acts in all and every
of the Meetings of these pretended Parliaments, do highly incroach upon, and
are destructive of, that Sovereign Power, Authority, Prerogative and Right of
Government, which by the Law of GOD and the ancient Laws and Constitutions of
this Kingdom, does reside in, and belong unto, the Kings Majesty, and do
reflect much upon the honor, loyalty and reputation of this Kingdom, or are
expired, and serve only as testimonion of dissloyalty and repraoch upon the
Kingdom, and are unfit to be any longer upon Record. Therefore the Kings
Majesty and Estates of Parliament, do hereby Rescind and Annull the pretended
Parliaments, kept in the years, one thousand six hundred and forty, one
thousand six hundred and forty one, one thousand six hundred and forty four,
one thousand six hundred and forty five, one thousand six hundred and forty
six, one thousand six hundred and forty seven, and one thousand six hundred
and forty eight, and all Acts and Deeds past and done in them, and Declares
the same to be henceforth void and null. And His Majesty, being unwilling to
take any advantage of the failings of His Subjects during those unhappy times,
is resolved not to retain any remembrance thereof, but that the same shall be
held in everlasting oblivion; and that all difference and animofities being
forgotten, His good Subjects may in a happy union, under His Royal Government,
enjoy that happiness and peace, which His Majesty intends, and really wishes
unto them as unto Himself, Does therefore by advice and consent of His Estates
of Parliament, grant His full Assurance and Indemnity to all persons that
acted in, or by virtue of the said pretended Parliaments and other Meetings
flowing from the same, to be unquestioned in their Lives or Fortunes, for any
Deed or Deeds done by them in their said usurpation, or by virtue of any
pretended Authority derived therefrom, excepting always, such as shall be
excepted in a general Act of Indemnity, to be past by His Majesty in this
Parliament. And it is hereby Declared, That all Acts, Rights and Securities,
past in any of the pretended Meetings above-written, or by virtue thereof, in
favors of any particular persons, for their civil and private interests, shall
stand good and valid unto them, until the same be taken into further
consideration, and be determined in this, or the next Session of this
Parliament.

XVI. Act concerning Religion and Church Government.
OUr Sovereign Lord, being truly sensible of the mercies of Almighty GOD,
toward Him in His preservation, in the times of greatest trouble and danger,
and in His miraculous Restitution to His just Right and Government of His
Kingdoms. And being desirous to improve these Mercies, to the glory of GOD and
honor of His great Name, Does with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, Declare, That it is His full and firm resolution, to maintain the
true reformed Protestant Religion, in it is purity of Doctrine and Worship, as
it was established within this Kingdom, during the Reigns of His Royal Father
and Grandfather of blessed memory. And that His Majesty will be careful to
promote the power of Godliness, to encourage the exercises of Religion, both
publict and private, and to suppress all profaneness, and disorderly walking.
And for that end will give all due countenance and protection to the Ministers
of the Gospel, they containing themselves within the Bounds and Limits of their
Ministerial Calling, and behaving themselves with that submission and obedience
to His Majesty's Authority and Commands, that is suitable to the Allegiance and
Duty of good Subjects. And as to the Government of the Church, His Majesty will
make it His care, to setle and secure the same, in such a frame as shall be
most agreeable to the word of GOD, most suitable to Monarchical Government,
and most complying with the publict peace and quiet of the Kingdom. And in the
mean time, His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Does allow the
present Administration by Sessions, Presbyteries and Synods, (they keeping
within bounds and behaving themselves as said is) and that notwithstanding of
the preceding Act, rescissory of all pretended Parliaments, since the year one
thousand six hundred and thirty eight.

XVII. Act for a Solemn Anniversary Thanksgiving, for His Majesty's
Restoration to the Royal Government of His Kingdoms.
THe Estates of Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, taking to their
consideration the sad Condition, Slavery and Bondage, this ancient Kingdom has
groaned under, during these twenty three years Troubles: In which, under the
specious pretenses of Reformation, a public Rebellion has been, by the
treachery of some, and mis-perswasion of others, violently carried on against
Sacred Authority, to the ruin and destruction, so far as was possible, of
Religion, the Kings Majesty, and His Royal Government, the Laws, Liberties and
Property of the People, and all the public and private Interests of the
Kingdom; So that Religion it self, which holds the right of Kings to be Sacred,
has been prostitute for the warrant of all these treasonable invasions made
upon the Royal Authority, and disloyal limitations put upon the Alleagiance of
the Subjects. And has it not also been pretended unto, for the warrant of all
those vile and bloody Murders, which in high contempt of Almighty GOD and of
His Majesty's Authority and Laws, were under color of Justice committed upon
His Majesty's good Subjects, merely for the discharge of their Duty to GOD, and
Loyalty to the King? Has not that Royal Government, under whose Protection
this Nation has, to the envy of the World, been so famous for many ages, been
of late trod under foot, and new Governments and Governors established and
kept up without His Majesty's Authority, and against His express Commands?
Has not Law, which is the Birthright and Inheritance of the Subject, and the
Security of their lives and fortunes, been laid in the dust, and new and unjust
Edicts and Orders past and published, for subjecting both life and fortune, and
what else was dear unto any of His Majesty's good Subjects, to the Cruel and
Ambitious Lusts of some usurping Rulers? Has not Religion and Loyalty been the
only objects of their Rapine and Cruelty? And has not their new and arbitrary
Exactions and Burdens upon the People, exceeded in one month what ever had
been formerly in many years paid to any of the Kings of this Kingdom? And when
the best of men and the most Excellent of the Kings of the earth, had in an
unusual way of confidence rendered His Person to the Trust and Loyalty of His
Native Subjects, was not the security of Religion pretended unto by some, who
then governed in Church and State, for the ground of that base (and never
enough to be abhorred) transaction, in leaving such a Prince their Native and
Dread Sovereign, to the will of these who were in open Rebellion, and for the
time had their swords in their hands against Him; And that when by these and
many such like undutifull carriages, the Kings Majesty was removed from His
Kingdoms, the foundations of this ancient and well constitute Government was
overturned, the Liberties and Property of the people inverted; And this Kingdom
exposed to be Captives and Slaves to Strangers, and nothing left unto them but
the sad meditation of their increasing miseries, and the bitter remembrance of
their bypast disloyalties? Yet even then it pleased Almighty GOD to
compassionat their low condition, and by the power of His own Right Hand, most
miraculously to restore the Kings most Sacred Majesty to the Royal Government
of His Kingdoms; And thereby to redeem this Kingdom from its former Slavery and
Bondage, and to restore it to its ancient and just Privileges and Freedom. And
the Kings Majesty acknowledging, with all humility and thankfulness, the
Goodness, Wisdom and Power of GOD, in this Signal Act of His mercy to Him and
His people, Does, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statute
and Ordain, That in all time coming there be a Solemn yearly Commemoration of
the same: And for that end, the twenty ninth day of May, (which day GOD
Almighty has specially honored and rendered auspicious to this Kingdom, both
by His Majesty's Royal Birth, and by His blessed Restoration to His
Government) be for ever set a part as a Holy day unto the LORD, and that in all
the Churches of the Kingdom, it be employed in public Prayers, Preaching,
Thanksgiving and Praises to GOD, for so transcendent Mercies: And that all
Trade, Merchandise, Work, Handy-labour, and other ordinary imploiments be
forborne, and the remaining part of the day spent in such lawful divertisements
as are suitable to so Solemn an occasion. And it is hereby recommended to all
Ministers of the Gospel, and to all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and other
public Ministers in the several Counties, and to all Magistrates within
Burghs, to be careful, that for this present year, and in all time coming, the
twenty ninth day of May, be accordingly kept and observed within their several
Jurisdictions. And for the speedier and more full intimation hereof to all His
Majesty's Subjects, It is Appointed their Presents be printed, and published at
all the Market Crosses of the Royal Buroughs.

XVIII. Act for the due Observation of the Sabbath Day.
THe Kings Majesty considering, how much it concerns the honor of GOD, that
the Sabbath Day be duly observed, and all abuses thereof restrained; And that
notwithstanding of several Acts of Parliament made in that behalf, particularly
the third Act of the sixth Parliament of King James the sixth of blessed
memory, the said day has been much profaned by Salmond-fishing, going of
Salt-pans, Milnes and Killes, hiring of Shearers, and using of Merchandise on
that day and otherwise. Therefore our Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent
of His Estates of Parliament, Ratifies and Approves all former Acts of
Parliament, made for observation of the Sabbath Day, and against the breakers
thereof; And by these presents Inhibits and Discharges all Salmond-fishing,
going of Salt-pans, Milnes or Killes; all hiring of Sheaters, carrying of
Loads, keeping of Mercats, or using any sorts of Merchandise on the said day,
and all other profanation thereof whatsoever, under the pains and penalties
following; viz. The sum of twenty pounds Scots for the going of ilk Salt-pan,
Miln or Kill on the said day, to be paid by the Heritors and Postessors
thereof; and the sum of ten pounds for ilk Shearer and Fisher of Salmond on the
said day, the one halt thereof to be paid by the Hirers and Conducers, and the
other half by the persons hired; and the said sum of ten pounds for every other
profanation of the said Day: And which Fines and Penalties are to be uplifted
and disposed of, in manner contained in the Act and Instructions anent the
Justices of Peace; and if the party Offender be not able to pay the penalties
foresaid, then to be exemplarly punished in his body, according to the merit of
his fault.

XIX. Act against Swearing and Excessive Drinking.
OUr Sovereign Lord, being desirous that all His Subjects within this Kingdom,
may live a quiet and peaceable life under His Government, in all godliness and
honesty; and in order thereto, having resolved to curb and suppress all sort
of sin and wickedness, and especially these abominable and so much abounding
sins of Drunkenness and all manner of Cursing and Swearing. Therefore our said
Sovereign Lord Ratifies and Approves all Acts of Parliament, made in former
times against the said crimes, or either of them. And further Declares, That
each person, who shall Blaspheme, Swear or Curse; and whosoever shall Drink
into excess, shall be liable in the pains following, according to the quality
of the offenders; viz. Each Nobleman in twenty pounds Scots, each Barron in
twenty Merks, each Gentleman, Heritor or Burgess in ten merks, each Yeoman in
forty shillings, each Servant in twenty shillings toties quoties, each
Minister in the fifth part of his years Stipend: and that the said Fines and
Penalties be uplifted and disposed upon, in manner contained in the Act and
Instructions anent the Justices of Peace. And if the party Offender, be not
able to pay the penalties foresaid, then to be exemplarly punished in his body,
according to the merit of his fault.

XX. Act against Cursing and Beating of Parents.
OUr Sovereign Lord, and Estates of Parliament, considering how great and
atrocious a crime it is, for Children to beat, or curse their Parents; And how
the Law of GOD has pronounced just sentence of death against such, as shall
either of these ways injure either of their Parents. Therefore His Majesty
with advice of His said Estates, Does hereby Statute and Ordain, That
whosoever, Son or Daughter, above the age of sixteen years, not being
distracted, shall Beat or Curse either their Father or Mother, shall be put to
Death without mercy: and such as are within the age of sixteen years, and past
the age of pupillarity, to be punished at the arbitrament of the Judge,
according to their deservings, that others may hear and fear, and not do the
like.

XXI. Act against the crime of Blasphemy.
OUr Sovereign Lord, and the Estates of Parliament considering, that hither to
there has been no Law in this Kingdom, against the horrible crime of
Blasphemy. Therefore, His Majesty, with advice of His said Estates, Does
hereby Statute and Orda^n, That whosoever hereafter, not being distracted in
his wits, shall rail upon, or curse GOD, or any of the Persons of the blessed
Trinity, shall be processed before the chief Justice; and being found guilty,
shall be punished with Death. Likeas, His Majesty, with advice foresaid,
Finds, Statutes and Ordains, That whosoever hereafter shall deny GOD, or any
of the Persons of the blessed Trinity, and obstinately continue therein, shall
be processed, and being found guilty, that they be punished with Death. As
also, His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Declares, That all persons
who have committed the foresaid Crimes since the seventeenth of February, one
thousand six hundred and forty nine, shall be proceeded against according to
this Act; and Ratifies all bygone Decreets and judicial Proceedings, against
any person committer of the said Crimes since the foresaid date, which have
been pronounced and done against the said Committers, according to this
present Act. And Declares, That the pronouncers and executors of the said
Sentences shall never be questioned therefore, in any manner of way, but are,
and shall be, hereby secured, no less then if this Act had been of the foresaid
date.

XXII. ACT concerning the several degrees of Casual Homicide.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of this present
Parliament, for removing of all question and doubt that may arise hereafter in
Criminal pursutes for Slaughter, Statutes and Ordains, That the cases of
Homicide after-following; viz. Casual Homicide, Homicide in lawful defense,
and Homicide committed upon Thieves and Robbers breaking houses in the night;
or in case of Homicide the time of masterfull Depredation, or in the pursuit of
denounced or declared Rebels for capital Crimes, or of such who assist and
defend the Rebels and masterfull Depredators by Arms, and by force oppose the
pursuit and apprehending of them, which shall happen to fall out in time coming
nor any of them, shall not be punished by death: And that notwithstanding of
any Laws or Acts of Parliament, or any Practick made heretofore or observed in
punishing of Slaughter; but that the Manslayer, in any of the cases aforesaid,
be assoillied from any Criminal pursuit pursued against him for his life, for
the said Slaughter, before any Judge Criminal within this Kingdom. Providing
always, that in the case of Homicide casual, and of Homicide in defense,
notwithstanding that the slayer is by this Act, free from Capital punishment;
Yet it shall be leisum to the Criminal Judge, with the advice of the Council,
to fine him in his means, to the use of the defuncts wife and bairnes, or
nearest of kin, or to imprison him. And His Majesty, with advice foresaid,
Declares, That all decision given, conform to this Act, since the thirteenth of
February, one thousand six hundred and forty nine years, shall be as
sufficient to secure all parties interessed, as if this present Act had been of
that date: And that all cases to be decided by any Judges of this Kingdom, in
relation to casual Homicide, or Homicide in defense, committed at any time
heretofore, shall be decided as is above expressed.

XXIII. Act Ratifying the Privileges of the College of Justice.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, that nothing is more necessary and of more
universal concernment, then the Administration of Justice; and in order
thereto, that the Judges, Advocats, Clerks and other Members of the Supreme
Judicatory, should be faithful, able and qualified persons; and for their
encouragement to serve the Country in their respective stations and places,
and to undergo the great toil, trouble and expense of time, and otherwise for
inabling them for, and during their service therein, It has been the wisdom
and practice of all Princes and Nations, and in special, of His Majesty's Royal
Progenitors, to grant to them diverse Liberties and Privileges, as is evident
by many Acts of Parliament and Statutes concerning the Privileges and
Immunities of the College of Justice, and members thereof, Granted, Renewed
and Ratified from time to time. Therefore His Majesty, with advice and consent
of His Estates of Parliament, Ratifies and Approves all and whatsoever
Liberties, Privileges and Immunities, given and granted by His Majesty's Royal
Predecessors, to, and in favor of, the said College of Justice, and of the
Senators, Advocats, Clerks, Writers to the Signet, and remanent Members of the
same, or whereof they have been in use and possession in any time bygone,
together with all Laws, Acts of Parliament, Statutes and Constitutions, made
and conceived in their favors; Holding and Declaring this present Ratification
to be as sufficient as if all the foresaids Privileges, Freedoms and
Immunities, Acts, Statutes and Grants, of and concerning the same, were in
special and at length expressed herein. And His Majesty with advice and consent
foresaid, Ordains and Declares, That the whole Privileges, Liberties and
Immunities foresaid, granted and belonging to the ordinary Lords and Senators
of the College of Justice, shall be extended, belong and appertain to, and
enjoyed by, the Advocats, Clerks, Writers to the Signer, and remanent Members
of the said College of Justice, in all time coming, notwithstanding of
whatsoever Act, Custom or Practice to the contrare.

XXIV. Act concerning Appear and Heirs, their payment of their Predecessors and
their own Debts.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
taking into consideration, that Appearand Heirs immediately after their
Predecessors death, do frequently dispone their Estate in whole or in part, in
prejudice of their Predecessors lawful Creditors, before their death come to
their knowledge, or before they can do lawful diligence against the said
Appearand Heirs; and which Dispositions the said Appearand Heirs do often make
before they be served Heirs and Infeft; Or otherwise, by collusion they suffer
their Predecessors Estates to be comprised or adjudged from them for payment of
their own proper Debts, real or simulate, without respect to their Predecessors
Creditors. And His Majesty, considering how just it is, that every man's own
Estate should be first liable to his own Debt, before the Debts contracted by
the Appearand Heirs. Therefore His Majesty, with consent foresaid, Declares,
That the Creditors of the defunct shall be preferred to the Creditors of the
Appearand Heir in time coming, as to the defuncts estate; Providing always,
that the defuncts Creditors do diligence against the Appearand Heir and the
real Estate belonging to the defunct, within the space of three years after the
defuncts death. And because it were most unreasonable, that the Appearand Heir,
when he is served and retoured Heir, and infeft respective, should for the full
space of three years, be bound up from making Rights and Alienations of his
Predecessors Estate; and yet it being as unreasonable that he should dispone
thereupon immediately or shortly after his Predecessors death, in prejudice of
his Predecessors Creditors, he having year and day to advise whether he will
enter Heir or not. Therefore it is hereby Declared, That no Right or
Disposition made by the said Appearand Heir, in so far as may prejudge his
Predecessors Creditors, shall be valid, unless it be made and granted a full
year after the defuncts death.

XXV. Act for Denouncing of Excommunicate Persons.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament,
considering the insolency of excommunicate Papists and others, who slight the
dreadful Sentence of Excommunication, to the dishonor of GOD and obduring of
their own hearts; Does therefore Ratify and Approve all Acts of Partiament and
Acts of Privy Council, standing before the year one thousand six hundred and
forty, against Excommunicate Persons. And Statutes and Ordains, That in time
coming, forty days being past after the said Sentence of Excommunication,
Letters be direct at the instance of His Majesty's Advocate, for denouncing all
Excommunicate persons, His Majesty's Rebels, and putting them to the Horn, and
that by Warrant of the Lords of Privy Council or Session: which denounciation
being used, by virtue of the said Letters, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh
and Peir of Lies, is hereby Declared, to be sufficient against them, and for
using of Caption thereupon, and taking of the Escheat and Liferent of the
Rebels, conform to the standing Laws of this Kingdom. Providing always, that
before the passing of any such Letters of denounciation, the whole Process and
Sentence of Excommunication be exhibit and produced before the Lords of
Session, in Session-time, to the end, that they may consider the legality of
the process and grounds whereupon the Sentence proceeded: and that accordingly
they may give forth the said Letters of denounciation, as they shall think
just and reasonable.

XXVI. Act appointing the Pursuer of the Thief, to have the Goods stolen from
him, restored.
OUr Sovereign Lord understanding, that when Theives are taken and execute for
theft, or declared Fugitives, their whole estate and the goods stolen also,
does fall to His Majesty and to Lords of Regalities, and other Justitiars
pretending right to the said stolen goods. For remeed whereof, His Majesty,
with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains,
That any person having goods or gear stolen from him, and having pursued the
stealer thereof, shall have his own goods again, where ever the same can be
apprehended: and where the stolen goods cannot be had, the Pursuer of the
Theif, shall have the just value of the goods and gear stolen from him, out of
the readiest of the Thiefs goods, with the expenses waired out by the Pursuer,
he always pursuing the Thief, usque ad sententiam; Reserving always to the
Sheriff or other Magistrates, and taker of the Thief, the expenses waired out
by them in the taking and putting the Thief to execution.

XXVII. Act for the Pardon of Penal Statutes.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, that the precise and rigorous exaction of the
Pain, Arbitrary and Pecunial, adjected to Penal Statutes heretofore made, would
prove a burden to His Majesty's Leiges, heavy and unsupportable, if by His
Majesty's grace and favor they should not be eased and liberate of the same.
In consideration whereof, His Majesty, being willing to give ease and relief to
His Subjects of the foresaid burden, Has therefore been graciously pleased,
with consent of His Estates of Parliament, to Discharge, freely Pardon and
Remit, and by these presents Discharges, freely Pardons and Remits, all
Contraveeners of any of the said Penal Statutes, for all Deeds done by them,
contrair to the tenor of the same Statutes, in time bygone; except only the
Statutes concerning the unlawful taking of Usury, Transporting of Silver and
Gold, and Slaying of Red and Black Fishes, which are no ways discharged by
this present Act, nor comprehended under the same.

XXVIII. Act discharging the Quots of Testaments.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, for
many weighty considerations moving His Majesty, Statutes and Ordains, That no
Quots of Testaments, confirmed since the sixteenth of November, one thousand
six hundred and forty one, and to be confirmed in time coming, shall be
exacted from any of His Majesty's Leiges by Commissars, Commissar-Clerks,
Fiscals, and others whom it effeirs; but prejudice always of the ordinary Fies
due to them as accords.

XXIX. ACT for Poynding upon Sheriffs and Commissars Decreets.
OUr Sovereign Lord and the Estates of Parliament, considering, That albeit by
Act of Parliament, of the date the ninth of July, one thousand six hundred and
six years, Letters of Horning are Ordained to be directed by deliverance of the
Lords of Session upon Sheriffs, Commissars, and other inferior Judicatories
their Decreets, upon the simple charge therein mentioned: Yet, the Act bears no
warrant for Letters of Poynding to be granted by the deliverance foresaid upon
these Decreets; whereby the Parties interessed, obtainers of the Decreets, are
ofttimes prejudged of their payment, when these Parties, against whom these
Decreets are obtained, do flit or remove out of the Shire or Jurisdiction of
the Judge before whom the said Decreets are given. Therefore His Majesty, with
advice of the said Estates, Ratifies the Act of Parliament abovementioned, in
the whole heads and points thereof: And for remedy of the prejudice foresaid,
Ordains Letters of Poynding to be direct by deliverance of the Lords of
Session, at the instance of the Parties interessed, upon the said Sheriffs,
Commissars, and other inferior Judges their Decreets contained in the foresaid
Act. Sicklike and in the same manner, as Letters of Horning are appointed by
the said Act to pass upon the same Decreets, that thereby the Parties may have
real execution, as well as personal upon their Decreets foresaids. Likeas, His
Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Declares, That all execution of
Poynding, legally used upon the said Decreets since the twelfth of June, one
thousand six hundred and forty nine years, shall be valid and sufficient; and
the Parties, Messengers and others, Executors and users thereof, shall never be
questioned, nor any Process sustained against them therefore, either Civilly or
Criminally, before any Judge whatsomever; But prejudice always to Parties
against whom Poynding have been used, upon reduceable or unwarrantable
Sentences, to pursue repetition as accords of the Law.

XXX. Act anent the Fewers and Vassals of Kirk-lands.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of this present
Parliament, considering, That whereas by the general Surrender of Kirk-lands
and Erections made by the Superiors and Titulars thereof, in favors of His
Majesty's dearest Father of ever blessed memory; It is specially provided, that
the said Superiors and Titulars, notwithstanding their Surrender foresaid,
shall have right to the Few-fermes and Duties of the Vassals and Fewers of the
said Kirk-lands and Erections, till the Kings Majesty make payment to them of
the prices of the said Few-fermes and Duties, modified by the Lords and others
of the Commission for Surrenders and Teinds. And sicklike the Fewers and
Vassals of the said Kirk-lands and Erections, are obliged by their new
Infeftments under the great Seal, to pay the said Few-fermes and Duties to the
Kings Majesty and His Successors; and so against reason may appear to be liable
to double payment thereof: It is therefore Statute and Ordained by His Majesty,
with consent foresaid, That the said Fewers and Vassals of Kirk-lands and
Erections, their Heirs and Successors, shall be obliged to make thankful
payment of the said Few-fermes and Duties contained in their Infeftments; and
whereof the said Superiors and Titulars have been in possession preceding that
Surrender foresaid, to the said Superiors and Titulars, their Heirs and
Successors, ay and while they get payment of the prices modified by the said
Lords and others of the Commission foresaid, according to the Act of
Parliament, one thousand six hundred and thirty three years. And that Letters
of Horning and Poynding shall be granted to that effect, without prejudice
always to His Majesty and His Successors, of the superiority of the said
Fewars and Vassals surrendered in manner foresaid, and without prejudice to them
of their Infeftments taken to be holden of His Majesty and His Successors.
Likeas it is Declared, That the said Fewers and Vassals of Kirk-lands and
Erections have been, in bona fide, in payment of the said Fewfermes and Duties
to the said Superiors and Titulars of all times bygone, according to the
provisions contained in the said general Surrender. It is always provided,
that this Act shall not be prejudicial to an Act past by this Parliament in
favors of the Earl of Lauderdail of the Lordship of Musleburgh, of the date
the ninth day of April last.

XXXI. Act concerning the Registration of Comprisings.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with consent of the Estates of Parliament, considering,
that the Registration of Comprisings, was only established by an Act of Secret
Council, and never authorized by any Law, or Act of Parliament, and that the
Registration thereof did put the Lieges to unnecessar charges: neither adding
to the validity of the Comprisings, nor to the benefit of the Comprisers: Has
therefore discharged, and by these presents discharges all Registration of
Comprisings, with all Gifts, Acts of Council, and other Warrands and Custom
whatsomever, granted and observed, at any time heretofore thereanent; and by
their presents Ratifies and Approves the Custom observed these many years
past; whereby, in place of the said Registration, a short Record of all
Comprisings of Lands, Teinds and others, and of the Comprisers names and
designations, the Defenders names, the Debts for which the Comprising is
deduced, the Messengers and Clerks names, the date of the Executions, the
Witnesses names thereto, and of the Superiors of whom the comprised Lands are
holden, has been made in a Book by the Clerk of Register, and his Deputs, at
the allowing of the said Comprisings, (for which Allowance and Recording,
there is only forty shillings Scots to be paid) and which Custom is very
useful and necessar for information of the Lieges. And therefore His Majesty,
with advice and consent foresaid, Ratifies and Approves the foresaid Custom,
and Ordains all Comprisings formerly deduced, and not allowed and recorded in
manner above-written, to be brought in to the Clerk of Register and his Deputs,
within threescore days after the publication hereof, and all Comprisings to be
led and deduced hereafter, to be brought in to the said Clerk of Register and
his Deputs, within threescore days after the date thereof. With certification,
that if they be not allowed and recorded within the said space, any other
Comprising though posterior in date, yet if it be allowed and recorded before
the prior Comprising, the same shall have preference according to the date of
the Allowance and Record; but prejudice always to any further diligence by
Infeftments, or charges against the Superior, according to the priority, or
posteriority thereof, pro ut de jure.

XXXII. Act concerning Heritable and Moveable Bonds.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, for
many just and reasonable causes moving Him, Statutes and Ordains, That all
Contracts and Obligations for Sums of money payable to Parties at any time,
made and dated since the sixteenth day of November, one thousand six hundred
and forty one, or to be made in time coming, containing clauses for payment of
Annualrent and Profit, are, and shall be, holden and interpret to be Moveable
Bonds, except, in these cases following; viz. That they bear an express
obliegment to infeft, or that they be conceived in favors of Heirs and
Assigns, secluding Executors, in either of which cases, Ordains the Sums to be
Heritable, and to pertain to the Heir: otherwise to be confirmed by the
Executor, and to appertain to the nearest of Kin, and to the Defuncts Executors
and Legators, according to the Law and practict of Movables, Declaring
always, that all such Bonds quoad fiscum, shall remain in the same condition
as they were before the said sixteenth of November, one thousand six hundred
and forty one, not to fall under the compass of single Escheat, nor shall any
part thereof pertain to the Relict, jure relictae, where the Bonds are made to
the Husband, nor to the Husband jure mariti, where the Bonds are made to the
Wife, unless the Relict, or Husband, have otherwise right and interest
thereto, Declaring nevertheless, that this provision shall no ways prejudge
Wife, nor Husband, and their Executors of their respective Titles and Interests
to the bygone Annualrents of the said Bands, resting before either of their
deaths.

XXXIII. Act for the right Packing of Salmond.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, understanding, that the
Salmond-fishings are one of the principal benefits, whereby Trade is
maintained, and Money brought into the Kingdom; And that through the evil
ordering thereof, both in the insufficiency of the Barrels, and also in the
disloyal packing of the same; not only is the Merchants estate damnified
thereby, but also the Nation is dishonored abroad, and disappointed of what
should return thereby. Therefore, Our said Sovereign Lord, with advice and
consent of the said Estates, Ratifies and Approves all and sundry Acts of
Parliament, Laws and Constitutions of this Realm, made anent Salmond-fishing,
and the sufficiency of the Barrels and loyal packing thereof, with this
addition, That the whole Coupers within this Kingdom, make the said Salmond
Barrels of good and sufficient new Knappel, for which they shall be answerable,
without Worm-holes, and White-wood, and of sufficient tightnesse, for
containing the pickle, and sufficient tightnesse for enduring all kind of
stresse in the handling; and that the Barrels contain no less then ten gallons
of the Stirling pint, (conform to an Act of His Majesty's Council, of the date
at Halyrood-house the fifteenth day of July, one thousand six hundred and
nineteen years, which His Majesty with consent foresaid, Ratifies and Approves,
in all the Heads, Clauses and Articles thereof) under the pain of five pounds,
to be paid by the Couper, for each insufficient Barrel and escheat of the said
Barrel, and that the same be well pinned in the pickle before the packing; and
thereafter the said Barrels to be well tighted and double-girthed before the
transporting thereof to Foreign Natitions. And that no Barrel be sooner made
and blown, but the Coupers Birn be set thereon, on the tapone-staff thereof, in
testimony of the sufficiency of the Tree; and that every Couper be answerable
and liable in payment of such loss as happen to be laid on the Fish at the
Market, if it be found to be in the default of the Couper by the insufficiency
of the Tree, or packing, or any other means in the Coupers default, and that
they keep right gage, both in the length of the staves, the bilge-girth, the
wideness of the head, and deepness of the chine; the Barrel being made,
marked, and thrice gene in the packing, shall be marked with the Marking-iron,
under a very particular Merchant mark, as use is. And that no Burgh, or any
other trading with Salmond, shall presume to counterfeit the Mark or Birn, of
an other trade, under the pain of confiscation of the Salmond, by and attour
the punishment of the Parties counterfeiters, at the pleasure of the Judge
ordinar; the one half of the said pain to pertain to His Majesty, and the other
half to the Burgh so wronged, and ordains the the Magistrates within Burgh to
put this Act to execution.

XXXIV. Act against Clandestine and unlawful Marriages.
OUr Sovereign Lord, and the Estates of this present Parliament, considering
how necessary it is, that no Marriage be celebrate, but according to the
lawdable order and constitution of this Kirk; and by such persons, as are by
the Authority of this Kirk warranted to celebrate the same. And that
notwithstanding hereof, sundry, either out of disaffection to the Religion
presently professed in this Kingdom, or being desirous to eschew the Censures
of this Kirk, or to satisfy their promise of Marriage formerly made to others,
or to decline the concurrence and consent of their Parents or others having
interest, or out of some other unlawful pretext, do procure themselves to be
Married, and are Married either in a Clandestine way, contrary to the
established order of the Kirk, or by Jesuits, Priests, Deposed or Suspended
Ministers, or any other not authorized by this Kirk. Therefore His Majesty,
with advice of His said Estates, Statutes and Ordains, That whatsoever person
or persons, shall hereafter Marry, or procure themselves to be Married in a
Clandestine and inorderly way, or by Jesuits, Priests, or any other not
authorized by this Kirk; that they shall be imprisoned for three months; and
beside their said imprisonment shall pay, Each Nobleman, one thousand pounds
Scots; each Barron and landed Gentleman, one thousand merks; each Gentleman and
Burgess, five hundred pounds; each other person, one hundred merks; and that
they shall remain in prison, ay and while they make payment of these respective
penalties abovementioned, which are hereby ordained, to be applied to Pious
uses, within the several Paroches where the said persons dwells. And that the
Celebrator of such Marriages be banished the Kingdom, never to return therein,
under the pain of Death. Likeas, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Prohibites
and Discharges all men and women, having both their ordinar residence within
this Kingdom, to get Marriage to themselves with others within the Kingdom of
England, or Ireland, without Proclamation of Banns here in Scotland, and
against the Order and Constitution of this Church, or Kingdom, under the pains
following, viz. For each Nobleman so Married, one thousand pounds; for each
landed Gentleman, one thousand merks; for each Burgess, five hundred pounds;
and for each other Substantious person, five hundred merks; for an Yeoman, one
hundred pounds; for each person of inferior quality, one hundred merks; the one
half of the which penalties, shall belong to the Kings Majesty, the other to
the Paroch, or Paroches where the Married parties did reside; and Ordains His
Majesty's Advocat, and the Procurator for the Kirk, to pursue before the civil
Judge, the Parties Contraveeners of this Act, or either part thereof, for
payment of the penalties respective abovementioned; and in case of the poor
condition of any man, Married in manner foresaid, Ordains him to be punished
with Stocks and Irons: which pains, corporal and pecunial, shall no ways be
prejudicial to, or derogat from the Order, and Censures of the Kirks, to be
inflicted against the Delinquents.

XXXV. Act concerning the Election and Charges of the Commissioners from Shires
to the Parliament.
THe Kings Majesty considering, That diverse debates have formerly occurred,
concerning the persons who ought and should have vote in the election of
Commissioners from the several Shires of this Kingdom to Parliament, and who
are capable to be Commissioners to Parliaments; and that it is necessar for the
good of His service, that the same be cleared for the future, Does therefore,
with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statute, Enact and
Declare, That beside all Heritors who hold a forty shillings Land of the Kings
Majesty in capite; that also all Heritors, Liferenters and Wodsetters holding
of the King, and others who held their Lands formerly of the Bishops or Abbots,
and now hold of the King, and whose yearly Rent does amount to ten chalders of
victual or one thousand pounds (all Few Duties being deducted) shall be, and
are capable to vote in the election of Commissioners of Parliaments, and to be
elected Commissioners to Parliaments; excepting always from this Act, all
Noblemen and their Vassals. And it being just, that those who shall be chosen,
and accordingly shall attend His Majesty's and the Kingdoms service in
Parliaments, have allowance for their charges; His Majesty does therefore, with
advice foresaid, Modifie and Appoint five pounds Scots of daily allowance to
every Commissioner from any Shire, including the first and last days of the
Parliament, together with eight days for their coming, and as much for their
return, from the furthest Shires of Caithness and Sutherland; and
proportionably at nearer distances; and that the whole Freeholders, Heritors
and Liferenters, holding of the King and Prince, shall according to the
proportion of their Lands and Rents, lying within the Shire, be liable and
obliged in the payment of the said allowance, excepting Noblemen and their
Vassals. For payment of which, all execution of Horning, Poynding and
Quartering is to pass, as for raising of the Excise; and that according as the
time and days of the Parliament shall be attested under the Clerk of Registers
hand. And because at this time, some Commissioners of Shires have been put to
extraordinary expenses in providing of Footmantles for the riding of the
Parliament; It is hereby Statute, That the Commissioners shall be relieved of
the prices thereof, to be given in under their hands; and that the prices of
the Footmantles be raised in the same way and by the same execution, with the
daily allowance aforesaid; the Commissioners always, at the rising of each
Parliament, making the Footmantles forthcoming to the Shire, to be disposed as
they shall think fit.

XXXVI. Act anent Presentation of Ministers.
FOrasmuch as the Kings most Excellent Majesty, considering how necessar it is
for the right and orderly administration of Gods Worship, and the exercises of
Religion, and for keeping of His good Subjects within their duties they owe to
GOD, to His Majsty, to their native Country and fellow Subjects, especially at
this time after so many confusions and distractions, both among Churchmen and
others; That more then ordinary care be had in presenting of Ministers to all
such Kirks as are, or shall be vacand within this Kingdom; has given
particular Commission under His great Seal, as to all Presentations to all
Personages, Vicarages, and other Benefices and Kirks at His Majesty's
presentation. And as to all other Benefices and Kirks, whereof the presentation
belongs to any other Patron or Patrons whatsoever, His Majesty, with advice and
consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That all Patrons or
Persons whatsoever, who has, or pretends any right to the Presentations to any
Patronages, Vicarages, or other Benefices of cure, Kirks or modified Stipends;
be careful in all time coming, that Presentations to these Benefices, Kirks or
Stipends, be granted by them to such persons only, as shall give sufficient
evidence of their Piety, Loyalty, Literature and peaceable Disposition; And
shall, in presence of the Patron or his Attorney, and of the Sheriff of the
Shire, Stewart of the Stewartry, or heretable Baily or Commissar of the bounds,
if it be in the Country, and of the Magistrates of the Buroughs within the
Burgh, before the granting and their accepting the Presentation, take and
subscribe the Oath of Alleagiance, the said Sheriff, Stewart, Baily, Commissar
and Magistrates having first taken the Oath themselves. And it is hereby
Declared, That if any person who has not so taken the Oath of Alleagiance,
shall be presented by any Patron, not only shall the Presentation be void and
null of it self, but the right of the Patronage, as to that vacancy, shall
belong to the Kings Majesty, and the Patrons be repute disaffected to His
Majesty's Government, and contemners of His Royal Authority. And Ordains their
presents to be printed and published at the Market Crosses, that none pretend
ignorance.

XXXVII. ACT concerning the Bullion.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice of the Estates of Parliament, now presently
conveened by His Majesty's special Authority, considering how much the penury
and scarcety of His Majesty's Coin here in Scotland, is occasioned by the
meannesse and smalnesse of the proportion of Bullion at first imposed, never
heretofore considerably augmented; notwithstanding His Majesty's Customs have
been several times augmented, Enacts Statutes and Ordains, That all Commodities
liable in payment of Bullion, shall pay according to the Rates mentioned in the
Alphabet of Bullion after-following, as the same is now augmented and
condescended upon. Which Alphabet of Bullion, His Majesty with advice foresaid,
Ordains to be printed and published. And to prevent all abuse and prejudice to
the said Mint, that may occur and fall out by the Customers exacting of His
Majesty's, and His Predecessors, their own Coin from the Merchants exporters of
the Commodities liable in payment of the quantities of Bullion, as is
aforesaid, or else exacting so much per ounce of the said Merchant exporter, to
the great prejudice and utter destruction of the said Mint, His Majesty, with
advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that every Fermerer or Customer, within
this His Majesty's Kingdom, shall by the advice and concurrence of the several
Clerks of Cocquet, cause all and every Merchant (whether Native or Forraigner)
exporter of the Commodities liable in payment of the quantities of Bullion, set
down in the aforesaid Alphabet of Bullion condescended upon, and agreed to, as
the same is now augmented and Ordained to be printed and published, find sicker
Surety and Caution, or give Pledges that he may answer for, that Bullion
equivalent in proportion to the quantity of goods exported, be delivered to the
Officers of His Majesty's Mint, (and that of Foreign Bullion) either Plate or
burnt Silver, twelve Denier fine, and being baser, to be considered by weight
and reckoning, and the said Surety, or Pledges, to be taken before the said
Merchant receive his Cocquet, Transire or other Warrant whatsoever, for
exporting the said goods liable in payment of the quantities of Bullion, as is
aforesaid; and Prohibites and Discharges all and every of the said Customers,
and Clerks of Cocquet within this Kingdom, to exact or receive any of His
Majesty's, or His Predecessors, Coyns or any other satisfaction whatsoever;
except the said Foreign Bullion at the fineness aforesaid, and that not only
under the pain of deprivation of their Offices, but also of punishing of their
persons, and fining of them in their goods, by the appointment, and at the
discretion of the Lords of His Majesty's Secret Council; and to the effect any
such collusion or transaction may be discovered, His Majesty, with advice
foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that each person delating or discovering any
such collusion, or transaction, as is aforesaid, shall receive and have paid to
him, the third part of the value of the Bullion, that was due to have been paid
by the Merchant exporter, but prejudice of the certification foresaid. As also
it is Statute and Ordained, That the said Customers, their Accounts, be
controlled upon the quantity of Bullion delivered to the said Officers of His
Majesty's Mint, according to their Letters of receipt thereof; and what rests
not delivered, that the Customers be answerable therefore; and that the said
Customers, grant a convenient time for home-bringing of the said Bullion,
correspondent to the distance of the port, at which the goods exported are to
be delivered; the longest time not exceeding seven months. And in like manner,
it is Statute and Ordained, That the Alphabet of Bullion, as the same is now
established and appointed to be printed and published, be of full force from
the date of their presents. And that all Commodities exported after the said
day, be liable to the several proportions of Bullion therein contained;
notwithstanding of any Act or Acts, made or to be made, in this present
Parliament, in favors of any Manufactories, Companies of Fishing or Trade, or
other Acts whatsoever; which are hereby Declared, not to impede the payment of
Bullion, augmented in manner foresaid.

Follows the A, B, C. of Bullion, as it is now established by our Sovereign
Lord and Estates of Parliament.
A
AShes, Potashes, Wood, or Soap-ashes, the last four ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Aquavitae, the barrel containing ten gallons two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Alum, ilk two hundred weight two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Anniz-seids, ilk hundred weight two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Apples, ilk two bolls, or ilk four barrels
two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
B
Barrel-staves the thousand two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Bear, every four bolls, half boll two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Beeff, ilk three barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Beans, every four bolls, half boll two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Bear, called drinking bear, the tun four ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Bell-mettal, the hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Bullets, four thousand two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Bird-lime, ilk three hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Brass, ilk two hundred weight, or barrel two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Bridles, the groce, or twelve dozen two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Brazile, ilk two hundred weight two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Butter good, ilk two barrels two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Butter corrupt, or Orkney Butter, ilk three
barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Bridle-bits, the groce,
or twelve dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Baikes, ilk
five hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Boots, ilk
thirty pair two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Buckram, ilk
hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Bark, ilk eight
bolls two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
C
CAbles, ilk five hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Cable-yarn, ilk thousand weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Cards called -- New Woollen Cards, ilk six dozen two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Cards called -- Old Woollen Cards, ilk twelve dozen
two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Cards called -- Stock Cards,
every four dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Cards called
playing Cards, every three groce, or thirty six dozen two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Cheese, ilk five hundred weight two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Coals, every four chalders two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Cordages, tarred or untarred, ilk five hundred
weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Corballs of Oak, ilk
twenty pieces two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Copper, ilk
thousand weight four ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Cloth of all
sorts, Linen and Woollen, ilk hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Copperas, ilk hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Cushons called sewed Cushons of all sorts, ilk twelve dozen two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Cambrick, ilk hundred else four
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
D
DEals of all sorts, the hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Dornick, ilk hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
E
Eggs, ilk three barrells two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
F
FLocks, the thousand weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Fustians, ilk three pieces two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Feathers for Beds, ilk three hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Flower, ilk four Bolls two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine.
G
Glue, ilk five hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Gloves, ilk six groce two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Grograins
of Scots making, ilk four pieces two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Galls, ilk hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Girdles, ilk hundred three ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Ginger,
ilk hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Glasses
called drinking Glasses, and Glass Bottles, ilk twelve dozen one ounce.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Glass called Window Glass, ilk three
chests two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
H
Hemp Seed, ilk six barrells two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Hemp, of all sorts, ilk eight hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Herrings, White-herrings, ilk six barrels two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Herrings, Red-herrings, ilk five thousand two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Halberts ungilt, ilk three dozen
two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Hides of all sorts, ilk three
dacker two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Hose, Hose, Bonnets and
Socks, of Wool, made in two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Hose,
Lieth-winde, Dundee and other places in this two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Hose, Kingdom, ilk five hundred pair two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Honey ilk three barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Horns, Buck-hornes, ilk five hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Horns, Hart-hornes, ilk three hundred two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Horns, Oxen-hornes, ilk two thousand two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Horns, Ram, or Sheep-hornes, ilk five
thousand two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Horses or Mears, ilk
two thereof two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Horses tails, ilk
three hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Hooks, ilk two
groce two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Hops, ilk hundred weight
one ounce. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Half-long Skines, ilk ten dacker
two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Hard Wair, ilk hundred weight
one ounce. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Horse-shoon, ilk hundred gang
two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
I
JEists, of Oak, ilk twenty pieces two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. JEists, of Fir, forty pieces two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Jedburgh Staves, ilk hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Iron, ilk, fifty stone weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Iron, ilk three Ship-pound two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Iron, ilk last eight ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Iron
Pots, ilk three dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Iron-Ordnance, ilk four hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Indigo, ilk hundred weight three ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine.
K
KEttles, ilk hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Killing, ilk hundred and one half two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Killing, ilk six barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Knappel of all sorts, ilk five hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Kine, ilk four of them two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Knives, ilk twenty dozen one ounce. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Kombes of all sorts, ilk hundred dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine.
L
LAmbs, ilk thirty two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Lead, ilk
two thousand weight or fodder two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Lead-ore, ilk six barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Leather called -- Wilde-leather, ilk three dacker two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Leather called -- White-leather, ilk four hundred skins two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Leather called -- Leather-points,
ilk ten groce two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Linning-cloath of
all sorts, ilk hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Lint-seed, ilk three barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Lint of all sorts, ilk eight hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Ling, ilk hundred and threescore two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Ling, ilk six barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Liquorise, ilk hundred weight one ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Lobsters, ilk two hundred one ounce. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. L^nt-wheels, ilk twelve dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Leamons, ilk barrel of the measure of ten gallons one ounce. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine.
M
MAdder, cropt-madder, and all other bal-madder, two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. MAdder, ilk two hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. MAdder, fat-madder, ilk three hundred weight two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Malt, every four bolls half boll two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Meal, every six bolls two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Masts of all sorts, ilk dozen two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Mittons called woven Mittons, ilk thousand
pair two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
N
NAils of all sorts, ilk twenty thousand two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Nuts, ilk eight barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Needles of all sorts, ilk twenty groce, the groce containing twelve dozen
one ounce. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Night-caps, ilk thirty dozen one
ounce. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. New-lit, ilk hundred weight two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
O
OArs of all sorts, the hundred containing six score two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Oats, every six bols two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Oxen, ilk three of them two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Oil, ilk six barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Orchyard-lit, ilk hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Onions and Onion heads, ilk four barrels two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Oisters, ilk twenty thousand one ounce. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine.
P
PAns of Brass, ilk hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Pans of Iron, ilk five hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Passments, of Silk of all sorts, ilk four pound two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Passments, of Worstead or Thread, ilk
twenty groce, the groce containing twelve dozen of else two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Pease, every six bols two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Penner and Ink-horns, ilk two groce two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Pewter, ilk hundred weight two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Pistols, ilk eight pair two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Pitch, great or small bind, ilk four barrels two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Points of Silk, ilk four groce two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Points of Leather, ilk ten groce two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Points of Thread, ilk threescore
groce two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Pots of Brass, ilk
hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Pots of Iron,
ilk three dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Powder, ilk
hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Pyp-staves, ilk
six hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Purses of Leather,
ilk four groce two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Plaiding, ilk
hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Pepper, ilk
hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Paper, ilk
forty reams two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Plaids called
wearing Plaids, ilk hundred else four ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Phingrim, being a sort of plaiding, ilk hundred else three ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Prunes, ilk two hundred weight one ounce.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Pleuch-socks and Culters, ilk hundred two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Pellet-skines, ilk two hundred one
ounce. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
R
RIbbands of Silk, ilk four pound weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. RIbbands of Worstead, ilk ten groce two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Roset, ilk three hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Rye and Rye-meal, ilk six bolls two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Rasines, ilk hundred weight one ounce. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Roe-skins, ilk hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Runds of Cloth, ilk three thousand else one ounce. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine.
S
SAil-canvas, ilk two hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Sackcloth, ilk two hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Saddles covered, ilk twenty four two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Saddle-stocks, ilk thirty two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Soap, ilk six barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Salmond, ilk three barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Salt, ilk three chalders, two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Saltpeter, ilk two hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Says of Scots making, ilk fifty else two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Says of Flanders making, ilk forty else two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Searges of Scots making, ilk fifty
else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Sheep, ilk twenty of them
two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Silk of all sorts, ilk four
pound weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called
Calf-skins, ilk three dacker two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Skins, called Clipped skins, ilk fifteenscore two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Cunning-skins, ilk two thousand two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Fulmert-skins, called
Fitchoes, ten dacker two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins,
called Futfells and Skaldings, ilk thousand two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Skins, called Goat Skins, ilk three hundred two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Kid-skins, ilk thousand two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Lamb-skins, ilk two thousand
two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Lentron ware, ilk
thousand two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called
Mariken-skins made in Scotland, ilk hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Skins, called Mertrick-skins, ilk dacker two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Otter-skins, ilk two dozen two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Shorling-skins, ilk two
hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called
Sealch-skins, ilk twenty dacker two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Skins, called Tod-skins, ilk half hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Skins, called Veal-skins, ilk four dacker two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Wool-skins, ilk fifteenscore two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Skins, called Woolf-skins, ilk two
dacker two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Sparres, Roof-sparres,
ilk hundred two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Sparres,
Roof-sparres of Oak, ilk twenty two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Sparres, Wicker-sparres, ilk thousand two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Stulling, every six bolls two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Stirrop-irons, ilk ten dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Stirrop-leathers, ilk twenty dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Sword-blaides, ilk threescore two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Swords mounted, ilk twenty two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. Sword-belts of leather, ilk twelve dozen two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Swine, ilk ten of them two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Suggar of all sorts, ilk sixty pound weight two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Sythes, ilk threescore of them two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Seathes, ilk five hundred thereof two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Seathes, ilk six barrels two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Shoos, ilk hundred pair two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Starch, ilk hundred weight two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Slyreland, ilk hundred else three ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Showed Beds the piece two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Sulfur, ilk hundred weight one ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine.
T
TAkle, ilk five hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Tallow, called Narves Tallow, ilk six barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Scots Tallow, ilk three barrels two ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Tar of great and small bind, ilk six barrels two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Tyking for Beds, ilk hundred else two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Tows, ilk five hundred weight two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Trumps, ilk five hundred one
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Tobacco, ilk hundred weight one
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Tobacco-pipes, ilk forty gross one
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
V
VEals, ilk ten of them two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Vinegar
of Wine, ilk two tuns two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Vinegar
of Bear or Ale, ilk three tuns two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
W
WAdmoll, ilk two hundred else two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Wainscot of all sorts, ilk thirty of them two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. Wax, ilk last or fourteen Ship-pounds four ounces. Bullion. Silver
twelve Denier fine. Wheat, every four bolls half boll two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Whale-shot, ilk two barrels two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Worstead yarn for Showing, ilk twenty pound two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Wool, ilk six stone weight two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Wines, ilk tun two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. Wine-sellars, ilk twenty of them two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. Whingers or Durks, ilk sixty of them one
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
Y
YArn, Cable-yarn, ilk eight hundred weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve
Denier fine. YArn, Cotton-yarn, ilk sixty pound weight two ounces. Bullion.
Silver twelve Denier fine. YArn, Irish-yarn, ilk three hundred weight two
ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. YArn, Raw Linning-yarn, Dutch or
French, ilk sixty pound two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. YArn,
Scots-yarn, ilk fifty pound weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier
fine. YArn, Spruce or Muscovia-yarn, ilk two hundred weight two ounces.
Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine. YArn, Woollen or Bay-yarn, ilk hundred
weight two ounces. Bullion. Silver twelve Denier fine.
XXXVIII. Commission and Instructions to the Justices of Peace and Constables.
OUr Sovereign Lord, taking to His Royal consideration, how much the appointing
of Justices of Peace and Constables within all the Shires of this Kingdom,
under the Reign of His Majesty's Royal Predecessors, did contribute to the
Peace, Quiet and good Government thereof, and to the speedy and impartial
execution of Law and Justice to all persons subjected to their jurisdiction and
power. Therefore, and for the furtherance of these ends in the future, His
Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does hereby
Statute and Ordain, That in all time coming, there shall be Justices of His
Majesty's Peace appointed within each several Shire of this Kingdom, to be
nominate, from time to time, by His Majesty and His Royal Successors: Which
Justices of Peace are hereby empowered to administrate Justice, and put His
Majesty's Laws in execution, according to the particular Instructions
after-mentioned, viz.

The Justices of Peace at their first sitting, shall take the Oath of
Alleagiance, and Oath De sideli administratione: which at first shall be
administrate to them by the Sheriff or his Depute of ilk respective Shire, or
in their absence, by the President and Conveener for the time.

Follows the Oath of Alleagiance.
I For testification of my faithful Obedience to my most Gracious and
redoubted Sovereign, CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Affirm, testify and declare, by this my solemn
Oath, that I acknowledge my said Sovereign, Only Supreme Governor of this
Kingdom, over all Persons and in all Causes; and that no Foreign Prince, Power
or State, nor Person Civil or Ecclesiastic, has any Jurisdiction, Power or
Superiority over the same: And therefore I do utterly renounce and foresake all
Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers and Authorities; and shall at my utmost power,
defend, assist and maintain His Majesty's Jurisdiction foresaid against all
deadly, and shall never decline His Majesty's Power nor Jurisdiction, as I
shall answer to GOD.

Follows the Oath De fideli administratione.
I As one of the Commissioners and Justices of Peace within Shires, according
to my knowledge, wit and power, shall do equal Right both to rich and poor,
conform to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Land; and that I shall not be
of Council with any person in any quarrel or matter depending before me; and
that I shall every Quarter keep the Sessions, or oftener, as I shall be
required, not having any just impediment in the contrair, and shall faithfully
and truly discharge my duty as a Justice of His Majesty's Peace, and shall
leave nothing undone that may tend to the preservation of the same: So help me
GOD.

The Justices of Peace, in each respective Shire, shall meet and conveen
together, four times in the year, viz. On the first Tuesday of May, the first
Tuesday of August, the last Tuesday of October, and the first Tuesday of March.
In which Sessions, they shall administrate Justice to the people in things that
are within their Jurisdiction, and punish the guilty, for Faults and Crimes
done and committed in the preceding Quarter; and by mutual and conjunct
advice, make and rectify Ordinances for the Fees of Servants, Shearers in
Harvest and other Laboring men, appoint Prices for all Handy-crafts, elect or
continue Constables or other Officers, and dispose of the Fines and Mulcts for
payment of the Constables, Clerks and other Officers Fees, and employ the
remanent on such necessary and pious uses, as they shall find most expedient;
and shall have power to continue the said Sessions, or to adjourn the same to
such days and places as shall be most convenient.

Any one Justice shall have power upon complaint of any person, being threatened
and fearing to be wronged, to bind the party complained upon, under such a
pecunial sum to keep the Peace, as he shall think fitting: As also to commit
him until Surety be found by him, the said Complainer always giving his oath
before the Justice, that he has just cause to dread him harm. And albeit no
person complain, yet if the Justice be credibly informed of appearance of
trouble betwixt any parties, he shall bind them to the Peace in manner
foresaid, except the parties declare upon their consciences, that neither of
them bear any grudge to other. And all such Bonds shall be kept and Recorded by
him, and he shall make delivery of the same to the Clerk of the Peace at the
next Sessions, to be kept and registrate by him.

If any person being charged to make his appearance before a Justice of Peace,
shall refuse or delay without cause, if the party be a Landed Gentleman, whose
Rents exceed ten chalders of victual, or one thousand merks of silver, then the
Justice (whose command is contemned) shall inform the same to some of His
Majesty's Privy Council, to the effect, the party of the quality foresaid may
be called and fined for his disobedience; and if the dissobeyer be of a meaner
degree, the Justice of Peace shall hereby have power to command the next
Constable, or in absence of a Constable, his own servant, or any other person
having a Warrant in writ subscribed by the said Justice of Peace, with
assistance of the Country, to bring any such party before him.

If either the Sheriff or Baily shall condemn any person in Bloodwyt, or
otherwise convict him in any pain proper for him to impose, the Justice shall
have no power of new to fine that Offender for that offense; but if they shall
find him not condignly punished, in regard of the offense committed by him,
they shall then inform His Majesty's Council thereof, that they may take order
therewith; and if there be no satisfaction made by the Sheriff or Baily to the
Party offended, the Justices may modifie a reasonable satisfaction to the Party
offended, he pursuing therefore before them: And if they find the satisfaction
decerned by the Sheriff or Baily, in favors of the said Party offended, not
condign, nor answerable to the offense and wrong sustained, then they shall
also inform His Majesty's Council thereof, that they may take order therewith
as appertains.

If either Sheriff or Baily or their Deputes, by collusion with the Delinquent,
shall suffer any person guilty, to be quitted or cleared by an Assize, the
Party once cleared, is not to be brought further in question before the
Justices, but upon their information, the Judges are to be called, censured and
severely punished by His Majesty's Council.

The said Justices shall hereby have power to proceed upon all persons
committing Riots, and breaking the Kings Peace under the degree of Noblemen,
Prelates, Counselors and Senators of the College of Justice, and to punish
and fine according to the quality of the Crime, and the Estate of the Offender.
And if any of the said persons, being charged to compear before the said
Justices, shall disobey, the Summons being indorsed, the lawful Citation
verified, and Fact proven, the Justices shall punish and fine the not
compearing, according to the quality of the Crime and Estate of the Offender.
And for the more clear determination of the order which shall be kept by the
said Commissioners, in the deducing of any such Process, Our Sovereign Lord,
with advice of His Estates, Declares, That it shall be lawful to the said
Justices, whenever they have any occasion to move any action against Parties,
for committing any like Fact or Riot, to refer the first Summons to the Parties
oaths of verity, failzeing of other lawful probation; who being personally
summoned by that first Citation, shall be holden as confessed, and Decree to be
pronounced against him, conform to the Libell and Summons. And if he be not
personally summoned by the first Citation, the said Commissioners shall be
holden to cause summon him of new again, by a second Summons at his dwelling
place; which two Citations shall be as sufficient to infer Decree and Sentence
upon the Libell against him, as if he were apprehended personally. And which
Sentence given after the manner and form of probation above-written, His
Majesty, with advice foresaid, Authorizes and Sustains as good and lawful in
themselves. And as concerning these persons of higher degree, the said
Commissioners shall use all their power for preventing and staying of the
Riots, commanding the attempters in His Majesty's Name to cease, and to find
Caution for keeping of the Peace, and for their compearance before His
Majesty's Council. And if any person, being charged to find Caution, and refuse
it, or delay to do the same, and in the mean time contraveeneth the said
charge, by committing of some Deed betwixt the time of the Charge and finding
of the Caution, nevertheless he shall be answerable for the pain, from the date
of the Charge, likeas if Caution had been then found.

The said Commissioners shall put His Majesty's Act of Parliament to due and
full execution against wilful Beggars and Vagabonds, solitary and idle Men and
Women without Calling or Trade, lurking in Alehouses, tied to no certain
services, repute and holden as Vagabonds; and against those persons who are
commonly called Egyptians, and they shall punish and fine their Ressetters and
Setters of houses to them accordingly, by such competent pains as is proper for
them to enjoin.

The said Commissioners and Justices of Peace are hereby authorized and
empowered, to give order (as they shall think most convenient and with least
grief to the Subjects) for mending of all Highways and Passages, to or from
any Market Town or Seaport within that Shire, and shall call before them all
such persons as shall strait these Passages (or otherwise by casting of
Ditches or Fulsies through the same) shall make these Highways noisome and
troublesome unto passengers, and shall punish and fine them according to the
quality of their offense. And to the effect it may be known of what breadth all
common Highways should be to Market Towns, Our Sovereign Lord, with advice
foresaid, Declares, That the same should be of twenty foot of measure in
breadth at the least, and where any are of larger breadth, they Ordain the same
so to remain unaltered or straightened, and that the said Justices maintain the
same, with all other Ways from any Town in the Paroch to the paroch Churches,
in the estate as they are: And where they find any necessity of other Ways
from any Town in the Paroch to paroch Churches, they shall inform His Majesty's
Secret Council thereof, who shall give them (after sufficient information)
their direction thereanent; according whereunto, they shall be holden to
proceed. And if any person refuse to concur for mending of Highways and
Passages, the said Justices shall have power to censure and punish them
according to their discretion; with provision always, that if in their
proceedings therein, they use such severity or rigor as may move just
complaints against them, they shall be censured therefore by His Majesty's
Secret Council as appertains.

The said Justices shall put His Majesty's Acts of Parliament to execution,
against Cutters and Destroyers of Plantting, Green-wood, Orchards, Gardens,
Haynings, Breakers of Dove-houses and Cunninghares, Stealers of Bees and
Bee-hives, users of unlawful Games with Setting Dogs, Slayers of red and
black Fishes and Smolts, in forbidden time, Foulers fouling in other men's
Lands, Makers of Moorburn and Mosseburn, Setters of Crooes and Nets in Waters
and Dames, having, and keeping of Crooes and Yairs in forbidden time, and shall
proceed against them accordingly. And for their better warrant to proceed in
the premises, it is His Highness pleasure, that Commissions be granted to the
said Justices of Peace, to try and punish the violators of the said Acts; in
the trial whereof they shall proceed by witnesses, or by oath of Party; and the
punishment to be inflicted by them, shall be a pecunial sum, answerable to the
circumstance of the offense, and quality of the offenders; with special
provision, that their Censures and Punishments shall extend against none, but
those against whom by privilege of their Instructions they may lawfully
proceed. And also with provision, that the said Commissions be not extended to
any persons, who shall be arrested and conveened for the said crimes, before
any other ordinary Judge. It is also provided, that the ordinance and power
contained in this Article, shall no ways be prejudicial to any other
Commissions, or Rights whatsoever, granted to other parties, whereby they have
power to proceed and censure the crimes and offenses above-written.

Item, They shall inform the Kings Majesty's Council, and His Highness
Treasurer, or Advocat, at the least once every year, of Forstallers and
Regraters of Mercats, that order may be taken with them, conform to the Acts of
Parliament.

It shall not be leasome to any Hoastlar, to resset any Masterlesse Men and
Rebels at the Horn, any Vagabonds, or other persons guilty of known crimes, or
using Stouth and Reaf, under the pains underwritten: To wit, forty shillings,
to be incurred by them for the first fault, four pounds for the second, and ten
merks for the third; together with the losing of the liberty of Brewing: The
incurrers of the which pains, shall be punished according to the order
foresaid, by the Barrons and Masters of the ground whereupon the Hoastlar
dwells, within the space of fifteen days after the committing of the Fact;
and if the said Barrons and Heritors, neglect to do the same, within the said
space, it shall be lawful to the said Justices, to pursue and fine the
Delinquents in their Courts, according to the pains foresaid, and to uplift the
same from them; without prejudice always of whatsoever Acts, made against the
said Hoastlars in the Barron Court Books, under whom they dwell, bearing any
higher pain, then as is set down in this above-written Act; and also without
prejudice of all Action, Criminal or Civil, competent of the Law, against the
said Hoastlars, in case they be under the danger thereof, which shall not be
taken away by any punishment, set down, and to be inflicted conform to this Act.

Item, They shall inform the Kings Treasurer and Advocat, of breakers and
contraveeners of the Acts of Parliament, made against Malt-makers, that the
transgressors and contraveeners thereof may be punished, conform to the Tenor
of the said Acts.

They shall set down order in the Country, for Governance in time of Plague,
and shall punish severely the disobeyers of the order appointed by them,
according to the quality of the Delinquent.

They shall appoint at the Quarter Sessions to be kept in August and February,
the ordinary Hire and Wages of Laborers, Workmen and Servants; and who shall
refuse to serve upon the price set down by them, shall be imprisoned, and
further punished at their discretion: and to the effect Servants may be the
more willing to obey the Ordinances to be made by the said Justices, for the
said Fees, the said Justices shall have power to decern, and compel the
Master to make payment of the Fees, appointed by their Ordinance, in case the
Servants please rather to pursue for the same before them then any other Judge.

The said Justices shall take notice in all Sheriffdoms, where there are any
Goales, and Prison-houses, within any Burgh, that the same may be kept up and
not suffered to decay or become ruinous: and if there be any Shire, where there
is not any Goal or Prisonhouse, they shall inform His Majesty's Council
thereof, that they may appoint and give order for building of one within the
Head Burgh of the Shire, and according to the directions to be given
thereanent, the Justices shall be holden to proceed.

And because there be a great many of Prisoners apprehended and committed, who
having no means of their own for their maintenance and entertainment, will
otherwise famish and starve before they can come to their trial, who not the
less, in regard of the crimes committed, can no ways be put under surety, or
otherwise, in faults of less consequence, are unable to find sufficient
Caution to be made forth coming, and answerable at the next Session; Therefore
it shall be lawful to the said Commissioners and Justices, at their Quarter
Session, to rate every Paroch for a weekly proportion, for the entertainment of
those poor Prisoners; providing they do not exceed the sum of five shillings
Scots money at the most, nor under one shilling at the least; which sum shall
be uplifted for that use by the Minister or Reader, who shall serve at every
Paroch, from such Deacons, who shall be appointed to collect the same; and the
said sums to be delivered by the Constable of the Paroch, at the Quarter
Sessions, in presence of the whole Bench then conveened, to such persons as the
said Justices shall trust therewith, and who accordingly, shall make due
account in paying the Jaylors such rates as shall be allowed for the poor
Prisoners, and making the rest forth coming for such use and intent of the like
nature, as the said Justices shall appoint.

All Magistrates of Burghs, and keepers of any Goals or Prisons, shall receive
into their Prisons, all such persons, as either shall be brought by Constables,
or sent unto them by Warrands under the hand of any one Justice of Peace, the
said Justices causing satisfy for their entertainment; and if any
Magistrates, or their Jaylors, suffer any persons, committed by the Justices to
their Prisons, to escape, they shall be condignly punished therefore, at the
discretion of His Majesty's Council.

Item, Our Sovereign Lord, with advice foresaid, Ordains the said
Commissioners, to set a price upon Crafts-mens work, and upon the Ordinars of
Penny-Bridals, together with the price of Shearers Fees, and to punish the
Contraveeners, as appertains.

They shall cause sufficient single and double Ale to be brewed in every Shire,
and shall appoint Visitors to that effect, with consent of the Barron and
Over-lord of the ground: They shall set down Acts against notorious and common
Drunkards, and impose sums upon the Contraveeners, according to their qualities
and deserts.

Our Sovereign Lord, with advice foresaid, Declares, That Three Justices of
Peace shall be a full number and Session, to decide in matters occurring
betwixt the four Quarter Sessions.

Also Declares, that no Letters of Caption ought to be granted against the
said Justices, for apprehending of Rebels, except they be found subject to do
the same, by possessing of such other offices and places, to the which the
obedience and putting to execution of any such charges does belong.

And because there is sensible prejudice seen and felt through many parts of
the Kingdom, by reason of diversity of Measures and Weights used in the same.
Therefore Our Sovereign Lord, with advice foresaid, for removing of all abuses
which may ensue in any time to come thereby, Has found expedient, and by this
Decree and Statute of Parliament, Decerns, Statutes and Ordains, That there
shall be but one just Measure and Weight through all the parts of the Kingdom,
which shall universally serve all His Highness Lieges, by the which they shall
sell and buy, and receive, and give out in all times to come; which Measure,
His Majesty with advice foresaid, finds should be that Measure of Linlithgow,
which is now commonly used and which has been used most customably through the
greatest parts of this Kingdom these many years bypast. And for settling a
perfect Order, whereby all the Measures that are now used may be reduced to the
conformity of the said Measures now authorized; and for making of proportion
answerable betwixt the lesser Measure and Weights, and the greatest. His
Majesty with advice foresaid, has granted full power and Commission to
Alexander Frazer of Phillorth, Sir Gilbert Ramsay of Balmayn, William Scot of
Ardross, John Murray of Touchadam, Sir Robert Hepburn of Keith, James
Creightoun of Saint Leonards, Sir Andrew Ramsay, Sir Robert Murray, Sir
Alexander Wedderburn, John Bell, William Cunningham, Andrew Glen, Sir William
Thomson. Whom, or any seven of them, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Ordains
to meet and conveen together, at such time and place as they shall think
expedient, and to consult and advise together, and to appoint and determine
upon the most convenient means, how the said Measures and Weights may be
reduced to the conformity foresaid; and after they have ripely advised
therewith, and given forth their determination thereanent, they shall deliver
the same, and whole course of their proccedings, in the said matter, to the
Commissioners and Justices of Peace, and to the Deans of Gild of the Head
Burghs of the Shires, who shall be holden carefully to do their diligence, to
see the Measure foresaid, now appointed, to have course through all parts, as
well Burgh as Landwart. And that there may be one constant conformity in Head
Burgh and Land, Our Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent foresaid, Ordains,
that the said Justices of Peace, in Landwart, take trial of the Measures and
Weights used in Burgh, and to take a Note from the Magistrates, and Deans of
Gild of every Town, of the Weights and Measures, and of the number thereof,
which the said Magistrates and Deans of Gild in Burgh, shall be holden to
show, declare and give up to them, to the effect the said Justices to
Landwart, may confer the same with the Standard now authorized; and where they
find any disconformity in the same, from the said Standard, the said Justices
shall inform the Kings Majesty's Council thereof, that they may take order
therewith as appertains: For it is expressly provided by these presents, that
the said Magistrates in Burgh, shall not be permitted to have or use more
Measures within Towns, then the number to be professed by them, and given up in
Writ to the said Justices to Landwart, as said is: this always being
respected, That if the said Magistrates within Burgh, find any necessity for
having any more Measures then was given up and used by them before, it shall be
licenced to them to make more Measures, they being answerable and conform to the
Standard; and making the said Justices to Landwart foreseen and acquaint
therewith, and declaring the number of the Measures, whereof they find the
necessity of use.

The said Justices shall be holden to give command and direction to their
Constables, to apprehend any such person, who shall be found contemptuously to
have disobeyed the Censures of the Church, they being lawfully required to do
the same.

The said Justices of Peace, as well to Burgh as Land, shall conveen and be
present at the Quarter Sessions of the Shire where the Burgh and Land lies,
give their Oath to the Bench at their admission, make their Record, and make
payment of the Fines intrometted with by them, as Justices of Peace of that
Shire, to their Collector.

They shall appoint a sufficient Collector for uplifting the Fines and
Penalties, which they have power to impose upon an Offender, and are to take
Caution of him for making due account.

They shall have, during the time of Sessions, for every day of their abode (so
it do not exceed the number of three days at the most at one time) allowed to
every one of them, forty shillings Scots money, daily to be paid and uplifted
by the Collector of the Fines; but neither Earl, Lord, Bishop, Privy Councellor
or Sessioner, shall have any allowance; and all such Justices as have the
benefit of that allowance, and shall be absent from every ordinary Quarter
Sessions, or otherwise when he is required lawfully by the Custos Rotulorum to
any particular Meeting, shall incur the penalty of forty pounds Scots money
not being lawfully excused, and the excuse allowed by the rest of the Justices
there assembled.

The Lords of Session shall direct general and summar Charges of Horning and
Poynding, at the instance of the Collector appointed in every Country for
ingathering all Fines and Penalties whatsoever incurred, upon a simple Charge
of fifteen days; and no Suspension shall be granted thereof, but upon
consignation of the sums contained in the Sentences, and by finding Caution for
payment of the charges, at the modification of the said Lords.

The said Commissioners, at the end of every Quarter Session, shall send to
His Majesty's Council, a Catalogue of all such persons as they have either
committed, or otherwise put under surety, with a short Abbreviate of the cause
thereof; to the effect, that thereupon the Council, as they shall think
expedient, may return to them against their next Session, or to the Custos
Rotulorum in the mean time, their further directions.

The said Justices shall put in execution, all Acts of Parliament made for
punishing all persons whatsoever, who shall Curse or profanely Swear, or shall
be Mockers or Reproachers of Piety or the exercise thereof; and shall require
and levy upon every Offender, the several penalties following, viz. Of a
Nobleman twenty pounds; each Barron twenty merks; each Gentleman, Heritor or
Burgess, ten merks; each Yeoman forty shillings; each Servant twenty
shillings, Scots money; each Minister the fifth part of his years Stipend;
without prejudice to other proceedings against any such Minister for the same.
And in any of all the cases before specified in this Instruction, the said
Justices shall put in execution all such Laws, as for Corporal punishments,
have any provisions mentioned in them for such cases: And in case of the
inabilities of the parties Delinquents to pay the sum mentioned in this
Instruction, the said Justices shall put in execution such Laws, as for
Corporal punishments, have any provision mentioned in them for such cases; and
that the Wives Delinquents shall be punished according to the quality of their
respective Husbands, and that their Husbands be liable for the payment of their
Wives Fines respectively, in manner abovementioned, toties quoties for each
fault: And all others whatsoever, not particularly herein nominate, are to pay
in proportion to their respective qualities and degrees. And also, the said
Justices are to put in execution, the Acts of Parliament made for the punishing
of all persons that shall be found guilty of the sin of Fornication; and that
they levy or cause to be levied, the several pecunial sums therein mentioned,
viz. For each Nobleman, for the first fault four hundred pounds; each Barron
two hundred pounds; each other Gentleman and Burgess one hundred pounds; every
other person of inferior quality ten pounds, Scots money; and that these
penalties shall be doubled toties quoties, according to the relapses and
degrees of the Offense, and quality of the Offenders. And that the said
penalties shall be levied, not only of the Man, but also of the Woman according
to her quality and the degree of her offense, the one without prejudice of the
other. All and sundry which penalties so to be levied, are to be disposed of as
follows; To wit, one half to pious uses in the same Paroch where the
Offenders live, or the offense has been committed, and the other half to be
divided in two equal parts, one part whereof to be given to the Informer and
Prosecutor, and out of the other half, to satisfy the Constable, or other
persons who shall be employed for bringing the person accused to Justice, and
the remainder to be disposed of to pious uses, or to satisfy the Constables
for their travel and service in other parts of their office, according as the
Justices shall think fit.

That the Justices shall put the Acts of Parliament in execution, for the
punishing of all persons found guilty of the sin of Drunkenness or excessive
Drinking, especially under the names of Healths, or haunting Taverns or
Alehouses after ten of the Clock at night, or at any time of the day, except
in time of travel, or for ordinary refreshments. As also against the keepers of
the Taverns or Alehouses, that shall sell the drink unto them: Which Penalties
in the said several Acts contained, the said Justices are to levy, or cause
to be levied, upon the said Delinquents; and the said penalties are to be
disposed of by the said Justices, in like-manner as aforesaid.

The said Justices shall put in execution, all Acts of Parliament, made
against such persons as shall Profane the Lord's Day, and require or levy the
penalties therein contained: which penalties foresaid, the said Justices are
to dispose of, in like-manner as aforesaid.

And at what time and whenever one shall accuse another person or persons to
be guilty of Treason, Murder or other Felony, Blasphemy, Incest, or any other
heinous Crimes: in such cases the said Justice or Justices, shall forthwith
cause such person or persons to be apprehended, and after inquiry made in the
cause, the said Justice or Justices, if they find cause, shall commit the
Offender to prison, or take sufficient Bail, if the case by the Law be
bailable; and shall take the information of the Party accusing upon oath, and
bind him to prosecute, and shall take the testimony or deposition of the
witnesses likewise upon oath, and bind them to give in evidence, and shall also
take the examination of the party accused. All which Recognizances,
Informations, Depositions and Examinations, the said Justice or Justices, shall
certify to the next Quarter Session, Assizes or Criminal Courts respectively,
to the end the Justice may proceed against them according to the Law.

And if any Nobleman, Barron or Baily, or any in their names, having power,
shall acclaim the right of Jurisdiction to proceed against any Delinquent
apprehended by a Constable for any Capital crime: Then, and in that case, any
of the Justices shall receive security of the said Party, who required the
Defender to be delivered to him, that justice shall be duly ministered, and
then shall cause delivery of the said person to be made to him; and the said
Justice of Peace, at the next Session, shall certify the whole matter to the
Bench; to the effect they may enquire, whether justice has been accordingly
ministered, and if any fault be found, to advertise His Majesty's Council, that
order may be taken therewith.

The said Justices shall twice in the year, at the first of December and the
first of June, take up a list of the Poor in every Paroch within Burgh or Land:
into which number there shall no person be received, who are any way able to
gain their own living; and to the effect these Poor may no longer be
necessitate to seek their living, with such hardship and difficulty by
scandalous vaging, as hitherto they have been in use of, the Justices shall
appoint two or more persons of good same and quality in every Paroch, to be
Overseers for the Poor in each Paroch aforesaid, and to authorize the said
Overseers, to make due trial and examination of the condition and number of
such Poor, Aged, Sick, Lame and Impotent inhabitants of the said Paroch, who
(of themselves) have not to maintain them, nor are able to work for their
living, as also of all Orphans and other poor Children within the said Paroch,
who are left destitute of all help; and the said Overseers are to list and
inroll all such persons, and to provide them such a convenient House for their
dwelling, either a part or together, as they shall judge requisite; and upon
consideration had, what the necessary maintenance will extend to weekly, the
said Overseers are to call for the Collections of the said Paroch, or other
Sums appointed for the maintenance of the poor thereof; and the persons who
have the said sums in their hands, are hereby required to deliver the same to
the said Overseers; and their Receipts under their hands, shall be their
sufficient discharge: which Sum so received, the Overseers are to dispose
proportionably to the several poor people aforesaid, according as they shall
find their necessities to require: and the said Overseers are to take due
trial of the good behavior and carriage of the poor persons, listed and
enrolled as aforesaid, that if any of them being so provided, shall go abroad
to beg, or otherwise miscarry themselves, or shall refuse, being able, to work
any manner of work that they are able to perform; in such cases, the said
Overseers are to acquaint the said Justices therewith, who shall appoint such
punishments for the first fault, as in their judgments they shall find
requisite; and if they shall continue in such miscarriages, they are to be
holden and reputed as Vagabonds, and so to be proceeded against according to
the Law in that case provided. And to the end that there may be an exact
performance of the Premises, the said Justices are hereby required, to call
before them the said Overseers once in every six months, or oftener if they
shall think expedient, to give an account upon Oath of the whole Sums received
by them, and to produce the Rolls of the said poor, together with an Account of
what money they have received any otherwise, for the use of the said poor; and
after a due consideration of the charge, together with the Discharge thereof,
to approve, allow, or dis-allow the same, as shall be found just: and the said
Justices are to take due trial and examination how the said Overseers have
discharged their Trust; and in case of the refusal of any of the said
Overseers, nominate and elected as aforesaid, to accept the said office, or
having accepted, shall be found negligent therein, or shall refuse or delay to
give an account of their intromissions, when required as foresaid, or to
deliver what money shall be found resting in their hands, undisposed of at the
end of the year, unto such new Overseers as shall be appointed: in such cases
the offenders shall incur the penalty of twenty pounds Scots, to the use of the
Poor, and suffer such further Censure, as the said Justices, at their Quarter
Sessions, upon consideration had of their fault, shall see meet to impose.

And further, the said Justices are hereby empowered and commanded, to call
for an account from these who took upon them to exerce that place and office,
during the late Usurpation, of all Fines, Penalties and others, raised, exacted
or uplifted of any persons, and to ordain them to deliver and make payment to
them of what has not been by sufficient order disposed of: and in case of any
difference arising thereupon, that the Justices consult His Majesty's Council,
who shall give their orders therein.

Constables.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice of His Estates, Finds and Declares, that the
Constables are to be made choice of, by the Commissioners and Justices of
Peace, in their Quarter Sessions, throughout the whole Country, two at least
in every Paroch, or more, according to their discretion, having consideration of
the quality thereof: In great Towns likewise, not being Cities nor free Burghs,
they are to appoint a number of Constables proportionably to the greatness
thereof; but in all Burghs Regal, and free Cities, the Constables are to be
chosen by the Magistrates of the same; and they are to endure, and to be
changed, from six to six months.

And who shall refuse to accept the Charge, and not to give his Oath for
dutiful execution thereof, shall be imprisoned, and fined at the discretion of
the Justices of Peace at their next sitting.

Follows the Oath to be taken by the Constables.
I do Swear, that I shall faithfully and truly discharge the Office of
Constabulary, within the Paroch of, etc. enduring the time appointed to me, and
shall not for favor, respect, or fear of any man, for bear to do what becomes
me in the said Office: and above all things, I shall regard the keeping and
preserving of the Kings Majesty's Peace, and shall at every Quarter Session and
meeting of Justices, give true and due information of any breach which has
been made of His Majesty's Peace, within the bounds of my commandment; and
shall no way hide, cover, nor conceal the same, nor any of the proofs and
evidences which I can give for the clearing and proving thereof: So help me GOD.

All the Constables, or at least one of every Paroch instructed with power to
answer for the rest within the said Paroch, shall attend at every Quarter
Session; there to give information of all such breaches of the Peace, and other
misdemeanors as have happened within their bounds, since the preceding
Sessions, and have come to their knowledge; and shall no way hide, cover, nor
conceal the same, nor any of the proofs and evidences which they can give for
the clearing and proving thereof; and otherwise to give the Bench further
information in any thing wherein they shall be required, and to receive from
the said Justices at the end of the Session, such order and direction, as they
then shall enjoin and appoint.

Every Constable, in their respective Paroches, shall apprehend any suspicious
persons, who are night walkers, and cannot give a good account of themselves,
and carry them to the next Justice of Peace, to find Caution for their good
behavior, or otherwise be committed to Prison; and the said Constable, or
Constables, shall stay and arrest all Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars and Egyptians,
and carry them before some Justice of Peace, who shall take order for their
committing to Prison, or other punishments, according to the Statutes of
Parliament.

Every Constable, in their respective Paroches, shall arrest all Idle persons,
whom they know to have no means to live upon, and will not betake themselves to
any Labor, Trade or Occupation; and shall carry them before some Justices of
Peace, who after examination shall either commit them to Prison, or take Surety
of them for their appearance at the next Quarter Session.

All Constables, in their respective Paroches, shall apprehend every person or
persons, that shall be guilty and culpable of Slaughter, Murder, Theft, or any
other culpable crime whatsoever; and shall require his Neighbors to assist for
safe conveying of such person or persons, to the next Justice of Peace, who
shall commit him or them, or take Surety according to the Instructions given to
the Justice of Peace in such like cases. And if any person or persons, shall
refuse or delay to assist the said Constable or Constables, in executing his or
their offices, such persons, for refusing or delaying, shall be imprisoned, or
otherwise punished by the said Justices at their Sessions.

All Constables shall arrest any person not being in His Majesty's service, who
shall be found wearing of Hagbuts, Guns or Pistols in any sort, and shall carry
them before some Justice of Peace, who is either to take security for their
appearance the next Quarter Session, or commit them Prisoners till they do the
same, unless they be Licenced from the Council, or some empowered from them to
give such Licenses.

Upon the appearance of any Fray or Stir betwixt parties, the Constable shall
require the assistance of his Neighbors, for sundring of the parties; and if
there be any harm done to the Constable, or any of the Assistants, by them who
made the Fray, they shall be punished by the Justices at the next Session.

When any person or persons, have made a Fray, and then flee to an house; the
Constable or Constabls may follow to the house, to open the doors: which if he
or she shall refuse, he shall take notice of the Master or Keeper of the house,
and require witnesses thereon; and albeit the Delinquent shall flee further,
without the bounds of the Constables charge, yet may the Constable follow and
apprehend him in a fresh pursuit, and crave concurrence of the Country for
that affect.

The Constables in every Paroch, shall execute all such Precepts and Warrands
as they shall from time to time receive from the Justices of the Peace.

And that the said Constables may have satisfaction for their travels and
pains, Our Sovereign Lord, with advice foresaid, Ordains the said Justices to
give up particular Notes in writ, to the Auditors of His Majesty's Exchequer,
of the Fines in-brought to them, that out thereof, such measure and
satisfaction may be appointed and given to the said Constables, and also to
the Clerks of the Peace, as may recompense their travels; wherein if it shall
be found, that the said Fines shall not be sufficient, the said Lords of His
Highness Chequer, shall appoint such further satisfaction to them, as in their
discretion they shall think their labors and diligence do deserve, and cause
them be paid of the same. And notwithstanding of this above-written Act, and
all the particulars foresaids contained in the same, Our Sovereign Lord, with
advice and consent of His said Estates, Statutes, Decerns and Declares, That
the erection of the said Commissioners and Justices of Peace, and grant of
Jurisdiction and Privileges to them, and the making or approbation of the
particular Acts abovewritten, introduced in their favors, or any thing therein
contained, shall not be in any sort derogatory or prejudicial to the Rights,
Privileges and Liberties, granted and bestowed by His Majesty or His Highness
Royal Predecessors of before, to any of His Majesty's Subjects, of whatsoever
estate or quality from the highest to the lowest: But Declares, that the said
Rights, Privileges and Liberties shall remain in their own integrity, safe,
entire, unhurt or unprejudged by the Premises, or any thing expressed in the
said Articles and every one of them, and are holden as especially reserved and
excepted out of the same.

And least this above-written Reservation, should seem altogether to destroy
the power granted to the said Justices, or should beget controversy betwixt
them and any other having right and liberty of Jurisdiction as said is, Our
Sovereign Lord, with advice foresaid, for removing of all question, which may
arise betwixt them thereanent, Declares, That it shall not be lawful nor
permitted to the said Justices, to make any Citation of Parties before their
Courts, till the expiring of the space of fifteen days after the committing of
the Fact for the which the Committer is to be conveened: At the complete
out-runing of the which space, if any having Power and Jurisdiction as said is,
has omitted and neglected to use and exerce the Privilege and Liberty of
their Right and Power; It shall then be lawful to the said Justices to make
Citation, and to proceed against the Parties, according to the Power and
Authority given to them by His Highness, with advice foresaid, and conform to
the particular Articles above-written in all points, and no otherwise

If any Party complain to a Constable that he is threatened by another, then
shall the Constable apprehend the Threatner and carry him with the party
Complainer before the next Justice of Peace, and if he refuse to go, then shall
he carry him to Prison.

Which all and sundry the premises, Our Sovereign Lord, with advice and
consent foresaid, Ratifies and Approves in all points, in manner as the same
proports. And gives unto them the strength and force of Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament, and Ordains execution to pass upon the same as effeirs.

XXXIX. Act for the Fishings, and Erecting of Companies for Promoving of the
same.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering the best and readiest means for improving the
benefit and advantages which properly belong unto Him, by the Fishes which are,
or may be, taken within the Seas, Channels, Firths and Lochs, adjacent and
surrounding this His ancient Kingdom. And perceiving the same may be of great
advantage many ways, especially in that the said Trade will not only be a
Nursery for Sea-fareing men, and a speedy occasion of building Ships for His
Majesty's and His Subjects use, both in Peace and War; But likewise will set
many poor and idle persons a work, and furnish the materials of a great native
Export, for the continual enriching of His Majesty's Kingdoms, by a sure
foundation of Trade and Commerce. For which ends, and that the said Trade of
Fishing may be the more effectually advanced and promoved within this His
Majesty's ancient Kingdom, His Sacred Majesty, with consent of His Estates now
conveened in this present Parliament, has Erected, and by the tenor hereof
Erects, Creats and Establishes, particular Societies and Companies of His
Majesty's own free born naturalized Inhabitants in Scotland; and of all others
who shall be taken and enrolled in any of the same Companies and Societies, and
admitted to the privileges thereof, and shall enter themselves in the said
Societies within any Shire or Burgh of this said Kingdom, one or more, betwixt
and the (...) day of (...) as the first modern Societies and Companies to the
effect after-specified, Constituting and Creating such persons who shall enter
themselves, and their successors, in a Body and Incorporation politic, to
exerce the Trade underwritten. And Ordains that none be accepted therein,
except he who shall enter the sum of five hundred merks Scots, at least, of
Stock, in the said Society. And Wills and Grants, that whosoever are of the
foresaid Societies or Companies to be Constitute, their Heirs or Assigns,
shall enjoy the yearly benefit of the Stock to be given by them, in all time
after the in-giving thereof; but to have no power to uplift the Stock, except
by consent of the Company or Council thereof after-specified. Granting and
Committing, likeas, His Majesty, by the tenor hereof, Gives, Grants and
Commits, to the said Companies and Societies so to be Constitute, and to all
such whom they or their Successors shall admit or receive therein, full power
to take and fish, Herring and White-fish, in all and sundry Seas, Channels,
Firths, Rivers, Floods, Lakes and Lochs of this His Majesty's said ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, and Isles thereunto belonging, wheresoever Herring or
White-fish are, or may be taken, and to bring in and disburthen the said
Herring and other White-Fishes, to all and sundry Ports, Harbors, Shoars; and
to lay the same on the Land, and to pickle them with Salt, and to dry, and load
the same in Barrels and Puncheons; and for conservation of the said Herring
and Fishes, to build Houses and little Cottages, and other things necessary for
the use of the said Fishing-trade, in whatsoever places shall be convenient,
upon the payment of the allowance underwritten, unto the Lord or Master of the
ground; or otherwise, to sell, use and dispose upon the said Herrings and
other Fishes, to the Inhabitants, or to keep and conserve the same in their
Ships and Boats, and to make and prepare them therein, and to carry and
transport the same to Foreign parts beyond Seas, in Ships and other Vessels
belonging to them, or His Majesty's other Subjects; and to sell, use and
dispose thereupon, to such who shall be in friendship and amity with His
Majesty and His Successors. With power also to the said Companies and
Societies respective, to elect and make choice of such of their own number as
they shall think fit, for making and frameing of Laws, Statutes and Rules, for
the right regulating, mannaging and carrying on of the said Trade of Fishing
(the said Laws being always approven and allowed by the Council of Trade) and
to punish transgressors accordingly. And that none be admitted to be
Counselors of the said Societies, except such who shall enter of Stock the
sum of one thousand merks money foresaid, and that they be Scots-men, or
naturalized Strangers, and Residenters within the said Kingdom. And to the
which Council, so to be Nominate and Constitute, the said Companies respective
shall submit, and to all their Acts, Statutes and Rules, especially, but
prejudice of the generality foresaid, to the particular Rules underwritten. To
wit; First, That none after the erecting and settling of the said Company or
Society, may enter or come in but by consent of the Company or the council
thereof, after the said (...) day of (...) next, except they be appointed to be
enrolled and taken in by the Council of Trade, to whom any person, in case of
exclusion, may make his Address. Secondly, That the return from Foreign places
upon this Stock, may be all sold in free Burghs and to free Burgesses within
this Kingdom, by the said Companies or any of them or their Factors, without
any previous offer to the Burgh; providing they do not retail by selling less
quantities nor five Tun of Wine, or the equivalent in value in other
Commodities; and if the Import and Return shall be of less quantities, then and
in that case these Commodities shall only be sold in whole sale, without any
retail whatsoever. Thirdly, That no Herring or White-fish taken by Scots-men in
the said Kingdom or Isles thereto belonging, be sold, fresh or salt, to any but
to Natives, except by the Companies respective: And that no Stranger
unnaturalized, shall have liberty to make and prepare Herrings or White-fish
upon the Land, or to make Booths for that effect, under the pain of
confiscation of what shall be seized upon, and the double thereof to be exacted
of the Seller, except they be free of one of the Companies foresaid. With power
also to the said Council, to use and have a Seal and Gage for ilk Company
respective, wherewith all their Barrels or Puncheons may be marked, and that
ilk Barrel of green fish contain twelve gallons, which is to be the ordinar
Gage betwixt Buyer and Seller. And also to make use of, and employ, all and
sundry Tolbooths and Wardinghouses, where necessity requires, for holding of
Courts, warding or punishing of Transgressors, the Burghs being always free of
the charges of the Prisoners; and further, to depute such of their number as
they think fit, concerning all businesses and affairs, and to cognosce and
determine in all questions and debates relating to the said Trade of Fishing;
and to cause execute such Decreets and Sentences as shall be pronounced
thereupon: And for that effect, to make choice of Officers and Servants, and to
administer Oaths to them, and amongst themselves, for the good of the Trade;
and if need be, with power to the said Council, to design certain Judges under
them in convenient places, to administer Justice in the matter of the Trade of
Fishing allanerly. And Our said Sovereign Lord, being most willing to cherish
and encourage the foresaids Societies and Companies, in the said Trade, Has
out of His Innate Beneficence and Royal Bounty, Ordained, and by the tenor
hereof Decerns and Ordains, that Salt, Cordage, Hemp, Cork, Pitch, Tar,
Clapboard, Knaple, Skew-hoops, and Holland Nets, imported for the Trade of
Fishing foresaid, by the foresaids Companies respective, is, and shall be, free
of any Custom or other Imposition whatsoever; and that the Herring and
Whitefish taken, made or prepared therewith, are and shall be free of any
manner of taxation or burden in the exportation of the same. And also, that all
Strangers Fishers, who shall repair to this His Majesty's ancient Kingdom, and
will come and make their residence within the same, shall be naturalized by His
Majesty, upon the desire and application of any of the said Councils, and
shall be entered Burgesses in any City where they shall reside, and shall be
freed of all manner of taxation, for the space of seven years next after their
arrival. And further His Majesty has Released and Discharged, and by the
tenor hereof simpliciter Releases and Discharges, the Teind Herring and Teind
Fish, of all such Herring and Fish, which shall be taken by the Boats and
Fishers of the said Companies respective, or such who shall be hired by them,
in all time hereafter. And also, Exoners and Discharges the Excise Herring due
to His Majesty (except the Herring of Dumbar) for all the days, space, years
and terms of nine years, next after the date hereof. And in like-manner, His
Majesty Declares, That all Ale, Bear, Strongwaters, and other provisions for
out-reeking of any Vessel for the said Fishings of the said Companies, is, and
shall be, free of all manner of Impositions whatsoever, Commanding hereby the
Lords and Masters of the ground, in all places through the said Kingdom where
there is Loch or other Fishings, not only to protect, maintain and defend the
said Company and Society, and all Masters of Ships, Fishers and others
whatsoever, going about the said Trade, and belonging to the respective
Companies of Fishing, from all harm, trouble or damage whatsoever, or else to
satisfy and refound their loss and damage which they shall sustain upon their
Land; but also that they, nor none of them, presume nor take upon hand, to
exact or levy, any more from the said Fishers, Merchants, or their Servants,
belonging to the said Companies, for Ground-leave, but only twelve shillings
Scots for every Last; and that in full satisfaction of the Saturdayes fishing,
or any manner of Dues whatsoever. And for the greater encouragement of
Merchant-fishers, Masters of Ships and other Vessels, and their Servants, to
attend the said Trade of Fishing; His Majesty, by His Sovereign Authority and
Prerogative Royal, not only by these presents Declares the Ships, Boats and
other Vessels, with their Furniture, provided for, and in exercise of, the said
Trade of Fishing, no ways to be Arrestable by any Creditor, but that the same,
and those that shall serve therein, shall not be Pressed to any public
service, without His Majesty's particular Command. And that the Fishers,
Masters and Servants, in the said Vessels, and makers of Herring and
White-fish, during the whole time of the said Fishing, and their employment
therein, shall be free from all Actions, and no ways conveenable before any
Judge or Judicatory whatsoever, for any cause or causes Civil, which may be
intended against them; But also by the tenor hereof Declares, the said
Fishers, Masters and their Servants above-written, shall be free of all
Captions, Arrestments or other Attachments on their persons, or against their
Materials and Instruments of Fishing, during the time and season of Fishing,
they being actually serving therein allanerly. And further, that none who shall
be upon the Council, or any of the Societies of Trade foresaid, shall be liable
to Sess, Stents or Taxations, for what Stock they have entered, or shall enter
in the said Companies or Societies respective, or for the benefit and profit
arising thereby in time coming. And it is hereby Declared, that it shall be
licent to any of the Council or Societies of the said Trade of Fishing
respective, for the good thereof, to dwell and reside in any part or place of
this said Kingdom, albeit they be Burgesses in any Burgh Royal, and not thereby
lose their freedom, notwithstanding of any Act or Acts in the contrair. And in
like-manner it is hereby Declared, that no person or persons shall have liberty
to export Herring or Fish, nor use or have the Privileges, Liberties and
Immunities above-written, but those that shall enter themselves, and be free in
one or other of the said Companies and Societies. And finally, It is hereby
Statute and Ordained, that those in the several Shires and Burghs of this
Kingdom, who shall enter in the said Companies and Societies, conform to the
tenor of this present Act, shall give an account thereof to the Parliament, or
His Majesty's Council of Trade for the time, within (...) after the erection
thereof, that the same may be Recorded ad futuram rei memoriam.

XL. Act for Erecting of Manufacturies.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering how many great advantages this Kingdom, and
the Subjects thereof, may have by the Erecting, Cherishing and Maintaining of
Manufacturies, thereby keeping in the Country great sums of money, daily
exported for bringing in such Commodities as may be made at home, and bringing
in money for such commodities as may be made and wrought within the same, and
exported to Foreign Nations; besides that thereby many Poor people and Idle
persons and Vagabonds, will be set at work and entertained, whereby virtue will
be increased and idleset curbed and restrained. And that upon this account, and
for this end, several Acts have been past by His Majesty's Royal Predecessors,
in their Parliaments, Conventions and Councils; and especially the one hundred
and thirteenth Act of the seventh Parliament, and the two hundred and fifty,
and two hundred fifty two Acts of the fifteenth Parliament of King James the
sixth, and Acts of Council in the years one thousand six hundred, one thousand
six hundred and one, one thousand six hundred and twelve, one thousand six
hundred and fourteen, one thousand six hundred and sixteen, one thousand six
hundred and twenty, one thousand six hundred and twenty three, and Acts of
Convention, one thousand six hundred twenty five, and one thousand six hundred
twenty six years. And His Majesty, being resolved to prosecute what has been
formerly intended, and to give such new encouragements as is necessary for
advanceing of Manufacturies; Has therefore thought fit, with advice and
consent of His Estates of Parliament, hereby to grant to all such persons as
have or shall undertake to set up any Manufacturies, the Privileges following,
viz. If any Stranger shall come, or be brought into this Kingdom by Natives, to
set up work, and teach his Art in making Cloth, Stuffs, Stockings, Soap, or
any other kind of Manufactury, he shall enjoy the benefit of the Law, and all
other Privileges that a Native does enjoy; with power to erect Manufacturies
either in Burgh or Landwart as they shall think fit, and there to dwell and
exercise their Trade without any stop or trouble: And for their further
encouragement, Declares, all Oil, Dying-stuffs, Foreign Wool, Potashes or any
other materials whatsoever useful for Manufacturies, that shall be imported,
to be free of Custom, Excise and other public Dues; and that all Cloth,
Stuffs, Stockings or any other Commodity to be made and exported by them, be
free of Custom and Excise, for nineteen years after January one thousand six
hundred and sixty two years. And if any Stock shall be employed for erecting or
entertaining of any Manufacturies of any kind, the same is to be free of all
public and private Taxes whatsoever. Likeas all Customers, Collectors,
Farmerers of Customs or Excise, and others, are hereby Discharged to demand any
Custom, Excise, or any other Imposition whatsoever, for such Materials before
mentioned and belonging to Manufacturies, as they will be answerable. And in
regard of the great prejudice to the Kingdom, by Exportation of Wool, and Skins
with Wool upon them, and of other Native Commodities and Materials fit for
Manufacturies; Therefore His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Does hereby
Discharge all and every person whatsoever, Native or Stranger, to Export out of
this Kingdom any Wool, or Skins with Wool upon them, or Skins of any kind, or
any Materials useful for Manufacturies, until they be made in work, or put to
the best avail for the good of the Kingdom; Certifying such as do in the
contrair, they shall forfeit such Wool, Skins, and other Materials, or the just
value thereof, the one half to His Majesty, and the other half to the Informer,
who shall discover, apprehend, and prosecute the same before His Majesty's
Exchequer; besides that the persons and estates of such Contraveeners, shall be
liable to such punishment and fine for the same, as His Majesty's Exchequer
shall appoint. And also His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Discharges all
Regraters and Forestallers of Mercats of Wool, and that no Merchant nor person
whatsoever, buy and keep up Wool to a dearth, but that they bring the same to
be sold in open Mercats, under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament
made against Regraters and Forstallers. And in regard there is much deceit by
wrapping up of Wool in the Fleece, by putting Stones, Sand, and other
insufficient stuff in the same, It is hereby Declared, that all such Wool shall
be confiscat, the one half to His Majesty's use, and the other half to the use
of those who shall apprehend, discover, and pursue the same. Likeas His
Majesty, for the further encouragement of the said Manufacturies, Does, with
advice foresaid, Discharge all Quarterings or Levying of Soldiers upon
Manufacturies, or the Masters thereof; and that no person whatsoever entise,
resset, or entertain any of the Servants or Apprentices of the Manufacturies,
without consent of their Master, under the pains contained in the Acts of
Parliament against Coal-hughers, Salters, and their Ressetters. And for the
further improving of the said Manufacturies, His Majesty, with consent
foresaid, Does hereby Empower the Masters, Erectors, or Entertainers of
Manufacturies, to meet by themselves for making of Ordinances for the good and
advancement of their Trade, for the right ordering of their Servants, and for
the sufficiency of their Stuffs, Cloth and others; and choose one of the most
expert of their number for visiting of their work, that a Mark or Seal may be
put upon it, distinguishing what is sufficient and what not. And because many
things may occur hereafter, which may be necessary for advancement of
Manufacturies; Therefore His Majesty, with consent foresaid, Does Empower the
Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council or Exchequer, or such as shall be
appointed by His Majesty, during this present Parliament, or thereafter, to
consider such Overtures as shall be offered for the good of Manufacturies; and
to make such Orders, and grant such further Liberties and Privileges to them,
as they shall think just. It is always Declared, that it shall be free and
Lawful to His Majesty's Treasurer and Commissioners of Exchequer, as they
shall find cause, to grant license for exporting of Wool and Skins, any thing
in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

XLI. Act for Planting and Enclosing of Ground.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering how many laudable Laws have been made, by His
Majesty's Royal Progenitors, for Parking and Enclosing of Ground, and Planting
of Wood, and for preserving of the same; and finding the great prejudice has
followed upon the not due observance of so notable and necessar Laws. And how
expedient, fit and necessar it will be, for the good of this His Majesty's
ancient Kingdom, especially for Shipping and Building, that Timber be Planted;
and how advantageous it is for the increase of Corns and Cattle, and the
sowing of Lint and Hemp for Manufacturies, that Parking and Inclosings be made.
Does therefore with consent and advice of His Estates of Parliament, Revive the
ninth Act of the fourth Parliament of King James the first, of blessed memory,
Entitled, An Act for Planting of Woods, Forests and Orchards, and all other
Acts made for that effect, by His Majesty or any other His Royal Predecessors;
and Ordains the same to be put to execution in time coming, conform to the
Tenor thereof, in all points; with this addition. Likeas, His Majesty, with
advice of His said Estates of Parliament, Does hereby Statute and Ordain, that
every Heritor, Liferenter and Wodsetter (according to the qualifications
underwritten) within his said ancient Kingdom of Scotland, worth one thousand
pounds of yearly valued Rent, shall enclose four Aikers of Land yearly at
least, and Plant the same about with Trees of Oak, Elm, Ash, Plain, Sauch or
other Timber, at three yards distance. And that all other Heritors of greater
or less Rent, nor the said sum of one thousand pounds money foresaid, do
Plant, Enclose and Ditch yearly, more or fewer Aikers, according to their
respective Rents, for the space of ten years next ensuing; and that of such
Lands as the Heritors shall think most fit for Planting and capable for
Enclosing, to be also Planted, Ditched or Enclosed in manner foresaid; and that
the said Heritors begin to Plant, Ditch and Enclose, the said ground, at the
feast of Michaelmesse next to come, and uphold the same in time coming. And for
the further encouragement of the said Heritors, Wodsetters and Liferenters, to
go about the ready observance of the said Act, liberty and power is granted to
them, at the sight of the Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords of Regalities, Barrons, and
Justices of Peace, in their respective bounds, to cast about the High ways to
their convenience, providing they do not remove them above two hundred else
upon their whole ground; Excepting always herefrom, Borough and incorporate
Aikers, which are no ways to be Parked or Enclosed, unless the Heritors
thereof shall think it meet and expedient. And where there are Liferenters upon
Lands, It is hereby Declared, that the same shall be done upon the equal
charges and expenses of the Liferenter and Heritor. And in case of Proper
Wodsets, It is also hereby specially Declared, that the same shall be done by
the Wodsetter, and the charges thereof is and shall be added to the reversion,
and no ways redeemable, while they make payment thereof, as well as of the
sums for which the Lands are Wodset. And for the better encouragement of
Heritors, and for preserving of the said Planting and Enclosures, It is Statute
and Ordained, that whosoever shall cut or break any of the said Trees, (not
being the Heritors themselves) shall pay unto the Heritors or persons wronged,
twenty pounds for every Tree; or if he be not able to pay the said twenty
pounds, it shall be in the power of the party thereby wronged, to make him work
six weeks, giving him meat and drink allanerly. And further it is Ordained,
that whosoever shall break down the Hedges or Dikes of the said Parks or
Enclosures, or be found within the same, being a stranger, shall be holden and
repute a breaker down thereof, and pay five pounds for every fault; or if he be
not able to pay the said five pounds, to work ten days to the owner of the
said grounds, for meat and drink as said is. And for the greater encouragement
of all persons, who shall be virtuously inclined, to Ditch, Enclose or Plant
their ground, in manner foresaid, His Majesty, with consent above specified,
has Declared, and by their presents Declares, such parts and portions of their
said ground, as shall be so Enclosed and Planted, to be free of all manner of
Land-stents, Taxations or Impositions, of whatsoever nature, or Quarterings of
Horse in the said Enclosures, for the space of nineteen years, next after the
date hereof; and that at the proportioning of the said burdens, the same
Enclosures shall be exempted and made free thereof accordingly. And also for
the better preserving of the said Enclosures, and of the Trees and Planting to
be set about the same, It is Statute and Ordained, that ilk Heritor, Tennant
and Cottar, keep their Cattle and Goods, out of their neighbors Enclosures at
all times, that their Trees, Planting and Ditching, be no wise damnified or
prejudged, under the penalty of five pounds for ilk contravention, toties
quoties, to be paid to the Party damnified. And further Statutes and Ordains,
That where Enclosures fall to be upon the border of any persons Inheritance,
the next adjacent Heritor shall be at equal pains and charges in Building,
Ditching and Planting that Dike which parts their Inheritance. And Recommends
to all Lords, Sheriffs, and Baylies of Regalities, Stewarts of Stewartries, and
Justices of Peace, Baylies of Buroughs, and other Judges whatsoever, to see
this Act put in execution, and to grant process at the instance of the Parties
damnified and prejudged, and to see them repaired, after the form and tenor of
this Act above-written, in all points.

XLII. Act Establishing Companies, and Societies for making Linnen-cloath,
Stuffs, etc.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering that all the laudable Laws and Statutes, made
by His Majesty's Ancestors, anent Manufacturies, for enriching of His Majesty's
ancient Kingdom, putting of Poor children, Idle persons and Vagabonds to work,
for the maintenance and relief of the Country of the burden of such
unprofitable persons, have been hitherto rendered ineffectual; And that many
good spirits, having aimed at the public good, have for want of sufficient
stocks, counsel and assistance, been crushed by such undertakings, Do conceive
it necessar, to Creat and Erect Companies and Societies for Manufacturies, that
what was above the capacity of single persons, may be carried on by the joint
assistance, counsel and means of many. And therefore His Majesty, with advice
and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does Establish particular Societies
and Companies, in the persons of such as shall enter themselves in the said
Societies, within any Shire or Burgh, one or more of this Kingdom; and after
their decease, in the persons of their Successors, (it being always Declared
hereby, that not any of them shall be represented but by one person allanerly)
or any other who shall list and enter themselves therein, betwixt and the (...)
day of (...) as the first modern Societies and Companies for making of
Linnen-cloath, Worstead Stockings, Searges, Baises, Says, Cottons,
Sempeternums, Castilians, Perpetuanaes, and all other Woollen Stuffs and
Cloth; and for their encouragement, and the good of this His Highness
Kingdom; His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Prohibits and
Discharges any of His Majesty's Lieges, to carry and transport into Spain,
Portugal, Biscay, Russia, France, or any place beyond Seas, any Linnen-cloath,
Bases, Says, Cottons, Sempiternums, Castilians, Perpetuanaes, or any other
Woollen Stuffs or Clothes, except they be free, and of one of the Societies
aforesaid. And it is hereby Declared, that all Materials imported for the use
of the said Manufacturies, and that all the said Stuffs or Clothes, exported
by the said Company, shall be free of all Customs, Excise, or any other
Imposition whatsoever, for the space of nineteen years after the (...) day of
(...) all other Merchants not free in one or other of the said Companies,
paying the usual Customs, Excise, or any other Impositions, for any of the
said Commodities Exported by them. As also His Majesty, with advice foresaid,
for the good and encouragement of these who shall enter themselves in the said
Companies, Does discharge the said Companies respective, where ever the same
shall be erected, to receive any within the same, except these who shall
contribute and bring in to make up a Stock to the said Manufacturies, the sum
of five hundred merks Scots, and does grant liberty to the said Members of the
said Societies respective, to choose and elect a certain number of their own
Incorporation and Society, to be a Council for making of Laws, for their better
regulating and ordering of the said Company and Manufactury, and things
belonging thereto; providing always, that no person elected have less of
Stock, in the said Company or Society, nor one thousand merks Scots money. And
that this Pious, Charitable and Profitable Design, may be no longer frustrate,
nor poor Children, Vagabonds or Idle persons, continue to be burdensome to
their Country; It is Statute and Ordained, that there be in each Paroch, one
or more persons provided and appointed, upon the charges and expenses of the
Heritors thereof, for instructing of the poor Children, Vagabonds and other
Idlers, to fine and mix Wool, spin Worstead, and knit Stockins. And for the
more speedy perfecting of the laudable Design and Policy, so much aimed at by
His Majesty's Royal Predecessors, and now prosecute by His Majesty, in His
prudence, and condescending care for the meanest of His Subjects, It is Statute
and Ordained, that with (...) months after the dissolving of this present
Parliament, the Commissioners of Shires do conveen the whole Heritors within
their respective Shires, for electing of some of the Heritors within each
Paroch, to see this present Act made effectual, and persons appointed for
instructing of the Children and others foresaid, to fine and mix Wool, knit
Stockins, and spin Worstead, and to see a maintenance settled in every Paroch
upon the said Instructers: And within the space of (...) next after the said
first meeting, that they convocat the persons elected, within the several
Paroches of the respective Shires, to take an account of them and of their care
and diligence in the matters aforesaid; and in case they shall be found to have
failed, that the said Commissioners now attending this present Parliament, do
see this present Act put in execution after the time aforesaid, in all the
said Paroches where the said persons elected shall be found to have been
deficient; and Ordains Magistrates of Burghs to be careful that the same be
made effectual within their Burghs and Liberties. And in case all, or any of
the said Commissioners or Magistrates aforesaid, do fail herein after the
foresaid time; His Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates aforesaid,
Does commit the care hereof to the Lords of His Majesty's Secret Council, that
the Laws may be no longer frustrate, nor the Kingdom burdened with Idle
persons, Vagabonds, or poor Children. And that Manufacturies may be promoved,
and for the incourageing of skillful Artizans to come from abroad, for training
up the persons foresaids, and working for the use of the said Companies, It is
hereby Declared, that all such as shall be brought home and employed for the
said Companies, shall be free to set up and work in Burghs and Landwart where
the Companies shall think fit, without paying any thing whatsoever to any
person or persons, under whatsoever color or pretext, for their Freedom; and
shall be free of Taxes and public Burdens or Exactions during their lifetime;
notwithstanding of any Law, Statute, Privilege or Indulgence, made or granted
in the contrair by His Majesty or any of His Predecessors, in favors of any
Committee or Incorporation whatsoever, which are all hereby Cassed, Rescinded,
and Declared void and null, in so far as they may be conceived to derogate from
the Privileges and Immunities granted by this present Act, in favors of
Tradesmen, Natives or Strangers, belonging to, or brought home by, the said
Companies, of working in the said Manufacturies. And to the end that the
foresaids Stuffs and Clothes may be more useful at home, and have the better
vent abroad, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, does Prohibit and Discharge any
Weaver belonging to the said Companies, or private Tradesman, to make any
Searges, under the breadth of an ell and a nail; Perpetuanaes and Sempiternums,
under the breadth of three quarters and a half; nor no Woollen Cloth, under an
ell and a half broad; under the pain of twenty pounds, to be paid by the Weaver
thereof, and the said Stuffs and Clothes to be confiscat, the one half to His
Majesty's use, and the other half to the use of the discoverers thereof.
Further, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, for encouragement of these who
shall enter into the said Companies or Manufacturies, Does grant to ilk one of
the said Companies, all the Privileges and Immunities that are, or shall be
hereafter by the Kings Majesty indulged to the Companies or Societies of
Fishers, as if the same were herein expressed. Whereanent, His Majesty, with
consent foresaid, has dispensed, and hereby dispenses for ever.

XLIII. Act discharging the exportation of Linnen-yarn, and regulating the
breadth of Linnen-cloath, etc.
OUr Sovereign Lord, conceiving it necessary for the good and wel-being of His
Majesty's Subjects, to project and endeavor the improvement of all the Native
Commodities of this His Majesty's ancient Kingdom, and to make Laws and
Ordinances, for eviting and preventing of all fraud and deceit used heretofore,
in making Sale of the said Commodities; And considering that it would tend
more to the advantage of His Majesty's Subjects, and promoving of
Manufacturies, to restrain the liberty that Merchants have taken to export
Linnen-yarn, then suffer them to carry the same unto other places and Kingdoms.
Therefore His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Discharges any Merchant or others whatsoever, to transport out of this Kingdom
any Linnen-yarn, under the pain of Confiscation of the same, the one half to
His Majesty's use, and the other half to the use of the Attacher and
Apprehender of the said Yarn; and Statutes and Ordains that all Yarn be sold by
weight, and that no Reel be made use of within this Kingdom, under the measure
and length of ten quarters, and that under pain of Confiscation of any Yarn
brought to the Market of a shorter Reel, the one half to His Majesty's use, and
the other half to the use of the Delaters and Apprehenders of the said Yarn. As
also, His Majesty considering, that Linnen-cloath is one of the most useful
Commodities of the product of this Kingdom, whereby much money in ancient times
was brought home; And that now, to the great prejudice of the said Commodity,
the same is brought in contempt abroad, and become hardly vendible, through the
deceitful Making, evil Bleetching, and unequal Breadth thereof: Therefore His
Majesty, with advice and consent of the said Estates, does Discharge and
Prohibit all Weavers to make any Linnen-cloath, of the price of ten shillings
Scots the ell, or above, under the Breadth of an ell and two inches, after the
first day of November next to come, under the pain to be imprisoned, for the
space of fourteen days, and of twenty pounds Scots to be paid for each fault,
to Magistrates of Burghs, Sheriffs of Shires, Lords of Regalities, and Barrons
within their respective bounds, and of the Confiscation of the same, to the use
of the Attachers and Discoverers thereof; and Statutes that all Linnen-cloath
be taken up by Selvage, and not by the Rigg, and so to be presented to the
Market; and that all Linnen-cloath be Bleetched without Lime, under the pain of
twenty pounds for each fault, to be paid to the Magistrates foresaid, within
their respective bounds. And lastly, It is hereby Declared, that all Flax and
Linnen-yarn Imported, and all Linnen-cloath Exported, by such as shall enter
into the Companies and Manufacturies for making of Linnen-cloath, shall be free
of Custom, and all other Imposition, for the space of fifteen years after the
said Manufacturies shall be established in the persons of such as shall enter
themselves in the said Companies, betwixt and the first day of January next,
conform to another Ordinance of Parliament for estabilshing the said Companies.

XLIV. Act for encouraging of Shipping and Navigation.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering that the Wealth, Safety and Strength of this
Kingdom, are very much concerned in the increase of Shipping, and encouragement
of Trade and Navigation; both which are much decayed, if not wholly ruined, by
the late unhappy Wars, and the sad effects that have followed thereupon. And
perceiving the present low condition of Trade, and the small number of Ships
and Seamen within this Kingdom, Has thought expedient, out of His Princely
zeal for the public good, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament
now presently conveened, to Statute and Ordain, and by these presents Statutes
and Ordains, that from and after the (...) day of (...) and thence forward, no
Goods nor Commodities whatsoever, that are of Foreign growth, Product or
Manufacture, which are to be brought into Scotland, or any of the Isles thereto
belonging, shall be shipped or brought from any other place or places, Country
or Countries, but only from those places where the said Commodities do grow,
are produced or made, or from the Ports where the said Goods and Commodities
commonly are, or usually have been, first shipped for Transportation, and from
no other place or Country; and in no other Ships or Vessels; but such as do
truly and only belong to His said Kingdom; and whereof the Master, and three
fourth parts of the Mariners, are Natives and Inhabitants within the same; or
at least in such Ships and Vessels, as do truly and only belong unto, and are
of the build of, these Kingdoms or Countries where the said Commodities do
grow, are made or produced; and whereof the Master, and three fourth parts of
the Mariners, are Natives and Inhabitants within the same. All which is to be
verefied and attested, under the Seal of the City or place from whence they
come, and Oath of the Parties to whom the said Ships or Vessels do belong,
under the pain of Confiscation of all such Goods as shall be imported from any
other place or Country, or in any other Ship or Vessel, contrair to the true
intent and meaning of this Act; As also of the Ship in which they shall happen
to be imported, with all her Guns, Furniture, Tackle, Ammunition and
Apparelling, the one half to His Majesty, and the other half to the use of
those who shall discover the Contraveeners of this present Act, and pursue for
the same before the Lords of His Majesty's Exchequer. And further it is Statute
and Ordained by His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, that all Goods
or Commodities whatsoever, produced or shipped, as is above expressed, which from
and after the said day, and thenceforward, shall be Imported into this Kingdom,
or any Islands thereto belonging, in any Ships or Vessels, that shall not truly
and only belong to the Natives and Inhabitants thereof (except in English or
Irish Vessels, Providing always that Scots Vessels enjoy the like benefit of
Trade within the Kingdoms and Dominions of England and Ireland, and no
otherwise) shall be liable to double Custom, and pay accordingly, whether the
said Goods pertain to Natives or Aliens. And further it is Statute and
Ordained, that from and after the said day, and thence forward, all Goods and
Commodities whatsoever, belonging to Aliens, Exported or Imported in whatsoever
Ships or Vessels, whether Foreign or Scottish, shall be liable to double
Custom, and pay accordingly. And it is further Statute and Ordained, that from
and after the said day, and thence forward, all Goods or Commodities
whatsoever, Exported in any other Ships or Vessels, then such as do truly and
only belong to the Natives and Inhabitants of this Kingdom, shall be liable to
double Custom, and pay accordingly, whether the said Goods appertain to
Natives or Aliens. And it is further Enacted and Ordained by His Majesty, with
advice and consent foresaid, that at and after the said day, and thence
forward, all Ships and Vessels belonging to this Kingdom, shall be Navigated
only by Scots-men, dwelling in Scotland, at least the Master and three fourth
parts of the same being such, under the pain of being esteemed Foreign
Vessels, and paying double Custom, for all the Goods and Commodities, Imported
or Exported within the same. And for preventing of all fraud, which may be used
in the buying of Foreign Ships, It is Statute and Ordained by His Majesty,
with consent foresaid, that from and after the said day no Ship whatsoever,
shall be deemed or pass as a Ship belonging to Scotland, or enjoy the benefit
of such a Ship or Vessel, until such time that he or thy claiming the same to
be theirs, shall make appear to the chief Officer or Officers of the Customs at
Lies, he or they residing in any place betwixt Berwick and Stirling on the
South Side of Forth, and to the chief Officer or Officers at Burntisland, he or
they residing in any place betwixt Stirling and Fife-ness upon the North-side
of Forth; and in case of their abode in more remote places, to the Officer or
Officers, of the Port next to the place of his or their abode, that they or he
are not Strangers, and shall have taken an Oath, before such Officer or
Officers, who are hereby authorized to administer the same, that such Ship or
Vessel was bona fide, and without fraud, bought by him or them, for a valuable
consideration, expressing the Sum, Time, Place and Persons, from whom it was
bought, and who are his Partners (if he any have) All which Partners shall be
liable to take the said Oath, before the chief Officer or Officers, of the
Customs rospective, as said is; and that no Forraigner, directly nor
indirectly, has any part, interest or share therein; and that upon such Oaths,
he or they shall receive a Certificat under the Hand or Seal, of the said chief
Officer or Officers, of the Port next the abode of the persons so making Oath,
whereby such a Ship may for the future pass, and be deemed as a Ship belonging
to the said Port, and enjoy the privilege of such a Ship or Vessel; and the
said Officer or Officers, shall keep a Register of all such Certificats, as he
or they shall so give, and return a Duplicat thereof, to the chief Officers of
the Customs at Lies, for such as shall be granted in all the other Ports of
this Kingdom, together with the names of the person or persons, from whom such
Ships were bought, and the sum of money which was paid for the same; as also
the names of all such persons as are Partners, if any such be. And it is
further Enacted by His Majesty, with consent foresaid, that if any Officer of
the Customs, shall from and after the said day, allow to any Foreign Ship or
Vessel, the privileges due to a Scots Ship, till such Certificat be by them
produced, or such Proof and Oath taken before them, or such as they shall
appoint to receive the same, and to examine whether the Master and three fourth
parts of the Mariners at least, be Natives and Inhabitants within this Kingdom;
that for the first offense, such Officer or Officers shall be put out of their
Offices or Places. And it is further Statute and Ordained, that no Merchants
belonging to this Kingdom, shall employ any Alien, or person not born within
this Nation, or naturalized, or made a free Denizen thereof, from and after the
said day, as Factor in any place beyond Seas, for the use and account of the
Merchants of this Kingdom, under pain of a pecuniary Mulct, to be paid by him,
or them that shall employ him: which sum shall be imposed at the discretion of
the Council of Trade, the one half thereof, to His Majesty and Successors, and
the other half, to him or them that shall inform and pursue for the same. It is
always hereby provided, that this Act, nor any Clause therein contained,
extend not to, or be meaned to restrain or prohibit, the Importation of any of
the Commodities of Asia, Africa, or America; as also of the Commodities of
Musco and Italy, from such Ports and Places, and in such Ships and Vessels, as
may be gotten most conveniently, until such time as the Merchants of this
Kingdom, have actual Trade to these respective places; and that the same be
prohibited by Act of Parliament, Privy Council, or Council of Trade. It is
hereby Declared, That it shall be lawful to import any sort of Corns, in time
of dearth, from any place or places, in any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, without
being liable to Confiscation, double Custom, or any other Penalty contained in
this present Act; the dearth and necessity of Import being always cognosced
and declared, by a public Act of the Privy Council, or Council of Trade.

XLV. ACT discharing the Exportation of Skins, Hides, etc.
THe Kings Majesty, considering how necessar it is, that all former Laws for
improving of Native Commodities be Revived, and understanding that the Deacons
and remanent Tradesmen of the Skinners, have upon their own charges, brought
from Foreign places, Perfumers, Makers and Preparers of Leather, by whose
pains and Art, the Kingdom may be furnished with Gloves at easier Rates, and be
able to furnish other Nations abroad with Made-work; Does therefore with advice
and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Ratify and Approve the hundred
seventy eight Act of the thirteenth Parliament of King James the sixth of
blessed memory, discharging the Exportation of Skins and others therein
contained; and Ordains the same to be put to execution, conform to the tenor
thereof in all points. And also considering how useful Goat Skins, Heart, Deer,
and other wild Beasts Skins might be, if they wrere prepared and improven by
Skinners within the Kingdom; His Majesty does therefore with advice foresaid,
Discharge all Merchants, Tradesmen and others, to Transport any Calf-skin,
Kid-skin, Hudderon, or Shorling-skins or any Goats-skins, Heart, Buck, Deer, or
any other wild Beasts Skins forth of the Kingdom, under pain of Confiscation
of the same. And for the further encouragement of the Skinner-trade and
Manufactury, License is hereby given to Export Gloves made within the Kingdom,
free of all Custom and Excise, for the space of nineteen years after the date
hereof, reserving always to the Lord-Treasurer and Commissioners of Exchequer,
to give Licenses for Exporting of Skins, as they shall find cause, after one
year from the date hereof.

XLVI. Act discharging Exportation of Woollen-yarn, Worstead, broken Copper and
Pewter, etc.
THe Kings Majesty, considering the great prejudice this Kingdom and
Manufacturies do receive, by the Export of Worstead, Woollenyarn, Raw and
Unwaked-cloath and Stuffs; and the discouragement that Tradesmen and Artists
have, by the Export of broken Copper, Brass and Pewter; Does therefore, with
advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Discharge all Merchants,
Tradesmen, and others whatsoever, as well Strangers as Natives, upon any
color or pretext whatsoever, to Export forth of this Kingdom, any Worstead,
Woollen-yarn, Raw or Unwaked-cloaths and Stuffs whatsoever, made within the
same, (Plaiding excepted) or any broken Copper, Brass or Pewter, under the pain
of Confiscation of what of any of the particulars above-written shall be
apprehended in the Exporting; the one half to be applied for His Majesty's use,
and the other half for the use of the apprehender and pursuer of the same.

XLVII. Act discharging Tradesmen to Import Made-work.
THe Kings Majesty, considering the great discouragement given to Manufacturies
and Trades, by Tradesmen's bringing home from Foreign places, such Commodities
as may be made within the Kingdom, by these of the same Trade; Does therefore,
with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Inhibit and Discharge all
Tradesmen and Mechanics, to Import from foreign parts any Made-work
belonging to that Trade or Calling whereof they are Freemen; or to vend the
same, or any such Ware brought home by Merchants, in their Shops or otherwise,
under the pain of Confiscation, the one half to His Majesty's use, and the
other to the apprehender or pursuer of the same.

XLVIII. Act for encouraging of Soap-works.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, considering the great advantage this His
ancient Kingdom has had, and may have by erecting and keeping up of
Soap-works, whereby the Eastern Trade and Green-land Fishing will be much
helped, by Importing of Potashes and other Materials; and money brought into
the Kingdom, by the Exported Soap made within the same; And His Majesty being
sensible of the prejudice this Kingdom has suffered during these troubles, by
the decay of these works, and being willing to give all due encouragements to
the same for the future; Does therefore, with advice and consent of the Estates
of Parliament, Declare all Oil, Potashes, and other Materials of any kind
whatsoever, to be imported for the use of Soapworks or making of Soap, and all
Soap made within the Country, to be free of all Custom and Excise, and all
other public or private Dues whatsoever; and also that all Soap, so made and
Exported, shall be free for the space of nineteen years, after the setting up
of these works, and after the date hereof, for such works as are already set
up; and discharges all Customers, Collectors or Fermerers of Excise or Custom,
and all others whatsoever, to demand Custom, Excise or other Duty, for any Oil,
Potashes, Tallow, or other Materials Imported for making of Soap, or use of
Soap-works allanerly, or for Soap made within the Kingdom, and exported as said
is.

XLIX. Act Reducing the Annuals to Six for the Hundred.
THe Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Has
thought fit, upon diverse good considerations, to Reduce, Likeas hereby they do
Reduce, the Annualrents of all money within this Kingdom, to Six for the
Hundred yearly, in all time coming. And Declares the said Six for the Hundred
to be free of all Retention, or other public Burdens whatsoever.

L. Act and Offer of Twelve thousand pounds Sterling to the Lords of Session.
FOrasmuch as among the many and unparalled blessings, wherewith it has
pleased the Almighty GOD to visit these Kingdoms, in the return of His Majesty
to the exercise of His Royal Government, it is the great happiness of this
Kingdom, that the ordinary Judicatories, the fountains and seats of Justice,
are by His Majesty established, according to their ancient and well grounded
Constitutions; And the Estates of Parliament considering, how much it does
import the advancement of His Majesty's service, the honor of the Kingdom, and
the good of the Subjects, that the Senators of the College of Justice (who are
the Supreme Judges under His Majesty, in all civil Causes) should be provided
to a competent allowance, toward their charge and expenses, in their
attendance on this their public Administration. And understanding, that by the
calling down of the Annualrents from ten to six of the hundred, and by the
disability of some Debitors, and by laying aside the twentieth penny of
Sentence-silver, (which is conceived to be an unequal burden and grievance to
such as must suit the benefit of the Law, and so are liable thereto, before
they can have repetition of it, or recovery of their just Debts) the present
yearly allowance to each of them, will not exceed one hundred pounds Sterling;
which being so mean, and unsuteable to the honor and reputation of that
employment, and to equity and justice, as to the persons called by His Majesty
to serve therein; Therefore the Estates of Parliament have thought fit to
grant, likeas they do hereby make a free Offer and Grant of a Taxation of
Twelve thousand pounds Sterling, toward the making up of a Stock, whereof the
Annualrent is to be employed for the use aforesaid, and to be paid by the
Shires and Burghs of the Kingdom; the one half thereof in the month of
November next to come, and the other half in the month of May thereafter, in
the year one thousand six hundred and sixty two years, and to be raised in the
same manner, the present or last Impositions are, and have been paid. And in
order thereunto, The Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, Does hereby Statute and Ordain, the said sum of twelve Thousand
pounds Sterling, to be paid by the Shires and Burghs of the Kingdom, in manner
and for the use aforesaid, the one half thereof in the month of November, and
the other half in the month of May next to come; and that the same be brought
in and delivered to any, whom the Senators of the College of Justice shall
appoint to receive the same; and whose discharge upon the receipt thereof, in
whole or in part, shall accordingly be a sufficient exoneration to the Shires
and Burghs, and all others whom it effeirs. And the said months of November
and May respective, being past, Ordains Letters of Horning and Poynding, and
all other Execution necessar tobe directed at his or their instances, against
the Shires or Burghs of the Kingdom and their Collectors: And twenty days
being expired, after either of the said months respective, Ordains Quartering
to be upon deficient Shires and Burghs; and that all who command the Forces
within the Kingdom, give orders, and be assisting hereunto accordingly.

LI. Act concerning Arrestments.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering the great charges that Creditors are put to,
by Comprising of Sums owing to their Debitors, by virtue of Heritable Bonds,
Contracts and other Writs bearing payment of Annualrents: which in respect of
the Obliegment for Annualrent, were not in former times Arrestable. Therefore
the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Finds
and Declares, that all Sums of money which are addebted by Bonds, Contracts and
other personal Obliegments, whereupon no Infeftments have followed, are, and
shall be Arrestable at the instance of any Creditor; not-withstanding that the
Bonds, Contracts and other Obliegements bear payment of Annualrents. And the
Kings Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Declares that this shall no
ways change the nature of the said Sums, nor prejudge the Heir nor any other
person their rights to the same as being Heritable, which are hereby Declared
to remain in their own nature unchanged by this Act, pro ut de jure, except
that only the same are Arrestable. And it is hereby expressly provided, that all
Arrestments and Executions thereof, since the twenty ninth day of July, one
thousand six hundred an forty four years, used conform to the tenor of this
Act, shall be as valid and sufficient, as if this present Act had been of the
said date; But prejudice always to the Creditors to Comprise the said
Heritable Sums, if they shall choose rather to Comprise then to Arrest.

LII. Act concerning the disposal of Vacant Stipends.
FOrasmuch as by diverse Acts, it is found that Stipends and Benefices of Vacant
Kirks, or which thereafter should vaik by Decease, Deposition, Suspension,
Transportation of Ministers, Disunion of Kirks, or any other way, should,
during the vacancy thereof, be employed on pious uses; and the Kings Majesty
considering, that during these troubles, many Learned and Religious persons in
the Ministry and Universities, for their expressions of duty and loyalty to His
Majesty, or not concurring in the confusions of the time, have been Deposed, or
Suspended from their Charge and Ministry, and have been otherwise put under
great sufferings, and they and their Families redacted to extreme misery and
want. And conceiving it to be an Act of great Piety and Justice, to have regard
to the sufferings of those honest and faithful Ministers and others, and in
some measure to provide for them, and repair their losses; Therefore His
Majesty, with advice of His Estates of Parliament, Ordains all Stipends or
Benefices of Kirks that are vacant, and not already disposed of, or which shall
vaik by Decease, Deposition, Suspension, Transportation, or any otherwise, to
be employed for the supply and maintenance, and toward the reparation of the
sufferings and losses of the persons aforesaids, and of the Wives and Bairnes
of such of them as are dead; and that in such manner and ways, as after trial
of their merits and sufferings, and the causes and grounds thereof, shall be
thought fit by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to whom His Majesty,
with advice and consent foresaid, commits the care of this business; And does
hereby empower and require them to use all diligence, that the Favor and
Justice hereby intended by His Majesty to these suffering Persons and their
Families, may be made effectual; and that notwithstanding of any thing
contained in any of the said Acts to the contrair. It is always provided,
that this Act is without prejudice of any Benefit, which by the Law and Custom
of this Kingdom, falls to the Relict, Bairns or Executors of a Minister after
his decease; and that this Act is to endure for the space of seven years, and
longer as His Majesty shall think fit.

LIII. Act ratifying the Act of Parliament 1633. anent the Annexation of His
Majesty's Property, etc.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of this present
Parliament, Ratifies and Approves, and for His Highness and His Successors,
perpetually Confirms, the tenth Act of the first Parliament of His Majesty's
Royal Father of blessed memory, King Charles the first, holden at Edinburgh, in
Anno one thousand six hundred and thirty three, Entitled, An Act anent the
Annexation of His Majesty's Property, in the whole Heads and Clauses thereof;
especially that Clause of the same, whereby His Majesty and the Estates of
Parliament then conveened, did Declare the right and title of Superiority, of
all and sundry Lands, Barronies, Milnes, Woods, Fishings, Towers, Fortalices,
Mannor-places, and pertinents thereof, pertaining to whatsoever; Abbacies,
Priories, Prioresses, Preceptories, and whatsoever other Benefices, of
whatsoever Estate, Degree, Title, Name or Designation the same were of, Erected
in temporal Lordships, Barronies or Livings, before or after the general Act of
Annexation of Kirk-lands made in the month of July one thousand five hundred
eighty and seven, together with the whole Few-mails, Few-fermes and other Rents
and Duties of the said Superiorities to be annexed, and to remain with the
Crown for ever, upon the reservation of the Lords and Titulars of Erection
therein specified: Likeas thereby His Majesty and Estates foresaid, Found and
Declared, that all Titulars of Erection without exception, should hold their
property and proper Lands of the Kings Majesty and His Successors in Few-ferm,
for payment of the Fewferm-duties, contained in the Infeftments, granted to
them before the said Act of Annexation, and no otherwise. And that all Rights
and Deeds, made and granted to whatsoever person or persons, preceding the
date of the foresaid Act, which might prejudge His Majesty and His Successors,
in the peaceable enjoying of the said Superiorities and Few-ferm-duties, should
be null and of no avail, by way of action, exception or reply. And further, His
Majesty, with advice and consent foresaids, of new Declares, the foresaid
Superiorities of all and whatsoever Kirk-lands, Milnes, Woods, Fishings and
whole pertinents of the same, pertaining of before to whatsoever Chapters,
Priors, Prioresses, Preceptors, and whatsoever other Benefices, of whatsoever
other Estates, Degree, Title, or Designation they be of, whereof the
Presentation belonged to His Majesty and His Highness Predecessors, erected in
temporal Lordships, Barronies and Livings, to pertain to His Majesty and His
Highness Crown, therewith to remain in all time coming. And also Declares all
and whatsoever Grants, Rights or Infeftments, of any of the said Superiorities
of the Lands and others pertaining to whatsoever Chapters, Priors, Prioresses,
Preceptors, Abbacies, and whatsoever other Benefices of whatsoever Estate,
Degree, Title, Name or Designation the same were of, with all Warrands, Tacks,
Commissions, Baileries or Deputations for entering of the Vassals thereto, made
and granted by His Majesty, or His said Umquhile dearest Father, in any time
bygone, since the Surrender in Anno one thousand six hundred twenty seven, or
to be made in time coming, with all other Gifts and Donanations of the said
Few-duties, formerly belonging to the said Lords of Erection, and made by His
Majesty's said Umquhile dearest Father, after the Surrender, and before the
Redemption thereof from the said Lords, and all heritable and irredeemable
Rights, granted by His Majesty's said Umquhile dearest Father after the
redemption, whereby the Profits, Casualities and Emoluments of the Superiority
of the said Kirk-lands, may be conferred to any other person, except the proper
Vassals thereof, directly or indirectly, of whatsoever Name, Title or
Designation they be of, and of all gifts of new Regalities or Jurisdiction, to
be null by way of exception or reply: Reserving always to these persons, who
have right to the Few-duties, the Right and Title thereto. And reserving to
John Earl of Lauderdail, His Majesty's Sole Secretary for the Kingdom of
Scotland, a Signatur superscribed by His Majesty at His Court of Whitehal, the
twenty fifth day of May last by past, and past in His Majesty's Exchequer, of
all and whole the Lordship, Barronie and Regalitie of Musleburgh, containing a
new gift of Union and Erection of the same, in a free Lordship, Barronie and
Regalitie; and discharges the Treasurer Principal and Deput, Commissioners of
the Treasurary, and remanent Lords of Exchequer, Writers to, and keepers of,
the Seals, from all passing or expeding any such new Grants, Rights,
Infeftments, Tacks, Warrands, Commissions, Baileries, or Deputations for
entering of Vassals, except allanerly such Infeftments and Signaturs, as shall
be granted to the Lords and others, who had formerly right to the said
Erections and Superiorities, whereby they might have right to claim the
Few-ferms and Few-duties addebted by the Vassals and others subject in payment
thereof, allanerly, ay and while they be satisfied therefore, in manner
specified in the fourteenth Act of His Majesty's said Umquhile dearest Father
His first Parliament, and with the whole remanent exceptions and reservations,
contained in the said Acts, made in Anno one thousand six hundred and thirty
three, which are holden as repeated and expressed herein. It is always Declared,
that notwithstanding of this Act, any who have gotten or shall get any new
Infeftment of Superiority of Kirk-lands, the same shall stand good, as to such
Vassals who have given their consents to the said right of Superiority: In
regard that such a consent, as to His Majesty, is of the nature of a
Resignation of their property, in favors of the said Superior, to be holden
of the King. But prejudice nevertheless to His Majesty, of His Highness right
of reversion of the Few-ferm, Few-duties and Casualities, conform to the
foresaid Act of Parliament, one thousand six hundred and thirty three.

LIVE. Act in favors of Laick Patrons, of Provestries, Prebendaries,
Chaplanries and Alterages.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Ratifies and Approves the Act of Parliament, made by King James the sixth, His
Majesty's Grandfather, of eternal memory, Parliament first, Chap. twelfth,
Anent Provestries, Prebendaries, Alterages, Chaplanries, and Collegiat Kirks,
pertaining to laick Patrons, together with the Act of Parliament twelfth, Chap.
one hundred and fifty eight, Ratifying the same; and Ordains the said Acts to
have full force and effect in all time coming; with this Declaration always;
That in respect the Vassals which held Lands of the said Provests, Prebendars,
and others foresaids, are put to a great uncertainty of their Superiors, it not
being known to them who are provided to the said Provestries, Prebendaries,
Chaplanries, Alterages, and others foresaids, by reason there is no public
Register, to the which they may have recourse for knowledge and notice thereof;
and that the most that they can know by any Register, is the Infeftments and
Seizings, made to these who are laick Patrons holding of His Majesty.
Therefore, for securing of the Vassals, who hold Lands, Milnes, Fishings,
Tenements, Annualrents or others whatsoever, of the said Provestries,
Prebendaries, Collegiat Kirks, or of Chaplanries, Alterages, and others of that
nature, at any time of before; It is Statute and Ordained, that the entry of
the said Vassals by Retour, Precept of Clare constat, Resignation, Comprising
or otherwise whatsoever, shall pertain to the laick Patrons and their
Successors, who stand infeft in the said laick Patronages, holding immediately
of His Majesty; and that the entry of the Vassals by them, shall be as valid
and sufficient to the said Vassals, receivers thereof, as if they were entered
by the Titulars of the said Provestries, Prebendaries, Alterages, Chaplanries,
and others foresaids. And that the said laick Patrons, shall be in all time
coming in their place, as Superior to the said Vassals, and to have the same
power to give Infeftments to His Majesty's Subjects, upon Retour or by precept
of Clare constat, or by Resignation, Comprising, or any manner of way, with
Gifts De novo damus; and that without consent of persons provided, or to be
provided, to the said Provestries and Prebendaries of Collegiat Kirks,
Alterages, Chaplanries, or other Titulars of Collegiat Kirks; and also without
consent of the Chapter or Convent of the said Prebendaries thereof, or most
part of the same, which of before was in use and custom. Whereanent, and anent
all Acts in the contrair, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, dispenses for
ever, Reserving always to the Titulars of the said Provestries, Prebendaries,
Alterages, Chaplanries, and others foresaids, the Fruits, Rents and Emoluments
of the said Provestries, Prebendaries, and others foresaids, which are no
ways prejudged by this present Act. It is hereby further Statute and Ordained,
with advice and consent foresaid, where there are any Prebendaries,
Chaplanries, Alterages, or other foundations of that nature abovementioned,
founded and situated within any Burgh Royal of this Kingdom, that the Provest,
Baylies and Council of that Burgh, where the same are founded, are and shall be
in all time coming, only undoubted Superiors, by whom, and by no others, the
Vassals and Tennents shall enter in manner above-specified; the said Provest,
Baylies and Council having been formerly Patrons of these Chaplanries.

LV. Act anent Cocquets and Entries of Ships.
OUr Sovereign Lord, understanding there are diverse abuses committed by the
Customers and receivers of Entries of Ships, and by the keepers of the Cocquet,
in sometime exacting from Masters of Ships, greater sums of money then is due
to them, and sometimes absenting themselves, to the great prejudice of the
Merchants estate, and to the hazard of the loss of their voyage. Therefore our
Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Ordains
that there be no greater price exacted, for entering their Ships and Goods,
then the sum of twenty three shillings four pennies; and for the said Cocquet,
then the sum of forty shillings; and that the keepers of the said Cocquet,
attend by themselves or their servants, diligently and readily to answer and
give out Cocquets to all Merchants and Masters of Ships, under pain of losing
their place, whenever they shall be found, either to exact more then the said
sum above written, or shall occasion to the said Merchants and Masters more
delay nor is needful for writing of the same.

LVI. Act anent Coal-hewers.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Ratifies the eleventh Act of the eighteenth Parliament of King James the sixth,
of worthy memory, made anent Coal-hewers and Salters, with this addition, That
because Watermen who laves and draws Water in the Coal-heugh-head, and
Gates-men, who work the ways and passages in the said Heughs, are as necessar
to the owners and Masters of the said Coal-heughs, as the Coal-hewers and
bearers. It is therefore Statute and Ordained by Our Sovereign Lord, with
advice and consent foresaid, That no person shall hire nor seduce any
Watermen, Winds-men and Gates-men, without a Testimonial of the Master whom
they serve, under the pains contained in the former Acts in all points. And
because it is found by experience, that the giving of great Fees, has been a
mean and way to seduce and bring Coal-hewers from their Masters, It is
therefore also Statute and Ordained, That it shall not be lawful for any
Coal-masters in this Kingdom, to give any greater Fee then the sum of twenty
merks in Fee or Bounteth, under any color or pretext: and because the said
Coal-hewers and Salters, and other Workmen in Coal-heughs within this Kingdom,
do ly from their work at Pasch, Zule, Whitesunday, and certain other times in
the year; which times they employ in Drinking and Debauchry, to the great
offense of GOD, and prejudice of their Master; It is therefore Statute and
Ordained, That the said Coal-hewers and Salters, and other Workmen in
Coal-heughs of this Kingdom, work all the six days of the Week, except the
time of Christmasse, under the pain of twenty shillings Scots, to be paid to
their Master, for ilk days failie (by and attour the prejudice sustained by
their said Masters) and other punishment of their bodies.

LVII. ACT discharging the Custom of two and a half of the Hundred, and the
Impost of four pounds on the Tun.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering that the prices of all Merchandice do daily
rise to exceeding great dearth, which is alleged to be occasioned through
extraordinary Customs and Impositions. For remedy whereof, His Majesty, with
advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does discharge all and sundry
whatsoever Customs and Impositions exacted by the Customers, which are not
allowed by the Acts of Parliament, and especially the late Custom of two and an
half per cent. and the late new Imposition of four pounds upon the Tun of Wine,
and all raising of His Majesty's Customs, directly or indirectly, without
consent of Parliament. And because that the too much troubling of Merchants,
and drawing of Masters and Mariners from their ordinary charges, does much
impede the Trade; Therefore His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid,
discharges the taking of Merchants, Masters and Mariners Oaths in the matter of
Customs. And to the end, that the Subject of Trade may not be restrained with
unnecessary Customs, His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Declares,
that all Goods and Merchandice, imported from Foreign places to this Kingdom,
and out of the same, paying Inward-custom, shall be free of all Outward-custom,
according as is used in England and Ireland. Likeas His Majesty Declares, that
He consented to the Act abovewritten, upon this condition, that Commission and
Warrant be granted to the Exchequer, to establish the Book of Rates, according
as the prices of Merchandice now rules; and His Majesty permitted the option to
the Buroughs, whereupon, the Buroughs having advised, they made choice to be
ruled by the the Book of Rates anent the Customs; and consented, that
Commission should be granted to the Exchequer to establish the Book of Rates,
according as the prices of Merchandice now rules. In respect whereof, Our
Sovereign Lord Ordains a Commission to be drawn up to the Exchequer to the
effect foresaid, and extracted thereupon, for establishing the Book of Rates
according as the prices of Merchandice now rules: And therefore Our Sovereign
Lord, with advice and consent foresaid, Ordains the Act abovementioned to
stand as a Law, in manner and to the effect above-rehearsed.

LVIII. Act in Favors of these who get their Wardholding changed by the Kings
Majesty.
THe Estates of Parliament having taken to consideration, that some difficulty
has occurred in the prosecution of His Majesty's Royal Fathers intention of
changing of Ward-holdings in Few, for the well of His Subjects, conform to the
two Commissions, granted by His said Majesty thereanent, under the Great Seal
of this Kingdom; And that the said difficulty has risen upon this ground, that
diverse of His Majesty's Subjects, holding Lands of His Majesty or of the
Prince, Ward, or Few cum maritagio, holds also other Lands, of other Superiors,
Ward; who whilst their Vassals held Lands Ward, or Few cum maritagio, of His
Majesty or of the Prince, could pretend no right to the Marriage of the Vassals
Heir; when the same shall be changed in Few, and Composition and a yearly
Few-duty being granted to His Majesty or the Prince for the said Ward and
Marriage, the other Superiors of the said Vassals, of whom he holds Ward, may
contend for the benefit of the casuality of the Marriage of His Vassals Heir,
when the same falls out, he being the Vassals eldest Superior of whom he holds
Ward; which was grievous to the Vassals, who by this new course of changing of
his holding, has componed both for Ward and Marriage. Therefore it is Statute
and Ordained, by the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, That all Vassals, holding Ward of His Majesty or the Prince, or
holding Few cum maritagio, who shall hereafter compone and agree with the
Commissioners to be appointed by His Majesty, for changing of their Holdings,
from Ward to Few, or for renunciation of the Marriage, contained in their
Few-infeftments, their Heirs and Successors in the said Lands, shall be free
of the Marriage that can be acclaimed by their Superiors of the Lands holden by
them of their said other Superiors, Ward; and that the said other Superiors,
shall have no right to the Marriage of their Heirs, when the same falls out, no
more then they would have had, if the Lands holden Ward of His Majesty or the
Prince, had continued still Ward: but that the said Vassals, whose holding
shall be changed, or who shall compone for their Marriage, as said is, their
Heirs and Successors, shall enjoy their Lands in all time thereafter, free of
any such burden of Marriage: Providing always, Likeas it is hereby Provided
and Declared, that if the foresaids Vassals whose holding shall be changed as
said is, and who shall compone for the renunciation of the Marriage contained
in their Few-infeftments, or their Heirs or Successors in the said Lands which
once held Ward, or Few cum maritagio, shall alienate and dispone the said
Lands to any other persons; then and in that case, the Aliener, or His Heirs,
shall no longer have the benefit of this present Act; but that notwithstanding
of this present Act, if they hold Lands Ward of any other Superior, that their
Superior shall enjoy all the benefit of his Superiority, as if this present Act
had never been made. And suchlike, for the greater furtherance of His Majesty's
Lieges, in the way of the changing of the tenours of the said Ward-holdings, or
renuncing of the Marriage contained in their said Few-infeftments, Our
Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent foresaid, Ordains Signaturs to be past
to the Lieges by the Exchequer, on the recommendation of the said
Commissioners of the Ward-lands in their favors, upon the Lieges their
Resignation for new Infeftments to be granted to them; bearing the new manner
of Few-holding, or bearing the renunciation of the said Marriage contained in
their old Few-infeftments, as shall be Ordained by the said Commissoners of
the Ward-lands.

LIX. Act anent the Exchequer.
THe Kings Majesty, considering that some doubts and debates may arise,
concerning the meaning of the eighteenth Act of the Parliament, holden by His
Majesty's Royal Father of blessed memory, in the year one thousand six hundred
and thirty three, Anent the deciding and judging in Causes concerning His
Majesty's Property; Does for explanation thereof, with advice and consent of
His Estates of Parliament, Find, Declare, Statute and Ordain, that the validity
and invalidity of Infeftments of His Majesty's Property, or of any other
Infeftments, may not be discussed nor decided in Exchequer, neither by way of
Exception, Action nor Reply; but that the discussing and decision thereof, is
only proper to the Lords of Session; Reserving always to the Exchequer to
judge in all other businesses concerning His Majesty's Rents and Casualities,
as they might have done before the year one thousand six hundred and thirty
three.

LX. Act concerning Docqueting of Signaturs.
THe Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does
Ratify and Renew the twentieth Act of the tenth Parliament of King James the
sixth, of blessed memory, and accordingly Statutes and Ordains, That no
Signaturs, Writs, Letters or Warrands shall be presented to be signed by His
Majesty, but by His ordinary Officers, to whose charge the same properly
belongs. And that His Majesty may the better know what passes under His Hand,
and upon what grounds he signs the same, It is appointed, That any of His
Majesty's Officers, who shall present any Signature, Writ, Letter or Warrant to
be signed by His Majesty, shall cause Registrate the Docquet of the same in a
Register, and then send the just double thereof under their hands to His
Majesty's Secretary, who is to give His Majesty timous notice of any prior
Deed, differing or contrary to the same, that His Majesty may give His further
Orders concerning the same.

LXI. Commission for Plantation of Kirks, and Valuation of Teinds.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering the great care His Royal Father and
Grandfather, of ever blessed memory, had, at all times, of the Reformed
Religion within this Kingdom, and of the Maintenance and Provision of the
Ministry and Churches thereof; Concerning which, and for the public good of
the Nation, His Majesty's Royal Father did emit a Declaration, immediately
after His succession to the Crown, and concerning diverse other particulars
relating to Teinds and Superiorities of Kirk-lands: in order whereunto, diverse
Acts and Ordinances of Parliament and of Commissions, were from time to time
made, during the Reign of His ever Glorious Father; And yet, by the unhappy
Troubles of the time, His Royal purpose has not got a final accomplishment,
so that diverse Churches are as yet unprovided with sufficient Maintenance,
many Teinds unvalued, and diverse other particulars are as yet unperfected; And
His Majesty being desirous to prosecute this good Work, for the universal good
of the People, and namely for the encouragement of the Ministers of the Gospel,
His Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Does Ratify
and Approve the nineteenth Act of the Parliament holden at Edinburgh by His
Royal Father, in Anno one thousand six hundred and thirty three, Entitled,
Commission for Valuation of Teinds, etc. in the whole Heads, Clauses and
Contents thereof, except in so far as there has been any derogation made
thereto, by Acts and Commissions made and granted by His Majesty, since the
date of the said Act, or granted by pretended Parliaments since, and which are
Ratified or Salved, or to be Reserved by this present Parliament. And His
Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Does give full Power and Commission
to the Persons aftermentioned, viz. John Earl of Middletoun His Majesty's
Commissioner, William Earl of Glencairn Lord High Chancellor, John Earl of
Craufurd and Lindsay Lord Thesaurer, John Earl of Rothes President of His
Majesty's Privy Council, William Duke of Hammiltoun, James Marquess of
Montrose, John Earl of Lauderdail His Majesty's Secretary, William Earl of
Marishall, John Earl of Atholl, George Earl of Linlithgow, James Earl of Home,
James Earl of Tullibardin, William Earl of Roxburgh, John Earl of Haddingtoun,
James Earl of Annandale, William Earl of Dumfries, John Earl of Tweddal, James
Earl of Calendar, John Earl of Dundee, David Viscount of Stormount, John Lord
Sinclair, David Lord Cardros, John Lord Belhaven, (...) Lord Halkertoun,
William Lord Cochran, William Lord Bellenden, Sir John Gilmor of Craigmiller
President of the Session, Sir Archibald Primerose of Chester Knight and
Barronet, Clerk of His Majesty's Council, Registers and Rolls, Sir John
Fletcher His Majesty's Advocat, Sir Robert Murray Justice Clerk; Sir James
Lockhart of Lee, Sir George Mackenie of Tarbet, Sir James Foullis of
Colingtoun, Sir Archibald Stirline of Carden, Sir James Dalrymple of Stair, Sir
John Scougal of Whitekirk, Senators of the College of Justice; Alexander Bruce
of Kincairn, Sir John Urquhart of Cromartie, Sir Robert Fletcher of Salton, Sir
Alexander Gibson of Durie, Sir Robert Innes of that Ilk, James Crighton of St.
Leonards, Sir George Kinnaird of Rossie, Sir Gilbert Ramsay of Balmayn, John
Murray of Polmais, William Scot of Ardrose, Sir James Dundas of Arnestoun, Sir
John Foullis of Ravilstoun, Richard Murray of Broughton, Sir Robert Hepburn of
Keith, Mr. Robert Preston of that ilk, Sir Andrew Ramsay, Sir Robert Murray,
Sir Archibald Sydserf, Sir William Thomson and John Miln Burgesses of
Edinburgh, Sir Alexander Wedderburn and Alexander Wedderburn of Dundee, Mr.
John Paterson of Perth, John Bell of Glasgow, William Cuningham of Air, Andrew
Glen of Linlithgow, Duncan Nairn of Stirline, Alexander Bruce of Culross,
Andrew Carstairs of St. Andrews, and William Seaton of Haddingtoun, Burgesses:
Or any thirteen of them, there being always present three Noblemen, three
Gentlemen, and three Burgesses, with His Majesty's Commissioner, the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Thesaurer, Lord President of the Council, Lord Privy Seal, the
Lord Secretary, (...) or any one of them, with power to them, or Quorum
foresaid, to meet and conveen at Edinburgh, or such other place or places, at
such times and diets as they shall appoint, to value and cause value whatsoever
Teinds, great or small, Personage or Vicarage, of whatsoever Lands and others
within this Kingdom liable to the payment of Teinds of whatsoever nature or
quality the same be of which are yet unvalued. Providing the Ministers serving
the Cure, who do lead Teinds, be secured of good and thankful payment of so
much victual or money answerable to the worth of the said Teinds, as the
Teinds shall be valued to. And also with power to them to receive reports from
Sub-commissioners, and to appoint Sub-commissioners conform to the former Acts
and Commissions, to appoint constant and local Stipends, and grant
Augmentations, to dis-joyn too large and spacious Kirks, build and erect new
Kirks, dis-member, annex and unite Kirks, and to take order that every Heritor
and Life-renter shall have the leading and buying of their own Teinds, if they
be willing, according to the Rates prescribed by former Commissions, namely by
the foresaid Commission granted by His Majesty, with consent of the Estates of
Parliament, in Anno one thousand six hundred thirty and three. And with power
to the said Commissioners or Quorum foresaid, to give recompense to Parties
for the augmentation of Stipends to be imposed by this Commission, in the same
way as was done by former Commissions, namely by the Commission in Anno one
thousand six hundred and seventeen. With power to them to determine all
Questions concerning the Prices of Teinds betwixt Titulars and others having
right to the Teinds, and the Heritors: And to appoint such securities in
favors of the Titulars and others having right, by the Heritors payers of the
valued Duties or buyers of the said Teinds, and in favors of the Ministers as
to their maintenance, as the said Commissioners shall think fitting, according
to the Rules set down in the said former Acts, namely in the said Act, in Anno
one thousand six hundred thirty and three. And suchlike, with power to them to
appoint and provide for such other pious uses in each Paroch as the estate
thereof may bear. Declaring, that where the Vicarage of any Paroch is a
several Benefice and Title from the Personage, the same shall be severally
valued, to the effect the Titulars or Ministers serving the Cure, having right
to the said Vicarage, be not frustrate of the true worth thereof. It is always
Declared, That Ministers serving the Cure, who now lead their Teinds, And that
Colleges, Schools and Hospitals be not constrained to sell, set nor dispon
their Teinds in prejudice of their Successors, notwithstanding of the valuation
thereof; And that Titulars and others having right to Teinds, shall not be
forced to dispon any Teinds valued or to be valued, which they shall be content
and willing to assign and dispon to the Ministers serving the Cure of the
Paroch, as a part of his Provision. And His Majesty, with consent foresaid,
Declares, That where Valuations are lawfully led against all parties having
interest, and allowed by former Commissions, according to the order observed by
them, that the same shall not be drawn in question, nor rectified upon the
pretense of enorm lesion, at the instance of the Minister, not being Titular;
or at the instance of His Majesty's Advocat, for and in respect of His
Majesty's Annuity: Except it be proved that collusion was used betwixt the
Titulars and Heritor, or betwixt the Procutor-fiscall and Heritors and Titular;
which collusion is Declared to be where the Valuations are led with the
diminution of a third of the just Rent, and which diminution shall be proved by
the Parties Oaths. And albeit that all the Acts of the pretended Parliaments,
in the years one thousand six hundred and forty, and one thousand six hundred
forty and one, and since; are Declared by an Act of this present Parliament,
null and of none avail in all time coming; Yet it is hereby Declared, That all
and whatsoever Valuations, Acts, Sentences and Decreets, done, concluded and
decerned by virtue of any Commissions granted by the said pretended
Parliaments, with all execution used or to be used thereupon, are and shall
stand valid in all time coming, notwithstanding of the foresaid Act Rescissory;
And this for the good and ease of the People, and for encouragement of the
Ministers of the Gospel, whereunto His Majesty has always a tender respect.
And although by a special Act of this present Parliament, the pretended
Parliament holden in Anno one thousand six hundred and forty nine, and in the
beginning of the year one thousand six hundred and fifty, is from the beginning
Declared void and null, and all that has followed thereon; Yet nevertheless
His Majesty Does, with advice foresaid, Authorize all Valuations, Acts,
Decreets and Sentences led, deduced and pronounced by the Commissions one or
more appointed by the said pretended Parliament, for Plantation of Kirks and
Valuation of Teinds, and all execution competent thereupon; Excepting such
Decreets and Sentences given in favors of Ministers for their Stipends, or for
dividing, uniting, annexing or building of Kirks, which shall be found to have
been unjustly or exorbitantly decerned: The Determination whereof is hereby
referred by His Majesty, with consent foresaid, to the said Commissioners,
that they after hearing of parties, and consideration of particulars, may take
such course for altering, annulling or allowing of the said Acts, Decreets and
Sentences, as they shall think fitting, conform to the Laws, Practique and
Custom observed preceding the year one thousand six hundred and forty nine:
and Ordains Process upon Supplications to be summarly granted, parties always
being cited, and that without any reduction. And it shall be lawful to the
said Commissioners or Quorum foresaid, to proceed in all Summons and Actions
to be intended for that effect, within the space of two years after the first
down-siting of the Commission. As also, with Power to the said Commissioners,
upon the dependence of the said Complaints and Processes to discharge
execution upon the foresaids Decreets, in whole or in part, as they shall find
just, ay and while the matter be determined by them. As also in respect that by
diverse Decreets pronounced by the said Commissioners appointed by the said
Commission, in Anno one thousand six hundred and forty nine, the burden of an
Augmentation was put upon diverse Tacks-men of Teinds, and yet no recompense
was made to them by prorogating of the said Tacks; In regard also that diverse
Registers of Commissions, preceding the Year one thousand six hundred and
forty nine, are lost, whereby Prorogations were granted in favors of
Tacks-men, and the Extracts also perished the time of the Troubles: Therefore
His Majesty, with consent foresaid, Gives power to the said Commissioners, or
Quorum foresaid, appointed by this Commission, to grant recompense and
prorogation to the said Tacks-men, in the same manner as was prescribed by the
former Commissions, namely by the Commission in Anno one thousand six hundred
and seventeen, the Titulars always being cited thereto. And whereas it may
fall out, that some of the said Commissioners now appointed, may be unable to
attend the service, through death, sickness, or some other notour and known
impediment. Therefore His Majesty Declares, that He shall be careful to fill
their places with other persons qualified, whose Oaths for faithful discharge
of the same, shall be taken by the Lord Chancellor, or in his absence, by the
President of the said Commission for the time: And Ordains this present
Commission to endure ay and while the same be discharged by His Majesty; and
Ordains the Acts, Decreets and Ordinances thereof, to have the force, strength
and effect of a Decree, Sentence and Act of Parliament; and the Lords of the
Session to grant and direct Letters of Horning, Poinding and others requisite,
in manner contained in the foresaids former Commissions. And considering that
it was the will and pleasure of His Majesty's Royal Father, that all Heritors
who should be willing to buy, should have their own Teinds at reasonable Rates;
Therefore His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that all
Heritors whose Teinds are not valued, shall have liberty to value and buy the
same at such Rates as are contained in the Act of Parliament one thousand six
hundred and thirty three years. With power to augment the said Rates according
to the burden of Augmentations and others sustained by the Titulars, since the
said Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred and thirty three years; and the
said Heritors to have the liberty of buying, as said is, within the space of
three years after the valuation. With power to the said Commissioners to
determine therein according to Justice; with this Declaration always, That in
case the impediment during the space foresaid, flow from the Titular, by reason
of his minority or other inability, in that case, the Heritor who offered
himself ready to buy his own Teind within the space foresaid, shall have place,
so soon as the impediment is removed, to buy his Teinds, notwithstanding of the
expiring of the years and space above-exprest. And it is Declared, that if the
Heritor be Minor, and his Tutors neglect the buying of his Teinds within the
foresaid space, the Minor shall have Action for two years after his minority,
to compel the Titular for selling of the said Teinds.

LXII. ACT for ordering the payment of Debts, betwixt Creditor and Debtor.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering how necessary and essential it is to the very
being and flourishing of Kingdoms and Nations, that there should be a National
confidence among the people themselves, and with these of other Nations with
whom they have correspondence and traffic abroad; and that the most effectual
and proper way to beget, cement, and maintain the same, is, that Promises,
Pactions, Obliegements and Debts be faithfully performed and satisfied, without
which there can be no trust, and consequently no society, intercourse and
commerce at home, and all Trade and Traffic with other Nations will certainly
decay and cease, to the irreparable loss, ruin and discredit of the Nation:
Yet, the troubles and difficulties of the time being so great, that it is fit
some breathing time and encouragement should be given to the Debitors, for the
better inabling them to keep their credit, and to take some effectual course
for payment of their Debts. Therefore His Majesty, with advice and consent of
the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That for all Sums and Debts
contracted before the term of Whitsunday, one thousand six hundred and fifty
eight years, and exceeding one thousand pounds Scots of principal, personal
execution shall be forborne by the space of six years, to begin at Whitsunday
last bypast, in this instant year, one thousand six hundred and sixty one;
Providing that the Debitors make payment of one years Annualrent at Candlemesse
next, in the year one thousand six hundred and sixty two, and that the residue
of the bygone Annualrents of the said Sums, resting unpaid at Whitsunday next,
shall become and be made a principal Sum, and the Debtor shall give security
for the same to these who have right to the bygone Annualrents, when they take
the benefit of the foresaid forbearance, in manner after-mentioned; or at any
other time that the same shall be demanded: Which Security to be granted for
the said bygone Annualrents, made up in a principal Sum, shall bear
obliegement to pay Annualrent for the same, in manner and from the terms
after-specified, viz. For a third part thereof, from Whitsunday next, one
thousand six hundred and sixty two years; and for an other third part, from
Martimesse thereafter, in the said year; and for the last third part, from
Whitsunday, in the year one thousand six hundred and sixty three, during the
not payment of the said principal Sum so made up, for which, personal execution
is to be forborne, as for the other principal Sums, by the space aforesaid of
six years after Whitsunday last. And without prejudice of the Security to be
granted in manner foresaid, It is also Declared and Ordained, that the said
bygone Annualrents, are made up, and shall be holden and esteemed principal
Sums; And that Annualrents shall be due and payable for the same from the
terms and in manner foresaid, and that execution shall follow at the instance
of those who have right to the same, upon and by virtue of their Bonds,
Contracts and Rights, and of this present Act and Ordinance, in the same manner
as if a new Security were already granted in manner and of the tenor
abovewritten.

And notwithstanding of the Premises, It is hereby Declared, that the Lords of
Session shall have power to grant and pass Suspensions for Sums not exceeding
one thousand pounds, upon such reasons as they shall think just.

And where those who have right to bygone Annualrents are only Liferenters,
and have no right to the stock and principal Sum, It is Ordained, that it
shall be lawful to them to use execution for the whole bygone Annualrents due
to them, as they might have done before the making of these Presents; and that
the said Lords of Session shall have power to grant and pass Suspensions
against the said Liferenters, in case they shall find just grounds and cause
for granting of the same.

It is likewayes Provided, that the benefit of the said forbearance, shall only
be granted and competent to such Debitors, as shall pay the said years
Annualrent, within the time foresaid, and shall betwixt and the first day of
November, compear before any of the Lords of Session, with the Clerk, and
declare before them upon Oath, that their Debts exceeds the value of four years
Rent of their Estate, pertaining to, and possessed by, them: which Declaration,
extracted under the hand of the Clerk of Register, or his Deputies, shall be a
sufficient Security against Personal execution: And for which Extract, the
Clerk Register and his Deputies shall have for their Fees the sum of thirty
three shillings four pennies Scots, and no more; And it is Declared, that all
persons, who shall not by themselves, or their Tutors or Curators, appear and
declare within the time, and in manner foresaid, shall be excluded from the
benefit of the foresaid forbearance, and shall never be reponed or admitted
thereafter, upon any pretext whatsoever.

And the benefit of the foresaid forbearance being granted to the Debitors, or
any of their Cautioners, upon the compearance and declaration foresaid, shall
only be personal for them and their Heirs and others representing them, and
shall not be extended to those who are bound with them, and liable to the said
Debts, unless they also compear and declare, that their own proper Debts and
Cautionry for persons who have taken the benefit of this Act, exceeds the value
of four years Rent of their Estate, and that within the time and in manner
foresaid.

And for the more ease of the Debitors, It is Ordained, that in case within the
time of the forbearance foresaid, the Debtor shall offer to the Creditor a
part of his Debt, not being beneath or within the third part of the whole Sums
due by him to the Creditor for the time, the Creditor in that case, shall be
holden to accept of the said partial payment: and in case of his refusal,
offer being made of a part of the said Sums, not within the proportion
foresaid, in presence of a Notar and Witnesses, the Debtor, upon consignation
of the same in the hands of the Clerk of the Bills, shall be free of the
Annualrent of that part of the said Sum that shall be consigned, in all time
coming after the consignation foresaid.

And whereas the legal reversion of Comprisings was formerly limited to seven
years, His Majesty, for the reasons and with consent foresaid, is graciously
pleased to extend the same to ten years in all time coming; and Statutes and
Ordains, that all Comprisings already deduced, and whereof the legal reversion
is not yet expired, or which shall be deduced any time hereafter, shall be
redeemable within the space of ten years after the date of the same; and all
Comprisings deduced since January, one thousand six hundred and fifty two
years, and whereof the legalls are expired, and all Comprisings deduced before
the said month of January, one thousand six hundred and fifty two years, and
which were not expired before the said month of January, one thousand six
hundred and fifty two years, shall be redeemable within the space of three
years, after Whitsunday now last bypast, notwithstanding the legal reversions
of the same be now expired.

And in case the Lands and others comprised, exceed in yearly Rent and value,
the Annualrent of the Sums contained in the said Comprisings, and of the
expense disbursed in obtaining Infestments thereupon, and the Debtor shall
desire the Creditor to possess the Lands and others comprised, it shall be
lawful to the Lords of Session, likeas the said Lords are hereby empowered
and authorized, upon a Supplication to be made to them by the Debtor, and
Citation of the Comprisers, to appoint the Apprisers to possess such of the
said Lands and others, during the legal reversion, as the said Lords of
Session shall think just and reasonable; the said Debitors always giving
possession to those who have right to the said Comprisings, and ratifying
their possession already apprehended by them (if any such possession they have)
of such of the said Lands and others as the said Lords of the Session shall
appoint, not being beneath in yearly Rent and value of the Annualrents
abovementioned; or otherwise giving to the Creditors (whether they have
possession or not) sufficient security, at the sight of the said Lords, for
payment of the said Annualrents, during the time foresaid; the said Lords of
Session having always power to determine, whether in the cases foresaids, the
Debtor shall give Surety to the Creditor for his Annualrents, or the Debtor
not being able to give Surety, the Creditor shall be obliged to take
possession of the Debitors Lands. And if the Lords of Session shall appoint, in
the case foresaid, the Creditor to be possessed for his Annualrent, then, and in
that case, the Debtor shall be holden to deliver the Evidents of the said
Lands to the Creditor, or transumps thereof; providing always, that the
Creditors right, by virtue of the said Comprisings, be no ways prejudged
after the expiring of the same: And that the whole Lands and others, both such
as shall be possessed by the Debtor, and the remanent of of the Lands and
others contained in the said Comprisings, shall pertain to the Creditor
irredeemably.

And because oftentimes Creditors, in regard they live at distance, or upon
other occasions, are prejudged and preveened, by the more timeous diligence of
other Creditors, so that before they can know the condition of the common
Debtor, his Estate is comprised, and the posterior Comprisers have only right
to the legal reversion, which may, and does often prove ineffectual to them,
not being able to satisfy and redeem the prior Comprisings (their means and
money being in the hands of the common Debtor) Therefore it is Statute and
Ordained, That all Comprisings, deduced since the first day of January, one
thousand six hundred and fifty two years, before the first effectual
Comprising, or after, but within year and day of the same, shall come in pari
passu together, as if one Comprising had been deduced and obtained for the
whole respective Sums, contained in the foresaids Comprisings. And it is
Declared, that such Comprisings as are preferable to all others in respect of
the first real Right and Infeftment following thereupon, or the first exact
diligence for obtaining the same, are and shall be holden the first effectual
Comprising, though there be others in date before and anterior to the same; and
the foresaid benefit given and introduced hereby, in favors of these whose
Comprisings are led within the time, and in manner foresaid, is only granted
and competent in the case of Comprisings, led since the first day of January,
one thousand six hundred and fifty two years, and to be led after the date of
their presents, and for personal Debt only, without prejudice always of ground
Annuals, Annualrents due upon Infeftment, and other real Debts, and Debita
fundi, and of Comprisings therefore of Lands and others affected therewith,
which shall be effectual and preferable according to the Laws and Practick of
this Kingdom now standing; And it is also provided, that the Creditors, having
right to the first Comprising, except as is above excepted, shall be satisfied
by the posterior Comprisers, claiming the benefit foresaid, of the whole
expense disbursed by them, in deducing and expeding the said first Comprising
and Infeftments thereupon.

And further, for obviating the frequent and fraudfull practice of the
appearand Heirs of Debitors, who are in use to acquire the right of expired
Comprisings, and by virtue thereof, to enjoy and possess their Predecessors
Lands and Estate, to the prejudice and defrauding of the posterior Comprisings
and other Creditors, It is Statute, that in case the appearand Heir of any
Debtor, or any other confident person to his behoof, shall at any time
hereafter acquire the right of an expired Comprising, already deduced, or which
shall be led and deduced hereafter, the said right shall be redeemable from the
appearand Heir, or the said confident person, their Heirs and Successors,
within the space of ten years, after the acquiring of the said right, by the
posterior Comprisers, upon payment allanerly of the Sums truly paid and given
out, for buying and acquiring the said rights, at the least so much thereof as
shall be resting unsatisfied for the same, by the intromission of the appearand
Heir, or of the said confident person, or their foresaids.

And His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does Declare, That the benefit
foresaid introduced hereby anent Comprisings, shall be extended to
Adjudications for Debt; so that the Creditors, at whose instance the same are
obtained, and those who have right to redeem the same, shall be in the same
case as to the benefit foresaid, as if the said Adjudications for Debts were
Comprisings.

And in case a Creditor, against whom the benefit of the foresaid forbearance
for six years shall be taken, or who has led, or shall lead a Comprising
against the Debtor, shall think fit, and be willing, and desirous to take his
Debitors Lands, or other Estate, or any part thereof for security or payment,
and in satisfaction of his Debt, then, and in either of these cases, the
Debtor shall be holden to give Security out of his Lands, and other Estate, or
to sell the same to the Creditor, at the sight of the Lords of Session, with
such warrandize, and at such rates and prices (if the Creditor be content to
buy) as they shall appoint; with certification, that otherwise the Debtor,
refusing or failing, shall lose and forfeit all benefit introduced in favors
of the Debitors by this present Act, as if it had never been made.

And in regard some persons may have taken advantage of the late times and
troubles, by taking and acquiring of proper Wodsets of Lands and others,
exceeding the Annualrent of the Sums lent upon the same; and providing
nevertheless, by the right of the foresaids Wodsets, and express provisions
therein, or by writ a part, that they should not be liable to any hazard of the
Fruits, Tennents, War or Troubles; His Majesty, with consent foresaid, Statutes
and Ordains, that all such Wodsets, granted since the year one thousand six
hundred and forty nine, shall be restricted to the ordinary Annualrent of the
Sums whereupon the same are redeemable; and the said Wodsetters shall be
countable for the superplus of the Mails and Duties, and other benefit of the
same, exceeding the Annualrent of the said Sums, and the same shall be imputed
and ascribed, in satisfaction of the said principal Sums pro tanto: And in
case any such Bargains and Rights shall be made and acquired hereafter, His
Majesty, with consent foresaid, Declares the same unlawful and usurary, and
the Contraveeners shall be punished severely as Usurers, conform to the Laws
and Acts of Parliament against Ockerers and Usurers.

And as to proper Wodsets, granted since the time foresaid, where the Creditor
undergoes the said hazards, and the same are affected with the ordinar
provisions and clauses irritant, in case of not payment of the Sums given out
and due upon the said Wodsets, at the terms and in manner mentioned in the
said Rights: albeit the said Wodsets and Provisions be lawful; yet His
Majesty, considering and having respect to the difficulties of the times,
Statutes and Ordains, with consent foresaid, That the said Clauses irritant,
shall not take away the Heritors right, they always redeeming within the space
of five years after Whitsunday last: And in case the Debitors conceive, that
they have dis-advantage by the said proper Wodsets, and shall desire to redeem
the same, it shall be lawful to them to redeem at any term of Whitsunday or
Martimesse they please, notwithstanding of any provision to the contrair in the
said Wodset-rights, or any other right a part suspending the redemption
thereof. Likeas it is Declared, That the Clauses of requisition contained in
proper Wodsets, granted since the year one thousand six hundred forty nine
years, shall be effectual and no ways suspended nor prejudged hereby; But
prejudice always to the forbearance of personal execution in manner
above-written. And where the Creditors and Wodsetters have transacted with
their Debitors, and have acquired irredeemable rights, for, and in place of,
their former Wodsets, It is Ordained and Declared, That when, and at what time
soever the said Wodsets were granted, whether before or since the year one
thousand six hundred and fifty years, the said transactions and irredeemable
rights acquired by the Creditor for the same, are and shall be valid and
effectual, and shall no ways be prejudged by these presents.

And further, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does Declare, That in case
any Debitors have by voluntar agreement betwixt them and their Creditors, or
any of them renounced the benefit of any Acts of this nature, concerning
Debtor and Creditor, made or to be made, the said agreement shall be of force
and effectual, and shall not be prejudged hereby; without prejudice always to
the said Debtor of the prorogation foresaid of the legal reversions of
Comprisings led and deduced against them, and not as yet expired,
notwithstanding of the agreement and renounciation foresaid.

And because, before the year one thousand six hundred and fifty, when money
past at eight or ten per cent. diverse proper Wodsets were then made and
granted, and are yet unredeemed; and since the beginning of January, one
thousand six hundred and fifty, there be diverse persons, who taking advantage
of the times, refused to lend their money, unless they got proper Wodsets of
Lands and Teinds, at extraordinary advantages, to the heavy prejudice of the
Debitors: Therefore, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains,
That in time coming, during the not requisition of the Sums whereupon the said
Wodsets are redeemable, and during the not redemption of the same respectively,
if the Debitors shall give sufficient Security to the Wodsetter for payment of
his Annualrent, during the not redemption, or not requisition, as said is; In
that case, the Creditor-wodsetter, shall be holden to renounce and quit his
possession of the said Lands and Teinds, in favors of the Debtor and others
having right from him; At least if the Wodsetter shall be content to retain the
possession of the same; In that case all the free Profits and Rents, which he
shall have or uplift out of the said Lands, shall be restricted to six per
cent. yearly of free money, and the Wodsetter shall be countable to the
Debtor, or others having right from him, for the superplus; and that without
prejudice of the Wodsetters real Right and Infeftment, ay and while the Lands
be redeemed, and the principal Sum whereupon the same is redeemable shall be
satisfied. It is always provided, that where any Creditor has had loss by
his possession of the Wodset-lands and others since the date of his Wodset, So
that he has not received as much free Rent as, communibus annis, has extended
to the Annualrent allowed by Law for the time, all charges and burdens being
deduced; in that case, it is provided that the Wodsetter shall be first
satisfied of what he wants before he quit his possession of the said
Wodsetlands, or be holden to accept Security for his Annualrents: And it is
Declared, that in the account of the Wodsetter's bygone loss, there shall be
allowed what he has disbursed upon reparation and building of Tennents houses,
Milnes, and for the advantage of the ground; and generally all other expense
which the Wodsetter was put to, and what loss he sustained in reference to the
said Wodsetlands, Rights and Securities thereof, any manner of way; and what he
has lost by Quarterings, Cesse, waste Land, depauperated Tennents, or by
Tennents who were or are not able to pay, unless the ground should be casten
waste: And because the Wodsetters probation of his said loss may be
difficile, he not conceiving that there should be necessity for any such count,
or that there should be any alteration made in the right and possession of his
proper Wodset, Therefore His Majesty, with advice foresaid, does allow the
Lords of Session to take such reasonable probation as in equity they shall
think fit: And if there be any deficiency, to take the Wodsetters Oath in
supplement; and where the Wodsetter is in natural possession of the
Wodset-lands, by dwelling thereon or laboring the same with his own Plough and
Goods, or otherwise, having the same plenished with his said Goods, in that
case, he shall not be holden to remove from his said possession, but at the
ordinary term of removing, and that he be lawfully warned forty days before,
and after sufficient Security shall be made to him, in manner above specified,
before the said warning.

And His Majesty having granted so much favor, benefit and indulgence to
Debitors, as the like cannot be shown to have been granted at any time in this
Kingdom, does Declare, Statute and Ordain, That the Laws and Practick of the
Kingdom concerning Debts, and payment thereof, and diligence and execution for
the same, and concerning proper Wodsets, where the Creditor-wodsetter has the
hazard of Fruits, Tennents, War and others, shall be observed inviolably, and
be of full force, vigor and effect in all time coming, excepting so far as the
same is altered, innovat and repealed by this present Act.

LXIII. Act Salvo jure cujuslibet.
OUr Sovereign Lord, taking to consideration, that there be many Acts of
Ratification and others, past and made in this Session of Parliament, in
favors of particular persons, without calling or hearing of such as may be
thereby concerned and prejudged. Therefore His Majesty, with advice and consent
of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That all such particular
Acts, and Acts of Ratification, past in manner foresaid, shall not prejudge any
third party of their lawful rights, nor of their actions and defenses
competent thereupon before the making of the said particular Acts, and Acts of
Ratifications; and that the Lords of Session and all other judges within this
Kingdom, shall be obliged to judge betwixt parties according to their several
rights, standing in their persons before the making of the said Acts. All
which are hereby exponed and declared to have been made, Salvo jure cujuslibet.

LXIV. Act of Adjournment.
THe Kings Majesty Declares this Parliament current, and Adjourns the same to
the twelfth day of March next to come; Ordaining all Members of Parliament,
Noblemen, Commissioners of Shires and Burghs, and all others having interest,
to attend that day; and that there be no new Elections in Shires or Burghs,
except upon the death of any of the present Commissioners.

A. Primerose, Cls. Reg.

A TABLE of the Printed ACTS.
1. ACt concerning the President, and Oath of Parliament. Page 3. 2. Act and
Acknowledgment of His Majesty's Prerogative, in the choice of His Officers of
State, Counselors and Judges. Page 4. 3. Act asserting His Majesty's Royal
Prerogative, in the calling and dissolving of Parliaments, and making of Laws.
Page 5. 4. Act asserting His Majesty's Royal Prerogative, in the making of
Leagues, and the Conventions of the Subjects. Page 6. 5. Act asserting His
Majesty's Royal Prerogative, in the Militia, and in making Peace and War, etc.
Page 7. 6. Act annulling the pretended Convention of Estates, kept in the year,
1643. Page 8. 7. Act concerning the League and Covenant, and discharging the
renewing thereof, without His Majesty's Warrant and Approbation. ibid. 8. Act
against Papists, Priests and Jesuits. Page 9. 9. Act approving the Engagement,
1648. and annulling the pretended Parliaments and Committees kept thereafter.
Page 11. 10. Act condemning the Transactions concerning the Kings Majesty,
whilst He was at Newcastle in the years 1646, and 1647. Page 15. 11. Act for
taking the Oath of Allegiance, and asserting the Royal Prerogative. Page 17.
12. Act concerning the Judicial Proceedings in the time of the late Usurpers.
Page 19. 13. Act and Offer of Forty thousand pounds Sterling, to be paid to
the Kings Majesty yearly during His lifetime, by this Kingdom. Page 21 14. Act
for raising the Annuity of Forty thousand pounds Sterling, granted to His
Majesty. Page 22. 15. Act Rescinding and Annulling the pretended Parliaments,
in the years, 1640, 1641, etc. Page 37. 16. Act concerning Religion, and
Church Government. Page 40. 17. Act for a Solemn Anniversary Thanksgiving, for
His Majesty's Restoration to the Royal Government of His Kingdoms. Page 41.
18. Act for the due observation of the Sabbath Day. Page 42. 19. Act against
Swearing and excessive Drinking. Page 43. 20. Act against Cursing and Beating
of Parents. Page 44. 21. Act against the crime of Blasphemy. ibid. 22. Act
concerning the several degrees of casual Homicide. Page 45. 23. Act Ratifying
the Privileges of the College of Justice. ibid. 24. Act concerning appearand
Heirs, their payment of their Predecessors and their own Debts. Page 46. 25.
Act for Denouncing of Excommunicate Persons. Page 47. 26. Act appointing the
Pursuer of the Thief, to have the Goods stolen from him, restored. Page 48. 27.
Act for the Pardon of Penal Statutes. ibid. 28. Act discharging the Quots of
Testaments. Page 49 29. Act for Poynding upon Sheriffs and Commissars Decreets.
ibid. 30. Act anent the Fewers and Vassals of Kirk-lands. Page 50. 31. Act
concerning the Registration of Comprisings. Page 51. 32. Act concerning
Heretable and Moveable Bonds. Page 52. 33. Act for the right Packing of
Salmond. ibid. 34. Act against Clandestine and unlawful Marriages. Page 53.
35. Act concerning the Election and Charges of the Commissioners from Shires to
the Parliament. Page 55. 36. Act anent Presentation of Ministers. Page 56. 37.
Act concerning the Bullion. Page 57. 38. Commission and Instructions to the
Justices of Peace and Constables. Page 65. 39. Act for the Fishings, and
erecting of Companies for promoving of the same. Page 79 40. Act for Erecting
of Manufacturies. Page 83. 41. Act for Planting and Enclosing of Ground. Page
85. 42. Act establishing Companies and Societies, for making Linnencloath,
Stuffs, etc. Page 87. 43. Act discharging the Exportation of Linnen-yarn, and
regulating the breadth of Linnen-cloath, etc. Page 89. 44. Act for encouraging
of Shipping and Navigation. Page 90. 45. Act discharging the Exportation of
Skins, Hides, etc. Page 93. 46. Act discharging the Exportation of
Woollen-yarn, Worstead, broken Copper and Peuter, etc. Page 94. 47. Act
discharging Tradesmen to Import Made-work. ibid. 48. Act for encouraging of
Soap-works. Page 95. 49. Act Reducing the Annuals to Six for the Hundred. ibid.
50. Act and Offer of Twelve thousand pounds Sterling to the Lords of Session.
Page 96. 51. Act concerning Arrestments. Page 97. 52. Act concerning the
disposal of Vacant Stipends. ibid. 53. Act Ratifying the Act of Parliament,
1633. anent the Annexation of His Majesty's Property. Page 98. 54. Act in
favors of Laick Patrons of Provestries, Prebendaries, Chaplanries and
Altarages. Page 100. 55. Act anent Cocquets and Entries of Ships. Page 102. 56.
Act anent Coal-hewers. ibid. 57. Act discharging the Custom of two and an half
of the hundred, and the Impost of four pounds on the Tun. Page 103. 58 Act in
favors of those who get their Ward-holding changed by the Kings Majesty. Page
104. 59. Act anent the Exchequer. Page 105. 60. Act concerning Docqueting of
Signaturs. Page 106. 61. Commission for Plantation of Kirks and Valuation of
Teinds. ibid. 62. Act for ordering the payment of Debts betwixt Creditor and
Debtor. Page 111. 63. Act Salvo jure cujuslibet. Page 118. 64. Act of
Adjournment. ibid.
FINIS.

