ACT For Pole Money, May 29. 1693.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT taking to their Consideration, that the Arrears due
to the Country and Army, preceding the first day of February one thousand six
hundred and ninety one, are not as yet paid, by the Fonds appointed in the
former Session of this Parliament, And that it is most Just, that the same be
duly and truly paid. THEREFORE, in Order to the said payment, viz. That the
foresaid Arrears due to the Country, may be paid in the first place; and then
the Arrears due to the Forces, in such manner, as that all Officers, Regiments
and Troops, may be first brought up to an equal Foot, and thereafter
Completed: and that what remains thereof, may be disposed of, as their
MAJESTY'S shall think fit, do freely and cheerfully offer the Pole Money
following: And for making the same effectual, Their MAJESTY'S, with Advice and
Consent of the said Estates, STATUTE and ORDAIN, that all Persons of
whatsomever Age, Sex, or Quality, shall be subject and liable, to the Pole of
six shilling Scots per Head, except poor Persons, who live upon Charity, and
the Children under the Age of sixteen years, and In familia of all these
Persons, whose Pole is one pound ten shilling Scots, or under the same. That,
beside the said six shilling Scots imposed upon all the Persons that are not
excepted, a Cotter having a Trade, shall pay six shilling Scots more, making in
the whole, twelve shilling Scots for every such Cotter. That all Servants, that
receives more than six pound Scots of yearly Fee, in money, or otherways, shall
pay the twentieth part of the said Fee, including the six shilling. Scots of
general Pole, which is to be imposed upon all Persons that are not above
excepted. That all Tennents pay in name of Pole to the King, a Merk, for each
hundredth Merks of the Masters valued Rent, effeiring to their respective Rents,
including the foresaid six shilling, of general Pole; and appoints the Master
of the Ground, to Adjust the Proportions of the Pole Money amongst the several
Tennents, according to their respective Duties, payable by them in Money, or
Victual, effeiring to his valued Rent. For which Pole, all Pole Money
heretofore appointed to be paid by Tennents to their Masters, is hereby
expressly discharged, and the Act or Acts thereanent rescinded. That Tradsmen
inhabiting within any Burgh, whether of Royalty, Regality, or Barony, whose
free Stock and Means is above an hundred Merks, and does not extend to five
hundredth Merks, be subject to a Merk Scots, including the foresaid six shilling
of general Pole. That all Tradsmen living within any of the said Burghs, whose
free Stock and Means extends to five hundredth Merks shall be subject and liable
to one pound ten shilling, including the foresaid six shilling of general
Pole. That all Merchants or Shopkeepers, and Tradsmen Inhabitants within any
of the said Burghs, whose free Stock and Means is above five hundredth Merks,
and does not extend to five thousand Merks, shall be subject and liable to two
pound ten shilling of Pole Money, including ut supra. And that those whose free
Stock and Means is above five thousand Merks and does not extend to ten
thousand Merks, shall be liable in four pound, including ut supra. That all
Merchants, Shopkeepers, Chapmen and Tradsmen Inhabitants within any of the
said Burghs, or else where, whose free Estate and Stock does extend to, or is
above ten thousand Merks in worth and value, shall be subject and liable to ten
pounds of Pole Money, including ut supra. That all Gentlemen so Holden and
Repute, and owning themselves to be such, and who will not renounce any
pretense they have to be such, shall be subject and liable in three pounds of
Pole Money, if they be not otherwise classed, and upon another consideration
made subject to a greater Pole, the said three pounds always including the
general Pole of six shilling, ut supra. That all Heretors above fifty pounds,
and under two hundred pounds of valued Rent, be subject and liable to four
pound of Pole Money, including ut supra. That all Heretors above two hundred
pounds Scots, and under five hundredth pound of valued Rent, be liable to nine
pound of Pole Money, including ut supra. That all Heretors of five hundred
pounds of valued Rent, or above the same, and under one thousand pounds of
valued Rent be subject and liable to twelve pound Scots of Pole money,
including ut supra. That all Heretors of one thousand pounds of valued Rent, or
above the same, and all Knight Baronets, and Knights, be subject and liable to
twentyfour pounds of Pole Money, including ut supra. That all Lords pay forty
pounds of Pole Money including ut supra. That all Viscounts pay fifty pounds of
Pole Money, including ut supra. That all Earls pay sixty pounds of Pole Money,
including ut supra. That all Marquesses pay fourscore pounds of Pole Money,
including ut supra. That all Dukes pay one hundredth pounds, including ut supra.
That the Sons of Noblemen pay according to their Rank, viz. All Dukes eldest
Sons as Marquesses, and their younger Sons as Earls. All Marquesses eldest Sons
as Earls, and their younger Sons as Viscounts. All Earls eldest Sons as
Viscounts, and the younger Sons, shall be liable in twenty four pounds of Pole.
All Viscounts and Lords Sons in twenty four pounds. And that all Noblemens
Daughters unmarried, and foris-familiat, shall be liable in the third of the
Pole of their eldest Brothers* That all Widows, whose Husbands would have been
liable to one pound ten shilling of Pole money, or above, are to be subject and
liable to the third part of their Husbands Pole, except Heiresses, who shall be
subject to the same Pole their Predecessor would have been. That all
Gentlewomen never married, and foris-familiat, or provided, and in possession
of their Estate, shall be subject and liable in the third part of their eldest
Brothers Pole. That all Notars and Procurators before inseriour Courts, and
Messengers at Arms, are to be subject and liable to four pounds of Pole Money,
including ut supra. Thall all Writters not to the Signet, Agents and Clerks of
inferior Courts, and Macets, shall pay six pounds of Pole Money, including ut
supra. That all Writters to the Signet, Clerks of Sovereign Courts, all
Advocats, Sheriffs and their Deputs, Commissars and their Deputs, and Doctors
of Physic, shall pay twentyfour pounds of Pole Money, including ut supra. That
all Ministers having Benefices, or Stipends, and Parish Kirks not planted,
shall pay twelve pounds of Pole. That all Officers of the Army, shall be liable
in a days pay for their Pole. That all persons who are to pay the said
respective Poles, though they be Poled in different Capacities, are only to pay
once at the greatest rate. And for the better stating, ordering and uplifting
the said Pole Money, Their MAJESTY'S, with consent foresaid, STATUTE and
ORDAIN, that the Commissioners of Assessment, or their Quorum, shall Meet and
Conveen at the ordinar place of their Meeting, upon the second Tuesday of
August, one thousand six hundredth and ninety four, and their shall divide the
whole Commissioners, whether present or absent, into such Divisions as they
shall think fit: appointing Parishes, one or more; for Commissioners one or
more is they shall see convenient, to meet the last Tuesday of the said month
of August, at the respective places to be appointed, impowering the said
Commissioners; to take up Rolls and Lists, of all the poleable persons within
the respective Bounds appointed to them, containing the Names, Qualities and
Degrees of the several persons, and of the value of the Estates belonging to
them, conform to the said Act: and ordains the Magistrates of Burghs-Royal, to
meet the third Tuesday of the said month of August, and to take up Rolls and
Lists, of all the poleable persons within their respective Burghs, containing
their Names, Qualities and Degrees, and the value of their Estates, and which
Commissioners and Magistrates of Burghs, are to give Intimation at the Kirk
door, upon a Sunday upon three days Warning, at least to the persons to be
polled, to Compear before them at the Parish-Kirk, to give up their Names,
Qualities, Degrees and values of their Estate, to the Effect the respective
Poles may be stated, and set down by the said Commissioner or Commissioners of
Assessment, or Magistrates of Burghs respective. And which Rolls, the said
Persons are to give up, or send under their Hand if they can write: otherwise
if they cannot write their Name, Quality, Degree and Estate, shall be marked by
the Clerk, as they give it up, excepting sennents, whose Names, and the
Pole Money payable by them, shall be given up, or sent by their Masters under
their Hands, with Certification, that such as do not Compear, or send under
their Hands their Names, Qualities, and value of their Estate, or do give up
their Quality, Degree or value of their Estate, otherways than it should be,
they shall be liable in the quadruple of their Pole; the equal half whereof
shall belong to the Informer, who shall make the same appear. And which Lists
and Rolls being so made up within the respective Sub-divisions, shall be
Recorded and Booked in a Register of the Shire, or Burgh, for that purpose:
whereof there shall be an Abstract sent to the Lords of the Thesaury, betwixt
and the first of October, one thousand six hundred and ninety four, containing
the number of the persons in the several Classes and Ranks above specified,
with the extent of their Pole. And their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of
the said Estates, do Ordain the foresaid Pole Money to be paid at, or before
the Term of Martinmass, one thousand six hundred and ninety four: and Requires
the Commissioners of Assessment, and Magistrates of Burghs, to cause Intimation
to be made for the payment thereof, at the Kirk-doors of the several
Parish-Kirks, upon the first Sunday of October, one thousand six hundred and
ninety four: Certifying: such as shall not make punctual payment at the said
Term of Martinmass one thousand six hundred and ninety four, they shall be
liable in the quadruple of their Pole, and Ordains Execution to be used against
them for the same, by poynding of their readiest Goods, or imprisoning their
persons. Likeas, Their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent foresaid, hereby
impowers the Lords of Privy Council, to Order and Appoint such further Methods
and Courses, as they shall judge fit, for Stating and In-bringing of the
Pole Money aforesaid; and to allow out of the said Pole Money, such Charges and
Expenses, as shall be necessary for Execution of this Act. And their Majesty's
and Estates foresaid, do hereby strictly Appropriat, destine and appoints the
Sums to be raised by this Act, for the ends and uses above specified, viz. for
payment of the foresaid Arrears due to the Country and the Army, in Manner and
in the Order above mentioned, and the Remainder to be disposed of by Their
Majesty's. And hereby Prohibites and Discharges, the applying thereof to any
other use whatsoever; Certifying such, as shall either give Orders for
misapplying thereof, or Intromet with the same. The Misapplyers and Receivers
thereof, shall be liable, Conjunctly and Severally in the double thereof, at
the Instance of any Party concerned, and their private Estates subject and
liable, for the double of that which shall be so misapplyed. And further, it is
hereby Declared, that where the Arrears due to the Country by the Forces, shall
be first duly stated, for any Burgh or Shire, conform to the Orders and Rules
set down thereanent. The Burgh or Shire to whom the said Arrears shall be found
due, shall have Retention, and get a Discharge of their Pole Money, in
satisfaction of their said Arrears: and the Declaration of the said Burgh or
Shire, getting the said Retention, shall be sufficient for the Collectors
Exoneration: and the Commissioners of Supply, and Magistrates of the foresaid
Shires and Burghs respective, are hereby empowered, to distribute and
proportion the said Pole Money, Retained to the persons there Inhabitants,
conform to their Interest in the said Arrears. And where the Arrears due to any
Shire or Burghs exceeds the Pole Money, due by the said Burgh or Shire; Then,
and in that Case, the superplus shall be ordered to be paid by the Lords of
the Thesaury, out of the Pole due, and brought in from other places, with
regard always to the total of these Arrears, and the total of the said
Pole.money; so that if the total of the Arrears shall exceed the total of the
Pole, the foresaid superplus shall only be payable, and paid proportionably:
and the Lords of Privy Council, are hereby fully empowered, to Decide and
Determine finally, all Questions and Difficulties hereby undetermined; that may
arise anent the premises. And lastly, it is hereby declared, that no Persons
liable in payment of this Pole, shall be holden to produce their Discharges, or
Receipts of the same, after the Term of Martinmass, one thousand six hundredth
and ninety seven years.


