A SERMON PREACHED AT White Hall, Before His Late MAJESTY.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D.D. and Dean of Canterbury.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1686.

Price 3 d.

A SERMON Preached at White Hall, etc.
1 Cor. III.15. But he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.


THE Context is thus. According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as
a wise Master Builder, I have laid the foundation and another builds thereon:
but let every man take heed how he builds thereupon. For other foundation can
no man lay, than that which is laid, Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon
this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man's
work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it; because it shall be
revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If
any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.
If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be
saved, yet so as by fire.

In these Words the Apostle speaks of a sort of persons, who held indeed the
foundation of Christianity, but built upon it such doctrines or practices as
would not bear the trial; which he expresses to us by wood, hay, and stubble,
which are not proof against the fire. Such a person, the Apostle tells us, has
brought himself into a very dangerous state, tho he would not deny the
possibility of his salvation: He himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

That by fire here is not meant the fire of Purgatory, as some pretend (who
would be glad of any shadow of a Text of Scripture to countenance their own
dreams) I shall neither trouble you nor my self to manifest; since the particle
of similitude [(...)] plainly shows that the Apostle did not intend an escape
out of the fire literally, but like to that which men make out of a House or
Town that is on fire. Especially since very learned persons of the Church of
Rome do acknowledge that Purgatory cannot be concluded from this Text, nay all
that Estius contends for from this place is, that it cannot be concluded from
hence that there is no Purgatory; which we never pretended, but only that this
Text does not prove it.

It is very well known that this is a Proverbial phrase used not only in
Scripture, but in profane Authors to signify a narrow escape out of a great
danger. He shall be saved, yet so as by fire, (...), out of the fire. Just as
(...) is used 1 Pet. 3.20. where the Apostle speaking of the eight persons of
Noah's family who escaped the flood, (...) they escaped out of the water. So
here this phrase is to be rendered in the Text, he himself shall escape, yet so
as out of the fire. The like expression you have, Am. 4.11. I have plucked them
as a firebrand out of the fire. And Jude 23. Others save with fear, plucking
them out of the fire. All which expressions signify the greatness of the
danger and the difficulty of escaping it; as one who when his house at midnight
is set on fire, and being suddenly waked leaps out of his bed, and runs naked
out of the doors, taking nothing that is within along with him, but employing
his whole care to save his body from the flames, as St. Chrysostom upon another
occasion expresses it. And so the Roman Orator Tully.
(who, it is likely did not think of Purgatory) uses this phrase; Quo ex
judicio, velut ex incendio, nudus effugit; From which Judgment or Sentence he
escaped naked, as it were out of a burning. And one of the Greek Orators
Aristides.
tells us, That to save a man out of the fire, was a common proverbial speech.

From the words thus explained, the Observation that naturally arises is this,
That men may hold all the Fundamentals of Christian Religion, and yet may
superadd other things whereby they may greatly endanger their salvation. What
those things were which some among the Corinthians built upon the foundation of
Christianity, whereby they endangered their Salvation, we may probably
conjecture by what the Apostle reproves in this Epistle, as the tolerating of
incestuous marriages, communicating in Idol-feasts, etc. And especially by the
doctrine of the false Apostles, who at that time did so much disturb the peace
of most Christian Churches, and who are so often and so severely reflected upon
in this Epistle. And what their Doctrine was, we have an account Act. 15. viz.
that they imposed upon the Gentile Christians Circumcision, and the observation
of the Jewish Law, teaching that unless they were circumcised, and kept the Law
of Moses, they could not be saved. So that they did not only build these
doctrines upon Christianity, but they made them equal with the Foundation,
saying, that unless men believed and practiced such things they could not be
saved.

In speaking to this Observation, I shall reduce my discourse to these two
Heads.

1. I shall present to you some Doctrines and Practices which have been built
upon the Foundation of Christianity, to the great hazard and danger of men's
salvation. And to b^ plain, I mean particularly the Church of Rome*

2. I shall enquire, whether our granting possibility of salvation (tho with
great hazard to those in the Communion of the Rome* Church, and their denying
it to us, be a rea^sonable argument and encouragement to an^ man to betake
himself to that Church.

And there is the more reason to consider ^hese things, when so many seducing
Spirits ^re so active and busy to pervert men from ^he truth; and when we see
every day so many men and their Religion so easily parted. ^or this reason
these two Considerations shall ^e the subject of the following discourse.

I. First. We will consider some Doctrines and Practices which the Church of
Rome has built upon the foundation of Christianity, to the great hazard and
danger of men's salvation. It is not denied by the most judicious Protestants,
but that the Church of Rome do hold all the Articles of the Christian Faith
which are necessary to salvation. But that which we charge upon them, as a just
ground of our separation from them, is, the imposing ^f n^w Doctrines and
Practices upon Christians as necessary to salvation, which were never taught by
our Savior, or his Apostles; and which are either directly contrary to the
doctrine of Christianity, or too apparently destructive of a good life. And I
begin

1. With their Doctrines. And because I have no mind to aggravate lesser
matters, I will single out four or five points of Doctrine, which they have
added to the Christian Religion, and which were neither taught by our Savior
and his Apostles, nor owned in the first Ages of Christianity. And the

First which I shall mention, and which being once admitted makes way for as
many e^^rors as they please to bring in, is their Doctri^^ of Infallibility.
And this they are very st^^ and peremptory in, tho they are not agree^ among
themselves where this Infallibility ^ seated; whether in the Pope alone, or a
Cou^^cil alone, or in both together, or in the diffusi^^ body of Christians.
But they are sure they have it, tho they know not where it is.

And is this no prejudice against it? can an^ man think that this privilege was
at fir^^ conferred upon the Church of Rome, and tha^ Christians in all Ages did
believe it, and ha^^ constant recourse to it for determining their differences,
and yet that that very Church which has enjoyed and used it so long should now
be at a loss where to find it? Nothing could have fallen out more unluckily,
tha^ that there should be such differences among them about that which they
pretend to be the only means of ending all differences.

There is not the least intimation in Scripture of this privilege conferred
upon the Roman Church, nor do the Apostes, in all their Epistles, ever so much
as give the least direction to Christians to appeal to the Bishop o^ Rome for a
determination of the many differences which even in those times happened among
them: And it is strange they should be so silent in this matter, when there
were so many occasions to speak of it, if our Savior had plainly appointed
such an infallible Judge of controversies for this very end to decide the
differences that should happen among Christians. It is strange that the ancient
Fathers in their disputes with Heretics should never appeal to this Judge; nay,
it is strange they should not constantly do it in all cases, it being so short
and expedite a way for the ending of controversies. And this very consideration
to a wise man is instead of a thousand arguments to satisfy him, that in those
times no such thing was believed in the world.

Now this Doctrine of infallibility, if it be not true, is of so much the more
pernicious consequence to Christianity, because the conceit of it does confirm
them that think they have it in all their other errors; and gives them a
pretense of assuming an Authority to themselves to impose their own fancies and
mistakes upon the whole Christian world.

2. Their Doctrine about Repentance, which consists in confessing their sins to
the Priest; which if it be but accompanied with any degree of contrition does
upon absolution received from the Priest, put them into a state of salvation,
tho they have lived the most lewd and debauched lives that can be imagined;
than which nothing can be more plainly destructive of a good life. For if this
be true, all the hazard that the most wicked man runs of his salvation is only
the danger of so sudden a death as gives him no space for confession and
absolution. A case that happens so rarely, that any man that is strongly
addicted to his lusts will be content to venture his salvation upon this
hazard; and all the arguments to a good life will be very insignificant to a
man that has a mind to be wicked, when remission of sins may be had upon such
cheap terms.

3. The Doctrine of Purgatory; By which they mean an estate of temporary
punishments after this life, from which men may be released and translated into
Heaven by the prayers of the living, and the sacrifice of the Mass. That this
Doctrine was not known in the primitive Church, nor can be proved from
Scripture, we have the free acknowledgment of as learned and eminent men as any
of that Church; which is to acknowledge that it is a superstructure upon the
Christian Religion. And though in one sense it be indeed a buildding of Gold
and Silver upon the foundation of Christianity, considering the vast revenues
which this Doctrine (and that of Indulgences, which depends upon it) brings
into that Church; yet I doubt not, but in the Apostles sense, it will be found
to be hay and stubble. But how groundless soever it be, it is too gainful a
Doctrine to be easily parted withal.

4. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation. A hard word, but I would to God that
were the worst of it; the thing is much more difficult. I have taken some pains
to consider other Re^igions that have been in the world, and I must freely
declare, that I never yet in any of them met with any Article or Proposition,
imposed upon the belief of men, half so unreasonable and hard to be believed as
this is: And yet this in the Romish Church is esteemed one of the most
principal Articles of the Christian Faith; though there is no more certain
foundation for it in Scripture, than for our Savior's being substantially
changed into all those things which are said of him, as that he is a rock, a
vine, a door, and a hundred other things.

But this is not all. This Doctrine has not only no certain Foundation in
Scripture, but I have a far heavier charge against it, namely, that it
undermines the very foundation of Christianity it self. And surely nothing
ought to be admitted to be a part of the Christian Doctrine which destroys the
reason of our belief of the whole. And that this Doctrine does so, will appear
evidently, if we consider what was the main argument which the Apostles used to
convince the world of the truth of Christianity; and that was this, That our
blessed Savior, the Author of this Doctrine, wrought such and such miracles,
and particularly that he rose again from the dead: And this they proved because
they were eyewitnesses of his miracles, and had seen him and co^^versed with
him after he was risen from t^^ dead. But what if their senses did decei^ them
in this matter? then it cannot be d^^nied but that the main proof of
Christiani^^ falls to the ground.

Well! We will now suppose (as t^^ Church of Rome does) Transubstantiation
(...) have been one principal part of the Christi^^ Doctrine which the Apostles
preached. B^ if this Doctrine be true, then all men's sen^^ are deceived in a
plain sensible matter, where in it is as hard for them to be deceived as (...)
any thing in the world: For two things ca^ hardly be imagined more different,
than little bit of wafer, and the whole body of man.

So that the Apostles persuading men to b^^lieve this Doctrine, persuaded them
not (...) trust their senses, and yet the argument which they used to persuade
them to this was bui^^ upon the direct contrary principle, that me^ senses are
to be trusted. For if they be no^ then notwithstanding all the evidence the
A^postles offered for the resurrection of our Sa^viour he might not be risen,
and so the fait^ of Christians was vain. So that they repre^sent the Apostles
as absurd as is possible, vi^ going about to persuade men out of the^^ senses
by virtue of an argument, the who^ strength whereof depends upon the certain^ty
of sense.

And now the matter is brought to a fair ^e; If the testimony of sense be to be
relied on, then Transubstantiation is false; If it be ^t, then no man is sure
that Christianity is ^e. For the utmost assurance that the A^^stles had of the
truth of Christianity was ^e testimony of their own senses concerning ^r
Savior's miracles, and this testimony ^ery man has against
Transubstantiation. ^om whence it plainly follows, that no man ^o not the
Apostles themselves) had more ^ason to believe Christianity to be true, than
^ery man has to believe Transubstantiation (...) be false. And we who did not
see our Sa^^our's Miracles (as the Apostles did) and ^^ve only a credible
relation of them, but do ^e the Sacrament, have less evidence of the ^^uth of
Christianity than of the falsehood of ^ransubstantiation.

But cannot God impose upon the senses of ^en, and represent things to them
otherwise ^an they are? Yes, undoubtedly. And if he ^ath revealed that he does
this, are we not (...) believe him? Most certainly. But then we ^ight to be
assured that he has made such a ^evelation; which Assurance no man can have,
^e certainty of sense being taken away.

I shall press the business a little farther. ^upposing the Scripture to be a
Divine Revela^ion, and that these words ( This is my Body) (...) they be in
Scripture, must necessarily be taken in the strict and literal sense; I ask
no^* What greater evidence any man has th(...) these words ( This is my Body)
are in the (...)ble, than every man has that the Bread (...) not changed in the
Sacrament? Nay no m(...) has so much; for we have only the eviden(...) of one
sense that these words are in the Bib^^ but that the Bread is not changed we
have t(...) concurring testimony of several of our sens(...)* In a word, if
this be once admmitted th(...) the Senses of all men are deceived in one (...)
the most plain sensible matters that can b(...) there is no certain means left
either to conv(...) or prove a Divine Revelation to men; nor (...) there any
way to confute the grossest imp(...)stures in the World: For if the clear
eviden(...) of all men's senses be not sufficient for this p(...)pose, let any
man, if he can, find a better a(...) more convincing argument.

5. I will instance but in one Doctrine mo(...)* And that shall be, their
Doctrine of depos(...) Kings in case of Heresy, and absolving th(...) Subjects
from their Allegiance to them. A(...) this is not a mere speculative Doctrine,
b(...) has been put in practice many a time by t(...) Bishops of Rome, as
every one knows that (...)versed in History. For the troubles and
co(...)fusions which were occasioned by this ve(...) thing make up a good part
of the History (...) several Ages.

I hope no body expects that I should take the pains to show that this was not
the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, nor of the Primitive Christians.
The Papists are many of them so far from pretending this, that in some times
and places, when it is not seasonable and for their purpose, we have much a-do
to persuade them that ever it was their Doctrine. But if Transubstantiation be
their Doctrine, this is; for they came both out of the same Forge, I mean the
Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the Third. And if (as they tell us)
Transubstantiation was then established, so was this. And indeed one would
think they were Twins and brought forth at the same time, they are so like one
another, both of them so mostrously unreasonable.

II. I come now in the second place to consider some Practices of the Church of
Rome, which I am afraid will prove as bad as her Doctrines. I shall instance in
these five.

1. Their celebrating of their Divine service in an unknown Tongue. And that
not only contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church, and to the great end
and design of Religious Worship, which is the Edification of those who are
concerned in it, (and it is hard to imagine how men can be edified by what they
do not understand) but likewise in direct Contradiction to St. Paul, who has
no less than a whole Chapter wherein he confutes this Practice as fully, and
condemns it as plainly as any thing is condemned in the whole Bible. And they
that can have the face to maintain that this Practice was not condemned by St.
Paul, or that it was allowed and used in the first Ages of Christianity, need
not be ashamed to set up for the defense of any Paradox in the World.

2. The Communion in one kind. And that notwithstanding that even by their own
acknowledgment our Savior instituted it in both kinds, and the Primitive
Church administered it in both kinds. This I must acknowledge is no addition to
Christianity, but a sacrilegious taking away of an essential part of the
Sacrament. For the Cup is as essential a part of the Institution as the Bread;
and they might as well, and by the same Authority, take away the one as the
other, and both as well as either.

3. Their worshipping of Images. Which practice (notwithstanding all their
Distinctions about it, which are no other but what the Heathens used in the
same case) is as point blank against the second Commandment, as a deliberate
and malicious killing of a man is against the sixth. But if the case be so
plain, a man would think that at least the Teachers and Guides of that Church
should be sensible of it. Why, they are so, and afraid the people should be so
too, and therefore in their ordinary Catechisms and Manuals of Devotion they
leave out the second Commandment, and divide the tenth into two to make up the
number; lest if the common people should know (...)t their Consciences should
start at the doing of a thing so directly contrary to the plain command of God.

4. The worshipping of the bread and wine in the Eucharist, out of a false and
groundless persuasion, that they are substantially changed into the body and
blood of Christ. Which if it be not true (and it has good fortune if it be,
for certainly it is one of the most incredible things in the whole World) then
by the confession of several of their own learned Writers, they are guilty of
gross Idolatry.

5. The worship and invocation of Saints and Angels; and particularly of the
Virgin Mary, which has now for some Ages been a principal part of their
Religion. Now a man may justly wonder that so considerable a part of Religion
as they make this to be should have no manner of foundation in the Scripture.
Does our Savior any where speak one word concerning the worshipping of Her?
Nay, does he not take all occasions to restrain all extravagant apprehensions
and imaginations concerning honor due to Her, as foreseeing the degeneracy of
the Church in this thing? When he was told that his Mother and Brethren were
without; Who (says he) are my mother and my brethren? He that does the will of
my Father, the same is my mother, and sister, and brother. And when the Woman
brake forth into that rapture concerning the blessed Mother of our Lord,
Blessed is the womb^ that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck! Our
Savior diverts to another thing, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it. Does either our Savior or his Apostles in all their
particular Precepts and Directions concerning Prayer, and the manner of it, and
by whom we are to address our selves to God, give the least intimation of
praying to the Virgin Mary, or making use of her Mediation? And can any man
believe, that if this had been the practice of the Church from the beginning,
our Savior and his Apostles would have been so silent about so considerable a
part of Religion; insomuch that in all the Epistles of the Apostles I do not
remember that her Name is so much as once mentioned? And yet the worship of her
is at this day in the Church of Rome, and has been so for several Ages, a main
part of their public worship, yea and of their private devotions too; in which
it is usual with them to say ten Ave Mary's for one Pater Noster; that is, for
one Prayer they make to Almighty God they make ten addresses to the blessed
Virgin; for that is the proportion observed in their Rosaries. He that
considers this, and had never seen the Bible, would have been apt to think that
there had been more said concerning Her in Scripture, than either concerning
God, or our blessed Savior; and that the New Testament were full from one end
to the other of precepts and exhortations to the worshipping of Her; and yet
when all is done, I challenge any man to show me so much as one sentence in the
whole Bible that sounds that way. And there is as little in the Christian
Writers of the first three hundred years. The truth is, this practice began to
creep in among some superstitious people about the middle of the fourth
Century: And I remember particularly, that Epiphanius who lived about that time
calls it the Heresy of the Women.

And thus I have given you some Instances of several Doctrines and Practices
which the Church of Rome have built upon the Foundation of Christianity. Much
more might have been said of them, but from what has been said any man may
easily discern how dangerous they are to the salvation of men.

I proceed now in the second place,

II. To consider, whether our granting a possibility of salvation, tho with
great hazard to those in the Communion of the Roman Church, and their denying
it to us, be a sufficient argument and encouragement to any man to quit our
Church and go to theirs. And there is the more need to consider this, because
thi^ is the great popular argument wherewith the emissaries and agents of that
Church are won^ to assault our people. Your Church (say they) grants that a
Papist may be saved; Ours denies that a Protestant can be saved; therefore it
is safest to be of our Church, in which salvation by the acknowledgment of both
sides is possible.

For answer to this I shall endeavor to show, that this is so far from being a
good argument that it is so intolerably weak and sophistica(...) that any
considerate man ought to be ashamed to be caught by it. For either it is good
of it self and sufficient to persuade a man to relinquish our Church, and to
pass over to theirs, without entering into the merits of the cause on either
side, and without comparing the Doctrines and Practices of both the Churches
together, or it is not. If it be not sufficient of it self to persuade a man to
leave our Church, without comparing the Doctrines on both sides, then it is to
no purpose, and there is nothing got by it. For if upon examination and
comparing of Doctrines the one appear to be true and the other false, this
alone is a sufficient inducement to any man to cleave to that Church where the
true Doctrine is found and then there is no need of this argument.

If it be said, that this argument is good in it self without the examination
of the Doctrines of both Churches; this seems a very strange thing for any man
to affirm, That it is reason enough to a man to be of any Church, whatever her
Doctrines and Practices be, if she do but damn those that differ from her, and
if the Church that differs from her do but allow a possibility of salvation in
her Communion.

But they who use this argument, pretend that it is sufficient of it self; and
therefore I shall apply my self to show, as briefly and plainly as I can, the
miserable weakness and insufficiency of it to satisfy any man's conscience or
prudence to change his Religion. And to this end I shall,

1. Show the weakness of the principle upon which this argument relies.

2. Give some parallel instances by which it will appear that it concludes
false.

3. I shall take notice of some gross absurdities that follow from it.

4. Show how unfit it is to work upon those to whom it is propounded. And

5. How improper it is to be urged by those that make use of it.

I. I shall show the weakness of the principle upon which this argument relies;
And that is this, That whatever different parties in Religion agree in, is
safest to be chosen. The true consequence of which principle if it be driven to
the head, is to persuade men to forsake Christianity, and to make them take up
in the principles of natural Religion, for in these al^ Religions do agree. For
if this principle b^ true, and signify any thing, it is dangerous to embrace
any thing wherein the several par^ties in Religion differ; because that only i^
safe and prudent to be chosen wherein all a^gree. So that this argument, if the
foundati^on of it be good, will persuade further tha^ those who make use of it
desire it should do for it will not only make men forsake the Pro^testant
Religion, but Popery too; and which is much more considerable, Christianity it
self*

II. I will give some parallel instances by which it will clearly be seen that
this argu^ment concludes false. The Donatists denied the Baptism of the
Catholics to be good, but the Catholics acknowledged the Baptism of the
Donatists to be valid. So that both sides were agreed that the Baptism of the
Donatists wa^ good, therefore the safest way for St. Austi^ and other
Catholics (according to this ar^gument) was to be Baptized again by the
Donatists, because by the acknowledgment o^ both sides Baptism among them was
valid.

But to come nearer to the Church of Rome Several in that Church hold the
personal In^fallibility of the Pope and the lawfulness of de^posing and killing
Kings for Heresy to be d^^^^de, that is, necessary Articles of Faith, and
^onsequently, that whoever does not believe them cannot be saved, But a great
many Pa^ists, tho they believe these things to be no matters of Faith, yet they
think those that ^old them may be saved, and they are gene^ally very favorable
toward them. But now, according to this argument, they ought all to ^e of
their opinion in these points, because ^oth sides are agreed that they that
hold them may be saved; but one side positively says that men cannot be saved
if they do not hold them.

But my Text furnishes me with as good ^n instance to this purpose as can be
desired. St. Paul here in the Text acknowledges the possibility of the
salvation of those who built ^ay and stubble upon the foundation of
Christianity; that they might be saved, tho with great difficulty, and as it
were out of the fire. But now among those builders with hay and stubble there
were those who denied the possibility of St. Paul's salvation and of those who
were of his mind. We are told of some who built the Jewish Ceremonies and
Observances upon the foundation of Christianity, and said that unless men were
Circumcised and kept the Law of Moses they could not be saved. So that by this
argument St. Paul and his followers ought to have gone over to those Judaizing
Christians, because it was acknowledged on both sides that they might be saved.
But these Judaizing Christians were as unchari^^^ble to St. Paul and other
Christians as t^ Church of Rome is now to us, for they sa^ positively that they
could not be saved. But (...) any man think that St. Paul would have be^^ moved
by this argument, to leave a safe an^ certain way of salvation for that which
w^ only possible, and that with great difficult and hazard? The argument you
see is the v^^ry same, and yet it concludes the wrong way^ which plainly shows
that it is a contingent arg^^ment, and concludes uncertainly and by chance and
therefore no man ought to be moved by i^

III. I shall take notice of some gross absurd^^ties that follow from it. I
shall mention bu^ these two.

1. According to this principle it is alway^ safest to be on the uncharitable
side. And yet uncharitableness is as bad an evidence, either of a true
Christian, or a true Church, as a man would wish. Charity is one of the most
essential marks of Christianity, and what the Apostle says of particular
Christians is as true of whole Churches, that tho they have all Faith, yet if
they have not Charity they are nothing.

I grant that no Charity teaches men to see others damned, and not to tell
them the danger of their condition. But it is to be considered that the damning
of men is a very hard thing, and therefore whenever we do it the case must be
wonderfully plain. And is ^t so in this matter? They of the Church of Rome
cannot deny but that we embrace all ^he Doctrines of our Savior, contained in
the Apostles Creed and determined by the four ^^rst General Councils: And yet
they will ^ot allow this and a good life to put us with^n a possibility of
salvation, because we will ^ot submit to all the innovations they would ^mpose
upon us. And yet I think there is scarce any Doctrine or Practice in difference
between them and us, which some or other of their most learned Writers have not
acknowledged ^ither not to be sufficiently contained in Scripture, or not to
have been held and practiced ^y the primitive Church; so that nothing an excuse
their uncharitableness toward us. and they pay dear for the little advantage
^hey get by this argument, for they do what (...) them lies to make themselves
no Christians that they may prove themselves the truer and more Christian
Church; A medium which ^e do not desire to make use of.

2. If this argument were good, then by this ^ick a man may bring over all the
world to ^gree with him in an error which another ^oes not account damnable,
whatever it be, ^rovided he do but damn all those that do ^ot hold it; and
there wants nothing but ^^nfidence and uncharitableness to do this. But (...)
there any sense, that another man's bold^ess and want of charity should be an
argument to move me to be of his opinion? cannot illustrate this better, than
by the di^^ference between a skilful Physician and (...) Mountebank. A learned
and skilful Physicia^ is modest, and speaks justly of things: H^ says, that
such a method of cure which h^ has directed is safe, and withal, that tha^
which the Mountebank prescribes may possibly do the work, but there is great
hazard and danger in it: But the Mountebank, who never talks of any thing less
than infallible cures (and always the more Mountebank, the strong^er pretense
to infallibiliiy) he is positive tha^ that method which the Physician
prescribe^ will destroy the Patient, but his receipt is infallible and never
fails. Is there any reason in this case, that this man should carry it merely
by his confidence? And yet if this argument be good, the safest way is to
reject the Physicians advice and to stick to the Mountebanks* For both sides
are agreed, that there is a possibility of cure in the Mountebank's method* but
not in the Physicians; and so the whole force of the argument lies in the
confidence of an ignorant man.

IV. This argument is very unfit to work upon those to whom it is propounded:
For either they believe we say true in this, or not. If they think we do not,
they have no reason to be moved by what we say. If they think we do, why do
they not take in all that we say in this matter? Namely, ^at tho it be possible
for some in the com^union of the Roman Church to be saved, ^et it is very
hazardous; and that they are (...) a safe condition already in our Church. And
^hy then should a bare possibility, accompa^'d with infinite and apparent
hazard, be an ^rgument to any man to run into that danger?

Lastly, This argument is very improper to ^e urged by those who make use of
it. Half ^f the strength of it lies in this, that we Pro^estants acknowledge
that it is possible a Papist ^ay be saved. But why should they lay any ^^ress
upon this? What matter is it what we Heretics say, who are so damnably
mistaken ^n all other things? Methinks, if there were ^o other reason, yet
because we say it, it should ^eem to them to be unlikely to be true. But I
^erceive when it serves for their purpose we ^ave some little credit and
authority among them.

By this time I hope every one is in some measure satisfied of the weakness of
this argument, which is so transparent that no wise man ^an honestly use it,
and he must have a very ^dd understanding that can be cheated by it. The truth
is, it is a casual and contingent argument, and sometimes it concludes right,
and ^ftner wrong; and therefore no prudent man ^an be moved by it, except only
in one case, when all things are so equal on both sides that there is nothing
else in the whole wo^^ to determine him; which surely can ne^ happen in matters
of Religion necessary to believed. No man is so weak, as not to con^der in the
change of his Religion the me^ of the cause it self; as not to examine t^^
Doctrines and Practices of the Churches (...) both sides; as not to take notice
of the con^^^dence and Charity of both Parties, togeth^^ with all other things
which ought to move conscientious and a prudent man: And if (...) on enquiry
there appear to be a clear adva^^tage on either side, then this argument is
nee^^less and comes too late, because the work already done without it.

Besides, that the great hazard of salvation in the Roman Church (which we
declare u^ on account of the Doctrines and Practic^ which I have mentioned)
ought to deter any man much more from that Religion, the the acknowledged
possibility of salvation (...) it ought to encourage any man to the embr^^cing
of it: Never did any Christian Church build so much hay and stubble upon the
found^^tion of Christianity, and therefore those the are saved in it must be
saved, as it were, out (...) the fire. And tho Purgatory be not meant i^ the
Text, yet it is a Doctrine very well suite to their manner of building; for
there is nee^ of an ignis purgatorius, of a fire to try the^^ work what it is,
and to burn up their hay an^ ^^ubble. And I have so much Charity (and I ^^sire
always to have it) as to hope, that a ^eat many among them who live piously,
and ^ve been almost inevitably detained in that church by the prejudice of
education and an ^^vincible ignorance, will upon a general re^^ntance find
mercy with God; and tho their ^rk suffer loss and be burnt, yet they themselves
^ay escape, as out of the fire. But as for those ^ho had the opportunities of
coming to the ^nowledg of the truth, if they continue in the ^rors of that
Church, or apostatize from the ^uth, I think their condition so far from being
^e that there must be extraordinary favou^^ble circumstances in their case to
give a man ^^pes of their salvation.

I have now done with the two things I pro^^unded to speak to. And I am sorry
that the ^^cessary defense of our Religion, against the ^^stless importunities
and attempts of our ad^^rsaries upon all sorts of persons, has enga^^d me to
spend so much time in matters of ^^spute, which I had much rather have em^^oyed
in another way. Many of you can be ^y witnesses that I have constantly made it
^y business, in this great Presence and Assem^^y to plead against the impieties
and wicked^^ss of men, and have endeavored by the best ^^guments I could think
of to gain men over (...) a firm belief and serious practice of the main ^ings
of Religion. And, I do assure you, I had much rather persuade any one to be
good man, than to be of any party or de^mination of Christians whatsoever. For
doubt not, but the belief of the ancient Cre^ provided we entertain nothing
that is destr^^ctive of it, together with a good life, will ce^^tainly save a
man; and without this no m^ can have reasonable hopes of salvation, no (...) an
infallible Church, if there were any such ^ be found in the world.

I have been, according to my opportuniti^ not a negligent observer of the
genius a^ humor of the several Sects and Profession in Religion. And upon the
whole matter* do in my conscience believe the Church of E^^gland to be the best
constituted Church the day in the world; and that, as to the man the Doctrine
and Government, and Worship (...) it, are excellently framed to make men sobe^
Religious: Securing men on the one han^ from the wild freaks of Enthusiasm; and
(...) the other, from the gross follies of Supersti^on. And our Church has
this peculiar adva^^tage above several Professions that we know (...) the
world, that it acknowledges a due a^ just subordination to the civil
Authority, an^ has always been untainted in its loyalty.

And now shall every trifling consideration be sufficient to move a man to
relinquish suc^ a Church? There is no greater disparag^ment to a man's
understanding, no greater a^^^ument of a light and ungenerous mind, than ^shly
to change ones Religion. Religion is ^r greatest concernment of all other, and
it (...) not every little argument, no nor a great ^ise about infallibility,
nothing but very plain and convincing evidence, that should sway a ^an in this
case. But they are utterly inexcu^^ble who make a change of such concernment
upon the insinuations of one side only, without ever hearing what can be said
for the church they were baptized and brought up (...) before they leave it.
They that can yield ^us easily to the impressions of every one ^at has a
design and interest to make Pro^^lytes may at this rate of discretion change
^^eir Religion twice a day, and instead of mor^^ng and evening Prayer they may
have a mor^^ng and evening Religion.

Therefore for God's sake, and for our own ^ouls sake, and for the sake of our
Reputation, ^t us consider and show our selves men; Let (...) not suffer our
selves to be shaken and carried ^way with every wind. Let us not run our ^^lves
into danger when we may be safe. Let (...) stick to the foundation of Religion,
the Ar^^cles of our common belief, and build upon ^^em gold, and silver, and
precious stones, I ^ean, the virtues and actions of a good life; ^d if we would
do this, we should not be ^t to set such a value upon hay and stubble. (...) we
would sincerely endeavor to live holy and virtuous lives, we should not need
to (...) about for a Religion which may furnish with easy and indirect ways to
get to Heav^

I will conclude all with the Apostles Exh^^^tation, Wherefore my beloved
brethren be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding the work of the Lord.

Now the God of peace which brought gain from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
(...) great Shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in ev^ good work, to do his will; working in you t^ which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Je^^^ Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and
ev^ Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press a Third Volume of Serm^^ and Discourses; some of
which never before Prin^ By Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury; in Octavo.

Also a Third Volume of the Works of the Learned Is^ Barrow, D. D. late Master
of Trinity College in Cambri^^^ in Folio: Never before Printed; and are the
last that (...) be Published of his in English.

Both which will be Published in Easter-Term next, (...)

Brabazon Aylmer, against the Royal Exchange in Corn^


