A SUMMARY OF THE ACTS OF THE PARLIAMENTS OF SCOTLAND AGAINST Popery and
Papists.
IMprimis, By an Act of Parliament of Q. Mary made at Edinburgh the 24 August,
1560. Popery is abolished.

Item. By the Second Act 1 Parl. Jac. 6. 1567. the before mentioned Act is
ratified, and it is further declared and Ordained, that no Subject of Scotland
suit or desire title or right of the Bishop of Rome, or his Sect, to any thing
within the Realm, under the pains of Proscription, Banishment, and never to
bruke Honor, Office nor Dignity within the Kingdom, and the Defenders of such,
or Furnishers of them with Money, shall incur the same Punishments, and the
Contriveners hereof to be proceeded against by the Justice.

By another Act of Q. Mary's made at Ed. the 24 of August, 1560. all former
Acts of Parl. contrary to the Word of God, Protestant Principles, and
Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland, are annulled.

It. By the 3 Act 1 Par. Ja. 6. 1567. this last mentioned Act of Q. Mary's is
ratified, being verbatim repeated, and the 26 Articles of the Confession of
Faith insert as they were approven by Parl. in Q. Mary's Reign on the 17
August, 1560.

It. By the 3 Act Parl. Q. Mary, made at Ed. 23 August, 1560. it is statute and
ordained, that no manner of person or persons, say, hear, or be present at
Mass, under pain of Confiscation of their Movables and Unmoveables, and
punishing their Bodies at the discretion of the Magistrates for the first
fault, of Banishment out of the Realm for the second fault, and of Death for
the third fault.

It. By the 5 Act 1 Parl. Ja. 6. 1567. this Immediate foregoing Act is ratified.

It. By the 6 Act 1 Parl. Ja. 6. 1567. it is declared that whoever gainsays the
Confession of Faith professed in the Parl. 1560. and more particularly
expressed and ratified in the present Parl. 1567. or refuses the participation
of the Sacraments as they are now administered, are no members of the Kirk of
Scotland.

It. By the 8 Act 1 Parl. Jac. 6. 1567. It is declared, that the increase of
virtue and Suppressing Idolatry craves that the Prince and People be of one
perfect Religion, which is now of Gods mercy presently professed within this
Realm. Therefore it is Statute and ordained, that all Kings Princes or
Magistrates whatsoever, holding their places, which hereafter in any time shall
happen to Reign, and bear rule over this Realm, at the time of their Coronation
and receipt of there Princely Authority, make their faithful promise by Oath,
that during their lives they shall serve God according to the true Religion,
and maintain it and the right administration of the Sacraments now received and
Preached within this Realm, and shall abolish and gainstand all false Religion
contrary to the same, etc.

It. By the 25 Act 2 Parl. Ja. 6. 1571. all the above mentioned Acts are
ratified.

It. By the 45 Act 3 Parl. Ja. 6. 1572. the above noted 6 Act 1 Parl. Ja. 6. is
ratified: and it is further enacted that all suspect and relapse Papists be
warned, according to the Order of the Kirk; and if they be forth of the Realm
on threescore days to recant their Papistical errors, give the Confession of
their Faith according to the Form appointed and approved in Parliament, under
the pain of Excommunication: and it is further declared that all obstinate
relapse persons who have returned to their Errors after professing the true
Religion, are and shall be repute and esteemed Infamous, and unable to sit or
stand in Judgment, pursue, bear Office, nor be admitted as Witnesses or
Assizers against any professing the true Religion; which being alleged be
sufficient to decline them from Office, etc.

It. By the 27 Act Parl. 3. Jam. 6. 1572. It is declared, that the true
Religion, and the Kings Authority, are so joined, as the hurt of the one is
common to both, and therefore Statutes that none shall be repute Loyal
Subjects, but be punishable as Rebellers, and gainstanders of the same, who
shall not give Confession, and make profession of the true Religion; and that
none that has made defection therefrom be readmitted to the Kings mercy, but
such as give of new the Confession of their Faith, and promise to continue in
the profession of the true Religion, and maintain it and the Preachers and
professors of it, against whatsoever enemies, and gainstanders: and Namely,
against whatsoever Nation, Estate, or degree they be that assist to set forward
or execute the Decrees of the Cruel Council of Trent.

It. By the 61 Act of the 5 Parliament of Jac. 6. the King being of perfect
Age, all the before mentioned Acts are ratified.

It. By the 68 Act of the 6 Parliament of Jac. 6. all the before mentioned Acts
are ratified.

It. By the 99 Act of the 7 Parl. of James 6. all the foregoing Acts are
Ratified.

It. By the 106 Act of the 7 Parliament of James 6. it is statute, That none of
the Kings Subjects, or Strangers, (excepting Ambassadors, Messengers, or
Merchants) Adversaries to the true Religion, or that has declined therefrom,
return to the Realm, or remain therein, except within forty days they give
Confession of their Faith, and subscribe the Articles of the true Religion, and
that in the Interim, none of them Repair to the Kings presence, Palace, or
dwelling House, nor remain longer than three hours within seven miles of them;
and whoever fails herein, shall be imprisoned, until they find Surety, that
they shall either Recant their Errors, and profess the true Religion, or depart
forth of the Realm within 15 days thereafter, and that in the mean time they
shall do nothing for the promoting the Popish Errors.

It. By the 23 Act, 10 Parl. Jac. 6. all the foregoing Acts are ratified after
the Kings perfect age of 21 years.

It. By the 114 Act, 12 Parl. of Jac. 6. all the foregoing Acts are ratified,
and several privileges granted to the Kirk.

It. By the 120 Act, 12 Parliament Jac. 6. It is declared, that the saying of
Masses, recepting of Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and trafficquing Papists, does
Infer the pain of Treason.

It. By the 164 Act of the 13 Parl. of Ja. 6. It is statute, that whatever
person says Mass, or Recepts or entertains for three nights, at several times,
or together, excommunicate Jesuits, or Trafficquing Papists, shall lose his
Escheat for the first fault; for the second time shall Amit their Life-rent
right of their whole Estate, and for the third time shall incur the pain of
Treason.

It. By the 193 Act of the 14 Parl. of Ja. 6. It is statute, that all wilful
hearers of Mass, and Concealers of it, be execute to death.

It. By the 8 Act of the first Parl. of Char. 2. 1661. It is statute, that none
of his Majesty's Subjects, of what quality or degree soever, hear Mass, supply,
entertain, furnish meat or drink, nor keep any Intelligence or Correspondence
with Priests, Jesuits, or Trafficquing Papists, under the pains contained in
the Laws and Acts of Parliament made on that behalf -- which is death, as may
appear by the aforementioned Acts of Parliament.

The Eleventh Act of the first Parliament of King Charles the Second, 1661. Act
for taking the Oath of Allegiance.
OUr Sovereign Lord being truly sensible of the many Sufferings and sad
Confusions, that his dutiful and Loyal Subjects have been brought under during
these troubles; and desirous that his Royal Government, in its due
Administration, may be refreshing and Comfortable unto them: And conceiving it
necessary for that end, and for the honor and advancement of his own Service,
the Welfare and Happiness of his Subjects, and the peace and quiet of this
Kingdom, that the places of of Public Trust (which be the Channels and
Conduits by which his Majesty's Government is conveyed unto his People,) be
supplied and exercised by persons of known Integrity, Abilities and Loyalty: Do
therefore declare; That it is and will be his Majesty's Royal Care, that those
whom (according to the undoubted right of the Crown) he has, or shall think
fit to call to his Councels, or any public Employments, shall be so qualified:
And that for the full satisfaction of all his good Subjects, and for removing
any Scruples or Jealousies can arise upon this account, they shall before their
admittance to, or exercise of any such Trust, Give such public testimony of
their Duty and Loyalty, as may evidence to the world, they are such as the
Kingdom, and all honest men and good Subjects may justly confide in. And
therefore the Kings Majesty, with Advice and Consent of his Estates of Peers
had, Does Statute and Ordain, That all and whatsoever person or persons, who
are or shall be Nominate by his Majesty, to be his Officers of State, of his
Privy Council, Session or Exchequer, Justice General, Admiral, Sheriffs,
Commissaries, and their Deputies, and Clerks; and all Magistrates, and Council
of Royal Burghes, at their admission to their several Offices, and before they
offer to exerce the same, shall take and swear the Oath of Allegiance, hereunto
subjoyned: And also that all other persons, who shall be required by his
Majesty's Privy Council, or any having Authority from them, shall be obliged to
take and swear the same.

The Oath of Allegiance.
I -- For testification of my faithful Obedience to my most Gracious and
redoubted Sovereign, Charles King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Affirm, testify and declare, by this my Solemn
Oath, that I acknowledge my said Sovereign only Supreme Governor of this
Kingdom, over all Persons, and in all Causes: And that no Foreign Prince,
Power, State, or Person, Civil or Ecclesiastic, has any Jurisdiction, Power
or Superiority over the same. And therefore I do utterly Renounce and forsake
all Foreign Power, Jurisdictions and Authorities: And shall at my utmost
Power, defend, assist and maintain his Majesty's Jurisdiction, forefend against
all deadly enemies: And shall never decline his Majesty's Power and
Jurisdiction: As I shall answer to God.

Note, That the Confession of Faith, and Doctrine Believed, and professed by
the Protestants in Scotland, in Twenty six Articles, were ratified by the Three
Estates at Edinburgh, Aug. 17. 1560. and exhibited to the King, and same
Estates in Parliament, and by their public Votes authorized as a Doctrine
grounded on the Infallible Word of God, December. 15. 1567. which was the first
Parliament of King James the sixth, as may be seen in the fourth Act, or
Chapter of the Statutes then made: By the same Parliament, the following
Chapters, or Statutes were enacted, viz. 1. For abolishing the Popes usurped
Authority, and the Laws formerly made against Gods Word. Chap. 2. and 3. 2. For
Confirmation of the said Confession. Chap. 4. 3. For abolishing the Mass. Chap.
5. 4. For Declaring the true and holy Kirk. Chap. 6. 5. For Admission of
Ministers. Chap. 7.


And according to these Acts, the Coronation Oath, which here follows,
transcribed out of the Eighth Act, or Chapter of that Parliament, must needs be
understood, when it requires the King to Maintain the true Religion, Preaching
of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments, then received and preached
in the Realm:

The Title of the Eighth Act, or Chapter, and the Act it self follows in these
words:

8. Anent the Kings Oath to be given at his Coronation.
Item. Because that the increase of Virtue and Suppression of Idolatry craves
that the Prince and the People be of one perfect Religion, which of Gods Mercy
is now presently professed within this Realm, Therefore it is Statute and
Ordained, by our Sovereign Lord, My Lord Regent, and Three Estates of this
present Parliament, That all Kings and Princes, or Magistrates whatsoever,
holding their Place, which hereafter at any time shall happen to Reign or bear
Rule over this Realm, at the time of their Coronation, and Receipt of their
princely Authority, make their faithful promise by Oath, in the presence of the
Eternal God, that enduring the whole Course of their Lives, they shall serve
the same Eternal God, to the uttermost of their power, according as he has
required in his most holy Word, revealed and Contained in the New, and Old
Testaments, and according to the same Word shall maintain the True Religion of
Christ Jesus, the Preaching of his Holy Word, and due and right Administration
of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached within this Realm: and shall
Abolish and gainstand all false Religion contrary to the same, and shall Rule
the people committed to his charge according to the Will and Command of God
revealed in his foresaid Word, and according to the laudable Laws and
Constitutions received in this Realm no wise Repugnant to the said Word of the
Eternal God, and shall procure to the uttermost of their power, to the Kirk of
God, and whole Christian People, true and perfect peace in all time to come:
the Rights and Rents with all just Privileges of the Crown of Scotland to
preserve, and keep inviolated, neither shall they transferr or alienate the
same. They shall forbid and repress in all estates and degrees, Reife,
Oppression, and all kind of wrong: In all Judgments they shall Command and
procure that Justice and Equity be kept to all Creatures without exception,
as the Lord and Father of Mercies be Merciful to them: And out of their Lands
and Empire they shall be careful to Root out all Heresies, and enemies to the
True Worship of God, that shall be convict of the true Kirk of God of the
aforesaid Crimes; and that they shall faithfully affirm the things above
written with their Solemn Oath.

Chap. 9. Provides, that no person may be Judge, Procurator, or Member of
Court, or Notary, who professes not the true Religion.

FINIS.

