THE PRESENT STATE OF New England, With Respect to the INDIAN WAR.

Wherein is an Account of the true Reason thereof, (as far as can be Judged by
Men.)

Together with most of the Remarkable Passages that have happened from the 20th
of June, till the 10th of November, 1675.

Faithfully Composed by a Merchant of Boston, and Communicated to his Friend in
LONDON.

Licensed December. 13. 1675. Roger L'Estrange.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON.

Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, and at the Ship
and Anchor at the Bridg-foot on Southwark side. 1676.

The Present State of New England, with respect to the Indian War.
THere being many and various Reports concerning the Causes of the present War
amongst us, it may not be amiss in the First place, to give you a true Account
of the Reasons thereof; which probably may add something to the Satisfaction of
our Christian Friends in Old England, which is thus:

About five or six Years since, there was brought up (amongst others) an Indian
in the College at Cambridg, named Sosoman, who after some time he had spent in
Preaching the Gospel to Unkus, a Sagamore Christian in his Territories, was by
the Authority of New Plymouth, sent to Preach in like manner to King Philip,
and his Indians: But King Philip (Heathen-like) instead of receiving the
Gospel, would immediately have killed this Sosomon, but by the persuasion of
some about him, did not do it, but sent him by the hands of three of his Men to
Prison; who as he was going to Prison, Exhorted and Taught them in the
Christian Religion; they not liking his Discourse, immediately Murdered him
after a most Barbarous manner: They returning to King Philip, acquainted him
what they had done. About two or three Months after, this Murder being
Discovered to the Authority of New Plymouth, Josiah Winslow being then
Governor of that Colony, care was taken to find out the Murderers; who upon
search were found and apprehended, and after a fair Trial were all Hanged.

This so Exasperated King Philip, that from that day after, he studied to be
Revenged on the English, judging that the English Authority have nothing to do
to Hang any of his Indians for killing another.

In order thereunto, his first Errand is to a Squaw Sachem (i. e. a Woman
Prince, or Queen) who is Widow of a Brother to King Philip, deceased, he
promising her great rewards if she would join with him in this Conspiracy, (for
she is as Potent a Prince as any round about her, and has as much Corn, Land,
and Men, at her Command) she willingly consented, and was much more forward in
the Design, and had greater Success than King Philip himself.

The place where this King Philip does dwell, is on a parcel of Land, called in
English, Mount-Hope, about twelve Miles long, and judged to be the best Land in
New England: And it was about thirty five Miles off of this Place to the
Northward, that the first English that ever came there, Landed; and by degrees
built Houses, and called the name of the place New Plymouth, (because Plymouth
in Old England was the last place they were at there). The English took not a
Foot of Land from the Indians, but Bought all, and although they bought for an
inconsiderable Value, yet they did Buy it. And it may be judged that now King
Philip repents himself, seeing what Product the English have made of a
Wilderness, through their Labor, and the Blessing of God thereon: All the Land
of the Colony of New Plymouth, was at first Bought of this King Philip's Grand
father, Massasoit by Name, except some few parcels he has Sold to some of the
Inhabitants of Swanzy, not far from Mount Hope. Thereupon about five Years
since, took an occasion to Quarrel with the Town, partly because he was vexed
he had Sold his Land, and partly because his Brother died five or six Years
before, and he thought the English had Poisoned him, and thereupon he troubled
them, but killed none; but the Governor by timely preparation hindered them of
doing any hurt.

Thus after King Philip had secured his Interest in Squaw Sachem, (whom he
persuaded that the English had Poisoned her Husband, and thereupon she was the
more willing to join with him) he privately sent Messengers to most of the
Indian Sagamores and Sachems round about him, telling them that the English had
a Design to cut off all the Indians round about them, and that if they did not
Join together, they should lose their Lives and Lands; whereupon several
Sachems became his Confederates. And having now five Years time, had
opportunity enough to furnish themselves with Ammunition and Arms, which they
did plentifully at Canada, amongst the French; and it is judged that some
English have also Sold them some Arms through Ignorance of their Design. In the
mean time King Philip Mustered up about Five Hundred of his Men, and Arms them
complete; and had gotten about Eight or Nine Hundred of his Neighboring
Indians, and likewise Arms them complete; ( i. e. Guns, Powder, and Bullets,)
but how many he has engaged to be of his Party, is unknown to any among us.
The last Spring several Indians were seen in small Parties, about Rehoboth and
Swansey, which not a little affrighted the Inhabitants. Who demanding the
Reason of them, wherefore it was so? Answer was made, That they were only on
their own Defense, for they understood that the English intended to Cut them
off. About the 20th of June last, Seven or Eight of King Philip's Men came to
Swansey on the Lords Day, and would Grind a Hatchet at an Inhabitants House
there; the Master told them, it was the Sabbath Day, and their God would be
very angry if he should let them do it. They returned this answer, They knew
not who his God was, and that they would do it for all him, or his God either:
From thence they went to another House and took away some Victuals, but hurt no
Man. Immediately they met a Man traveling on the Road, kept him in Custody a
short time, then dismissed him quietly; giving him this Caution, that he should
not Work on his God's Day, and that he should tell no Lies.

These things happening, with many others of the like Nature, gave the Rehoboth
and Swansey Men great cause of Jealousies; which occasioned them to send to
Plymouth, and to the Bay (i. e. Boston) for some Assistance, in case they
should need it. But before any came to them, they of both Towns were gathered
together into three Houses, Men, Women, and Children, and there had all
Provisions in common, so that they who had nothing wanted not.

Immediately after, notice came hereof to the Governor of the Messachusets
Colony ( Boston being Metropolis, and the Honorable John Leveret Governor
thereof) Drums beat up for Volunteers, and in three Hours time were Mustered up
about an Hundred and ten men, Captain Samuel Mosely being then Commander. This
Captain Mosely has been an old Privateer at Jamaica, an excellent Soldier,
and of an undaunted Spirit, one whose Memory will be Honorable in New England,
for his many eminent Services he has done the Public. There were also among
these men about Ten or Twelve Privateers, that had been there sometime before:
they carried with them several dogs, that proved serviceable to them, in
finding out the Enemy in their Swmps; one whereof, would for several days
together, go out and bring to them six, eight, or ten young Pigs of King
Philips Herds. There went out also amongst these Men, one Cornellis a Dutchman,
who had lately been Condemned to die for Piracy, but afterward received a
Pardon, he willing to show his Gratitude therefore, went out and did several
good Services abroad against the Enemy.

Plymouth also sent out several Men at the same time, both Horse and Foot: Also
most Towns in all the United Colonies thereabout sent out some more, some less,
as they were in Number. By this time the Indians have killed several of our
Men, but the first that was killed was June 23, a Man at Swansey: that
adventuring with his Wife and Son (about twenty Years old) to go to his House
to fetch them corn, and such like things: He having just before sent his Wife
and Son away, as he was going out of the House, was set on and shot by Indians;
his Wife being not far off, heard the Guns go off, went back: They took her,
first defiled her, then skinned her Head, as also the Son, and dismissed them
both, who immediately died. They also the next day killed six or seven Men at
Swansey, and two more at one of the Garrisons; and as two Men that went out of
one of the Garrisons to draw a Bucket of Water, were shot and carried away, and
afterward found with their Fingers and Feet cut off, and the skin of their
Heads flayed off.

About fourteen days after that, they sent for more help; whereupon the
Authority of Boston, made Captain Thomas Savage the Major General in that
Expedition, who with sixty Horse, and as many Foot, went out of Boston, having
pressed Horses for the Footmen, and six Carts to carry Provisons with them:
Whereof Mr. John Morse was Commissary General abroad, and Mr. Nathaniel
Williams Commissary at home. They Traveled day and night till they came to
their Garrisons, and within three days after, marched Horse and Foot (leaving
Guards in the Garrisons) toward Mount Hope, where King Philip and his Wife
was; they came on him at unawares, so that Philip was forced to rise from
Dinner, and he and all with him fled out of that Land, called Mount Hope, up
further into the Country; they pursued them as far as they could go for
Swamps, and killed fifteen or sixteen in that Expedition, and returned, and
took what he had that was worth taking, and spoiled the rest, taking all his
Cattle and Hogs they could find, and also took Possession of Mount Hope, which
had then a thousand Acres under Corn, which is since cut down by the English,
and disposed of according to their Discretion.

Cornellis was in this Exploit, and pursued Philip so hard, that he got his Cap
off his Head, and now wears it.

About three days after, the general (finding Cornellis to be a Stout Man, and
willing to venture his Life in the Cause of the English) sent him with twelve
Men under his Command to Scout about, with Orders to return in three Hours on
pain of Death; in his way he met sixty Indians that were halling their Cannooes
ashore, he set on them, killing thirteen, and took eight alive, purses the
rest as for as he could go for the Swamps; then he returned and Burnt all those
Cannooes, about forty in number: By this time Cornellis and his twelve Men (all
being perserved) returned to the Camp, but they were eight Hours absent:
Whereupon a Council of War was called, who past the Sentence of Death on him,
for exceeding the Order given him. Immediately was also Pardoned, and received
thanks for his good Service done in that Expedition; and was in a short time
sent out on the like Design, and brought Home with him twelve Indians alive,
and two Indians Heads ( i. e. the Skin with the Hair on it.)

About the 25th of July, the General returned with twelve Men to guard his
Person,

Captain Mosely being there, and plying about, found Eighty Indians who
surrendered themselves, and were secured in a House, provided for them near
Plymouth: Thereupon came to Boston, to know the pleasure of the Authority about
them, and in a days time returned with this Order; he should kill none that he
took alive, but secure them in order to a Transportation: Wherefore afterward
there were Shipped on board Captain Sprague an Hundred seventy eight Indians, on
the 28th of September, bound for Cales.

In this time, the Indians continued daily to commit many Acts of Hostility on
the English; they Burnt Twenty three Houses at Swansey, and killed many People
there, and took much Cattle, as also Burnt the Hay and Corn in great
quantities. They Burnt near thirty Houses in Dartmouth, (a place in
New Plymouth Colony) killing many People after a most Barbarous manner; as
skining them all over alive, some only their Heads, cutting off their Hands and
Feet; but any Woman they take alive, they Defile, afterward put her to Death
by some of those or the like ways. They have Burnt most of the Houses in
Rehoboth, Taunton, and Swansey; a Party of Indians came to Mendham, which is
Thirty two Miles from Boston, and there killed five or six Persons, who being
pursued, two were killed, the rest fled.

Some part of our Forces afterward set on about Five hundred Indians, not far
from Pocassit, pursuing them into a larg Swamp, not far from thence; how many
they killed is not known, in regard the Indians adventured back and took their
dead Men away with them: (as they commonly do if they can possibly) But in this
Fight were killed King Philips Brother, his Privy Councellor, (being one
formerly Educated at Cambridg) and one of his chief Captains; the Heads of
which three were afterward brought to Boston. There were killed in this
pursuit six Englishmen, and nine or ten wounded.

This Pocassit Swamp, is judged about seven or eight Miles long, and so full of
Bushes and Trees, that a parcel of Indians may be within the length of a Pike
of a Man, and he cannot discover them; and besides, this as well as all other
Swamps, is so soft Ground, that an Englishman can neither go nor stand thereon,
and yet these bloody Savages will run a long over it, holding their Guns cross
their arms (and if occasion be) discharge in that posture.

On the Lords Day, the (...) of July, an Indian came to Dorchester, (within
half a Mile of Mother Georges House) to the House of Mr. Minor, in Sermontime,
and there were then at Home the Maid servant and two young Children, she
keeping the Door shut for safety; the Indian when he saw he could not come in
at the Door, went about to come in at the Window, she perceiving his
resolution, took two brass kettles, under which she put the two children, she
ran up Stairs and charged a Musket and fired at the Indian, (he having fired at
her once or twice and mist her, but struck the top of one Kettle, under which a
Child was) and shot him into his shoulder; then he let his Gun fall, and was
just coming in at the Window, she made haste and got a Fire shovel full of live
Coals and applied them to his Face, which forced him to fly and escaped: But
one was found dead within five Miles of that place afterward, and was judged
to be this by his scalded Face.

These Transactions may be computed to end with July. Before any further
progress be made in this Relation, it may not be amiss to give you some Account
of what concerns our Neighbor Indians at Peace with us.

There are two Potent Sagamores, that are in Amity with us: The one is
Ninnicroft, his Territories border on Connecticot Colony; the other is Unkus,
the only Christian Sagamore among them.

This Unkus, and all his Subjects professing Christanity, are called Praying
Indians. In the first week in August, the Authority of Boston sent an Express
to him, to require him to come in and Surrender himself, man, and Arms, to the
English: whereupon, he sent along with the Messenger his three Sons, and about
Sixty of his Men, with his Arms, to be thus disposed of, viz. His two youngest
Sons, (about thirty Years old) to remain as Hostages (as now they do at
Cambridg) and his Eldest Son to go Captain of the Men as Assistants to the
English against the Heathens, which accordingly they did. And the English not
thinking themselves yet secure enough, because they cannot know a Heathen from
a Christian by his Visage, nor Apparel: The Authority of Boston, at a Council
held there the 30th of August, Published this following Order.

AT A COUNCIL Held in BOSTON, August 30. 1675.
THe Council judging it of absolute necessity for the Security of the English,
and the Indians that are in Amity with us, that they be Restrained their usual
Commerce with the English, and Hunting in the Woods, during the time of
Hostility with those that are our Enemies.

Do Order, that all those Indians that are desirous to Approve themselves
faithful to the English, be Confined to their several Plantations
underwritten, until the Council shall take further order; and that they so
order the setting of their Wigwams, that they may stand Compact in some one
part of their Plantations respectively, where it may be best for their own
Provision and Defense. And that none of them do presume to Travel above one
Mile from the Center of such their Dwelling, unless in company with some
English, or in their Service near their Dwellings; and excepting for gathering
and fetching in their Corn with one Englishman, on peril of being taken as our
Enemies, or their Abettors: And in case that any of them shall be taken without
the Limits abovesaid, except as abovesaid, and do lose their Lives, or be
otherwise damnified, by English or Indians; The Council do hereby Declare, that
they shall account themselves wholly Innocent, and their Blood or other Damage
(by them sustained) will be upon their own Heads.

Also, it shall not be lawful for any Indians that are in Amity with us, to
entertain any strange Indians, or receive any of our Enemies Plunder, but shall
from time to time make discovery thereof to some English, that shall be
Appointed for that end to sojourn among them, on penalty of being reputed our
Enemies, and of being liable to be proceeded against as such.

Also, whereas it is the manner of the Heathens that are now in Hostility with
us, contrary to the Practice of all Civil Nations, to execute their bloody
Insolences by Stealth, and Sculking in small Parties, declining all open
decision of their Controversy, either by Treaty or by the Sword.

The Council do therefore Order, that after the Publication of the Provision
aforesaid, It shall be lawful for any Person, whether English or Indian, that
shall find any Indians Traveling or Sculking in any of our Towns or Woods,
contrary to the Limits abovenamed, to command them under their Guard, and
Examination, or to Kill and destroy them as they best may or can. The Council
hereby declaring, That it will be most acceptable to them that none be Killed
or Wounded, that are willing to surrender themselves into Custody.

The Places of the Indians Residencies are, Natick, Punquapaog, Nashoba,
Wamesit, and Hassanemesit: And if there be any that belong to any other
Plantations, they are to Repair to some one of these.

By the Council. Edward Rawson, Secr.


Which company of Praying Indians marched out of Town (having Saluted the
Governor with three Volleys) and were appointed to march in the Front, which
they did, and met with several Skirmishes, in which they Killed some, and about
forty-five more Surrendered themselves; which were shipped off amongst those
Captain Sprague carried away.

Concerning the Narragansets, Ninnicroft is their Sagamore; his GrandFather,
and Father, always kept Truce with the English, but he now gives sufficient
cause to think otherwise of him.

The Squaw Sachem, having ran very far in her Engagements with King Philip, and
fearing lest she should be taken, she committed her Person to the possession of
this Ninnicroft, judging her self safe by virtue of his Protection; where she
has continued ever since July last. Whereupon a certain number of Men were
sent by the Authority of Connecticot Colony ( John Wenthrop Governor) to the
Narragansets, to require them to deliver the Queen, and withal to Ratify that
long Peace they had maintained with the English: Whereupon the Narragansets
concluded a Peace with them, and sent a Hundred Men to Connecticot, for the
assistance of the English. The English made this Agreement with them, That for
every Indians Head-skin they brought, they should have a Coat, ( i. e. two
Yards of Trucking Cloth, worth five Shillings per Yard here) and for every one
they bring alive, two Coats; for King Philips Head, Twenty Coats; and if taken
alive, Forty Coats: These went out, and returned in fourteen days time,
bringing with them about Eighteen Heads in all.

Several other Sachems of the Countries, called in Indian, Nipmog, came to an
English Town called Brookfield, (but in Indian, Quawbawg, during the time our
Garrison was there) and told them they were Praying Indians, ( i. e.
Christians) and that they would be quiet, and do no harm to the English; but
withal, told them, that for their own safety they could not deliver up their
Arms: But the Inhabitants of Brookfield thought they would be Faithful, in
regard they were Praying Indians, took their words and dismissed them.

The Authority of Boston, with the Advice of the Governor of Connecticot, as
also of Plymouth Colonies, then sitting in Council for several days together at
Boston, For their better satisfaction, sent a Party of thirty Horse under the
Command of Captain Hutchinson, and Captain Wheeler; when they were come to
Quawbawg, they sent a Party of Horse to the Nipmoog Sachems to Treat with them.
(For you must understand that Captain Hutchinson had a very considerable Farm
thereabouts, and had occasion to employ several of those Sachems Men, in
Tilling and Plowing his Ground, and thereby he was known by Face to many of
them.) The Sachems sent this word, they would speak with none but Captain
Hutchinson himself; whereupon Capt. Hutchinson and Capt. Wheeler, sent them
word they would come to them themselves: Accordingly the Indians appointed the
meeting at such a Tree, and at such a time. The time being come, Captain
Hutchison, Captain Wheeler, and his Company, (with some of the Inhabitants of
Brookfield, who thought them to be very Honest, therefore took no Arms with
them) went to the place, but the Nipmoog Indians were not there. Whereupon the
Guide that conducted them through the Woods, brought them to a Swamp, not far
off the appointed place; out of which these Indians ran all at once and Killed
sixteen Men, and Wounded several others, of which Wounds three Weeks after,
Captain Hutchison died, when his Wife and Son were within twelve Miles of him
in their Journey to see him; whose Death is the more lamented, in that his
Mother, and several others of his Relations, died by the hands of the Indians,
now near forty Years since.

The rest that escaped, made what haste they could to the Town of Brookfield,
they made choice of the strongest House there, resolved to make a Garrison of
it; in order thereunto, as soon as they could, got all the People (about Eighty
in number) into this House. The Indians pursued them close, and in four Hours
time had Burnt twenty and odd Houses in Brookfield, and abode thereabout three
or four days, shooting day and night, with most dreadful Screechings and
Yellings, which signified their Triumph. They in this time endeavored to set
the Garrison on fire diverse times, but by the Providence of God were prevented;
once by a shower of Rain, another time by their Diligence within. One from
within stepped out to drink some Water and was killed, and one more killed
within. The Bruits had contrived an Engine with many Wheels, to fire the
Garrison ten or twelve Rod off, and had loaded it with combustibles therefore,
(and news was brought to Boston that they were all Burnt, but it was not so)
and had assuredly done it, had not Major Willard come to their Relief with a
flying Army of sixty Horse, at nine or ten a Clock at Night: They forced their
way through the Body of the Indians, and Fired a pace on them, and in two Hours
time wholly Routed the Indians thence, killing several. Thus deliverance was
wrought by a mighty Hand for them, when they had no outward reason to expect
any.

During the time these People kept themselves in that House, two Women were
safely delivered of two Sons apiece, who in a Months time brought them all
themselves on foot to Boston, where they were plentifully releived out of the
Church-Stock there.

There are also another sort of Indians, (best know to the Commonalty of
Boston) by the name of Mr. Elliots Indians, or Captain Guggins Indians.

This Mr. Elliot, you must understand, is the Man that has by his own great
Labor and Study, invented the way of Printing the Indian Language, and has
also perfectly Translated the whole Bible, with the Singing Psalms in Meeter;
the Assemblies Catechism; the Practice of Piety, into the Indian Language; as
also Written several Books, very profitable for understanding the Grounds of
Christian Religion: For which Pains and Labor, he deserves Honor from all
such who are Well-wishers to things of the like Nature, whose Name will never
Die in New England.

A Specimen of his Translation of the Bible into the Indian Language is as
follows.

Isaiah, Chap. 23. Ver. 1, 2, 3.
OOWeanun Tire. OOnook kenaau Tarshishe kuhtoonogquog, newutche mahchimoo,
newaj matta wetuwoniuneog, wanne petutteaun: wutch Chittimme ohkert nag
wehteauwahuoneau. THe burden of Tire. Howl ye ships of Tarshish, for it is laid
waste, so that there is no house, no entering in: From the land of Chittim it is
revealed to them. 2. Chequnappek wadohkeogish munohhanehtu, ken, Zidone
anaqishaenuog neg quoshkodteacheg keitoh, kenum wamechumuhkonukquog. 2. Be
still ye Inhabitants of the Isle, thou whom the Merchants of Zidon that pass
over the Sea, have replenished. 3. Kah nashpe mishe nippeash, wuskanuem Sihor,
sepue kepenumoonk ne wutte shegenoom, kah noh wutohtimoinne ahhut
kodtauwompatimuk. 3. And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the
River is her revenue, and she is a Mart of Nations.

This Captain Guggins, is a Captain and Justice of Peace at Cambridg: He
receives Thirty Pound per annum from the English, to sit as Judge among the
Indians, to Judge any difference (not Capital) among themselves, or between them
and the English.

Of these Indians thus distingished, it may not be amiss to give a brief
Account, in its proper place.

Now it falls in Course, to think on what is done in the Field on both Sides.

On Thursday the 5th of August, being Lecture-day at Boston, was ordered by the
Old Church (of which the Governor is a Member) to be observed as a Fast by
that Church, which accordingly was done: And at the Contribution was then
Collected Sixty Nine Pound, which was for the distressed Families Relief. And
on that very day was Captain Hutchisons Company so defeated: Which thing was
taken especial Notice of, by all those who desire to see the Hand of God in
such sad Providence, which did occasion another Fast to be kept, by Mr.
Mathers Church, at the North Meeting House the Wednesday following.

On Wednesday, the 12th of August, was appointed a Fast for Mr. Mather's
Church, which was duly observed; that day being a Court day for the Council, no
Magistrate was there, yet notwithstanding there was gathered at the
Contribution sixty eight Pound.

Mr. Mather in his Sermon, took occasion too in speaking of the Benefit of
Communion with God, to tell us that there are in this Colony seventy nine
gathered Churches, and that to this day the Indians had not done any Damage to
any thing that belonged to any of the Places where these Churches were.

August coming on, we have now from all Parts raised more Men, so that there
are now in the Field in several places, six hundred Horse and Foot: Most of the
Army were not far from the Swamp wherein King Philip with all his People were;
they resolved to compass it, which they did once: And in their second
Encounter, forced King Philip with all his Retinue out of the Samp, and pursued
them; in their pursuit they killed his Lievetenant-General, with about twenty
(that they saw of his Men, and the English had not the loss of one Man, but two
wounded. We having all this while a Party of Unkus's Indians in the Field on
our side.

About the 15th of August, Captain Mosely with sixty Men, Met with a company,
judged about three hundred Indians, in a plain place where few Trees were, and
on both sides preparations were making for a Battle; all being ready on both
sides to fight, Captain Moseley plucked off his Periwig, and put it into his
Breeches, because it should not hinder him in fighting. As soon as the Indians
saw that, they fell a Howling and Yelling most hideously, and said, Umh, umh me
no stawmerre fight Engis mon, Engis mon get two head, Engis mon got two head; if
me cut off un head, he got noder, a put on beder as dis; with such like words in
broken English, and away they all fled and could not be overtaken, nor seen any
more afterward. About a Week after this, Capt. Moseley took two Indians, the
Father and his Son, and willing to Examine them both apart, proceeded thus: Took
the old Man and bound him to a Tree, after he was so bound, he sent away the
Son by a File of Men out of sight; the old Man there confessed he was a Praying
Indian, and that he was only hunting for Deer thereabouts; but said, that his
Son was one of those Men that wounded Captain Hutchison: So then, after they
had pumped him as much as they could, they fired a Gun with no Bullet in it
over his Head, untied him, and sent him another way with a File out of sight;
then brought they his Son, bound him in like manner, they telling him that they
had shot his Father, and would shoot him also, if he would not confess what he
was, and what he knew: He fairly told them, that he was a Praying Indian, but
his Father made him go with him to the Nipmoog Indians, and that there they
shot three or four times apiece; whereupon they then brought the old Man and
tied him to his Son, and Examined them together; at length they confessed they
were both among the Nipmoogs, and that the Son did wound Captain Hutchison;
after their Examination, they were both shot to Death.

In this same Week, King Philips Men had taken a young Lad alive about fourteen
Years old, and bound him to a Tree two nights and two days, intending to be
Merry with him the Next day, and that they would Roast him alive to make sport
with him; but God overnight, touched the heart of one Indian, so that he came
and loosed him, and bid him run Grande ( i. e. run Apace) and by that means he
escaped.

Toward the latter end of August, Captain Moseley took eight Indians alive,
and sent them Prisoners to Boston, who were put in Prison there; these were of
the Number of Mr. Eliot's Indians; (as also many of those Indians that were
Shipped off by Captain Sprague, for the Straits and Cales) these Men were at
several times tried for their Lives, and condemned to Die: Mean time Mr. Eliot,
and Captain Guggins, pleaded so very hard for the Indians, that the whole
Council knew not what to do about them. They hearkened to Mr. Eliot for his
Gravity, Age, and Wisdom, and also for that he has been the chief Instrument
that the Lord has made use of, in Propagating the Gospel among the Heathen;
And was their Teacher, till such time that some Indians were brought upon in
the University to supply his place. But for Captain Guggins, why such a wise
Council as they, should be so overborn by him, cannot be judged otherwise then
because of his daily troubling them with his Impertinences and multitudinous
Speeches, in so much that it was told him on the Bench, by Cap. Oliver.
a very worthy Person there present, that he ought rather to be Confined among
his Indians, than to sit on the Bench; his taking the Indians part so much has
made him a Byword both among Men and Boys. But so it was, that by one, and two
at a time, most of these eight Indians, (and four more sent afterward on the
same account) were let loose by night, which so Exasperated the Commonalty,
that about the 10th of September, at nine a Clock at night, there gathered
together about forty Men (some of note) and came to the House of Captain James
Oliver; two or three of them went into his Entry to desire to speak with him,
which was to desire him to be their Leader, and they should join together and
go break open the Prison, and take one Indian out thence and Hang him: Captain
Oliver hearing their request, took his Cane and cudgelled them stoutly, and so
for that time dismissed the Company; which had he but in the least countenanced,
it might have been accompanied with ill Events in the end. Immediately Captain
Oliver went and acquainted Mr. Ting his Neighbor, (a Justice of Peace) and
they both went the next Morning and acquainted the Goverour, who thanked
Captain Oliver for what he had done last night, but this rested not here: For
the Commonalty were so enraged against Mr. Elliot, and Captain Guggins
especially, that Captain Guggins said on the Bench, that he was afraid to go
along the streets; the answer was made, you may thank your self; however an
Order was issued out for the Execution of that one (notorious above the rest)
Indian, and accordingly he was led by a Rope about his Neck to the Gallows;
when he came there, the Executioners (for there were many) flung one end over
the Post, and so hoised him up like a Dog, three or four times, he being yet
half alive, and half dead; then came an Indian, a Friend of his, and with his
Knife made a hole in his Breast to his Heart, and sucked out his Heart-blood:
Being asked his reason therefore, his answer, Umh, umh nu, Me stronger as I was
before, me be so strong as me and he too, he be ver strong Man fore he die.

Thus with the Dog-like-death (good enough) of one poor Heathen, was the
Peoples Rage laid in some measure, but in a short time it began to work (not
without Cause enough). About the beginning of September, Captain Hinksman was
sent out Commander of one hundred Men, and were to meet together at Roxbury
Meeting-House-yard, when they were there, ready to March, they all unanimously
resolved not to go with him, but if Captain Oliver would go, they would go
gladly; whereupon the Council sent for him Home, and sent Captain Lake in his
room.

On wednesday, August 25. was observed a Fast at Charlestown, whereto several
of Boston went, there was gathered that day Seventy eight Pound.

King Philip now beinning to want Money (having a Coat made all of Wampampeag,
(i. e. Indian Money) cuts his Coat to pieces, and distributes it plentifully
among the Nipmoog Sachems and others, as well to the Eastward as Southward, and
all round about. This gives occasion to suspect that the Narragansets may also
be Bribed, who are out on our side, in that they follow not Orders to pursue
King Philip effectually. Captain Lathrop, and Captain Beers, being at Hadly,
and there hearing of an Indian Castle not far thence, they marched with an
Hundred and eighty Soldiers thither, who required the Indians to surrender
their Arms; the Indians told Captain Beers, that they would the next Morning.
But the Captains with their Men soon made themselves Masters thereof, forcing
them into a Swamp, having killed nine or ten, they Retreated.

By this time the Town of Deerfield begins to be in danger: Whereupon Captain
Beers with eighty Men went to bring away the People, the Inhabitants thereof.
The Indians having Burnt twenty five Houses; in their way, they were met with
by a parcel of Indians of about a Hundred and fifty, which the English got the
better of, killing near Forty Indians, having lost but four or five Englishmen:
But immediately there did appear the greatest Body that has at one time been
seen by the English, and fell upon Captain Beers, immediately killing him and
sixty five of his Men, and fifteen escaped; these fifteen ran to Captain
Moseley, who then was about nine or ten Miles off, he came with his sixty Men,
and gave the whole Body of the Indians Battle (judged about one thousand two
hundred) for three Hours; whereupon after having killed several of the Indians,
he was forced to Retreat, and continued Fighting for all the time that he and
his Men were Retreating nine Miles; Captain Moseley lost out of his Company
nine, and thirteen wounded. The next day they come up again, the Indians were
gone, they had stripped the dead Men of all their Clothes and Arms, and Horses;
amongst which dead, was one who had life in him, and was found by a Friend
Indian, he took him up and said, Umh, umh poo Ingismon, me save you life, me
take you to Captain Mosee; he carries him fifteen Miles the day after to
Captain Moseley, and now this Man is well again and in good health.

Immediately Orders were taken at Boston for the sending out more Relief, as
many as to make up Captain Moseleys Company an Hundred complete, were forthwith
sent away: They are fitting out an Hundred more from Connecticot, under the
Command of Major Treat, and Captain Whiting the Minister of Hartford.

September 10, Eight Indians came to Boston from Ninnicroft, in an Embassy,
having a Certificate from Captain Smith an Englishman, that has a large Estate
thereabouts: They dispatched their Business, and had another Pass, tied at the
end of a Stick, that Englishmen may see it afar off. They were going out of
Town a back way, two Men men met them, and seized on him that had the Pass;
these two Men were Brothers, and this Indian had been among King Philips
Indians, and these two Men Swore in Court, that that was the Man that killed
their Brother, they knew him; whereupon two days after his Trial and
Confession, he was Hanged like the other.

September 23. About ten at night we had an Allarm given us, and before eleven
we had one Thousand two Hundred Men in Arms, and dismissed by twelve that night:
The occasion was, one of the Watch was Drunk about thirty Miles off at Mendham,
and he fired a Gun, so it came to Boston; the next morning he paid ten
Shillings, and sat some hours in the Stocks for his being Drunk, and afterward
had twenty Lashes for giving a false Allarm.

On the 28th day of August, happened here at eleven a Clock at night, a most
violent Storm of Wind and Rain, the like was never known before; it blew up
many Ships together that they Bulged one another, some up towords Cambridg,
some to Muddy-River, doing much hurt to very many; also it broke down many
Wharffs, and blew down some Houses thereupon. The Indians afterward reported
that they had caused it by their Pawwaw, ( i. e. worshipping the Devil). They
farther say, That as many Englishmen shall Die, as the Trees have by this Wind
been blown down in the Woods: But these Heathenish notions are consonant to
their barbarous Cruelty, and ought to be valued accordingly, by all who own
any thing superior to it or them.

Several Men, some whereof are Quakers, will not go out on Command, and for
their disobedience thereunto, are forced to run the Gantelop.

About the 15th of September, the Authority of Boston sent a Party to
Ninnicroft, to require him to come to Boston, to treat concerning the delivery
Squaw Sachem: He sent word he would come, provided he might be safely returned
back; Captain Smith living near him, offered himself, Wife and Children, and
Estate, as Hostages therefore.

Ninnicroft seeing this, resolved to send his Eldest Son thither (he himself
being very aged) so away they came, bringing Captain Smith with them; when they
came to Roxbury, they sent word to Boston they were come, and desired to know
if they might have admittance into Boston: Word was sent them, that they should
be very welcome. In order thereto, Captain James Oliver, and Captain Clark,
were ordered with six Files of Muskets a piece to meet on the Neck, to conduct
them into Town. The Indians meeting these Captains, thought that they were all
to Die immediately; some were for running away, and some not, but Captain Smith
being with them, endeavored to pacify them as well as he could. When they
met, they opened to the Right and Left, and gave them three Volleys, and so
Guarded them to the Governors House. The next Morning this Sagamore with all
his Retinue, went to Captain Olivers House, to give him hearty thanks for
Yesterdays kindness, in his conducting them safe to Town.

The Council sat every day during their abode in Boston, until they came to an
Agreement: The Narragansets by degrees, came to this Agreement, That they were
to deliver the Squaw Sachem within so many days at Boston; and the League of
Peace was then by them confirmed, which was much to the general satisfaction;
but yet many had hard thoughts of them, fearing they will at last prove
Treacherous: They were dismissed out of Town in safety, according to their desire.

The Governor and Council seeing, and seriously considering the Misery that
many had already undergone, and that the Country was like to be in, Issued out
this following Order for a Solemn Fast all over the Colony; which was performed
with a very great show of outward Penitence, and (no question) with much inward
Affection by very many: The Governor himself beginning the duty of the Day,
with a most heavenly Prayer.

AT A COUNCIL Held at BOSTON, Sept. 17. 1675.
IT pleased the HOLY GOD (all whose Works are Truth, and his Ways Judgment) for
our sins whereby he has been provoked, in special by the under-valuation of
our pleasant things; great unthankfulness for, and manifold abuses of our
wonderful Peace, and the Blessings of it in this good Land, which the Lord has
given us; ill entertainment of the Ministry of the precious Gospel of Peace:
Leaving our first-Love, dealing falsely in the Covenant of the Lord our God: The
Apostasy of many from the Truth unto Heresies, and pernicious Errors; Great
Formality, inordinate Affection, and sinful Conformity to this present evil
vain World: And (beside many horrid and scandalous Sins breaking forth among
us, for which we have cause to be greatly humbled before the Lord) our great
unsensibleness of the displeasure of the Lord in suffering these Abominations
to be perpetrated, together with our Carnal Security, and unquietness under the
Judgments of God upon us; our abiding very much unreformed, notwithstanding all
Warnings and Chastisements, whereby the Lord has been, and is still debating
with us; we having greatly incensed Him to stir up many Adversaries against us,
not only Abroad, but also at our own Doors, (causing the Heathen in this
Wilderness to be as thorns in our sides, who have formerly been, and might
still be, a Wall unto us therein; and others also to become a Scourge unto us)
the Lord himself also more immediately Afflicting us by Diseases, whereof so
many Children in some of our Towns have died this Summer. His not going forth
with our Armies as in former times, but giving up many of our Brethren to the
Mouth of the devouring Sword, yea, showing himself Angry with the Prayers of
his People: Threatening us also with scarcity of Provision and other Calamities,
especially if this present War with the barbarous Heathen should continue: And
that the Lord of Hosts himself withdraw not the Commission He has given to the
Sword, and other Judgments to prevail against us.

The Governor and Council of this Jurisdiction therefore (being under the
Sense of these evils, and also of the distressed State of the rest of the
Colonies confederate with our selves, and of the Churches of Christ in other
parts of the Christian World, in this day of Trouble, Rebukes, and Blasphemy;
and fearing the sad Issue thereof, unless the Lord help us with our whole
Heart, and not feignedly, to turn unto Himself) Do Appoint, and Order the
seventh day of the next Month, to be a Day of Public Humiliation, with Fasting
and Prayer, throughout this whole Colony; that we may set our selves sincerely
to seek the Lord, rending our Hearts, and not our Garments before Him, and
pursue the same with a through Reformation of what ever has been, or is an
Image of Jealousy before the Lord, to offend the Eyes of his Glory; if so be,
the Lord may turn from his fierce Anger, that we perish not. We do therefore
require all the Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction to forbear Servile Labor upon
that Day, and that they apply themselves respectively to observe the same, as
is Appointed.

By the Council. Edward Rawson, Secr.


On the 1st of October, News came to Boston, that the Indians had Burnt the
Farm-house of Major Pinchon, situate near Springfield, and killed much Cattle,
and Burnt much Corn, which occasioned his Son to abide still in Boston (he
being before provided to go for London, with Capt. John Walley in the John's
Adventure, Mr. Pinchon's one Ship): It is judged that Major Pinchon's damage
may amount to eleven or twelve hundred Pound Sterling. This day also came the
News to Mr. Purchase, that his House and Goods were Burnt, his Wife and Children
killed; the latter proved false: He was also bound in Capt. Walley for London,
but remained at Boston for some time, in order to the settling his Family
there. His Loss likewise amounted to above a thousand Pound Sterling.

On the 12th of October, a Body of Indians came to Springfield, who immediately
fired the Town, and consumed thirty two Houses, and almost as many Barns, with
their Corn and Hay.

The Indians that did this Mischief, were a company of those sort called
Praying Indians, about forty in number, that always dwelt near to Springfield,
and at that time were confined to their Town and a mile about it; but for their
usual Civility sake, were permitted daily to have Converse with the Town, about
what Business they had, and at midnight they did their Exploit. The
Neighboring Towns hearing it, and that it was done by them, Rose without any
Command or Leader, and slew all of them they could find, which was about thirty.

Likewise tidings came this day from the Eastward, that they have killed twenty
Men within this ten days; wherefore here is this 20th of October, marched forty
Men out of Boston, for their Relief.

The Narragansets we fear more and more every day, will be perfidious to us,
the time being past that they should have delivered Squaw Sachem at Boston. Our
Fears are the more increased, as well in that we understand several of them
appear up and down in Arms; however here is a Levy now coming out for a
thousand Englishmen to wait on them, which we hope may reduce them to good
order, as well as recover Squaw Sachem out of their hands; which if she be but
taken by the English, her Lands will pay more then all the Charge we have been
at in this unhappy War.

October 28. This day by advice from Hatfield, we have this particular Account
of what happened there.

On Wednesday, the 19th of October, a party of Indians about seven Miles off
Hatfield in the Woods, made several great Fires, to make the English think they
were there, but as soon as ever they had set fire to the Wood, they came
directly toward Hatfield, and about two Miles from Hatfield they lay in Bushes
by the way side undiscoverable, thinking to cut off the English in their way to
the Fires: About Noon, they of Hatfield sent ten Horsemen well armed, to Scout
out and see what is the matter in the Woods; and in their way, the Indians at
once shot down nine of the ten, and the other returned to Hatfield to carry the
news: Capt. Samuel Moseley being then not far from thence, with sixty Men, was
immediately sent for, who presently came. By four a Clock, there were come into
the Town, above seven hundred Indians armed, and immediately set Fire in three
places to the Town, but by care was soon quenched; Capt. Moseley presently
engaged five hundred of these Indians, whilst two hundred and more other
Indians were at the other end of the Town endeavoring to Fire it, There was
also another Captain, with about sixty Men not far off, who hearing the Guns,
came immediately thither and set on the other Party of two hundred and odd; but
two English Captains soon joined together, and they had a Fight with those
seven hundred and odd Indians, for near two Hours time, till they could see no
longer; in this Fight we lost only three Men, and we judge we may have killed
above an hundred Indians, we forced the rest in great disorder to run away, we
forced them over a large River, who in their Swiming over, lost all their Arms
and Ammunition, and several were Drowned, as was seen the next day, This Fight
does much discourage them, and encourage our English: there were ten Men
wounded of ours in the Fight, but none Mortally we hope.

Care now is taken to satisfy the (reasonable) desires of the Commonalty,
concerning Mr. Elliots Indians, and Capt. Guggins Indians.

They that wear the name of Praying Indians, but rather (as Mr, Hezekiah Ushur
termed Praying-Indians) they have made Preys of much English Blood, but now
they are all reduced to their several Confinements; which is much to a general
Satisfaction in that respect.

Dated from Boston, November. 10. 1675.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Have here enclosed you as large an Account as I can at present of the State
of this Wilderness, in respect to the Heathens: I must confess, I was the
willinger to take a little the more Pains in the Collecting thereof, for the
sakes of those with you, who wish us well. Which if it may answer its intended
end therein, the Labor in Writing will be well bestowed. You may expect more
from me as there is occasion, mean while I am,

Sir, Your Friend and Servant.
Psalm. 80.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.



FINIS.

