A TRUE AND FULLER RELATION OF THE BATTLE FOUGHT AT Stow in the Would, March
21. 1645.

Between the Forces under Sir William Brereton, Coll: Morgan, -- AND The Lord
Ashley.

With a Catalogue of the Prisoners, etc.

Sent by a Gentleman of Credit under Sir William Brereton to some Members of
the Honorable House of COMMONS, and by them desi red to be published.

LONDON: Printed for Tho: Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1646.

Honored Gentlemen,
ACcording to my engagements I shall give you an account of the proceedings of
our Forces in reference to our great victory at Stowe: Sir William Brereton
marched with 1000. Horse from Leychsield on Tuesday March 17. 1645. to
Colshill, and quartered there two nights, waiting for intelligence from
Collorell Morgan, and had notice that he was come as f^r as Stratford upon
Avon; and on Tuesday March 19. in the morning, Sir William marched from
Collhell through Warwick Town, toward Stratford; his Rendevouz was within a
mile of Warwick, that after noone, Sir William had intelligence that Col.
Morgan was returned back as far as Camden, because that his intelligence
was, that the Lord Ashley had a bridge carried with him, and was ready to go
over the River to join with the Kings Horse from Oxford: presently after which,
Sir William had intelligence that Ashley was Retreated back toward Worster,
and bended his march toward Leychsield, whereupon Sir William marched back
again toward Bermingham to get between him and Litchsield, and took up his
quarters 4. miles from Stratford, at the Lady Smiths house, about eleven of the
Clock at night Intelligence came to him, that Ashleys quarters were within 3.
miles, whereupon (not knowing whether his intentions were for Litchsield or
Oxford,) we rose, and marched away at one of the clock after midnight, and
came to a Town called Knoll, toward Bermingham, Friday morning March 20 we
had Intelligence that Ashley had laid his Bridge, and was passing over the
River; whereupon we had several messengers ^^om Colonel Morgan, that he would
face them on Camden Hills, whilst Sir William marched up: and notwithstanding
that we had marched all the night before, yet we marched back again to
Stratford, and came thither about the going down of the Sun, and presently
received Posts from Coll. Morgan that the Enemy were within 3. miles of him,
and that their Forlorn Hopes were engaged, and if Sir William made not have
they would be gone; for he himself should be too weak to engage all their
Forces. Whereupon Sir William gave a strict command, that none should stay in
Stratford, but all march away presently, notwithstanding the constant marches
before. The Bridge at Stratford being pulled down, we could pass over but one
at a time, yet we made all the haste that possibly we could, and came to Camden
hills by 12. 2 Clock that night. Colonel Morgan with his party were advanced
by 11. and still sent post to Sir William to follow, and he would do what
possibly he could to engage Ashley to stay. Sir William not delaying any time,
but marched as fast as possibly might be, desiring him by constant posts to
engage the Enemy if possibly he could, whilst he came up, which he promised to
do with all speed. And between one and two on Saturday morning, after we had
marched backward and forward 30. miles since Friday morning, we overtook Col:
Morgan, and then being joyn*d, we marched about a mile, and by that time the
Scouts brought word that the Enemy were drawn up into a Body near Stow in the
Old, at which all our soldiers rejoiced, being desirous to engage. Then we
marched (the whole Army) in Batalia and after we discovered them standing in
Batalia we faced them an hour before we fought, both sides waiting for day
light: Sir William and Colonel Morgan did agree (without any difference) in
the drawing up of the Army, which was ordered as follows. Sir William Brereton
led the Right Wing of Horse, which were those that came with him from
Litchsield: And the Gloucestershire men we placed in the left Wing, Collonell
Morgan himself very gallantly led the Van* Upon the first Charge the Enemy
forced the left Wing to a disorderly Retreat by over-powring of them; so that
to them it seemed something doubtful, But Sir Will: Brereton with our Right
Wing of Horse charged their left both of Horse and Foot, and totally Routed
them, pursuing them into Stow; killing, and wounding many in the town: and the
mean while our Left wing Rallied; our word was God be our Guide: The Enemies
word was Patrick, and George.

A List of the Prisoners I have here enclosed. Thus have I given you an Account
of the good hand of God with us, to whom belongs all the glory. I rest,

Your humble Servant, R. S.
From Stratford upon Aven March 23. 1645.
A List of the Commanders and Officers taken in the Battle at Stow in the
Would, March 21. 1645.
LOrd Ashley General. Collo: Corbet. Collo: Gerrard. Collo: Mouldsworth.
Lieut: Coll: Broughton. Major Billingsley. Major Harneage. Major Salistone.
Capt: Edw: Gray. Capt. Tho: Gibbert. Capt. Harrison. Capt. Peacock. Capt:
Harris. Capt: Salman Halston. Capt: Arding. Capt: John Bonner. Capt: Tho:
Bonner. Capt: Josa^ Sing. Capt: H^tton. Capt: Geniger. Capt: Mathews. Capt:
Davenport Capt: Ge^e: Wright Capt: Potts Capt: Smith
Reformad. Lieu: Hill. Lieut: John H^bson. Lieu: B^^nswick. Lieut: W^^burton.
Lieut: Geo: Faucott Lieut: Hobman. Lieut: Benjamen Thornbury. Lieut: Fletcher.
Lieut: Kirk. Lieut: Smith Remormad. Lieut: Poole Reformad. Lieut: Heart
Reformad. Lieut: Kely Reformad. Lieut: Warham Reformad. Capt: Lieut: Aston.
Lieut: Edw: Baker. Cornet Godfrey Preses. Cor: Brooks. Cor: Roberts. Cor:
Russell. Cor: Francis Resketh. Ens: Blackburn. Ens: Horton. Ens: Dedluck. Ens:
Ellis. Ens: Farmer. Ens: Cleaver. Ens: Avis. Ens: Hobson. Ens: Calbrook. Ens:
Broughton. Ens: Mason. John de Ashfield Clark. Alexander Clegley Chaplain to
Sir Will: Vaughan. Edw: Barker Martial General. Quartermaster Stone
Quartermaster Watts
Reformad. Robert Weal Surgeon. Rich: Aston Servant to the Lord Ashley. Mr.
Williams Quartermaster General. Coll: Egerton. Capt: Stanley. 2 Lieut:
Coronels. Common Soldiers 1630. About 100 slain. 2000 Arms taken. Taken since
by Collo: Fleetwood in the pursuit, Sir Cha: Lucas. And 100 common Soldiers
and Troopers.
FINIS.

