ANSWER TO JOHN LIONS Very weak Defense of his most Wicked, Innovated
Oppression.

OR THE EXCHEQUER GALLON Proved to be a Standard only for Dry things.

Or, A further Manifestation, That the TROY Weight, and the Wine Measures, are
the Standards of England for Weights and Measures.

Written In Defense of the Practice of the present and all former Commissioners
of Excise, who have, from the beginning of the Laws of Excise, made use of
three several Gallons in Gaugeing things Excisable, as the Wine Gallon, Ale
Gallon, and the Corn Gallon.

Written by S. S. Philomathematicus.

London, Printed in the Year. 1659.

(...) for Excise.
May it please your Worships,
AS this Discourse, and the Treatise called, The Cry of the Oppressed, etc. and
the Supplement to that Treatise, are nothing else but a Vindication of your
Worships Actings before 1656. and of the Constant practice of all former
Commissioners, for the Excise, even from the beginning of the Laws of Excise.
They having, as is very well known, made use of all three Gallons (to wit) of
the Wine Gallon, containing 231 Cubical inches, to measure Wine of all sorts,
Soap, Oil, Honey, Strong Water, etc* And of the Ale Gallon, containing 288
Cubical inches for Ale and Beer: And of the Exchequer Gallon, containing 272
Cubical inches, as for Salt, and all dry things Exciseable. And as the Author
has nothing else in design but a Vindication of your Worships former and
present Actings, and the manifestation of Truth and Justice; so he hops he
shall find your Worships Patrons of his paper labors, to whose serious and
judicious perusal he humbly Dedicates them: That so your Worships being rightly
informed of the diversity and legality of the three Measures, you may at last
return to do your first and best works. As it has been your unhappiness to be
the first who by Mr. Lions false informations and suggestions, did take up this
most unequal Gauge, so it may be your Honor to be the first in laying it down;

Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via.
Yours to serve you in all ways of Justice and Righteousness, S. S.

An Answer to a foolish Pamphlet, entitled, The Exchequer Gallon Vindicated.
Worthy Sirs,
AS I have met with John Lion, Couchant, in his close and private Remonstrance
delivered in to the Honorable, the Commissioners for bringing in the Arrears
due to the Commonwealth; wherein I have detected two notorious untruths offered
unto their Honors; as, 1. That the Exchequer Gallon was in use in Broad-street
from the beginning of that Office. And Secondly, That four Winchester or Ale
quarts, did exactly agree with the Exchequer Gallon. So likewise I having met
with Mr. Lion Rampant in print, or his folly in Folio, I doubt not but as I
have made appear, That his Remonstrance was composed of Sophistical Fallacy,
and impudent Falsity, so likewise to make manifest, That this pityful Pamphlet
is but a confused heap of blind Bayard-like folly, or very profound ignorance,
and that (...) ^^^ted by a Syllog^^m in Bocardo, then by any serious and sollid
demonstration. But lest John Lion should glory in his Folly, Fallacies and
Falsities, Confutandi Gratia, I thus reduce his wild, confused and
unsignificant discourse into these two heads; 1. He endeavors to prove, That
the Exchequer Gallon is the true and only Standard Gallon of England, that all
things are to be measured by it. 2. That the Coopers Barrels are, and must be
made by that Gallon.


For the manifestation of his first Position he goes very far, even as far as
Magna Charta, and cites 9 Hen. 3 cap. 25 which says, One Measure of Wine shall
be throughout our Realm: One Measure of Corn (that is to say) according to the
quarter of London, etc. And as it is of Weights, so it shall be of Measures;
which is as much as to say, Vnum pondus, and una mensura sit per totum Regnum
nostrum.

To what purpose he cites this Statute, I cannot tell, unless it be to show,
how that the Corn Gallon and the Wine Gallon are all one; and so to prove, That
^he Exchequer Gallon is the Standard Gallon of England, to measure all things,
as Wine, Ale and Corn: Which if so, why does not Mr. Lion measure Wine, Oil and
Soap, Strong Waters, etc. by that Gallon also; or rather, why do the
Commissioners of Excise, who are under an Oath to be faithful in their places,
do the people of England so great an injury, as to Gauge Wines, Oil, Soap,
Honey, etc. by the Wine Gallon, containing but 231 Cubical inches, and not by
the Exchequer Gallon, which contains 272 Cubical inches, which Mr. Lion affirms
to be a Standard Gallon to measure all things, as well liquids as dry? Worthy
Commissioners, and singularly learned Mr. Lion, I expect your Answer to this,
otherwise you must blush at such Actings.

2. He cites Statutes made the 17 Edw. 2 I suppose he means the 18 Edw. 2. as
the Ordinance for Bakers, and Brewers, and Victulars, and for Else, Bushels and
Forestallers, cap. 8. and 9. which provide, That there shall be Standards of
Bushels and Gallons, etc. But what they are, or should be, the new Ordinance
there cited, called, The Ordinance for Measures, or, as it is styled in o^^
Magna Charta, Compositio mensurarum, shows; which s^ith, That by the consent
of the whole Realm, the measures of our Sovereign Lord the King was made; (that
is to say) An English penny called a Sterling, round and without clipping,
shall weigh 32 wheat Corns in the midst of the Ear, and ^0d shall make an
ounce, and 12 ounces one pound, and 8 li. shall make a Gallon of Wine, and
eight Gallons of Wine shall make a Bushel London, etc. For what (...) except it
be to prove that the Wine Gallon is the Standard Gallon of England, for which I
contend.

If he by the Wine Gallon in this Ordinance understands his Exchequer Gallon,
why then does not that Gallon agree with eigh^ pound of Wheat of Troy weight,
as this Ordinance does direct, and according as 12. Hen. 7. cap. 5. does set
forth? If Mr. Lion seriously compare this Ordinance with the Statute of 12 Hen.
7. cap. 5. he must either recant, or hang down his head like a Bul-rush as he
does.

Fortis est Veritas and praevalebit. 3. He cites 15.25, 27. Hen. 3. all which
Statutes provides, That all Bushels, half Bushels, Pecks, half Pecks, Pottles
and Quarts through England, as well within Franchises as without, shall be
according to the Kings Standard. Note, these Statutes do not say, According to
the Standards, but according to the Standard, which is the Wine Gallon, as in
that Ordinance aforesaid: So that the different pottles and quarts, as the Wine
quart, and the Ale quart; and so the Wine Gallon, the Ale Gallon, and the Corn
Gallon must agree with the Standard, that is, not to be of equal capacity or
content, for then all quarts must agree with the Standard Gallon, which we find
to be false by experience; for the Ale quart in the Exchequer is of a larger
size then the Standard, for it is a fifth bigger then the Wine quart, and one 18^
part bigger then the Corn quart, which agrees with the now Exchequer Standard
Gallon; for 4 Ale Exchequer quarts over-runs the Exchequer Gallon almost half a
pint, which is the proportion the Brewers contend for. Yet this Statute says,
It must be according to the Standard, that is, it must agree with the standard
according to its assize, which Roger de Hoveden, cited in the Treatise called,
The Cry of the Oppressed, explaineth to be, Secundum diversitatem liquorum,
which is the proportion of 4 to 5 etc.

Mr. Lion proceeds to cite more Statutes, all which he blindfoldly applies to
prove the now Exchequer Gallon to be the Standard Gallon for all things; as 15.
Rich. 2. cap. 4.16. Rich. 2. cap. 3. which says, There shall be one measure of
Wine, Corn, and A^e, and all measures shall be made according to the Standard
in the Exchequer; which Standard is the Wine-gallon mention^^ in the old
Ordinance for Measures; So that unum pondus, and una mensura sit per totum
regnum nostrum, must be understood cum grano salis. Not that all Measures
should be of equal capacity, or content with the Standard: but according to
the Standard, which Expositors expound to be meant secundum assisam vel
proportionem, which Mr. Lion by no means will grant. So Roger de Hugden
afore-cited does expound; Vna mensura vini and cervisiae, that is, says he,
secun^^^ (...) says, unum pondus, that he expound; to be secundum diversitatem
mercaturarum: So the pound Troy, and the pound Aver du pois are one, although
they di^^er as four to 5; so likewise Magna Charta says, One Measure, one
Weight, one Yard; yet we know (...) that are apt to shrink are measured by the
Ell, which is the proportion of 5 to 4. so when Magna Charta, and these
Statutes do say, One measure of Corn and Wine, i^ must not be understood one
secundum capacitatem, but one as it is expressed secundum quarterium Londini,
rased and stricken, which is as all Artists do observe the proportion of 28 to
33, as appears in the Treatise called, The cry of the Oppressed.

Mr. Lion will needs make us believe likewise that 11. Hen. 7. cap. 4. speaks
for his Standard, and no other; which is most ridiculously absurd; for why then
was that Standard Gallon and Bushel, and all Bushels and Gallons made by it
broken and damned the next year, viz. 12. H. 7. c. 5 when the now Exchequer
Gallon was made, and it is yet more evident, That the Wine Gallon was then the
Standard Gallon, for that in that Act it is provided, That the liquid or
water-measure on shipboard to be used was to contein 5 pecks of the Standard,
that is 5 pecks Wine-measure, as the Liquid or Waterside Bushel used at
Bear-key, and Brooks wharf, which is called the Winchester and common-bushel,
holds ten Gallons wine-measure, which is 5 pecks of-the Wine-Standard, and
not 5 pecks of the now-Standard in the Exchequer, which then would be a very
exceeding great Bushel, as is evident.

The now Exchequer Gallon was never made or placed in the Exchequer until 12.
Hen. 7. cap. 5. and then, and not till then was made a Standard-Gallon for Dry
things only. In Haec Verba: Wherefore the King our Sovereign Lord, by the
assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this Parliament
assembled, and by authority thereof ordains, establishes, and enacteth, That
the measure of the Bushel contein 8 Gallons of Wheat, and every Gallon 8 li. of
Wheat of Troy-weight, and every li. contein 12 Ounces of Troy-weight, and every
Ounce contein 20 Sterlings, and every Sterling to be of the weight of 32 Wheat
corns in the midst of the ear, according (...) old Law of the Land: which old
Law says exp^esly that 8 li. of Wheat of Troy-weight shall make a Gallon of
Wine: So that according to the letter of this Act, this is but a confirmation
of the old Standards, which were the Troy-weight and Wine-measures, ut
superius; and therefore a sufficient wa^^ant for your Worships to use the
Wine-gallon,

Note: This Statute proceeds, and says; And that it pleases the (...) ^ushel
and a Gallon after the said Assize, to remain in his said Treasury for ever.
Note, It is not said according to the old Laws and Statutes of the Realm as is
afore-declared, but after the said Assize, viz. for Dry things: the which this
Bushel and Gallon was to measure in Markets, etc. as is at large set forth in
the Supplement to the Treatise, called, The Cry of the Oppressed.

Thus I have made it appear, that the Troy-weight and Wine-measure were the
Standards in the Exchequer until the Statute 12. Henry 7. cap. 5. which also
confirms them as above is proved, and yet for the preventing of mistakes in
sizing of Bushels and Gallons which are half-pecks to be sent to Markets, etc.
The Wine-gallon which was de facto the Standard in all ages, until the 12.
Henry 7. and is now de jure by the letter of that Act the Standard of England,
was thence removed, and this Gallon for dry things only (which Mr. Lion m^kes
a Gallon for Liquids and Dry things) there placed, for the preventing of
mistakes in sizing of Bushels and Gallons to be sent down into the Countries.

I proceed to Mr. Lions Second Undertaking, which is to prove, That the Coopers
Barrels are, and must be made according to the Exchequer Gallon, or Standard.

That they are made by that Gallon is such a notorious untruth, that I will no^
take the pains to disprove it. But whether they must be made by that Gallon, is
the grand and only question.

By the 23. Hen. 8. cap. 4. It is ordained and enacted, That every Barrel for
Beer shall contein 36 Gallons, every Kilderkin 1^ Gallons, etc. of the Kings
Standard Gallon, etc. But there is no other Standard Gallon, says Mr. Lion:
Ergo. It Is confessed, if a man reads no more of that Act, a learneder man then
Mr. Lion might construe it to be understood of the Kings Standard Gallon of the
Exchequer; as was Mr. Oughtred, a man whom I admire for his universal skill in
all Arts and Sciences. But if Mr. Lion be willing to correct his mist^ke, and
be desirous to be satisfied by what Gallon the Coopers do and must m^ke their
Barrels, he must read the latter part of the Statu^e (viz.) that clause; It is
enacted that every Cooper that hereafter shall make any Vessels specified in
the said Act, shall from the feast (...) ^^^ntecost next coming make every such
vessel according to the Assize mentioned in the Treatise called, Compositio
Mensuratum: that is to say, Every Barrel for Ale shall contein 32 Gallons of
the said Assize, whereof 8 Gallons make the common Bushel.

No^e: This clause is like a Hand to point out by what Gallon the Barrels are
to be made. viz. By the Coopers great Gallon of 288 Cubical Inches for the
common Bushel which at this day is in the Exchequer, conteins 8 Gallons
accor^^^^ (...) 8 Gallons according to the Standard-gallon, which contein 272
Cubical Inches, 8 Gallons of which makes the Standard Bushel, which at this day
is in the Exchequer likewise. Neither must it be understood by the Common
Bushel, the Standard Bushel; for then this clause would signify nothing, but
be a Tautologie: and therefore the Coopers whom this clause principally
concerns, and who by this Statute are made the Judges of the Content of all
Vessels made, by virtue of this Act; and to whom, by this Act, the Sizing and
Gaugeing of all Vessels is committed, and for that end have sworn Gaugers and
Sealers appointed, do understand it of the Gallon containing 288 Cubical
Inches, and no other, which in the Sta^ute 31. Eliz. cap. 8. is called the
Standard appointed and allowed for Beer and Ale, of which Standard or Gallon
Mr. Lion by no means will take any notice. And the Gallon, viz. the Winchester,
agrees with the Coopers Scantlings, as is cleared in the Treatise, called, The
Cry of the Oppressed, etc.

Further, by no Law your Worships, nor yet any Gauger general, are made the
Judges of the Content of the Beer-barrel; and therefore for you to judge any
thing to be a Barrel of Beer or Ale other then what agrees with the Coopers
Scantlings (Pardon my boldness) such judgments of yours are void in Law, and
reversable; because coram non judice: the Master and Wardens of the Company of
Coopers being the sole Judges of the Content of a Barrel of Beer or Ale, and
that by 23. Hen. 8. cap. 4.

But that your Worships should be fully satisfied in a point of such grand
concernment to the State and People, I shall make it appear, that the Excise is
to be paid by that Gallon, containing 288 Cubical Inches,, and no other; and
that by a Proviso of that Ordinance of Parliament made 17 October. 1643. where it
is ordained, That no Brewer, or Retailer of Beer, or Ale, Perry, Cider, etc.
shall take any more in the price thereof, upon the sale of the same
commodities, then according to the usual rates and prices appointed by Law for
the same (excepting only the rate for Excise) as they will answer their
contempts herein to both Houses of Parliament.

In which Proviso your Worships may observe two things: 1. That the Brewers are
to take but the Rate of a Barrel of Beer or Ale Annually set by the Justices,
which is this year at ten shillings the Barrel, except it be 2 s. and 6 d. per
Barrel for the Excise: This rate is set upon the Coopers Ba^rels, sealed,
marked, and sized according to the Statute, which are made by the Coopers great
Gallon, containing 288 Cubical (...) 8. cap. 4. the Brewers are to sell by no
other, therefore he must collect his Excise by them also; and therefore
consequently must be gauged by that Gallon, whereof 36 Gallons make that
Barrel, which is the Gallon containing 288 Cubical Inches.

2. The Victualler or Retailer of Beer or Ale, by 1 Jac. cap. 9. is to sell a
full Ale-quart of the best Beer or Ale for a penny, and by this Ordinance he is
to take no more then the Excise of that Quart; so that the Victualler is to
take his Excise by that Gallon which corresponds with the Ale-quart, which is
by all Artists called, the Ale, or Winchester Gallon; and consequently he must
receive his Beer and Ale by the same measure, and consequen^ly the Brewers must
be Gauged by that Gallon, whereof 4 full Ale-quarts make the Gallon: Quid
before aut planius?

Thus I have, as I humbly conceive, vindicated your Worships from that pitiful
scandalous Libel of John Ly-on, who in his Title page says [Written in behalf
of the Common-wealth] when as it is clear, that Paper does cast a very great
aspersion upon the Commissioners of the Commonwealth for Excise, as if they
had betrayed their trust in Gaugeing by all 3 Gallons, when as he says, The
Exchequer Gallon is the Standard Gallon for all Liquids and dry things: So
that in effect he does charge your Worships of cheating the people of this
Nation, by Gauging most Liquid things; as, Wine, Oil, Soap, Strong Water,
etc. by the Wine-gallon, containing 231 Cubical Inches, when as he says, they
ought to be Gauged by the Exchequer Standard Gallon, containing 272. He
charge likewise the Master and Wardens of the Company of Coopers, and their
sworn Gaugers and Sealers, of Knavery and perjury, for m^king, sizing, and
sealing Barrels that hold some 38, some 39 of his Standard Gallon. He charge
also the Master and Wardens, and Company of Brewers of Selffishness and
dishonesty, for selling 38 Gallons of the Exchequer, whereas he says, they
ought to sell but 36 of those Gallons to the Barrel.

Thus John Ly-on, as bold as a Lion, has scandalized 3 Worshipful Orders and
Societies of men, in his most absurd Libell; which can be no less then Crimen
lesae Majestatis, and therefore ought to be punished as a Libeller; and to have
his impudent forehead Branded with the Letter L, whereby he may be known to be
a Libeller, as well as a beast of Prey John Lion.

Pudent haec opprobria vobis, dici potuisse and non potuisse re^elli.
FINIS.

