A DISCOVERY OF THE TRUE Standard-Gallon OF ENGLAND; What it is, when, and by
whom made, and where it is to be found.

By which the Assizes of Wine, Ale, and Corn, are to be justly known according
to the proportions they bear to this Standard-Gallon.

The which Assizes are mentioned in the Treatise called Composito Mensurarum,
and in all other Old Books of Assizes.

This Standard being not known to the Commissioners and Farmers of the Excise
of Beer, and Ale, in London, etc. As appears by their Non-observances of the
Assizes of Beer and Ale, gives a just occasion of the Brewers fifth Complaint.

Linea recta est tam mensura suae quam obliquae. LONDON, Printed in the year,
1658.

Crown surmounting French fleur-de-lis with Tudor rose and Scottish thistle on
either side
The true Assize of Beer and Ale; asserted, maintained, and proved by the
Statutes, Old Assize-books, and general practice of Artists.
It is the just Complaint of the Brewers, that the Gagers of the Commissioners
of Excise, etc. do not observe the Assizes of Beer and Ale according as they
are commanded to do by the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
made September the 11. 1643. Article XXIII

That they do not Gage the Brewers by the right Standard-Gallon, appears by
these Statutes following; First, the Ordinance, for Measures made in Incertis
temporibus, and Printed among the Statutes in XVIII. Edw. 2. by the consent of
the whole Realm of England the Measure of our Sovereign Lord the King was made:
viz. An English Penny, called a Sterling, round and without clipping, shall
weigh 32 Wheat-corns, in the midst of the Ear, and XXd shall make an Ounce, and
12 Ounces one pound, and 8l shall make a Gallon of Wine, and 8 Gallons of Wine
shall make a bushel London, which is the eighth part of a Quarter.

Note.
That by the Old Law these are the Weights and Measures of the Realm.

The 12 Hen. 7. Cap. 5o these Weights and Measures in the O^dinance abovesaid
are enacted to be Standards in haec verba; Wherefore the King our Sovereign
Lord, by the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Ordeineth, Establishes,
and Enacteth, Which old Law is the Ordinance above.
That the Measure of the Bushel shall contain 8 Gallons of Wheat, and that every
Gallon shall contein 8 pound of wheat of Troy-weight, and every pound shall
contein 12 Ounces of Troy weight, and every Ounce shall contein 20 Sterlings,
and every Sterling shall be of the weight of 32 Corns of Wheat that grow in the
midst of the Ear, according to the Old Law of the Land: Note this is the
Standard of England.
And that it pleased the King's Highness to make a Standard of a Bushel, and a
Gallon after the said Assize, to remain in his Highness Treasury for ever.

Wine-Gallon.
This Gallon conteins 231 Cubical Inches, which is the Wine-Gallon.

About 40 years after, by the Statute of the 23. of Hen. 8. cap. 4. it was
Enacted, That every Barrel for Beer shall contein 36 Gallons, every Kilderkin
18 Gallons, every Firkin 9 Gallons of the Kings Standard Gallon.

Note this is the same Standard Gallon, made the 12 of Hen. 7. cap. 5 ^here
being no ^ther Standard Gallon ^t that time.
And that every Barrel for Ale shall contein 32 Gallons, every Kilderkin 16
Gallons, etc. of the King's Standard-Gallon: So that they shall be of good and
just Measure, or else above, and not under.

The same Act of 23 of Hen. 8. farther provideth, and explaineth what is meant
by these words; 36 Standard Gallons, or above (toward the end of the 4. cap.
of that Act); It is Enacted, that every Cooper which shall hereafter make any
the Vessels specified in the said Act, shall from the Feast of Pentecost next
coming make every such Vessel according to the Assize specified in the Treatise
called, Composito Monsurarum: viz. ^ote this is the ^^me Standard ^allon
afore^^id.
Every Barrel for Ale contain 32 Gallons of the said Assize, or above; of which
8 Gallons make the Common Bushel to be used in this Realm: every Kilderkin 16
Gallons, etc.

So that it appears plainly, that the Wine-Gallon is the Standard-Gallon; the
which Gallon is to this day in the Exch^quer, the which was made in Henry the
7th his time; by which Gallon are the Coopers Barrels to be made, as appears
by the Statute of 23. Hen. 8 cap. 4o, But yet with a respect to the Assize
specified the Treatise called, Composito Monsurarum; The which Treatise is now
not to be found (Tempus edaxrerum has swallowed it up) but the Assize is still
kept up by Tradition of the Coopers in their Scantlings for their Barrels,
Kilderkins, and Firkins, their scantlings for Beer and Ale, being nothing but
the addition of a fifth to Wine-measure, which is called Ale-measure, and by
some Winchester Measure; but why called Winchester Measure, is not yet well
known.

Mr. Newton in his book grants that the Wine-Gallon does contein 231
Cubical-Inches.
Now all the Artists in London do agree, that the Wine-Gallon conteins 231
Cubicall-Inches, or thereabouts, to which if you add a fifth viz. 57 it makes
288 Cubicall-Inches: which is the Content of the Ale-Gallon. And these 288
Cubicall-Inches agrees punctually with the Coopers scantlings, and this
likewise agrees with the Ale quart, which is the quart part, or fourth part of
the Ale-Gallon.

The which Ale-quart is mentioned in 1o; Jacobi. Cap. 9o; where it is enacted,
that the Innkeeper, Ale-house-keeper- or Victualler, shall not sell less then
one full Ale-quart of the best Beer or Ale for a penny. The which Ale-quart is
a fifth more then the Wine-quart. This Ale-quart by the consent of all Artists;
does contein 72 3/16 which is the fourth part of 288 which is the Content of
the Ale-gallon by which the Victualler ought to receive his Ale and Beer by.
And this all the Books of Assize call the Ale-measure, and sometimes Winchester
Measure; And this Ale-quart or Ale-measure was made one fifth bigger then the
Wine, because of it is foulness in working, yest, and frothing, as M. Powell
speaks in his Book of Assize.

The Gallon by which Mr. Lion Gage^h the Brewers-Tunns is not the Wine-Gallon,
therefore not the Standard mentioned in the Act, therefore not the Standard of
England; for it holds as he himself affirms, 272 Cubicall-Inches, which is
bigger then the Standard-Gallon, and less then the Ale-Gallon by one
eighteenth part: This Gallon was made in the time of Queen Elisabeth, about 88,
as appears by the Superscription; It being never confirmed by any Act of
Parliament; or ever used for the Ale-Gallon, until Winstanley and Mr. Lion, two
Novices in the Art of Gag^ing, mistaking the Standard-Gallon, took that for the
Standard of England, which was made for no other end but to be a Measure by
which the Bushells to measure Water-Corn, should be made: For if that were the
Standard-Gallon, as Mr. Lion by a mistake so calls it; and the Commissioners
and Farmers in their answer do affirm and assert to be; then all Bushels and
Gallons of Towns Corporate, which do not agree with It, ought by the Act of the
12. of Hen. 7. Cap 9. to be broken so that then likewise the Wine-Gallon it
self must be broken, because it contains 41 Cubicall-Inches less then the
Corn-Gallon, which Mr. Lion calls the Standard-Gallon. The mistake of which
Corn-Gallon for the Standard-Gallon occasioned learned Mr. Oughtred to affirm
the Ale-Gallon to contein but 272 Cubicall-Inches; And that contrary to the
opinion of Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Gunter, Mr. Reynolds, and all the ancient and late
Artists and Mathematicians of England; for as Accurate Mr. Henry Philips in his
late Treatise of Gageing of Vessels observes that there are in use 3 sorts of
Measures; the Measure for Wine being 231 Inches, the Measure of dry things as
Corn, etc. being about 272 Inches, and the Measure for Beer and Ale being 288
Inches, the Proportion between these 3 Gallons he observes to be 28. 33. 35.
And so concludes the Proportion between the Wine and Ale-Gallon to be exactly
as 4 to 5. The which he proves by the London Coopers Scantlings for a
Beer-Barrell after this manner. The Diameter at the head 19 Inches 9 parts The
Diameter at the Bung 23 Inches 0 parts The Length is 27 Inches 4 parts

Which being cast up yeildes -- 36 Gallons and 140 parts over, according to 288
-- So that the Beer-Barrell agrees exactly with the Rule of Proportion
aforesaid between the Wine-Gallon and the Ale-Gallon, which is as 4 to 5. The
said M. Philips concluding that the Rule of Proportion of 4 to 5 agrees very
well with the Coopers and Brewers, who are most concerned herein, and would not
willingly lose so much over-measure as Mr. Oughtred and Mr. Lions Rules
intimate, but would rather if they had any truth in them, be ready to follow
them for their own advantage, for thereby the Cooper would save his Timber, and
the Brewer his over-measure.

Qui non est hodie, Cras magis aptus erit.

