THE COPY OF A LETTER Written by a Friend, to the Lord of BLAIKWOOD, and his
Answer, With the COPY of My LORD ANGUS'S LETTER, From UTRECHT, 21/11 January
1692. To My LORD MARQUESS OF DOUGLAS HIS FATHER, Edinburgh, 16th: August 1692.
SIR,
MY Lord ANGVS's Death is generally Regrated by all, which occasions some that
are better acquaint with his Circumstances to Reflect a little more freely on
his going to this Campaign to serve under King William; And on that part you
are supposed to have had in it: For they say, that my Lord Marquess and his
Family were particularly obliedged by King Charles the Second, and King James
his Successor: For such was King Charles his Concern and care of that Noble
and Ancient Family, that in the year, 1682. He wrote to the Lord Chancellor,
and Theasurer of Scotland to know it is present condition, showing that in
regard of many signal services performed by that Family to his Royal
Predecessors, he would not only see to its standing, but to its continuance,
in a splendid and plentiful condition. And that in the mean time he would take
care of the breeding of the Marques's Son: For which effect in the Year, 1684.
There was realie granted to my Lord Angus a Pension of two hundred Pound
Sterling* And this pension King James in the Year, 1686. Was pleased to
continue, and also to order all the Arrears thereof to be paid, with two
hundred pound Sterling more, by way of advance: Which were certainly singular
marks of the Royal Bounty of these two Kings: And a very promising earnest of
far greater things, that my Lord Marquess might have expected from them. To
this it is also added, That my Lord Angus himself was not so forward to have
gone to this Campaign, but did rather incline, to prosecute his Travells; and
that he wrote to you to obtain his Father's leave: Which as the Event has
happened, had been indeed his wiser and better Course. However, these things do
a little burden both the Marquess and you: And some are pleased to express
themselves more freely, by declaring that they cannot comprehend what could
have moved the Marquess to be so forward in this Affair; seeing that
notwithstanding of the eminent Character of his Family, and that he himself was
amongst the first to advance King William's Interest in Scotland, and did both
venture his Son to the Army, and put himself, without regard to the low
condition of his Fortune, to a considerable expense for his Equippage: Yet it
is visible enough, that since the late Revolution to this day, the Marquess
has been acknowledged in nothing, and neither Place nor Pension conferred upon
him. It Is like the Marquess may be unwilling that this last part should be
noticed, as knowing, That King William, a Stranger, cannot be blamed for this
Omission: And that the distribution of Favors depends often as much upon the
Ministers, as upon the Prince. But seeing these things do furnish discourse, I
should be content to hear from you such a clear and satisfying Account, as
might enable me to do my Lord and you the service in this occasion, that you
may very justly expect from,

For the Lord of BLAIKWOOD.
SIR, Your humble Servant, M. T: S:


Edinburgh, 26th: August 1692. SIR
I Take it very kindly, that you do so far concern your self in this Affair,
touching my Lord Angus, his Loss, if he be lost, (which you may be sure we are
loath to believe) is indeed irrepairable, and never enough to be regrated: And
thence you and all Equitable Men, may very well conclude, That my Lord, his
Father, had never ventured him, if the thing could possibly have been evited:
But as he was the only Son, and hope of the Family, and had from his Fathers
extreme Care and Tenderness, received a suitable Education; So you see that his
Ripening years, with the concurrence of other things, did present to him this
occasion, which not only he himself, but all acquainted with the condition of
his Family judged very proper, to recommend him to the Kings Notice and Favor,
And to introduce him to those Advantages, which his Family stands so absolutely
in need of. The only demurr that stood in his Fathers way, was the hazard of
his Person; And that did weigh so much with him, and the principal Friends of
the Family; That tho my Lord Angus was exceedingly earnest to have made the
last Summers Campaigne; Yet his Father did restrain him: But as that Restraint
could not be made effectual without some insinuation of Hope for the ensuing
year, from those that were employed to deal with him: So both together wought
so powerfully upon his boiling Spirit, Aspyring so Vehemently to show himself
worthy of his Noble Progenitors, That at the Return of this Campaign, it was
utterly impossible to make him defer any longer. And I am persuaded, that had
the severest of his Friends known his Earnestness in this matter, as well as
his Father and I did, They would this day have been very far from adding to his
Fathers affliction, the least censure of his proceeding. I cannot tell you all
particulars, But here is one, I think may answer for all, Which is the coppie
of the Letter he wrote to his Father with his own hand, in January last, which
indeed broke his Father to a consent, and without which it is probable, he had
never been broke. This Letter I do therefore transmit to you, Not doubting, but
since it was so powerful upon a tender Father, and all that see it, to prevail
for their consent; it will now be satisfying, to answer all the murmuring that
may arise on so sad an Event. I could acquaint you with other Letters and
Passages, whereby you might be convinced, that his Desire, if not complied
with, had certainly broke out into some more desperate Resolution: But this
Letter alone was too persuasive to need any other support. It has pleased GOD,
in his high Sovereignty, to Dispose otherwise nor was hoped: But this only
requires our Submission. And I am persuaded, when all things shall be
considered, all Men will conclude, That my Lord Angus's Conduct in this whole
Affair, was so Rational in every Respect; That it remains only to be lamented,
That so fair Appearances should have been prevented by a Death, which, tho most
Honorable, could never be too late. And thus I leave you, to peruse his Letter
herein enclosed;

SIR, Your humble Servant, WILL: LAWRIE


Vtrecht, 21/11 January, 1692. MY LORD,
I Cannot express the Extreme Trouble and Grief it is to me, to be so long
without hearing from your Lordship, since it is now near four months, that
neither Mr. Cranstoun nor I, have had the honor of one Letter, tho we have
wrote several times both of us; So I Am assured our Letters must have been
miscarried, since the circumstances I am now under, are so difficult, and of so
great importance, both to me, and (if I dare say) to your Lordship also, and
the Family, I have the Honor to belong to; That if you had got my Letters, you
would not have been so long of letting me know your Commands: This made me take
the Resolution some days ago, to write to my Lord Drumlangrig, and the Master
of Stair, and to entreat that they together with the Duke of Queensberry,
Melvil, Tarbat, and Carmichael, being all at Court, would consider upon my
Case; And upon what might be the properest course for me to take; Give your
Lordship Advice of their Opinion in a Letter. My Lord, I know too well your
Lordships Goodness and Kindness to me, beyond most of Fathers, and much beyond
what ever I shall be able in my life to acknowledge, with that dutifulness that
becomes me; And therefore can protest to you, that I had no other, neither
Design nor Prospect in Writing to London, than simply this, That these Persons
being the nearest Relations of our Family, and these whom I have always
observed most concerned, both in your Lordship and in me: I was persuaded that
being all at Court, they would have a further view of things, and be more able
to Judge truly what would be fittest for me to do, then either they
themselves, or your Lordship could do, being only in Scotland, where they could
not so narrowly see the state of things. I know not whither they will be so
good as to do what I desired of them; But I Am sure, my Lord, That all that I
can ever expect or pretend to hereafter, my honor in the eyes of all the
World, and all that ought to be dear to a Gentleman, are most deeply concerned
in my Conduct at this time. I have been assured both by my Lord Drumlangrig,
and others, That if I had been in the Campaigne last year, when Leiutenant
General Douglas died, I had gotten the Regiment of Guards: And tho that's a Post
more honorable and lucrative, than any I can expect to get in many years to
come; Yet, my Lord, if you knew the censures past upon my absence. I Am
persuaded you would believe my missing of that preferment is not the greatest
loss I suffer by it. The Mr. of Stair particularly can inform your Lordship,
how much to my dishonor, all the General Officers of the Army, all the Court;
And I may say, all perhaps that knew me in the Army, spoke of my being here;
while others that were both younger, Men of Quality, and only Sons as well as
I, were there serving as Volunteers, tho they had not half the Obligation to do
it that lies upon me, considering my Regiment was there in actual service: And
how these Reflections went so far as to be spoken in the Kings Bed Chamber, and
even in his Majesty's own hearing, till the King had the goodness to take it
upon himself, and to tell the Company, That he had commanded me for this year
to follow my Studies. Tho this was a great goodness in the King to me. Yet my
Lord, I may say, it saved but little of my Honor, since even my Lord Portland,
the Kings own Favorite; Notwithstanding he both knew at the Hague, the King
had discharged me, and heard his Majesty own it again in the Campt; Yet after
that spoke seriously of it both to my Lord Drumlangrig, and Sir John Dalrimple,
and fell a laughing at their alleging the Kings Commands, as a thing either
procured expressly by my Friends from the King, or at best commanded by his
Majesty out of mere Bounty and Goodness; Because he observed my Relations
averse from my serving of him. And Portland told them further, that these sort
of Commands were not to be obeyed by a Young Man like me. And that however the
King had commanded me not to make the Campaign; Yet to be sure, He would not be
ill pleased to see me disobey him, and that I would find it would be my great
Interest as well as Honor to do it. Besides when the King spoke to the Master
of Staire last Spring, at the Hague, to discharge me from coming to the Fields,
he told him expressly, he would not hinder me the next Year; Which coming from
the King, any Man will interpret as a positive command, Lieutenant General
Douglas, tho but few Days in the Campt, was pleased both to his Nephew, and
Sir Robert Douglas in that time, to show a great concern in me, and spoke of my
absence in so strong Terms, that he told them it had been better for me to have
been there, tho I should have come barefoot, and without a whole Coat; And was
pleased to say, that the next year, he would come himself, and pull me from
Vtrecht to the Campt, tho he should be obliged to seek a Contribution from my
Friends that are Officers in the Army for my Subsistence there, since it was
the only way I had* both to make my own Fortune, and Contribute to the
establishing of the Family I belonged to. And Major General Talmash spoke of my
absence with great heat to my Lieutenant Colonel, And told him, I would ruin
my self and Family by it: Notwithstanding, he knew that the King had commanded
me to stay here.

When these People who are all my Friends have spoke of my being from the
Campaign, your Lordship may be pleased to consider, what other persons, both
Princes and General Officers of the Allies Army, to most of whom I have the
Honor to be known at the least, in a general acquaintance, will say of it; And
with what freedom they will pass their Censures on me. I Am not capable to make
those deep Reflections upon my own Interest that your Lordship and others of
your Relations, who are much wiser then I, can do; But it seems obvious to me,
that considering the low Circumstances of our Family, it will be impossible for
me ever to raise my self, or indeed to live as your Son ought to do, unless I
have the Kings Favor, and be able to obtain both His Majesty's Protection, and
some Pension or place, to help me, and relieve your Lordship of the burden of
maintaing me hereafter. And I find that the wisest of those about the Court,
think not only, that the making a Campaign will be the surest way to get some
part in his Majesty good Graces; But that unless I do it, I can never have the
Face to pretend hereafter at Court to any thing, nor any of my Friends the
confidence to solicit for me. And for my own part, if I can make but this
Compaign, as I hope it will remove the foul Censures that have past on my last
years absence, So if I do not make it, I do not see, that I can ever without
Shame and Confusion look any Man of Honor in the Face hereafter, either at
Home or Abroad; And I have reason to apprehend. I Will be looked upon by all Men
as a Coward, and one that is a dishonor to your Lordship, and to the Family:
And I believe, the only part that will be left fittest for me after it, will
be, that your Lordship should call me Home, and let me spend my Life as a
private Geutleman in the Country. I hope your Lordship will not condemn me for
it, if the sense of this touch me so near, since all that ought to be dear to a
Man upon Earth seems to be lying at the Stake with me in it: And when People
consider the Race I am come off, and the Illustrious things done by our
Predecessors; It will serve to heighten my shame and confusion, and increase
the Worlds contempt of me. Therefore I earnestly beg, my dearest Lord, by all
your Lordships goodness to me, and by all the kind Affection you have been
pleased to show to me all my life hitherto; That you would consider on this as
a thing concerns your own Honor, and the Honor of the Family of DOUGLAS, as
well as mine in particular; And that if it be possible in any way of the World,
you would let me wait upon the King this Summer, tho I should do it in never so
poor and mean a way.

I know your Lordships straits, and the difficulty you may have to live, much
less to furnish me money upon this Occasion; And I confess I do not see well
how it can be done, but if there were any possibility of it, I am persuaded it
will be laying out money the most profitable way that ever I can spend it, even
in point of interest; And that it will be a fair, if not certain way of giving
me Access to obtain things hereafter of the King: that may do much more then
make up what has been given out on this Occasion. And besides, I have heard
both my Lord Drumlangrig and the Mr. of Stair say, as well since the Campaigne,
as last Spring, while we were upon this subject, That if your Lordship
consented once freely to my making a Campaign, they were persuaded there might
be some sum of money got from the King, to help to put me in a Condition to do
it with; And I persuade my self, that both they two, and my Lord Carmichael,
would need but to be desired by your Lordship, to do something for me in it.
But the Season is now so far advanced, that I know not what to do, since its
very like the King himself will be in the Fields before eight or nine weeks at
the farthest; And however small an Equippage I have, there will be still many
things that will be of an absolute necessity for me, in case you allow me to
go, and which I will have but a very short time to prepare. I entreat
therefore, your Lordship will let me know your Commands so soon as possible,
for there is now no time to lose; And I Am sure you will be satisfied, that it
is necessary I be determined to one thing or another before the King comes over
here; since if I be not to make the Campaigne, I can neither appear at Court,
nor stay at this place, without the Kings knowing himself that I am here: If I
am to make the Campaigne, I believe it will not do ill, so soon as your
Lordship comes to a Resolution in it, if you should write to the Secretary and
Drumlangrig, to see if they can fall upon a way to obtain any thing from the
King, to help me to make an Equippage. I only long to hear from your Lordship,
I know you will command me nothing but what shall be the fittest for me to do;
so I trust to it, and shall strive above all things while I live, to Carry
always as becomes,

My LORD, Your Lordships most Dutifully Obedient, and most Affectionate Son,
Sic Subscribitur. ANGUS.



