DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT, In favors of the Undertakers of the Cloath-Manufactory at New-Milns.
Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of August, 1685.
FOrasmuch as there being an Address, with a Memorial given into the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council, by the Undertakers of the Cloath-Manufactory at
New-Milns; both which being Remitted to a Committee of their Number, to
Consider thereof, and Report: And this day the Report made by the said
Committee, being fully Considered, The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Do
for the said Manufactories Encouragement, Hereby give full Power and Warrant to
the Undertakers therein, or those to be entrusted by them, to seize on all
foraign Cloth, and Searges, Silk-Gloves and Stockings, Silk and Worsted
Stockings, which has been Imported into this Kingdom, contrary to Law, either
before or after the Date hereof, to be disposed of according to Law; And this
bu^ ^rejudice of Pursuit against Delinquents, for the three Months preceding,
and in time coming, as is prescribed by the Acts of Parliament and Council; and
do hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge all persons whatsomever, either by
Collusion, or otherwise to Import, or Trafficque within this Kingdom,
concerning the Conveying, Vending, or Selling any foraign Woolen-Cloath, and
others aforesaid within the same, under the Pains and Penalties made there
against; Declaring that if any of the Undertakers of the said Manufactory shall
be found guilty aforesaid, That they shall not only lose and amit their
Privilege of the said Manufacture, with all their Interest therein: but shall
be otherwise punished as aforesaid. And for the said Manufactories further
Encouragement, it is hereby Declared, That if they shall within three Months
Advertisement, sufficiently furnish His Majesty's Officers and Soldiers, with
Woolen-Cloath, of what Die or Color shall be ordered, and at such a rate as by
them shall be agreed upon (the Council being to determine the rate, in Case of
any discrepance betwixt them) all further Importing of English Cloth, for
furnishing, as said is, is hereby Discharged; And in case they fail, the
Council is to see them provided, as they shall think fit; This being but
prejudice of punishing the said Undertakers, if they fail herein, as shall be
Determined by the Council. And the said Lords Do hereby allow the said
Undertakers to pursue the Transgressors aforesaid, after the date hereof,
before any Judge Competent; and for defraying their Charge and Expenses of
Plea, allow them the benefit of the Acts of Parliament and Council, being the
half of the value of the Seizure; the other half being to come in to the King,
according as shall be determined by the Judges: And for the Manufactures
further Encouragement. The Lords do Declare, that they will be every manner of
way concurring and assisting to them, according to Law; And as a first proof of
their Encouragement, Do hereby Discharge the wearing of all Woolen-Cloath, and
Searge, Silk-Stockings and Gloves, Silk and Worsted Stockings, and Worsted
Stockings, except that which is Native, under the Pain and Penalty of five
hundred Merks Scots Money for each Transgression; the Transgressors being to be
punished as said is, and the Penalty to be applied to the said Manufacture, or
any other Informer, equally betwixt the King and Them, as shall be Determined
by the Judge; The person or persons challenged being alwise hereby obliged to
Declare upon Oath, from whom they had any of the said Prohibited Goods: And
further Allow the wearing of all Native Woolen-Cloath, Searge, and others
aforesaid, conform to the Power given to the Council, by the late Act of
Parliament, of the thirteenth day of May last bypast; And Ordain all former
Laws, and Acts of Parliament and Council, made in favors of Manufactures, for
Encouragement of Trade, and Prohibiting the Importing of foraign Goods, to be
put to full and vigorous Execution, by the persons respectively entrusted, to
that effect, as they will answer, under the Pains and Penalties therein
contained. It is always hereby Provided and Declared, That these Presents are
not to hinder, or Impede any person or persons, to wear out the Clothes, and
others aforesaid, already made by them, or the wearing out of made Clothes,
brought into this Kingdom, and worn by them, where the persons have been a
considerable time abroad, without incurring the Certification aforesaid.
Requiring hereby all Magistrates, whether to Burgh or Land, to be concurring
and assisting to the said Undertakers in the Premises, as they will be
answerable. And to the effect all persons concerned may have notice hereof, and
know their hazard, if they fail in any part of the Premises, The said Lords
Ordains the Macers of Council, to pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and
make publication hereof, that none pretend Ignorance.

Extracted by me. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.

This may be Reprinted, R. L. S. September the 4th. 1685. by E. Mallet in
Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge.


