THE LAWS AND ACTS OF THE SECOND PARLIAMENT, Of our most High and Dread
SOVEREIGN, CHARLES THE SECOND, By the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith

Begun at Edinburgh, the 19. of October, 1669.

By a Noble Earl, John Earl of Lauderdail, Viscount Maitland, Lord Thirlestane,
and Bolton, etc. His Majesty's Commissioner for holding the same, by virtue of
a COMMISSION under His Majesty's Great Seal of this Kingdom:

With the special Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament.

Extracted from the Records of Parliament, be Sir ARCHIBALD PRIMEROSE of
Chester, Knight and Barronet, Clerk to His Majesty's Council, Registers and
Rolls.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings
Most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1679.

CVM PRIVELEGIO.

CR

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LAWS and ACTS made in the second PARLIAMENT our our most High and Dread
Sovereign, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
I. ACT asserting His Majesty's Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical.
November 16. 1669.
THe Estates of Parliament having seriously considered, how necessar it is, for
the good and Peace of the Church and State, That His Majesty's Power and
Authority, in relation to Matters and Persons Ecclesiastical, be more clearly
asserted by an Act of Parliament; Have therefore thought fit it be Enacted,
Asserted and Declared, Likeas, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of His
Estates of Parliament, do hereby Enact, Assert and Declare, That His Majesty
has the Supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical within this His Kingdom; and that by virtue thereof, the
Ordering and Disposal of the External Government and Policy of the Church does
properly belong to His Majesty and His Successors, as an inherent Right to the
Crown: And that His Majesty and His Successors may Settle, Enact and Emit such
Constitutions, Acts, and Orders, concerning the Administration of the External
Government of the Church, and the Persons employed in the same, and concerning
all Ecclesiastical Meetings, and Matters to be proposed and determined therein,
as they in their Royal Wisdom shall think fit. Which Acts, Orders and
Constitutions, being recorded in the Books of Council and duly published, are
to be observed and obeyed by all His Majesty's Subjects, any Law, Act or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding. Likeas, His Majesty with Advice and Consent
foresaid, does Rescind and Annull all Laws, Acts and Clauses thereof, and all
Customs and Constitutions, Civil or Ecclesiastic, which are contrary to, or
inconsistent with His Majesty's Supremacy as it is hereby asserted, And declars
the same void and null in all time coming.

II. ACT concerning the Militia.
November 16. 1669.
FOrasmuch as by diverse ancient Laws an Acts of Parliament, made in the Reigns
of His Majesty's Royal Ancestors, it is Statute and Ordained, That
Weapon-showings be holden in ilke Shire several times in the year, at which the
Lieges are appointed to be harnished and armed, according to their qualities
and degrees; as at length is specified in these Acts. And it being declared by
the fifth Act of the first Session of His Majesty's late Parliament, That it is
His Majesty's Prerogative-Royal and undoubted Right, to have the power of
raising in Arms the Subjects of this Kingdom, and of the commanding, ordering
and disbanding, or otherwise disposing thereof as He shall think fit. As also,
the Estates of Parliament of this Kingdom, in recognisance of His Majesty's
Royal Prerogative foresaid, and in a further acknowledgement of their duty,
Having, by the twenty fifth Act of the last Session of the foresaid Parliament,
made offer to His Majesty of twenty thousand Footmen and two thousand Horsemen,
sufficiently armed and furnished with forty days provision, to be raised from
the several Shires of the Kingdom, according to the proportion expressed in that
Act, to be in readiness as they shall be called for by His Majesty, to march to
any part of His Dominions of Scotland, England or Ireland, for any service
wherein His Majesty's Honor, Authority or Greatness may be concerned. And His
Majesty, finding it expedient that the foresaid number of Foot and Horse should
be modelled and trained in military discipline, to the effect they might be in
greater readiness and fitness for His Majesty's Service when they should be
called for, Having, by advice of His Privy Council, constituted and settled a
Militia of Horse and Foot in many Shires of the Kingdom, according to the
proportions mentioned in the foresaid Act; and in some other Shires a Militia
of Horse only; having thought fit in this exigent, for important reasons, to
change their Foot into a proportion of Horse, suitable to the charge of their
proportion of Foot: And having nominated and appointed the Colonels and
Lieutenant-Collonels of Foot, and Captains of Horse; And the Lords of Prvy
Council having, by His Majesty's Order and Warrant, appointed Commissioners of
the Militia in the several Shires, ordered the election of the inferiors
Officers, appointed particular days of Rendezvous, the way of listing of
Foot-souldiers, ordered fit allowances to be given to the Foot and Horsemen
every day of the Rendezvous; That Colors, Standarts, Drums and Trumpets be
provided at the charge of the Shire; and having given several other Orders and
Instructions concerning the ordering and disposing of the Militia, The Estates
of Parliament do in all duty acknowledge His Majesty's singular Wisdom and
tender Care of this His ancient Kingdom, in constituting and settling the
foresaid Militia. Likeas, His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates
of Parliament, does Ratify and Approve the constitution and model of the
Militia, as the same is established by His Majesty, with advice of His Privy
Council: And particularly, their appointing days for Rendezvous, ordering fit
allowances to be given to the Foot and Horsemen the said days of their
Rendezvous; And all Acts, Commissions, Orders and Instructiones past and
emitted by the Council concerning the Militia, and their whole proceedings
relating thereto. And Statutes and Ordaines, that in all time coming there be
allowed to each Footman six shillings Scots, and to each Horseman eighteen
shillings Scots, every day of the Rendezvous, to be paid be the Heretors; And
that the said six shillings to be paid to the Footmen, be refounded to the
Heretors by the men-tennents and servants for whom the Footmen are put out, and
who are not listed in the Militia. And also Statutes and Ordaines, that the
Rendezvous be punctually kept, that Horse and Foot be duly outreiked and
sufficiently armed, that Fractions with their proportions of the price of the
Colors, Drums, Standarts, and Trumpets be timeously paid Likeas, His Majesty
with advice foresaid, does give power and warrant to the Commissioners of the
Militia in the respective Shires, to fine parties for the Soldiers absence
from the Rendeizvous, not exceeding six pounds Scots for the Horsemen, and two
pounds Scots for the Footman absent ilk day of the Rendezvous; And likewise,
such as shall be deficient in the outreik of Horse or Foot, or in payment of
the fractions thereof, or of the proportions of Colors, Drums, Standart, and
Trumpets, or of the pay allowed by this present Act to the Horsemen or Footmen,
the men-tennents and servants for whom the Footmen are put out, being always
liable to relieve the respective Heretors of the payment of the fines
aforesaid, inso far as concerns the deficiency in outreik of Foot, or payment
of the fractions thereof, or absents of the Footmen from the days of
Rendezvous. And to the effect, more ready obedienuc may be given to this
present Act and Ordinance, His Majesty, with advice foresaid (without
derogation from any power already given by the Instructions or Acts of Council)
does authorize and empower the Commissioners of the Militia in the respective
Shires, or any three of them (two of the quorum not being Officers) alter trial
taken that parties have been absent from the Rendezvous, or deficient in the
outreiks and payments foresaid; to give order and warrant to any one of the
Serjants of Foot of the respective Companies, or Corporals of Horse to be named
by the said Commissioners, to poind and distreinzie the ^a^^iest Goods and
Geer of these absent or d^ficient, wherever the some may be found, apprise and
make sale thereof toward the payment of the sums specified in the said
Warrant, and of the charges and expenses of the poinding and apprising; these
charges always not exceeding als much more as the sums for which the poinding
shall be used. Likeas, His Majesly, with advice foresaid, constitutes the said
person, to whom the foresaid Order shall be directed, Sheriff in that part;
with power to him, by virtue of that Order, to poind the Goods without
necessity of carrying the same to the Paroch church or Mercatcross of the head
Burgh of the Shire to be apprised; and to do and act in the excution of the
said Order, sicklike as a Mestenger at Arms may do by the Law, in execution of
Letters of poinding and apprising given under His Majesty's Signet: Providing
always, that the goods poinded be valued and appr^s^d by two honest sworn men,
whose oaths the said Sh^riff in that part is authorized to take to that
effect; And declares, That it shall be leisome to the party from whom the Goods
shall be poinded, to redeem the same within six days after the poinding, by
payment of the sums, for which the poinding shall be used, expenses of the
poinding foresaid, and twelve shillings scots each day during the not
redemption. And in case the party do not redeem the goods poinped within the
space foresaid, declares that it shall be lawful to the said Sheriff in that
part to retain the goods or sell the same, with deduction of the third of the
sum to which they were apprised, He always being countable for the price
thereof to the Commissioners of the Militia, who are to see the party, from
whom the Goods were poinded, satisfied of the superplus of the price if any be
of the Goods for which the poinding was used, expenses foresaid of the
poinding, third part of the value to which the Goods were apprised, with twelve
shilling Scots ilk day during the space that the party had power to redeem,
being always deduced, and declares the said Warrant, being signed by three of
the said Commissioners (one of them only being an officer) to have the force
and strength of an Decree; and that there is no necessity of any Precept or
Charge to follow thereon: And that the poinding and apprising so used, by
virtue of the said Warrant, is and shall be als lawful and valid, as if all
the solemnities requisite and usual in poindings were observed; whereanent His
Majesty, with advice foresaid, does dispense in this case of the Militia. And
it is declared, that these who are not sufficiently armed or mounted at the
Rendezvous, shall be holden as absent therefrom, and shall be fined and poinded
accordingly in manner foresaid. And for preveening debates that may arise the
time of mustering, it is Declared, that Lieutenants and Cornets of Horse shall
be reckoned of the number of Horsemen, appointed to be put out in the
respective Shires: But prejudice always to any of the said Officers, to claim
and suit payment of Fractions, if they be Leaders of Horse. As also, His
Majesty, with advice foresaid, does authorize and empower the Lords of His
Privy Council from time to time, to appoint days of Rendezvous, and to give
such further orders as shall be requisite for the full establishmen of the
Militia in every particular thereof; and to call for an account from the
several Shires of their procecure and diligence in settling the same. And
commands and requires all His Majesty's Subjects of whatsoever degree or
quality, to give due and ready obedience to all such orders and directions as
they shall receive from His Majsties Privy Council, relating to the Militia,
under the pains and certification contained in any Acts made, or to be made by
them thereanent.

III. ACT for registration of Instruments of Resignation ad remanentiam.
November 16. 1669.
OUR Saveraign Lord, with the advice of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and
Ordains, That all Instruments of Resignation that shall be made in the
Superior hands, ad remanentiam, (forty days after the publication hereof) be
registrate within threescore days after the date thereof, in the same manner
and way and at the same rates as Renunciations, Seisings or Reversions: To the
effect, the Lieges may the better know, that the Infeftment which was granted
to the Resigners is thereby void and extinct, and that they may be put in mala
fide to contract with the Resigner thereanent, or to comprise the same from
him, otherwise the said Resignation to be null. It is always hereby Declared,
That the Instruments of Resignation of Tenements, Lands and Fishings holden in
free Burgage, being registrate in the Town Court Books of the Burgh, shall not
fall within the certification of this present Act.

IV. ACT concerning poinding before the days of the Charge expire.
November 16. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, that hereafter it shall not be lawful to poind movables
upon registrate Bonds, or Decreets for personal Debts, while the parties be
first Charged, and the days of the Charge be expired: With certification, that
poinding otherwise used shall be null, and the poinders shall be punished and
proceeded against as spuiliers; But prejudice always of any Decreets recovered
at the instance of Heretors against their Tennents in their own Courts;
whereupon it shall be lawful to them to use poinding as formerly; And but
prejudice to Superiors to use poinding against their Vassals for their
Few-duties, as they might lawfully have done of before.

V. ACT for the security of the Persons of Ministers.
November 30. 1669.
FOrasmuch as the Kings Majesty, considering how just and necessar it was, that
the Orthodox Clergy should be protected from the violence of disaffected and
disloyal persons; Did therefore, with advice of His Privy Council, by His Royal
Proclamations of the fifteenth of March and thirteenth of June, one thousand
six hundred and sixty seven, command and charge all Heretors, Liferenters and
others, having any real Interest or Rent within the several Paroches of the
Kingdom, to protect, defend and secure the Persons, Families and Goods of their
Ministers, not only in the exercise of the Ministerial Function, but in their
dwelling Houses; or being elsewhere within the Paroch, from all injuries,
affronts and prejudices which they might incur in their Persons or Goods, from
the violence and invasion of any disaffected, disloyal or other wicked person:
With certification, if the actors of such outrages should not be apprehended
and brought to trial, by the means and diligence of the Parochioners, the
Parochioners should be decerned to pay to suffering Ministers for reparation,
damage and interest, such a sum and fine as His Majesty's Council should
determine; as is more fully expressed in the said Proclamations. And the Estates
of Parliament, having taken to their consideration the proceedings of His
Majesty's Council herein; and finding that the protection of the Orthodox
Clergy, and the restraining of the insolency of disaffected, disloyal and
wicked persons at this time, did require more nor ordinary means and care from
His Majesty's Council; Have therefore thought fit, Likeas, His Majesty, with
advice and consent of His Estates, does hereby Ratify and Approve the two
Proclamations aforesaid, and the proceedings of His Majesty's Council in
prosecution thereof; and authorizeth them still to prosecute the same as
occasion shall offer, until His Majesty in His next Parliament give farther
Orders therein. And it is Declared, that this Act is and shall be but prejudice
of any former Laws and Acts of Parliament made against the invaders of
Ministers, and of the pains therein contained; And particularly the twenty
seventh Act of the eleventh Parliament of King James the sixth, and seventh Act
of King Charles the first His Parliament in Anno, 1633. Which Acts His Majesty,
with advice foresaid, does hereby Ratify and Approve,, and Declares the same
to stand in full force, strength and effect in time coming.

VI. ACT. for the ordering of Suspensions of the Benefices and Stipends of the
Clergy.
November 30. 1669.
THe Kings Majesty being careful that the maintenance of the Clergy be duly
secured unto them, and that they be not withdrawn by unnecessar Law-sutes for
recovery thereof; Does therefore, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, Statute and Ordain That no Supension shall be past in time coming
against any Archbishop, Bishop, Minister of the Gospel or Universities and
Colleges, of any Charges to be given at their instances for payment of the
Rents of their Benefices, Stipends or Colledge-rents, where they have special
Decreets against the Heretors or possessors due and liable in payment thereof
to them, except upon production of Discharges or consignation of the sums
charged for, if the Rent of the Benefice or Stipend consist in money; or of one
hundred merks Scots for ilk Chalder of Victual where the same consists in
Victual, and proportionally if the Victual charged for be less then a Chalder,
without prejudice to the Lords of Session to modifie a greater or less sum for
the Chalder of Victual, as they shall find cause at the discussing of the
Suspension. And if any Bill of Suspension of a general Charge shall be presented
in time of Session, That the ordinary Lord upon the Bills, before the passing
thereof, call for the Chargers at the Bar, that they may instruct the ground of
the Charge: And in case it shall be found by the Lords of the Session, at the
discussing of the Suspension, that either the Charge has been maliciously
given or maliciously suspended, That the Lords modifie a fifth part of the sum
charged for, of expenses of Plea to be paid by the malicious Charger or
Suspender.

VII. ACT for Naturalization of Strangers.
December 8. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord, out of His Innate Bounty and Royal Inclination to favor
and protect Strangers, and for the increase and promoving of Trade and
Manufactories, being garciously pleased and willing to give encouragement to
Strangers to repair to, and dwell and reside within this Kingdom; Has
therefore thought fit; Likeas, His Majesty's with advice and consent of His
Estates of Parliament, does hereby Statute, Ordain and Declare, That all
Strangers, being of the Protestant Religion, either such who having Estates
shall think fit to bring the same to this Kingdom, to dwell and inhabit within
the same; or who shall come to set up new Works and Manufactories therein, and
shall repair to, and settle their abode, dwelling and residence within this
Kingdom; shall be, and are hereby naturalized as native born Subjects of the
Kingdom of Scotland, and are to enjoy His Majesty's Royal Protection, the
benefit of the Law, and all other Privileges which a Native does enjoy, als
freely in all respects, as if they themselves had been born within the same;
and that they shall have liberty and freedom of Trade, and freedom to buy and
purchase Lands, Heretages, and other Goods moveable and immovable, and to
enjoy the same by succession, purchase or donation, or any other way; and to
dispose thereof and transmit them to their Heirs and Successors, who are to
succeed thereunto: And to enjoy all other Liberties, Privileges and Capacities
which do belong to, and are competent, or may and shall belong to any native
Subject born within this Kingdom. And further, His Majesty does Declare, that
upon applications to be made unto Him by these Strangers, He will grant unto
them the free and public exercise of their Religion in their own Languages,
and the liberty of having Churches within this His Kingdom. It is always
hereby provided, that no person or persons shall have the benefit of this act,
until first by Petition to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, containing
an exact designation of their names, places of their birth and former
residence, and that they are of the Protestant Religion, it be found by the
Council, that they are qualified according to this Act, and ought to have the
benefit thereof. And it is hereby Declared, that these presents, with an
Extract of the Act of Council, in favors of the said persons to the effect
aforesaid, shall be unto them a sufficient Naturalization to all intents and
purposes. Which Extract shall be given to them freely, without payment of any
money or composition; save only the Fee of nine pounds Scots money to the
Clerks of Council and their Servants.

VIII. ACT concerning the Bullion.
December 8. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord considering, that by diverse former Acts of Parliament made
by the Kings Majesty and His Royal Ancestors, and specially by the thirty
seventh Act of the first Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, it is
Statute and Ordained, that all and whatsover Commodities yearly exported forth
of this Kingdom, should be liable to the payment of Bullion, twelve denier
fine, according to the quantities contained in the Alphabet of Bullion thereto
adjoined, and that for the yearly support of a stock of Coinage within the
Kingdom, and for supplying of His Majesty's Mint, being a part of His
Prerogative Royal. And His Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, being still
willing to support and encourage the same, and to provide for all necessary
ways and remedies for increasing the stock of Coinage within the Kingdom, and
especially those that may be of most advantage, and may most encourage the
Manufactories and the natural growth and native Commodities of the Kingdom; And
finding, that the removing of the Bullion from the whole native Commodities and
others exported forth of this Kingdom, and that the imposing of the said
Bullion upon the Commodities imported, or some considerable part thereof, may
very much contribute thereto; And being resolved, that His Majesty's Mint
should be hereby encouraged, and that no hurt or derogation should thereto
occur by this change. Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and consent of His
Estates of Parliament, Declares, That all and whatsover native Commodities of
this Kingdom, and others that shall be exported forth thereof, contained in the
foresaid Alphabet of Bullion, after the second day of February next to come,
one thousand six hundred and seventy years, shall be free, and are hereby
discharged of the payment of all quantities of Bullion therein contained: And
the Customers and their Deputies are hereby prohibited and discharged to take
surety or pledges, or to use any other exaction upon the Merchants therefore,
under all highest pain. And His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Rescinds and
Annulls any Causes contained in the foresaid thirty seventh Act of the first
Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, or in any other Acts of Parliament,
in so far allanerly as the same imposes Bullion upon the native Commodities of
this Kingdom, and others to be exported forth thereof, and no further: And in
lieu and place thereof, Statutes and Ordains, That the imported Goods and
Commodities underwritten be liable in payment of theseveral quantities of
Bullion aftermentioned, viz. Spanish, Rhenish and Brandy-wines of all sorts,
each Tun twenty four ounces, twelve denier fine; Frenchwines of all sorts,
every Tun twelve ounces; Loaf-suggar the hundred weight, six ounces;
Playing-cards, one ounce the gross; Paper for Printing and Writing of all
sorts, one ounce every six rimms; Gray-paper, every twelve rimms one ounce;
Deals every thousand five ounces; Single-trees, every thousand five ounces;
Double-trees, every thousand ten ounces; Double-double-trees, and all other
greater Fir-timber, every thousand twenty ounces; Steel, every hundred weight
one ounce; Iron and Iron-work beaten of all sorts, every Tun two ounces; Onions
and Aples, every two Barrals one ounce; Mum-beer, every Barral four ounces;
Prunes, every Tun four ounces; Raisins, Currants and Figs, every Tun ten
ounces; Iron-pots of all sorts, every dozen one ounce; Soap, every Barrel two
ounces, Suggar-candy, every hundred weight ten ounces; Copper-kettles,
Brass-pans, and all other made work in Brass or Copper, Yetline or beaten,
every hundred weight four ounces; Mader, every thousand weight five ounces;
Hats of all sorts, every three dozen two ounces; Window-glass of all sorts,
every Chest one ounce; Limons and Oranges, each thousand one ounce; Hops of all
sorts, every hundred weight one ounce; Spanish-leather, Marikin,
Tanned-leather, Wild-leather, and all other sorts of leather, except
Muscovia-leather, every hundred weight one ounce; Gloves of all sorts, each
dozen one ounce, Whale-bane or Baline, ilk two hundred weight one ounce. And
Statutes and Ordains, that the Merchant or other importers of the abovewritten
Commodities or any of them, make ready payment of the foresaids quantities of
Bullion hereby imposed, to the Officers of His Majesty's Mint for the time,
being of the fineness of twelve Deniers, and being baser to be considered by
weight and reckoning, and that immediately upon the entry of the said Goods;
And in case the said importer shall fail to pay in the said Bullion at his
entry, he shall be holden and astricted, to make payment of the sum of twelve
Shillings Scots for ilk ounce thereof to the Collectors, at the Port or
Precinct where he enters the said Goods; and which money so paid by him at
his entry, shall be redeemable from the said Collectors, upon the payment of
the foresaids quantities of Bullion in to the Officers of His Majesty's Mint:
Provided always, such payment of Bullion be made within forty days, after
the date of the entry of the Goods, and not thereafter. And it is hereby
Declared, That it shall not be lawful to the said Tacks-men, Collectors or
their Deputies, to permit the said importers to break Bulk, or to give them
Transire's or other warrant thereanent, till first the said Importers report
or produce the Mint-masters receipt of the due quantity or Bullion paid in
specie, or else, that the Tacks-men Collectors or their Deputies, receive
payment of twelve Shillings Scots for ilk ounce of Bullion not delivered in to
the Mint; and for ilk ounce of Bullion of twelve Denier fine, sopayed in to the
Mint in specie by the Importer, he is to have delivered back to him in His
Majesty's Coin three pounds ten pennies Scots, and for ilk ounce of eleven
Deniers fine, he is to have delivered back to him fifty five shillings nine
pennies Scots, and so proportionably conform to the fineness of the Bullion
given in, and that in satisfaction of all Dues whatsover that can be acclaimed
by the Officers of the Mint, for His Majesty or otherwise. And whereas, by the
former Acts of Parliament made anent Bullion, the general Tacks-men and
Collectors of the Customs and their Deputies, were bound and obliged to take
sicker Surety or Pledges, such as they would be answerable for, for the Bullion
to be brought in and which then lay upon export, and that what rested not
delivered to the Mint, the said Tacks-men, Collectors and their Deputies, were
to be answerable therefore; And that by the constant practice of His Majesty's
Exchequer, the said Tacks-men and Collectors, by their Tacks and Commissions
given to them, and Obligations granted by them, are bound to make count,
reckoning and payment of the whole Bullion then arising upon the export of this
Kingdom, And lest His Majesty or his said Mint should sustain any hurt or
prejudice, or be at any uncertainty by loosing of those bonds, or by this
change; Therefore it is hereby Statute and Ordained that all general Tacks-men
of His Majesty's Customs of this Kingdom, general Collectors of the same and
their Deputies present and to come, shall be, and are hereby bound and
obliged, virtute Officii, and by the acceptance of their Tack or Office, to
make count, reckoning and payment to the Officers of His Majesty's Mint, of all
and whatsoever quantities of Bullion that shall yearly arise upon the imported
Commodities aforementioned, and which shall be delivered by the Merchant in
specie; and also to make payment of all such sums of Money, as shall be paid
by the Merchant to them, in place of Bullion, at the aforesaid rate of twelve
shillings per ounce, to the General and Master of the Mint for the time being,
and that quarterly; beginning the first quarters payment at the term of
Whitsonday next, one thousand fix hundred and seventy and so-forth yearly and
quarterly thereafter. And whereas, the said Tacks-men, Collectors or their
Deputies, were formerly holden and astricted to give in exact accounts of the
whole Commodities exported yearly forth of this Kingdom upon Oath, whereby the
full charge of the Bullion was yearly known; And to the effect, that the full
charge of the bullion now imposed upon the foresids Commodities imported, may
be als fully known: It is hereby Statute and Ordained, That the said Tacksmen
Collectors or their Deputies at all the Ports or Precincts within this Kingdom,
shall givein yearly in Exchequer the exact account of the several quantities of
the Commodities, whereupon Bullion is hereby imposed, and that upon Oath, at
the feast and term of Martimas yearly: As also, to exhibit and produce the
subscribed Entries by the Merchants of the foresaids Goods imported; and for
that effect, that Letters of Horning be directed against the said general
Collectors, Tacksmen and their Deputies, by the Lords of His Majesty's
Exchequer, upon a charge of six days: And it is hereby declared, That the
said Tacks-men, Collectors or their Deputies shall be holden and astricted to
deliver to the importer, Certificates of the forsaid Bullion in specie, or of
the Money paid therefore at the rate foresaid, gratis. And whereas by the
meaning of this Act, it is left in the option of the importer, either to pay
Bullion in specie or to pay money for the same, at the rate oftwelve Shillings
per ounce, and that the Money so paid is to be delivered to the General and
Master of the Mint, by the said Tacks-men Collectors and their Deputies, and
thereby the said General and Master are obliged to import the stock of Bullion
themselves: Therefore it is hereby Statute and Ordained, that the said
Officers shall be obliged to Coin the said Bullion so imported by them, and to
make the same pass His Majesty's Irons, and that the said Officers be
controled by their Letters of receipt of the said sums of Money granted by
them, to the said Tacks-men, Collectors and their Deputies. And it is hereby
Declared, That the foresaids whole Commodities imported after the foresaid day,
shall be liable to the several proportions of Bullion above specified,
notwithstanding of any Act or Acts of Parliament formerly made, or to be made
in this present Parliament, in favors of any Manufactories, Companies of
Fishing or Trade, or other Acts whatsoever, which are hereby Declared not to
impede the payment of Bullion imposed upon the imported Goods foresaids, in
manner abovementioned.

IX ACT concerning Prescriptions.
December 8. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That all Arrestments to be used hereafter upon Decreets,
registrate Bonds, Dispositions or Contracts, not pursued and insisted on within
five years after the laying on thereof, shall after that time prescrive, And
that all Arrestments already used upon the ground aforesaid, shall preserive
within five years after the date hereof. And that all Arrestments, used or to
be used upon dependence of Actions, shall likewayes prescrive within five years
after Sentence is obtained in the said Actions, if the said Arrestments be
not pursued or insisted on within that time, And likewayes, His Majesty, with
advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That Ministers Stipends and Multars not
pursued for within five years after the same are due, And likewayes Mails and
Duties of Tennents, not being pursued within five years after the Tennents
shall remove from the Lands for which the Mails and duties are craved, shall
preserive in all time coming: Except the said Ministers Stipends, Multars,
Mails and Duties shall be offered to be proven to be due and resting owing, by
the defenders their Oaths, or by a special writ under their hands
acknowledgeing what is resting owing; And that all Bargains concerning
movables or sums of money, probable by Witnesses, shall only be probable by
Writ or Oath of Party, if the same be not pursued for within five years after
the making of the Bargain. And further, His Majesty, withadvice and consent
foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That all Actions proceeding upon Warnings,
Spuilies, Ejections, Arrestments, or for Ministers Stipends and others
foresaid, shall prescrive within ten years, except the said Action be wakened
every five years: But prejudice always of any of the said Actions, which by
former Acts of Parliament are appointed to prescrive in a shorter time. And
also Statutes and Ordains, That Holograph missive Letters, and Holograph Bonds,
and Subscriptions in Compt-books without Witnesses, not being pursued for
within twenty years, shall prescrive in all time thereafter; Except the pursuer
offer to prove, by the defenders Oath, the verity of the said Holograph Bonds
and Letters, and Subscriptions in the Compt-books. It is always hereby
Declared, That Prescriptions shall not run in any of the Cases foresaid,
against Minors during the years of their Minority.

X. ACT concerning Interruptions.
December 8. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, that all Interruptions, as to the Rights of Lands be
citations, shall in all time hereafter be execute by Messengers at Arms, and
against the defenders personally or at their dwelling places, and at the Paroch
Churches in the time of Divine Service, or immediately after; And in case the
Parties be forth of the Kingdom, at the Mercatcross of Edinburgh, and Peer and
Shore of Lies, upon threescore days. And that all Citations that shall be
made use of for Interruptions, whether in real or personal Rights, be renewed
every seven years, otherwise to prescrive; Except the Parties be Minors: In
which case this Act is not to be extended against them, during the years of
their Minority.

XI. ACT concerning the forfeiture of persons in the late Rebellion.
December 15. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord and His Estates of Parliament, having considered the
Process of Treason, pursued and deduced at the instance of Sir John Nisbet of
Dirletoun, His Majesty's Advocat, by Warrant and Order of His Majesty's Privy
Council before the Justice, against the persons after mentioned, for their
treasonable rising in Arms, and being in, and having accession to, the late
Rebellion in the Western Shires, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred and sixty six; with the Libels, Interloquiturs, Probations, Depositions
of Witnesses, and the verdicts of Inquests and dooms of Forfeitures proceeding
their upon: Do find, that the Justice and their Assessors appointed by the
Council in the said Process, in finding the said Libels to be relevant, and
admitting the same to the knowledge of Inquests; and the foresaid Inquests in
finding the same to be verified and proven, and in giving their verdicts and
dooms of Forfeiture theirupon respective; Have proceeded justly and warrantably
upon relevant Libels, and clear evidences and probation; And therefore, do
Ratify and Approve their Proceedings, Interloquiturs, Verdicts and respective
Dooms and Sentences of Forfeiture given and pronounced by them in the said
Process, viz. The Sentence and Doom of Forfeiture pronounced against Colonel
James Wallace, Joseph Lermonth, (...) Mckclellan of Barscobe, Mr. John Welsh,
Mr. James Smith, Patrick Listoun in Calder, William Listoun his son, William
Porterfield of Quarreltoun pronounced upon the fifteenth day of August, in the
year of God, one thousand six hundred and sixty seven years; And the other
Sentence and Doom of Forfeiture pronounced against William Muir of Caldwell,
(...) Caldwell, eldest Son to the Good Man of Caldwell, Robert Ker of Kersland,
Mr. John Cunninghame of Bedland, Alexander Porterfield, Brother to Quarreltoun,
John Maxwel of Monreith younger, (...) Mckclellan of Belmagahan, Mr. Gabriel
Semple, Mr. John Crookshanks, Patrick Mcknaught in Cumnock, upon the sixteenth
day of August, in the said year of God, one thousand six hundred and sixty
seven years? And Decerns and Ordains the said Process and Dooms and Sentences
of Forfeiture foresaid, to be valid and effectual to all intents and purposes,
notwithstanding that the said persons found guilty and convicted of the crimes
foresaid, did not compear in the said Process; And Declares, that the said
Sentence and Dooms of Forfeiture shall be of als great force and strength, as
if the said persons had compeared, or the same had been pronounced in
Parliament. And His Majesty with consent foresaid, does Approve His said
Advocats service in the said affair. And in respect it were against reason and
justice, that when any person or persons are accused of high Treason, for
rising in Arms against His Majesty, or His Authority, when they are cited to
underly the Law before the Justice, if they do not appear, that their absence
and contumacy, which ought to be an aggravation, if any can be, of so high and
horrid a crime, should be of any advantage to them: Therefore, His Majesty,
with consent foresaid, does Statute and Ordain, that in time coming in all such
cases of treasonable rising in Arms, and open and manifest Rebellion against
His Majesty or His Successors and their Authority, His Majesty's Advocat for
the time, may and ought to insist against, and prosecute such persons as he
shall be ordered by His Majesty or His Privy Council to pursue: And if they be
cited and do not appear, the Justice notwithstanding of their absence, may and
ought to proceed to consider, and give their Interloquiturs upon the Libel; and
if it be sound relevant, to admit the same to the knowledge of an Assize, and
upon the verdict of the Inquest, finding the same to be proven, the Doom and
Sentence of Forfeiture ought to proceed, and be given and pronounced in the
same manner, as if the persons accused had compeared and were present. And His
Majesty, with consent foresaid, does remit to the Justice General,
Justice-Clerk or Justice-Deputes, the Summons and Process of Treason, intended
at the instance of His Majesty's Advocat, againist certain persons therein
mentioned, for their accession to the said Rebellion, and depending before His
Majesty and the Estates: With power to them to proceed, notwithstanding of the
absence of the said persons; And if the said Summones be found relevant and
proven by the verdict of Inquest, to pronounce the Sentence and Doom of
Forfeiture thereupon.

XII. ACT concerning the Excise and Customs.
December 15. 1669.
FOrasmuch as many debates, questions and inextricable difficulties do and may
arise, in levying and inbringing of the Excise, imposed by the fourteenth Act
of the first Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, to the great prejudice
of His Majesty, and of the Trade of this Kingdom: Therefore, and for preventing
and clearing of the same, and to the effect, the said Excise may be more
orderly and easily levied and collected, His Majesty, with advice and consent
of His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Orda^ns, That notwithstanding the
said Excise is due and payable by the Retailers, yet the Importers shall be
layable for the same in time coming, at the rates contained in the said Act,
for Wines of all sorts, Vinegar and Salt, as they are particularly expressed
therein, and that under the provisions after-specified: To wit, that what shall
not be paid by the Retailers, shall be completely made up by the Importers,
within twelve Months after the importation thereof, for which they are to give
sufficient security to the Farmers or Collectors of His Majesty's Excise, at
the entry of the said Wines, which are to be according as they shall be loaded
at the Port from whence they came; And for the said Importers, their greater
case and encouragement, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does Statute and
Ordain, that the Collectors or Farmers of His Majesty's Excise in all time
coming, shall grant abatement to the said Importers of the fourth part of the
said Excise duties of all Wines and Vinegar imported and entered by them, in
consideration and upon the account of leckage and decayed Wines, and other
hazards and inconveniences. And further, It is Statute and Ordained, for the
encouragement and greater ease and advantage of Trade and Merchants, that the
Importers of all other Goods and Commodities, except what is excepted from the
duties of Excise by the foresaid Act of Parliament, shall pay the Excise
thereof, according to the Books of Rates for His Majesty's Customs, and as the
said Commodities are and shall be valued and rated in the same; And if any of
the said Commodities be not contained in the Books of Rates, the Excise of the
same is declared to be five percent. according to the value of the said Goods;
And the Excise of the said Commodities is to be paid at the entering of the
same in the Excise-office, unless the said Excise-duty exceed the sum of one
hundred Marks Scots; in which case, the said Importers shall be obliedged to
give sufficient security for payment of the said Excise-duty, within six
Months after the entering of the same; they making it always evident, that no
Merchant shall make entry of any Goods, but what properly belongs to himself.
And for further encouragment of Trade and Traffic, It is Statute and Ordained,
that all Goods and Merchandise whatsoever imported, and which shall be
instructed to be really exported, within twelve Months after the entering
thereof, shall be free of Excise; and in case of payment thereof, the same shall
be repayed at the exportation of the said Commodities, the Importers always
making faith, that the Commodities exported, are the same which were imported
and entered; and in case bond of security has been given for the Excise of the
said Commodities, the same shall be returned unregistrat, or discharged if the
same be registrat. And for the regulating of the Excise of Salt, and the better
levying and inbringing of the same, His Majesty, with consent foresaid,
Statutes and Ordains, that the Importers of foreign Salt of all sorts, at
their entering of the same at the Excise-office, shall give sufficient security
for payment of the Excise thereof conform to the Rates contained in the
foresaid fourteenth Act, and that the Importers shall be obliged by the said
security, to pay the said respective Excise-duties, for such parcels of the
said Salt as shall be ratailed, when and as the same shall happen to be
retailed, and to pay completely the whole Excise of the said Salt, within
twelve Months after the entering thereof, and that whether the said Salt has
been expended and employed upon the cureing of Fishes or not; Providing
always, their be abated and allowed to them, the Excise of all Salt that shall
happen to be cast away at Sea; And likewise, the Excise of Salt expended upon
Fishes, that may happen to be cast away betwixt one Port and another, before
the same be entered, to be exported out of this Kingdom, the wrak and quantities
of the Salt or Fishes lost thereby, being always sufficiently instructed. And
further, it is Ordained, that all Inland Salt consumed within this Kingdom,
whether the same be expended upon Fishes or employed otherwise, shall be liable
to the duty of Excise, expressed in the said Act, which shall be paid by the
first buyer thereof, and that before it be carried from the Salt-pans where it
is bought; And albeit it be provided in manner foresaid, that the Excise-duties
respective abovementioned, should be paid for Foreign and Inland Salt,
whether the same be employed upon Fishes or otherwise, and that in respect of
the great difficulties, to clear and make appear what Salt is employed upon
Fishes or not, and that His Majesty may be prejudged of the Excise of Salt,
upon groundless pretenses, that the same has been, or is to be employed upon
Fishes; Yet, nevertheless, His Majesty being most willing to give all due
encouragement to the Trade of Fishing, and that whatsoever Salt shall be
employed and expended in order to the said Trade, and upon the cureing of
Fishes to be exported, shall in effect be free of Excise; and upon, and after
mature and exact consideration of the quantity of Sait, necessary and
sufficient for each Last of Herring and White-fish of any kind, and of each
Last of Salmond, and what the Excise of the same Salt respective will amount
to, finding that the Excise of the Salt of the Last of Herring and White-fish,
will amount to the sum of ten pounds four shillings Scots, and that the Excise
of the Salt of each Last of Salmond, will amount to the sum of twelve pounds,
money foresaid. His Majesty, with consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that
there shall be no Custom exacted at the exportation of the said Herring and
White-fish, and that whatever the foresaid ten pounds four shillings of Excise,
shall exceed the Custom payable for the said Herring and White-fish, at the
exportation thereof, shall be duly and timeously paid to the Merchant
exporters, without any delay, reward or abatement for each Last of Herring and
White-fish of any kind whatsoever that shall be exported out of this Kingdom:
And that the foresaid sum of twelve pounds, for the Excise of the Salt of each
Last of Salmond, at the entry and exportation shall be paid to the Heretors,
Life-renters and others, from whom the Merchant exporters bought these Salmond,
they always producing Certificates from the respective Heretors and others,
making up the just quantities contained in their Entries; upon which
Certificate, the foresaid sum of twelve pounds is to be paid, to the Heretors
and others from whom these Salmond were bought, or to any having their warrant
to receive the same; which sums respective above-written, for the Herring,
White-fish and Salmond, are to be paid in manor above-specified, by the
Collectors at the respective Ports where the same shall be entered, for whom,
the Farmers and principal Collectors of the Excise are to be answerable and
careful that the same shall be punctually paid; and in case of not punctual
payment, they shall be liable for the parties damage; providing always, that
the said Herring, White-fishes and Salmond, be duly entered in the
Excise-office, and the exportation thereof sufficiently instructed to the
Collectors, so as they may certify the same under their hands. Likeas, His
Majesty, with advice foresaid, does inhibite and discharge the Collectors or
Farmers of Excise upon any pretext, to give any ease or abatement of the forty
shillings Scots imposed by the foresaid fourteen Act, upon ilk Bool of foreign
Bay Salt, Linlithgow-measure, imported into this Kingdom: Certifying them, if
they contraveen, the said Collectors shall suffer deprivation of their Office,
and the said Farmers shall loose the benefit of their Tack of the Excise, and
shall be further liable to the payment of such fines and penalties, as the
Lords of Exchequer shall think fit to inflict. And for the better inbringing of
the Excise of the said Inland Salt, it is Ordained, that all Owners of
Salt-pans and their Greeves, shall be obliged to exhibit and produce to the
Collectors or Farmers of Excise or their Deputies, when they shall be required,
their Compt-book of all Salt sold, to be perused by them, and returned within
the space of twenty four hours, to the effect, it may be known what Salt is
consumed, and that the Excise of the same is duly paid, whereupon they are to
make faith, if they be required, and that they have sold nor disposed upon no
more nor is contained in the said Books; And sicklike, the Saltars of every
Salt-pan shall be obliged to give an account to the Collectors of the said
Excise of the Salt appertaining to them any manner of way, and what they have
sold of the same, and to instruct, that the same has been duly entered in the
Excise-office, and that the Excise duty of the same has been paid, whereupon,
and that they have sold no more but what has been duly entered, they are
Ordained to make faith if they be required; It is always provided, that where
Excise-offices are in the Town or place where the Salt is made, the
Salt-masters, their Greeves or Salters, shall be holden to repair to the
Excise-office, to the effect foresaid, if they be required; but if there be no
Excise-office in these places, the Collectors or Farmers of Excise or their
Deputies are appointed to conveen them at the respective Salt Girnals, or
Salt-pans where the Salt is made, and the said persons shall not be obliged
to go any further. And in like manner, His Majesty considering, that diverse
questions and debates may arise, anent the interpretation of several Acts and
Privileges made and granted in favors of Manufactories, for immunity and
exemption from the Excise or Custom of certain Goods, which are the Materials
of the said Manufactories; Does hereby, with consent foresaid, Statute, Ordain
and Declare, That no Manufactory shall have the benefit thereof, excepting such
as shall be, or has been lawfully erected since the first day of January, one
thousand six hundred sixty one years, and shall be found by the Lords of His
Majesty's Exchequer to have been, or to be erected conform to the Acts of
Parliament, and to have the qualifications required by the same. And further,
His Majesty understanding, that if after so large expressions of his Majesty's
Royal care and tenderness for the advancement of Trade and ease of Merchants,
any shall be so unfaithful as to persume to conceal and abstract the Goods
imported by them, thereby evading the payment of the Custom and Excise due and
payable to His Majesty; not only His Majesty will be prejudged of His Custom
and Excise, but also the Trade of Merchandise will be much endamaged by the
said Merchants their underselling others, who do honestly make true entries of
their Goods, and pay the duties of Custom and Excise. Therefore, for preventing
of the said prejudice and abuse, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does give
power and warrant to the Collectors of Custom and Excise, or to their Deputies,
to call and pursue such persons who shall wilfully and wickedly conceal and
abstract their Goods, or any part thereof, and not duly enter the same, or who
shall be accessory, or any ways aiding and assisting to the concealing or
abstracting thereof; and that before the Lords of His Majecties Exchequer, if
the said persons dwell and reside within twelve miles of the place where the
said Lords shall happen to sit for the time, or in their option, before any
other competent Judge: And in case the said persons live at farther distance,
it shall be lawful to the said Collectors or Farmers, or their Deputies, to
pursue them before the Sheriffs, Stewarts of Stewartries, or Bailiffs of
Regalities, Magistrates of Burghs, or any other competent Judges, who are
hereby required to take due and speedy trial of the premises, and to admit
probation thereof by writ, witness, oath of party or otherwise according to
Law, any Act or Acts of Parliament, or Clauses therein contained to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding. And to the end, that His Majesty's Lieges and
Merchants, upon the occasion and pretense foresaid, be not unjustly molested
and troubled, It is Ordained, that the said Process and Pursutes shall be
intended within three Months after the fraudful abstracting and imbezleing
foresaid; and that these at whose instance they shall be pursued, shall be
obliged to give their oaths de calumnia, if thereto required, that the said
pursutes are not intended of malice, but upon credible information, and that
they have just reason to pursue, as they conceive. And in case any Merchant,
Skipper, Mate or Mariner, or other person shall be found guilty of, or
accessory to, the said imbezeling, in concealing or abstracting any Goods which
ought and should have been entered; It is Statute and Ordained, that the said
delinquents shall be imprisoned for the space of twenty four hours, and until
they make payment of the full price and value of the Goods which shall be found
to have been abstracted by them, and shall be further fined by the Lords of His
Majesty's Exchequer, as they shall see cause. And in case any Goods shall be
found and seized, upon account that they were concealed and not duly entered,
they shall not only be detained and confiscate without redemption, but also the
Owners of the said Goods, and all others who shall be found to be accessory or
aiding to the concealing or abstracting of the same, shall be imprisoned for
the space of twenty four hours, and such fines and other punishment shall be
imposed and inflicted upon them, as the Lords of Exchequer shall appoint. And
that the Collectors of His Majesty's Customs and Excise and their Deputies, at
the making their accounts of their intromission with the Custom and
Excise-duties, shall be holden and obliged to give their oaths upon the truth
of these accounts to be given in by them. And it is provided and declared by
His Majesty, with consent foresaid, that the foresaid Act of His Majesty's
first Parliament, whereby the Excise is imposed, shall stand, and is and shall
be of full force; except in so far as the same is altered, innovat, qualified
and taken away in manner abovementioned.

XIII. ACT for annexation of Orknay and Zetland to the Crown
December 17. 1669.
FOrasmuch as the Isles of Orknay and Zetland are a great and so considerable a
part of this His Majesty's ancient Kingdom, that for diverse Ages they were the
occasion of much trouble and expense of blood and money, for maintaining
thereof against the invasion of Forraigners, and recovering the same out of
their hands by Arms and Treaties; And the said Isles being of a great and
large extent of bounds, and so remote and at such a distance from the ordinary
seat of Justice and Judicatories, that the Inhabitants within the same are not
able to travel in the winter season; and at other times cannot, without great
trouble and expenses, repair to the said Judicatories to complain when they are
oppressed and grieved. It is not only fit in order to His Majesty's Interest,
but will be the great advantage of His Majesty's Subjects dwelling there, that
without interposing any other Lord or Superior betwixt His Majesty and them,
they should have an immediate dependence upon His Majesty and His Officers,
being their great security against Foreign attempts and oppression at home.
And seeing it is most expedient and necessar, that a public Patrimony and
certain Revenue in Lands, Lordships and others, should be settled upon, and
annexed unto His Majesty's Crown, for supporting of His Royal Estate and
Government, and the great and necessar charges of the same, which if not
defrayed out of His Majesty's own Property and Revenue, would unavoidably ly,
and be a heavy burden upon His Majesty's Lieges: And to that purpose, diverse
Acts of Annexation have been made from time to time, and in specialy the
Earldom of Orknay and Lordship of Zetland, with the pertinents of the same,
were annexed to the Crown in the years, one thousand five hundred and forty,
and one thousand six hundred and twelve, respective. And yet, importunity
prevailing with His Majesty and His Royal Father, their goodness and
inclination to gratify their Subjects, they have been induced to give away and
part with so great a Jewel of their Crown, and to dispone and grant Rights of
the said Earldom and Lordship; which being found to be to the great prejudice
of His Majesty, His Crown and Subjects, and contrary to the Laws and Acts of
Parliament of this Kingdom, by a Decree of the Lords of Session, obtained upon
the twenty fifth day of February last bypast, at the instance of Sir John
Nisbet of Dirletoun Knight, His Majesty's Advocat, for His Majesty's interest,
against William Earl of Morton, Charles Lord Dalkeith his son, George Viscount
of Grandistoun, and certain other persons therein mentioned; the said Lords by
their Decree foresaid, have reduced the Contracts, Dispositions, Infeftments,
Acts of dissolution, and other Rights therein mentioned, made and granted by
His Majesty and his Royal Father, to, and in favors of, the diseased William
Earl of Morton, Grandfather to William now Earl of Mortoun, and the said George
Viscount of Grandistoun, of the said Earldom of Orknay and Lordship of Zetland,
with the Rights also therein mentioned depending thereupon: And the said Lords
have found and declared, that His Majesty has good and undoubted Right to the
said Earldom and Lordship, as His annexed property, for the reasons therein
contained; as the said Decree at length proports. Therefore, His Majesty, with
advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, does Ratify and Confirm the
said Decree, and Ordains the same to be of full force, strength and effect in
all time coming; holding and willing this their Ratification to be
alssufficient and effectual, as if the said Decree and whole tenor of the same
were insert herein. And His Majesty, following the laudable example and
practice of His Royal Predecessors, does, with consent foresaid, Ratify the
said former Annexation of the same to the Crown; and without prejudice thereof,
does of new again unite, annex and incorporate to His Crown of this His ancient
Kingdom, to remain inseparably with the same in all time coming, the said
Earldom of Orknay and Lordship of Zetland, with all and sundry Isles, Holmes,
Udal-lands and other Lands whatsoever, of what name and by what designation
soever the same are or may be known, lying within the Sheriffdom of Orknay and
pertaining to the said Earldom and Lordship, and belonging to His Majesty in
manner foresaid, in Property or Superiority, or by any other Right or Title,
together with all Castles, Towers, Fortalices, Milns, Multars, Fishings,
Annual-rents, Reversions, Patronages of Kirks, and Teinds Parsonage and
Vicarage pertaining to His Majesty within the bouds foresaid; And all and
whatsoever Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper and other Minerals within the foresaid
bounds, with the heretable Office of Justiciary, Sheriffship and Foudrie and
Admiralty within the foresaid Isles, and belonging to the said Earldom and
Lordship, with all other Parts, Pendicles and Pertinents, Casualities,
Privileges, Juriselictions, Offices and others whatsoever pertaining to the
same; All which, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does unite and annex to
His Crown, Declaring the generality foresaid to be sufficient to the intent and
effect foresaid, as if each Part, Parcel, Pertinent, Office, Patronage or
Privilege belonging to the said Earldom and Lordship were herein exprrst. And
it is Statute and Declared, That the said Earldom and Lordship, Lands, Teinds,
and others abovementioned, annexed to the Crown in manner foresaid, shall
remain therewith in all time coming; and that the same or any part thereof
shall nor, not may be given away in Fee and Heretage, nor in Frank-tenement,
Life-rent, Pension or Tack, except for the full duty which may be gotten from,
and paid by the Tennents, nor by any other manner of Alienation, Right or
Disposition whatsoever, to any person or persons of whatsoever estate, degree
or quality they be, without advice, Decree and Deliberation of the whole
Parliament; and for great weighty and reasonable causes concerning the good,
welfare and public interest of the whole Kingdom, first to be proposed and to
be advised, and maturely pondered and considered by the Estates, re integra,
before any previous Grant, Right or Deed be given, made or done by His Majesty
or His Successors, concerning the disposition of the said Earldom and Lordship
or any part thereof, which may any ways predetermine them or the Estates of
Parliament, and prejudge the freedom of their Deliberation and Consent. And if
at any time hereafter it shall be thought fit to dispone or grant any Right of
any part of the said Earldom and Lordship, It is Declared, that the general
narrative of good services, weighty causes and considerations shall not be
sufficient; but the particular causes and considerations whereupon His Majesty
and His Successors may be induced to grant, and the Estates to consent to such
Rights, are to be expressed; that it may appear, that the same is not granted
through importunity, or upon private suggestions or pretenses, but for true,
just and reasonable causes and considerations of public concernment. And
farther, it is Declared, that if any general Act of Dissolution of His
Majesty's property shall be made at any time hereafter; The said Earldom and
Lordship, and others abovementioned and annexed, shallnot be understood to
fall or be comprehended under the same; And if the said Earldom and Lordship,
or any part thereof, shall be annallied or disponed, or any Right of the same
shall be granted otherwise then is appointed and ordained in manner
abovementioned; His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does statute and declare,
That all Dispositions, Infestments and other Rights of the said Earldom and
Lordship, or any part thereof which shall be granted contrary to this present
Act, with all Acts of dissolution and Ratification and other Acts of Parliament
concerning the same, shall be from the beginning and in all time coming void
and null, and of no effect: And notwithstanding thereof, that it shall be
lawful to our Sovereign Lord and His Successors for the time, to take back and
receive at their pleasure for their own use, without any Process of Law, the
Lands and others above-annexed, or any part thereof which shall be annallied or
disponed; and these in whose favors any such Rights and Alienations shall be
made, shall be countable for, and liable to refound and pay all profits,
intromission or benefit taken, uplifted or enjoyed by them in the mean time:
And it is Declared, That all other Clauses, Articles and Provisions contained
in any former Act or Acts of Annexation to the advantage of His Majesty and His
Crown, are and shall be holden as repeated and insert herein. And farther, His
Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates foresaid, has suppressed the
said Office of Sheriffship, and has erected, and hereby erects a Stewartry
within the bounds foresaid of the said Earldom and Lordship, and Isles of
Orknay and Zetland, to be called in all time coming, The Stewartry of Orknay
and Zetland; Ordaining the Tenants, Possessors and Inhabitants within the
bounds foresaid, and other persons who were formerly answerable and liable to
the jurisdiction of Sheriffship and Foudrie abovementioned, to be answerable to
His Majesty's Stewart of the said Stewartry, with all Privileges competent to
any Stewartry of His Majesty's Property within this Realm. Likeas, it is
Declared and Statute, that the foresaid Office of Stewartry shall not be given
heretably to any person or persons and their heirs, without advice and consent
of Parliament in manner above mentioned; and all Rights of the same which shall
be granted otherwise at any time hereafter, shall be from the beginning and in
all time coming null and void. It is always Declared, that this Act and
Annexation foresaid shall not prejudge the Bishop of Orknay of his Patrimony
and Privileges belonging to him, or of any part thereof; and that he and his
Successors shall be in the same case as they were before the making hereof. And
likewayes it is Declared, that the Annexation foresaid and the suppressing of
the said Office of Sheriff, and the erecting of the said Stewartry shall be
without prejudice to his Majesty's Vassals within the said Isles, of their
Liberty and Privilege to have and send Commissioners to Parliament, to
represent them in the same manner as they did or might have done formerly.

XIV. ACT concerning the exportation of Corns.
December 17. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord considering, that by the eleventh Act of the third Session
of His Majesty's late Parliament, liberty is granted to export Corns of all
sorts, when they are under the prices following, viz. Ilk Boll of Wheat under
twelve pounds the Boll, Beer and Barley under eight pounds the Boll, Oats and
Pease under eight merks the Boll. And seeing, by reason of several Duties
formerly imposed upon Corns, the exportation thereof has been hitherto
obstructed; And his Majesty being desirous for the good of this His ancient
Kingdom, to give all due encouragement to the export of Corns, and to remove
every thing which may impede the same: Has therefore thought fit, Likeas, His
Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, does Statute and
Declare, That all Corns which shall be exported in time coming by His Majesty's
subjects forth of this Kingdom, shall be free, and are hereby discharged of the
payment of Custom, Bullion, and all other Duties whatsoever, except one Merk
scots allenerly for ilk Chalder. And lest any considerable prejudice should
thereby ensue to His Majesty's Customs, it is Statute and Ordained, That the
Duties after-mentioned are and shall be imposed upon the Commodities following,
viz. Ten shillings scots upon ilk Barrel of Tar, and twenty shillings scots
upon ilk Tun of Iron imported into this Kingdom, and that over and above all
former Impositions put thereon; and the Customers, Collectors and their
deputies are hereby appointed and empowered to uplift the same accordingly. And
for preventing any debates that may arise anent the respective prices of the
Victual, when the same are under or above the rates expressed in the said Act;
His Majesty, with advice foresaid, does recommend to, and authorizeth the Lords
of Privy Council to determine the same; And Declares, that it shall be lawful
to His Majesty's Subjects to export Corns of all sorts, unless by a
Proclamation or public Intimation from the said Lords of Council, they be
prohibited and discharged to do the same. And Ordains this Act to begin and
take effect upon the second day of February next to come.

XIV. ACT for regulating the prices of Ale and Drinking-beer, and Maltmen.
December 23. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord considering that it is most agreeable to reason and equity,
and of universal concernment to all His Majesty's Subjects, and specially to
those of the meaner sort, that a due proportion be observed betwixt the price
of the Boll of Beer, and the Pint and other measures of Ale and Drinking-Beer
vented and sold within this Kingdom, that thereby the liberty taken by Brewars
and Vintners, to exact exorbitant prices for Ale and Drinking-beer at their
pleasure may be restrained. Therefore His Majesty, with advice and consent of
His Estates of Parliament, does recommend to, and authorize the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council from time to time, after consideration had of the
ordinary rates of Rough-Beer and Barley for the time, to regulate and set down
the prices of all Ale and Drinking-Beer, vented and sold in the several Shires
and Burghs of the Kingdom, as they shall think just and reasonable; And
likewayes to set down a Table of proportion betwixt the weight and price of all
Bread made of Wheat, and the price of the Boll of Wheat, in like manner as
betwixt the price of the Ale and the Boll of Beer: With power to the said
Lords of Council to make and emit such Acts, Orders and Directions, in relation
to the prices of Ale and Drinking-Beer, and weight and prices of Wheat-bread,
and to inflict such censures, pains and penalties upon the contraveeners of
these Acts and Orders as they shall think fit; and to do all other things
requisite for execution of the same. And in case, after settling of the said
prices by the Lords of Council, any Brewar shall cease from, and give over
their brewing or venting of Ale or Beer, His Majesty, with advice foresaid,
Declares, that they shall not be permitted or allowed to brew or vent any Ale
or Beer for the space of one year thereafter, and shall be further liable to
such pains and punishments, as the Lords of Council shall think fit. And
further, His Majesty taking to consideration, that by the twenty ninth Act of
the first Parliament of King James the sixth, Maltmen are declared to be no
Craft, and discharged to have a Deacon; Which Act of Parliament, His Majesty,
with advice foresaid Ratifies and Approves, and Ordains the same to stand in
full force and effect in all time coming. And that notwithstanding of the said
Act, and expressly contrair thereto, The Provost and Council of Edinburgh have,
by their Act dated the eleventh of March, one thousand six hundred and forty
six, ranked Mastmen amongst one of their Trades and Callings, discharged any to
be admitted thereto within their B^^^ony of Leith, but by their License, with
consent of the Calling; and have constitute a Box-master amongst them, and
granted liberty to them to meet and keep correspondence, providing the
Water-Bailiff be present with them: Therefore, His Majesty and Estates of
Parliament not only Declares the said pretended Act of the Council of Edinburgh
to have been null and void from the beginning, and Ordains the same to be razed
out of their Registers; but discharges the said Town, or any other Burgh within
the Kingdom, ever to presume to do the like again; And Ordains the said Box to
be broken, and the Office of Deacon, Visitor, Box-master, or any other
pretending to the like power, and the pretended Calling or Incorporation and
Society of Brewars or Maltmen, to cease at Leith, and in all other Burghs,
Towns and Places in the Kingdom: With certification, that if they shall be
found hereafter to meet and keep correspondence amongst themselves, upon
whatsoever pretense, either at Leith, Edinburgh, or in any other Burgh, Town or
Place, ilk person so meeting shall be liable in the penalty of five hundred
Merks toties quoties, whereof the one half to be paid to the informer, he
proving the same before the Council; and this by and attour such personal
punishment, as the Lords of Privy Council shall think fit to inflict.

XVI. ACT for repairing Highways and Bridges.
December 23. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord considering how necessar it is for the good of the people,
that Highways be made and maintained for ready and easy Passage, Travel and
Traffic through the Kingdom; and that the care thereof which has been laid
upon the Justices of Peace, has yet for the most part proven ineffectual, in
regard the said Justices have not had special Orders and Warrands for that
effect. For remeid whereof, His Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates
of Parliament, Does Appoint and Ordain the Sheriff of the Shire, and one of his
Deputies, being always an Heretor therein, and the Justices of Peace in each
Shire, to conveen at the head Burgh of the Shire upon the first Tuesday of May
yearly, for ordering of Highways, Bridges and Ferries; With power to them, or
major part of them that shall happen to conveen, to set down a particular List
of the Highways, Bridges and Ferries within their bounds, and to divide the
Paroches of the said bounds as they lie most to the several Highways to be
repaired, and as they may have the most equal burden, and to appoint such of
their number or other Overseers of such parts and portions of the said
Highways, as are most convenient and nearest to their ordinary residence, and
to nominate such of their number as they see fit, to survey and give an account
of the Highways, Bridges and Ferries unto the rest; with power to them to
appoint Meetings from time to time, till the said Survey, List and Division of
the said Highways be closed: Which persons, or any one of them to whom the
particular portions of the said Highways shall be committed, are hereby
authorized and strictly required, to call and conveen all Tennants and Cottars
and their Servants, within the bounds appointed for their parts of the
Highways, by public intimation at the Paroch-Kirks upon the Sabbath day,
immediately after the first Sermon, or any other way that they shall think fit,
to have in readiness Horses, Carts, Sleds, Spades, Shovels, Picks, Mattocks,
and such other instruments as shall be required, for repairing of the said
Highwayes, and to conveen at such places thereof as they shall be required, and
in such proportion and with such furniture as the said Justices or Overseers
shall appoint, and that in the most equal and proportionable way, as the said
Justices and Overseers will be answerable. With power to them to design such of
the said persons as they find to be most skillful, to attend and direct the
rest, and to appoint them fit Wages for their attendance; providing that the
days they are required to work do not exceed the number of six days for Man
and Horse yearly for the first three years, and four days yearly thereafter,
and that they be only betwixt the Bear-seed yearly, and Hay-time or Harvest
thereafter: With power to the said Justices or Overseers to poind the readiest
Goods of the absents, for twenty shillings Scots money for the absence of ilk
Man daily, and thirty shillings for the Man and Horse, without further
solemnity but apprising the same upon the ground of the Land, and therewith to
hire others in place of the absents; and in case the said absents shall have
no poindable Goods, to punish them in their persons as they shall see cause.
Which Highways shall be twenty foot of measure broad at least, or broader, if
the same have been so of before, and shall be so repaired, that Horses and
Carts may travel Summer and Winter thereupon: and if any part of the said
Highways cannot well be continued as now they are, but require to be changed,
the said Justices shall appoint three of their number to visit the places
where the Highways need to be changed, and to set down Meiths for the new Way
in place thereof, and upon Oath to estimate the damage of the parties prejudged
thereby, and to deliver the same to them in writing under their hands, to the
effect the same may be satisfied by the whole Shire, in manner after-specified.
Which Justices are Ordained again to conveen at the head Burgh of the Shire the
first Tuesday of June yearly, and thence every Tuesday from fourtnight to
fourtnight, at such places as shall be by them appointed during the Months of
June and July, for three years next ensuing, for taking account of the said
several Justices and Overseers of the respective proportions of Highway
committed to them, and to fine those Justices and Overseers who shall failie;
still increasing the said fines till they give obedience and perform their
part, and to poind therefore upon the ground of the Lands where their Goods
shall be found, without further solemnity. With power also to the said
Justices to visit the Ferries in their Shire, and where the Ferries ly betwixt
two Shires, that they correspond with the Justices of the other Shire, to the
end they may appoint fit and sufficient Boats, and convenient Landing places;
and so to regulate all things concerning the Ferries, as His Majesty's Lieges
may be readily and conveniently served, and at reasonable rates, and to punish
all such as shall neglect or transgress the Rules set down by them to the
effect foresaid.

And because the work of the inhabitants within the several bounds, will not be
able sufficiently to repair the Highways and others foresaid; Therefore, His
Majesty, with advice and consent of the said Estates, does hereby authorize and
require the whole Freeholders and Heretors of the several Shires, to conveen
at the respective head Burghs the said first Tuesday of June yearly, and to
call for an account from the Justices of Peace of what is needful for
reparation of the Highways and others foresaid, and what charges and expenses
is requisite for promoving thereof; and for making or repairing Bridges and
Ferries where they shall be found needful, and accordingly to stent the
Heretors of the said Shire, comprehending the Heretors of the Burroughlands
therein, in what shall be found necessary for the effect foresaid, not
exceeding ten shillings Scots upon each hundred pound of valued Rent in one
year, which is to be uplifted be the said Justices or whom they shall appoint,
be poinding as said is, and employed for the use foresaid; and of which they
shall be obliged to give an account to the said Heretors at the next
Michaelmas head Court yearly. Likeas, His Majesty, with consent foresaid,
prohibits and discharges all persons whatsoever to break or abuse the said
Highways by plowing up any part thereof, laying stones, rubbish or dung
thereon, or any way breaking or pooling the same, or turning in, or damming
water thereupon; and Ordains the Conveener of the said Justices at their
meeting the said first Tuesday of May yearly, to take an Oath of the remanent
Justices and of the Constables, of what damage they know done to the
Highways, Bridges or Ferries since the year preceding, in any of the
foresaid particulars prohibited, or any other, and by whom. Upon which, the
said Justices shall conveen the transgressors and in case of conviction by
oath or witness, shall fine them as they shall see just, and shall poind
therefore in manner foresaid, and apply the same for the use of the said
Highways. With power also to the said Justices, to call for an account of all
Destinations and Mortifications to Bridges, Causa's, Ferries or Highwayes, and
to cause the intrometters therewith, that have not applied the same to these
proper ends, to make payment thereof to such persons as they shall appoint, to
be employed to the uses for which the same were destinat. Likeas, His Majesty
Ordains the Conveener of the said Justices to give a particular account under
his hand, of what progress is made in the reparation of the said Highways,
Ferries and Bridges, upon the third Tuesday of July next to come, and so forth
yearly to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, who are hereby empowered to
grant Letters of Horning and Poinding for the effects foresaid if need be.

And further, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, gives power to the said
Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to Ordain the levying of moderat Customs
at Bridges, Causa's or Ferries for the building, repairing and upholding
thereof, in case the said Stent shall not be able to accomplish the same, and
to appoint the endurance thereof as they shall see cause. With power also to
them, that in case the said Justices and Heretors failie in the performance of
the things by this Act committed to them, so that the Highways shall not be
sufficiently repaired, nor Bridges and Ferries sufficiently provided for, to
take such course for making the same effectual as they shall judge expedient,
and to punish the said Heretors and Justices, as their neglect shall deserve:
With power likewayes to the said Lords of Privy Council, to appoint and
commissionat Overseers for putting the premises in execution where they shall
see cause; which Overseers so appointed, shall have the same power as is by
this present Act committed to the Justices of Peace foresaid. And farther, His
Majesty Ordains, that where labored Land lies upon the sides of Highways,
the said labored Land shall be fenced with Dike and Ditch or Hedge; yet so as
neither Dike, nor Ditch, nor Hedge, nor any part thereof, be within the
forementioned breadth appointed for the Highway: And in case any labored Land
so lying shall not be fenced betwixt and the first day of August, one thousand
six hundred and seventy one, then and in that case, the said Justices are
hereby authorized and required to cause poind in manner foresaid, the Laborers
of the said Land for four shillings Scots for each eln which shall not be so
fenced after the said time, and to apply the said fines for the fencing thereof
in manner foresaid. Likeas, it is hereby Declared, that whatsoever stones,
rubbish, dung or other impediments beis thrown or found lying upon the said
Highways, or water turned in or dammed thereupon, shall be esteemed and held
as done by the Laborers of the Land next adjacent to the Highways where the
damage is done, who shall be fined therefore be the said Justices and Overseers;
Reserving right to the said Laborers to call before the said Justices any
other for their relief, who have been the real actors of the skaith.

XVII. ACT anent enclosing of Ground.
December 23. 1669
WHereas by the forty one Act of the first Session of His Majesty's first
Parliament, entitled, Act for planting and enclosing of Ground, It is
provided, that where Inclosers fall to be upon the borders of any man's
Inheritance, the next adjacent Heretor shall be at equal pains and charges in
building, ditching, and planting that Dike which divides their Inheritance. And
the Estates of Parliament considering the inconveniency and difficulty the
execution of that part of the said Act may meet with, in Lands marching
together where the Marches are crooked and unequal, or where any part of the
bordering Ground is unfit or incapable of bearing a Dike or receiving a Ditch,
or hinders the completing of the Enclosure in an equal line. For remeid
whereof, His Majesty, with advice and consent of the said Estates, does Statute
and Ordain, That whenever any person intends to enclose by a Dike or Ditch
upon the March betwixt his Lands and the Lands belonging to other Heretors
contiguous thereunto; it shall be leisome to him to require the next Sheriffs or
Bailiffs of Regalities, Stewarts of Stewartries, Justices of peace or other
Judges Ordinar, to visit the Marches along which the said Dike or Ditch is to
be drawn, who are hereby authorized, when the said Marches are uneven or
otherwise incapable of Ditch or Dike, to adjudge such parts of the one or
other Heretors Ground, as occasion the inconveniency betwixt them, from the one
Heretor in favors of the other, so as may be least to the prejudice of either
party, and the Dike or Ditch to be made, to be in all time thereafter the
common March betwixt them; and the parts so adjudged respective from the one to
the other, being estimat to the just avail and compensed pro tanto, to decern
what remains uncompensed of the price, to the party to whom the same is
wanting: And it is hereby Declared, that the parts thus adjudged hinc inde,
shall remain and abide with the Lands or Tennandries to which they are
respective adjudged, as parts and pendicles thereof in all time coming.

XVIII. ACT anent Adjudications.
December 23. 1669
OUR Sovereign Lord taking to consideration, that by several Acts of Parliament
and constant Practick of the Kingdom, there is one years Rent of all Lands,
Annual-rents or others apprised, due and payable to the Superior of the said
Lands and others, before he be holden to enter and infeft the Compriser; and
that there is the same reason in cases of Adjudications as Apprisings.
Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes, Ordains and Declares, That the Superiors of Lands, Annual-rents and
others adjudged, shall not be holden to grant any Charter for infefting the
Adjudger, till such time as he be paid and satisfied of the years Rent of the
Lands and others adjudged, in the same manner as in Comprisings; And Declares,
that in all cases, Adjudications shall be in the like condition with
Comprisings, as to Superiors.

XIX. ACT concerning the Confirmation and Quots of Testaments.
December 23 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That it shall be lawful to Executors, at the confirmation
of the Defuncts Testament, to give up the Debts owing be the Defunct, and that
the Quot be only paid for the free Geer (the Debts being always instructed)
with power to the said Executors, for instructing of the said Debts before
the Commissar the time of Confirmation, to cite the Creditors for production of
the Bonds and Instructions of their said Debts; and if the said Creditors
shall not produce the same, and yet shall happen thereafter to seek payment
from the Executors, that then and in that case, the Creditors shall be obliged
to relieve the Executors of a proportion of the Quot paid by them, effeiring
to the said Debt, or otherwise to allow the same to them; And for preventing
of all fraud, both the Executors and Creditors shall be holden to make faith,
if required, anent the truth and reality of the said Debts, that they were
truly resting unsatisfied the time of the Defuncts decease. And likewayes,
Statutes and ordains, That in all time coming, Executors Creditors be free of
paying of Quot, in so far as they confirm only for Debts resting to them be the
Defunct the time of his decease, and thereupon the said Executors shall be
holden to make faith, if required, notwithstanding of any Instruction produced
by them. As also, the Relict confirming her self Executrix Creditrix, and for
satisfying of the obliegement of her Contract of Marriage; or other Provision
made to her by her Husband where there was no Contract of Marriage, be also
free of Quot, in so far as the Inventar extends to five years purchase of the
Annual-rent or Life-rent provided to her; and that she shall be liable and pay
Quot for the superplus of the free Goods or Debts confirmed; And that this be
extended to all other Life-renters, confirming themselves Executors Creditors.
As likewayes, that poor people, not worth in heretable or moveable Estate
forty pounds Scots money, have their Confirmation past and registrat free from
payment of any Quot; and for Fees of Court, that they pay only two pounds
eighteen shillings Scots. And farther, it is Statute and Ordained, That
heretable Debts resting by the Defunct, be Infestment, Bonds or Contracts
bearing obliegement to infest, be not allowed be the Commissars at the
Confirmation, to defaulk off the Inventar in prejudice of the Quot, where there
is an heretable Estate belonging to the Defunct to satisfy the heretable
Debts, even though the said Debts be given up by the Defunct himself or his
Executor. And likewayes, it is Statute and Ordained, that Commissars admit of
no division in Testaments, in favors and upon account of the Relict, where by
her Contract of Marriage or otherwise, she is secluded from all part of her
Husbands movables; And if a bipartit or tripartit division be craved be the
Executor at the confirmation upon her account, in that case the Procurator
Fiscal shall have power to cite the Relict, for production of her Contract of
Marriage, or to give Oath upon her having thereof, or that by the same or any
other Writ, she is secluded: And if it appear, either be the said Contract or
be any other Writ, or be the Relicts Oath, that she is secluded from the third
or half of the movables, That then the Testament shall be confirmed without
division upon her account, and the Quot paid accordingly; And in case there be
any exception in the Relicts favors, of the Insight and Houshold-plenishing,
or any part thereof, in that case deduction is only to be granted of the quot,
effeiring to the proportion excepted and reserved in her favors. And lastly,
His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that in time coming,
no Charges of Horning be given to any person, at the Procurator Fiscals
instance, for giving up of Inventer, but upon a Roll of the persons names to be
charged subscribed be the Commissar, and that within the space of three years
after the Defuncts decease, after which time it shall not be leisome to give
any such Charges of Horning for giving up of Inventer; And for the years
preceding, that they shall only charge for giving up Inventer of the Goods of
such Defuncts who have deceast since the year, one thousand six hundred and
sixty. And Ordains, That Letters of Caption shall not be used against any of
His Majesty's Lieges for not confirming of Testaments, but where the Letters of
Horning have been execute against the parties personally, or at their
Dwelling-houses and Paroch-Kirk-doors, on a Sabbath Day after Divine Service.
And Ordains the Commissars of the respective Diocesses, to keep Circuit Courts
the time of the Spring and Harvest Vacance, for confirmation of Testaments at
such convenient places in ilk Presbytery, as may be most conducing to the good
and ease of the Lieges; and whereunto they are to be cited personally, or at
their Dwelling-places and Paroch-Kirks as said is, to the end and effect
foresaid: With certification, that if the Commissar, Commissar-clerk,
Procurator Fiscal, or any other Member of Court, contraveen this Act, the
contraveener shall suffer deprivation of his Office, and never be readmitted
thereto again, beside satisfaction to the party grieved, of any damage
sustained by him there-through.

XX. ACT for in-bringing of public Dues from the Northern Shires.
December 23. 1669
OUR Sovereign Lord considering, that diverse persons within the Shires of Ross,
Sutherland, Caithness, Argyl, Inverness and Burghs within the same, are in
arrear, and deficient in payment of a considerable part of the Annuity of
Excise, granted to His Majesty in the year one thousand six hundred and sixty
one, the Taxation and assessment imposed by the Conventions of Estates in the
years, one thousand six hundred and sixty five, and, one thousand six hundred
and sixty six-notwithstanding of all legal diligence used for in-bringing
thereof. For obtaining payment of which Arears, and for the more effectual and
better payment of the said Annuity of Excise in time coming, His Majesty, with
advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, does Statute, Ordain and
Declare, That the persons deficient and in arrear of the foresaid Annuity of
Excise, Taxation and Assessment in the said Shires, and Burghs within the same,
preceding the Month of November last, and who shall not pay in the same
according to their respective proportions, to the Receivers and Collectors
thereof, betwixt and the first day of June next to come, shall be liable in
double payment of all such deficiency and arrear, without any manner of
defaulcation. And farther Declares, that if for the future, three quarters
payment of the said Annuity of Excise in the said Shires, shall happen to run
in the fourth unpayed (the feast and term of Candlemas next ensuing being the
first term) Then and in that case, such Shires, Burghs and Persons therein so
deficient, shall be liable in payment of the double of the whole years Annuity
of Excise, toties quoties, and all execution personal and real shall be used
against them therefore. And His Majesty and Estates of Parliament does hereby
Declare, That this present Act or any thing therein contained, shall no ways
liberate the Commissioners of Excise for the said respective Shires and Burghs,
from being liable in the single payment allanerly of the said Annuity of
Excise; but that they shall still stand obliged therefore as formerly, in
manner contained in the Act of Parliament made thereanent.

XXI. ACT Salvo jure cujuslibet.
December 23. 1669.
OUR Sovereign Lord taking to consideration, that there be many Acts of
Ratifications and others, past and made in this Session of Parliament, in
favors of particular persons, without calling or hearing of such as may be
thereby concerned and prejudged: Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and
consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That all such
particular Acts and Acts of Ratification past in manner foresaid, shall not
prejudge any third party of their lawful Rights, nor of their Actions and
Defenses competent thereupon, before the making of the said particular Acts and
Acts of Ratifications; And that the Lords of Session and all other Judges
within this Kingdom, shall be obliged to judge betwixt Parties, according to
their several Rights standing in their persons before the making of the said
Acts: All which are hereby exponed, and Declared to have been made, Salvo jure
cujuslibet.

XVII. ACT of Adjournment.
December 23. 1669
THE Kings Majesty Declares this Parliament current, and adjourns the same to
the eight of June next to come; Ordaining all the Members of Parliament to
attend that day, and that there be no new Election of Commissioners from Shires
or Buroughs, except upon the Death of some of the present Commissioners.

A LIST of the Printed ACTS past in the PARLIAMENT, kept at Edinburgh in
October, 1669.
ACT asserting His Majesty's Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical. Page 3 2. Act concerning the Militia. Page 5 3. Act for
registration of Instruments of Resignation ad remanentiam. Page 9 4. Act
concerning poinding before the days of the Charge expire. ibid. 5. Act for the
security of the persons of Minister-. Page 10 6. Act for the ordering of
Suspensions of the Benefices and Stipends of the Clergy. Page 11 7. Act for
Naturalization of Strangers. Page 12 8. Act concerning the Bullion. Page 14 9.
Act concerning presciptions. Page 18 10. Act concerning Interuptions. Page 19
11. Act concerning the forfeiture of persons in the late Rebellion. Page 20 12.
Act concerning the Excise and Customs. Page 22 13. Act for annexation of Orknay
and Zetland to the Crown. Page 28 14. Act concerning the Exportation of Corns.
Page 32 15. Act for regulating the prices of Ale and Drinking-beer, and
Maltmen. Page 33 16. Act for repairing Highways and Bridges. Page 35 17. Act
anent enclosing of Ground. Page 39 18. Act concerning adjudications. Page 40
19. Act concerning the Confirmation and Quots of Testaments. Page 41 20. Act
for inbringing of public Dues from the Northern Shires. Page 43 21. Act Salvo
jure cujuslibet. Page 44 22. Act of Adjournment. ibid.
A LIST of the Acts and Ratifications past in in this first Session of His
Majesty's second Parliament, and which are not here printed.
Rotestations by some Noblemen, and others Commissioners from Shires and
Burghs, concerning their precedence in the Rolls of Parliament. His Majesty's
Letters to the Parliament, concerning the Union of the Kingdoms of Scotland and
England, with the Parliaments Answers. Act anent the election of Commissioners
from Shires. Act for continuing the Imposition for upholding the Caussa of
Couiemonth. Acts for yearly Fairs and Weekly Mercats to some Noblemen and
others. Protestation by the Earl of Nithisdale, that the forfeiture of
Mcklelland of Balmagachan should not prejudge him. Protestation by the Vassals
of Orknay, that they be not prejudged be the present annexation thereof to the
Crown. Protestation in name of the Duke of Lenox, that this annexation do not
prejudge his right of Admiralty in Orknay. Protestation by the Lord Advocate
contra these two Protestations Commission anent the regulation of the Commissar
and Sheriff-Courts, and other inferior Courts of Justice. Act suspending the
payment of public Debts. Protection to William Dick. Ratification in favors
of the Duke and Duchess of Hamiltoun. Protestation by the Town of Linlithgow
against the same. Protestation by the Duke of Hamiltoun in the contrair. Two
Ratifications in favors of the Earl of Argyl. Protestations be the Earl of
Errol and others against the same. Protestation be the Earl of Argyl in the
contrair. Ratification in favors of the Lord Newbyth. Ratification in favors
of Mr. John Young of Leny. Ratification in favors of Thomas Moncrief of that
ilk. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Kellie. Ratification in favors of
the Lord Stair. Ratification in favors of Sir Andrew Fletcher of Aberlady.
Ratification in favors of Mr. Andrew Oswald and his Son. Two Ratifications in
favors of Sir John Nicolson of that ilk. Ratification in favors of Mungo
Graham of Gorthie. Ratification in favors of the Archbishop of St. Andrews.
Ratification in favors of the Earl of Perth. Ratification in favors of the
Earl of Roxburgh. Ratification in favors of Sir Alexander Frazer of Dorrs.
Ratification in favors of Sir Robert Cunningham of Achinharvy. Ratification in
favors of William Murray of Ochtertyre. Ratification in favors of Sir James
Drummond. Ratification in favors of Sir John Forbes of Wattertoun.
Protestation in name of the Town of Aberdeen against the same. Ratification in
favors of the Earl of Tweedale. Ratification in favors of Sir Hary Bruce of
Clackmannan. Ratification in favors of Sir Alexander Don of Newtoun.
Ratification in favors of Sir Patrick Home of Polwart. Ratification in favors
of Sir Charles Erskine of Cambo. Ratification to him of his Office of Lion King
at Arms. Ratification in favors of Sir Philip Anstruther. Ratification in
favors of David Fothringhame of Pourie. Ratification in favors of the Earl os
Middleton. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Dundonald. Ratification in
favors of the Lord Lee. Ratification in favors of Sir John Keith of
Caskieben. Ratification in favors of the Master of Ross. Ratification in
favors of John Forbes of Cullodin and his Son. Ratification in favors of
David Blair of Adamtoun. Ratification in favors of William Hamiltoun of
Wishaw. Ratification in favors of George Dundas of that ilk. Ratification in
favors of Sir William Ker of Hadden. Ratification in favors of Thomas Boyd of
Pinkill. Ratification in favors of the Minister of North- Lies. Ratification
in favors of Hugh Wat. Ratification in favors of the Town of Bervie.
Ratification in favors of Sir Adam Blair of Carberry. Ratification in favors
of George Fullertoun. Ratification in favors of David Philp of Overcarnbie.
Ratification in favors of Mr. Robert Deens of Longhirdmistoun. Ratification in
favors of the Earl of Annandale. Protestation in name of the Viscount of
Stormont against it. Protestation be the Earl of Annandale in the contrair.
Ratification in favors of Sir John and Sir Robert Dalyells. Ratification in
favors of Mr. John Wishart. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Linlithgow.
Ratification in favors of Sir John Nisbet, Lord Advocat. Ratification in
favors of Alexander Brodie of Letham, etc. Ratification in favors of Sir
William Purvess of Woodhouslee. Ratification in favors of the Girdle-makers of
Culross. Ratification in favors of James Stewart of Torrence. Ratification in
favors of the Lord Drumlanrig. Ratification in favors of the Viscount of
Stormont. Ratification in favors of Lieutenant General Drummond. Ratification
in favors of Sir William Bruce of Balcaskie. Ratification in favors of the
City of Glasgow. Protestation be the Town of Ruglin against it. Ratification in
favors of the Town of Forfar. Ratification in favors of Mr. Andrew Burnet of
Weristown. Ratification in favors of Sir John Aitoun of that ilk. Remit for
the Viscountess of Stormant, Lord Drumlenrig and Lord of Ednem. Act for an
Imposition to be uplifted at the North-water Bridge. Prorogation of the
Imposition for the Bridge of Sauchtenhall. Act for changing the Way at Walter
Chiesties House at Dalry. Recommendation for the Heretors of the Sheriffdom of
Berwick concerning their fishing on Tweed. Commissions for the fishings in the
Waters of Spey and Divern. Act anent the Fishings on Spey, etc. Commission for
improving of Trade. Act discharging the Custom of Books. Act anent the Kirks of
Kinneil and Burroughstounness. Act concerning the Losses of the Town of Dundee.
Recommendation in favors of the Masters of the Scots Incorporation at London.
Continuation of the Lady Bramfords business.
FINIS.

