A Timely WARNING TO Rash and Disobedient PERSONS: OR, A Strange and Wonderful
Relation of a young Gentleman that sold himself to the Devil for twelve Years
to have Power of being Revenged on his Father and Mother; and now his time
being Expired, he lies in a sad and deplorable Conditon, to the Amazement of
all Spectators. With the Substance of a Sermon upon this unhappy Accident; also
a Prayer for the Grace of God against Temptation. By D. S. And now Published as
a Monument of Divine Vengeance, to drive Hard-harted and Stubborn (...) as to a
speady Repentance.



Printed by W. O. for E. Brooksby, in Pye-corner.

A Timely WARNING TO Rash and disobedient Persons.
HOw dreadful and amazing the fatal Consequences of Malice and Revenge have
proved to those that have unluckily harbored them in their Bosoms, no Age has
been ignorant of; nor has sad and fearful Examples been wanting, as Witnesses
of God's Wrath and Indignation against daring Sinners, by suffering them to
fall in the Snares they have laid for others; for to what prodigious Slanders,
Abuses, Rapes, Murders, and all manner of such like Evils have unruly Passion
carried some Men and Women, for which, in fine, themselves have suffered Shame
Punishment and untimely Death! But among the many that have created Trembling
and Horror in the Minds of good Christians, what we are now about to relate,
may even startle the Reader, to think that such a Temptation should take place.

In a small Town near Portsmouth, there lived a wealthy Gentleman, having got
an Estate by his Labor and Industry; but amongst his Fortunes had the
Misfortune, as many indulgent Parents have met withal, to have an Undutiful and
Extravant Son; and though he was tender over him, yet in the end, his
reiterated Affronts, Abuses, and Debaucheries, began to lesson the Father's
Affection, and caused him to hold his Hand from supplying him with Money as
formerly: This incensed the Son, and made him fly out into unatural Expressions
against his Father, and resolving upon Revenge, studied many ways, but through
his Father's Caution, and the Hand of Divine Providence, they took no Effect:
Then he applied himself to his Mother, who in Hopes of his reclaiming and
returning to the Rules of Duty and Obedience, her Fondness constrained her to
supply him (unknown to his Father) with Money and Credit; but finding this
rather proved as Fuel to continue and increase the Flame of his Lusts and
Excess, she grew weary of taking any further Care to supply him with Money: but
however, spared not to give good Admonishment, and with Tears to entreat him to
take up, and not to be a Scandal and Grief to her and his Father.

This proved but Oil thrown into the Flame and made him break out into Curses
and Execrations, yet she gave not so over, but set many of her Neighbors and
Relations to see if they could persuade him to a better Temper; but their
Solicitations proved as successess, and he was given over as a lost young
Reprobate, which too fatally proved true, as ^n the Sequel will appear; for
although he was ^o obstinate, yet when Necessity pinched him, he was constrained
to come to his Father's House, where free Entertainment for Diet and Lodging
was not denied him: when on a Day being at Dinner, he asked his Father to let
him have ten Pounds to pay off a Debt, for which he feared to be arrested: But
he refusing, he started up, and went away in a great Huff, vowing to be
revenged for that Denial, at the Hazard of Body and Soul. This made the aged
People weep, and condole their Misfortunes, and wish that all People would be
warned, and not appear too fond and indulgent of their Children in their
Minority, but keep a strict Hand over them, to prevent their Ruin when they
grow in Years.

This Graceless Son, upon his Departure, went to a Quack-pretender to
Astrology, to have his Father's Nativity cast, thereby to know how long he
should live; who told him a very plaucible Story, after he had erected his
(...) ^ample: but to as much Purpose, (...) old Man (...) Mountebank for his
Death, which put (...) into a great Fret^ and that being over, he fell into a
deep Melancholy, which lasted many Days; in which time, he owned the Devil
tempted him to kill his Father and Mother; and though he started at first at so
bloody and barbarous a Suggestion, yet he had it several times after in his
Thoughts, and laid some Projects to effect it; and once he let go the Cock of a
Pistol at his Father, but it missed Fire: And as these Thoughts of Mischief
were in his Head, and was beating his Brains, he had Notice that he had
disinherited him for the last violent Attempt, and settled his Estate upon his
Daughter, the Sister of this Extravagant. This enraged him more and more, and
now nothing but the bloodiest Revenge he could ca^t in his Mind fitted his
Temper; when one Evening in his Closet, at a Lodging (...) had taken, musing on
these Matters, and verily conceived he was awake, a very fair and proper Woman,
to outward Appearance, entered his Chamber, and gave a Rap or two at his
Closet-door, which he opened, and was at first startled; but then thinking it
might be some Gentlewoman that lodged in the House, he began to complement her,
and in the end they fell into Discourse, the supposed Lady earnestly pressing^
him to know the Cause of his Melancholy; which he, out of Bashfulness, for a
time declined; but being more eag^rly pressed, he told her, he was born to a
good Estate, and was brought up like a Gentleman; but having a covetous
niggardly Father, he denied him a Competency to maintain him suitable to his
Education, and several other Passages; and that now he had utterly barred him
of the Hope he had to live well after his Death, in settling his Estate on
another, which had much perplexed his Spirits, and almost distracted him. To
which the Female Shape replied with a smile, That if that was all, his loss
should be repaired, if he would follow the Advice that should be given; and
that he should be revenged of the Injury done him, upon those that had done it.

This Discourse could not but Amaze the unhappy young Man, to think what it
might tend to, and made him inquisitive who this new Acquaintance might be; but
she refused to resolve him, forbidding him to make further enquiry; and to show
it a design in earnest, claped a Purse of Gold into his Hand, and a Diamond
Ring on his Finger; which so overjoyed him, that in a fatal Hour, he rashly
declared, he would do whatever she desired with his Body and Soul. And here
they struck a fatal Bargain, That she would maintain him in all manner of
Splender, and help him to be revenged on his Enemies for the space of twelve
Years, if after that, he would go with her whither she would carry him. This,
after some pause, he promised; then she showed him a Cabinet full of Diamonds,
Rubies, Pearls, and Gold; and withal, bid him Write and Sign the Contract in a
few Words, and she would desire no Witness, charging him to be private in the
Business.

This he did, though (as he confessed) his Hand and Heart trembled, and he felt
an unusual reluctance of Mind: However, the dark Project went on, and she
carried away the Writing; yet he said, when he had slept and waked again, he
took all as if it had passed by the way of a Dream; and indeed, Satan, the
great Deceiver, had deluded him; for the Treasure he thought he had in
Possession, was Fantastical, or Imaginary; and he had that way, no doubt, been
imposed on with seeming Riches by him, who can at Will, turn his own dreadful
Form into that of an Angel of Light: This startled him, and he could not well
persuade himself of the Truth of what had passed, but suspected, whether he was
in his right Wits or not; yet going abroad the next Day, he found a real Purse
of Gold, and in it a Diamond Ring, and some Stones of great Price, and this he
concluded to be the Success of his Agreement, and disputed not further the
Matter at that time; but getting into a Gang of Gamesters, he continued to
increase his Store, and lived in all manner of Riot and Debauchery; yet nothing
could put his Father's last Act out of his Mind, and he studied daily to be
revenged; and at length the old Man was taken with a pining Disease of which he
grievously languished, and most were of Opinion, he was Bewitched: The Mother
was taken with an unusual Palsy; their Cattle and Poultry died strangely; and
lastly, the Father, after a long Sickness, gave up the Ghost.

The Son all this while flourished to outward Appearance, chiefly by Gaming, in
which he had prodigeous Success, contrary to what he was wont; so that the
Devil, no doubt, helping his Servant, People wondered how they came by it, and
gave various Censures: But the twelve Years growing to an end, he fell into an
unaccountable Melancholy, and would often burst into Tears; fearful to be
alone; and found such a Hell of Horror in his Mind that he wished for Death:
But being desired by some Friends to pray, he told them his He^^t was so
hardened, he could not; and although he was prayed with, yet he minded it not,
but frightfully cast his Eyes about, as if some fearful Apparition had been
near; and once in the Agony of his Mind, attempted to hang himself; and so
continued, t^^^^ng what he knew of this Matter, till the time as near as he
could compute was expired; when in the Nightime, there arose such a Storm of
Wind, Lightning, Thunder, and Rain, as frighted most People; and the Roof of
the House where he lay being split in s^^der, his Body was rent in a fearful
manner and turned black, as if scorched with Fire and having lain some time to
the Astonishment of many Spectators, was privately Intered: And may this be a
Warning to wicked Livers

The Substance of a SERMON, Very suitable upon the foregoing Occasion, to warm
us to flee Temptation, and speedily turn unto the Lord.
James 1. Ver. 13.14, 15. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of
God, for God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any Man: But
every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lusts, and enticed: Then
when Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin; and Sin when it is finished,
brings forth Death.


IT is undoubtedly for Man's Sins, that the power of Darkness is permitted to
go up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may Devour; and that he
prevails against the Souls of the Sons of Men, otherways precious in the sight
of their Maker: It is for Sin that God gives us up to shame and reproach to
rashness and despair of his Mercys; for certain it is, God never leaves nor
forsakes us, till our offending the Divine Majesty of Heaven, makes him turn
away his aimable ^yes, and leave our Souls eclipsed, under the power of an
implacable Enemy, who being and Immortal Spirit, too subtle for Mortals to
contend with, unless supported by the Divine Hand, we are unable to resist his
Temptations, which he guilds over like bitter potions, that we may swallow them
the more securely, and studies to suit them to our Inclination: To the
choleric fiery S^pirit, he represents Reveng and Blood shed, bold and brave.
To the Sanguine Carnal, Lusts, and Luxury, as Generous and Jovial. To the
Phlegmatic, Lasiness and S^oath; and to the Melancholy, Envy and Despair. The
most experienced Angler has not half so many baits and slights to entrap the
unthinking watery ^ry, as this grand Deceiver has to entrap the Souls of Men,
that are so proud of being Rational. We find that he durst, even in the
Presence of the Almighty, be so bold to demanded a Commission to tempt
righteous Job, and had, no doubt, prevailed against him, had not an Almighty
Hand sustained him; as you may find it more at large, in the first and second
Chapters of that Book: Nay, more transcendent than this, he durst to tempt even
the Lord his God, when he carried him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glories thereof, promising to
give them, if our blessed Savior would fall down and worship him; and had a
Lie immediately prepared, if there had been a possibility of its taking place:
For that (continues he) is delivered to me, and to whosoever I will ^ give it:
But here he was Repulsed, with a Get thee bind me Satan, for it is written,
Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Luke 4, etc.

If St. Paul, who was endued with the most excellent Spirit of Wisdom, was not
proof against his Temptation, with strong Prayer and Cries, when he sent a
Messenger to Buffet him, a Thorn in the Flesh, as himself terms it; what can we
that dare not pretend to so great a portion of immediate Inspiration do to
resist him, in whom (as the Psalmist say) is our help? Why truly, our help is
in the Lord; it is he alone that can deliver out of the Paws of the Spiritual
Lion, and Bear. He is come to us in great Wrath, because he has but a short
time; and is so implacable an Enemy to the Soul, that where his force is
baffled, fallacies, delusions, and subtle underminings, frequently take place;
and so far we find his malice to extend, that when he was compelled to depart
out of the possessed Person, that his hand might not be out in doing Mischief,
begged earnestly to enter into a simple Herd of Swine, whom he as maliciously
destroyed.

Let us then, to be safe from his Temptations, so as they may not bring us to
shame in this World, and endless Misery in the next, lay hold on him that is
Mighty, and able to save to the utmost, all those that by Faith and true
Repentance draw near unto him: Let us lay hold on the Rock of Ages, and build a
sure Foundation upon this Mercy and Goodness; for ^i^ he alone can deliver us
from Everlasting Death, and defeat the cruel designs of the Destroyer of Souls.
Had this unadvised Person made God his Refuge, he had not been, as now we sadly
fear he is, suffering under the Almighty Uengeance; though it is not for us to
dare so much as positively to limit the Mercies of God even to the worst of
Sinners, but we must submit them to his will and pleasure, whose Mercies are
over all the works of his Creation: Sometimes we may be tempted for our good,
which is the trial of our Faith and Perseverance; for Blessed (says St. James)
is the Man that endures Temptation, for when he is Tried he shall receive the
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him. Let no man
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with
Evil, neither tempts he any Man, but every Man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own Lusts, and enticed: then when Lust has conceived, it brings
forth Sin; and Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death, James 1.12, 13,
14, 15.

Thus we see it is the depravity of Man's Nature and wicked Inclinations, that
gives Satan the advantage over him, to snare and entrap his Soul, to rob him of
Glory, Bliss, and Immortality, to which he was born an Heir, and has a Title to
be Coheir with the Lord of Life. Let us be fervent in Prayer then, least we
enter into Temptation, as this deplorable Wretch did: Let us put on the Armor
of God in Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, and the Helmet of Salvation, that
so we may quench the fiery Darts of our Enemy: Let us but resist the Devil as
we ought, and we have a warrant that he will flee from us: Let us put away
Wrath, Envy, and Revenge, Love our Parents, and Reverence our Supetiours, be
watchful over our Souls, and live not in Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering,
and Wantonness; but put on the Lord Jesus; and take no care for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof: Which that we may all do, and so be happy, God of his
infinite Mercy grant through the Merits and Meditation of our blessed Savior
and Redeemer. Amen, Amen.

A Prayer against Temptation.
Lord, in whom alone is our Strength and Trust, mightily defend us, we beseech
thee, from our Spiritual Enemy, that he may get no Advantage over us; keep us
in perpetual Safety under the Shadow of thy Wings, that no Tribulation,
Discontent, Fears, or Afrightments, may make us fall from thee. Arm us with
Spiritual Weapons, that we may be able to repel the fiery Darts of the
Adversary; and at last having overcome, may receive the immortal Crown of
Glory, which thou have prepared for all them that love and fear thee: And since
thy Son came to destroy the Works of the Devil, l^^ the Kingdom of Darkness
fall before (...) Satan fell, like Lightning that thy Scepter of Righteousness
may be established for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

