A New and Further NARRATIVE Of the STATE of NEW ENGLAND, BEING A Continued
ACCOUNT of the Bloody Indian-War, From March till August, 1676.

Giving a Perfect Relation of the Several Devastations, Engagements, and
Transactions there; As also the Great Successes Lately obtained against the
Barbarous Indians, The Reducing of King Philip, and the Killing of one of the
Queens, etc.

Together with a Catalogue of the Losses in the whole, sustained on either
Side, since the said War began, as near as can be be collected.

Licensed October 13. Roger L'Estrange.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry,
1676.

For the better Understanding some Indian Words, which are necessarily used in
the Following Narrative, the Reader is Desired to take Notice,

That a Swamp signifies a Moorish Place overgrown with Woods and Bushes, but
soft like a Quagmire or Irish Bogg, over which Horse cannot at all, nor English
Foot (without great difficulty) pass.

A Sachem is a King, Prince, or Chief of an ancient Family, over whom he is as
an absolute Monarch.

A Squaw Sachem is a Princess or Queen.

Wigwams are Indian Huts or Houses.

BOSTON, July 22. 1676.
SIR,
HAving presumed in Two former Letters to give you a faithful Account, of the
Original Occasion (as near as I could Discover) and sad Progress of the Cruel
Wars between us and our Barbarous Enemies, the Indians; I thought (having this
other Opportunity) your Curiosity might expect, at least (from that knowledge I
have for many years had of your Courteous Disposition) was assured your
Goodnature would Pardon, the trouble, of a Further Relation of material
Occurrences which have since happened amongst us, the rather for that I
remember my self under the voluntary Obligation of a promise so to do.

My last (which I hope you Received) was of the 9th of February, 1675/6: And
seriously at that time my hand trembled, and my heart almost fainted, when my
mind reflected on our present miseries, and revolved for the future what might
be the Issue of that Deluge of Calamity which threatened us; The Dispensation we
lay under was Cloudy and affrighting, Fresh Messengers (like Jobs servants)
howrly arriving to bring the Doleful Tidings of New Massacres, Slaughters and
Devastations committed by the Brutish Heathens; and certainly it cannot but
deserve both Wonder and Commiseration, that these parts which were not many
Months since hardly to be Parrallel'd for plenty and security, are now almost
destroyed and laid waste by the savage Cruelties of a bloody (and sometimes
despicable) Enemy; who are now become so well-furnisht with Arms and Ammunition
(by the base treachery we fear of some of our Neighbors) so instructed in
Discipline by Experience, and heightened in Pride by unexpected success, That
unless our God (whose tender mercies are over all his works) in compassion to
the English Nation in this Wilderness, wonderfully appear for our deliverance,
nothing could be expected but an utter Desolation; And of this his gracious
dealing toward us, we have lately had several Instances, our Forces being
crowned with success, and the Enemy put to flight, or so far divided and
discouraged, that great Numbers have surrendered themselves, when by our own
strength or outward Circumstances we could least expect it. But that I may set
down things in some Method, I shall reassume the Narritive of our Troubles,
where I left off in my last Letter, and relate the most considerable Actions
from that time, in the same Order as they happened.

After that sharp Eight on the 19. of November, whereof I formerly gave you the
Particulars, our wounded men (in number about 150.) being dressed, were sent into
Rhode Island, as the best place for their Acommodation, where accordingly they
were kindly received by the Governor, and others, only some churlish Quakers
were not free to entertain them, until compelled by the Governor: Of so
inhumane, peevish and untoward a disposition are these Nabals, as not to
Vouchsafe Civility to those that had ventured their Lives, and received
dangerous wounds in their defense. As for the Indians that survived the
battle, they forsook their New-built Fort, and that Swamp where the Fight
happened, and posted themselves in a Swamp twenty miles distant from thence; The
Weather being extreme cold, and the snow so deep, that we could not for some
time march in pursuit of them; yet still kept Scouts abroad daily to observe
their Motions, and thereby hindered them from coming to the Seaside; killed and
took Prisoners diverse of them, as they were found straggling; and burnt great
Numbers of their Wigwams (or houses:) And being reinforced with some
Additionall Forces from Boston and Plymouth, together with a Bark laden with
Provision, we resolved to set upon them again with the first opportunity; And
in order thereunto marched to Potuxit, where we understood, That two nights
before the Indians had assaulted a Gentleman's House about break of day with
much Violence, and wounded Two men in it, striving to Fire the House several
times, by tying Pine-splinters or long Poles in a Bunch fired, and held upon
the Shingles; but those within prevented that stratagem from taking effect,
beat off the Assailants, and found one of them left dead upon the place; But
the Outhouses and Hay the Indians burnt, and drove away all the sheep and
cattle: We marched after them with all convenient expedition, and came to the
Swamp, where they had been, but most of them were then fled, having by their
Scouts discovered the advance of our men; yet our Horse killed, and took many
of them, following the pursuit, till our Horses were tired, our men faint, and
our victuals spent; Insomuch that several horses were killed and eaten, whereof
the General (the worthy Josiah Winslow Esquire, Governor of New London) eat
his part, and in all as well hardships as dangers, was not wanting to encourage
his men by his own valiant example: But finding it both vain and hazardous to
march farther after this flying rabble of barbarous Heathens, who we heard were
then got together, about 5000. men women and children, toward Quobage; Our
Army left the Chase, and having placed a Garrison of about Seventy men, in
Captain Smiths (a strong) house, within four Miles of the Narragansets
Dwellings, marched homewards to Marleborough. and from thence to Boston, where
they were disbanded in December.

But upon this, the Indians began to appear abroad again as mischievous as
ever; For the very next week they set upon Lancaster Town, killed several
people, and carried away many prisoners; Such houses as were fortified,
defended themselves, but the greatest part of the Town they fired and
plundered; and had destroyed the whole place, had not Captain Wadsworth upon
hearing of the Guns come with great expedition from Sudbury, with a party to
their relief; After this they cut off a farm-house near Sudbury, killed seven
people in a barbarous manner, and carried some away captive: Three hundred of
them set upon the Town of Maidesfield, and burnt at least fifty Houses, killed
and took diverse of the Inhabitants, being all surprised before they were aware:
For the subtle Indians near daybreak, came about the Houses privately, and lay
close in the Fences; and as people came out of their Houses, shot them down:
Upon this the Governor of Massachuset sent out about Five hundred or Six
hundred men under the Conduct of Major Thomas Savadge and Captain Mosely, as
next in Command to him, who having intelligence by a girl that had made her
escape, that the Indians were in Three Towns beyond Quoboge, marched thither,
where they joined Major Treat with the Connecticot Forces; but the Enemy were
fled; only skulkingly out of the Woods, they shot one of Captain Moseleys men,
and wounded one or two more: But their main body being closely pursued,
dispersed and ran into Woods and Swamps, so that it was impossible for our men
to come up with them, and therefore marched away for Hadley and Northampton, to
secure them and the other Towns in those parts, and by a special Providence
came very seasonably; For within two days after his Arrival, Northampton
(though fortified round) was assaulted, the Sentinel surprised and slain, and
the Enemy entered the Fortifications: Being ignorant (as it is supposed) of any
Recruits newly come thither, but found such warm entertainment, that though
they had kindled their fire, they durst not stay to roast their breakfast, but
were forced to fly with great confusion; we having lost only three men, and the
Enemy above twenty, as was judged, though the number could not be certainly
known; it being their Custom to carry off their dead always with them, if
possible: The next day they appeared about a thousand strong, whereupon the
Major drew out his Forces, and pursued them to their usual place of Rendevouz
near Deerfield; But they would not abide his coming up with them, but fled
dispersedly into the Woods, where he was able to do little or no Execution upon
them.

The Council of Boston (to the great surprise of many people) refusing to
maintain the Narraganset Garrison, raised by the United Colonies, lodged as
aforesaid in Mr Smiths house, they having eat and destroyed what they could,
quitted the said House, those of the Soldiers that belonged to Connecticot
hiring a Boat to transport them to Pawcatucke, fearing to March through the
Narraganset Country, and those of the Massachusetts and Plimmouth went to
Seacunicke; But the very next day after their Departure, the Indians came and
burnt the said Garrison-house (one of the most delightful seats in
New England) and another house of the said Capt. Smiths at Sawgaw, together
with all the Houses at Narraganset; and the day following assaulted Warwick
with so unhappy a success, that they burnt most of the Houses there, and
indeed ruined all but four, which during the present danger were kept by their
owners with their friends and servants as Garrisons; Out of which there was a
sally made with Twenty men, who with the loss of one of their number killed
ten of the Indians, yet could not preserve the rest of the Town, nor hinder
them from carrying from thence a Considerable booty of Cattle.

The 14th of March the savage Enemy set upon a Considerble Town called
Groughton, and burnt Major Wilberds House first (who with his Family removed to
Charles Town) and afterward destroyed sixty Five dwelling-houses more there,
leaving but six houses standing in the whole Town, which they likewise
furiously attempted to set on fire; But being fortified with Arms and Men as
Garrisons, they with their shot, killed several of the Enemy, and prevented so
much of their design; Nor do we hear that any person on our side was here
either slain or taken captive; But the very next day two men coming from
Malbury to Sudbury, were set upon in the Woods by a great Number of Indian
Women, armed with Clubs, pieces of Swords, and the like, who by their numbers
having over-mastered the two poor Travelers, that had nothing but small sticks
to defend themselves with, beat out their brains, and cut off their privy
members, which they carried away with them in triumph; so vain it is to expect
any thing but the most barbarous usages from such a people amongst whom the
most mild and gentle sex delight in cruelties, and have utterly abandoned at
once the two proper Virtues of Womankinde, Pity and Modesty.

Their next Attempt (I mean of any considerable Body of the Indians) was upon a
Town called Nashaway, which they set fire to, and burnt down to the ground;
There was little resistance made here, people endeavoring rather to escape
their Fury by flight then opposition; and yet they killed many, burnt the Town
down to the ground, and took no less then five and fifty persons into their
merciless Captivity: And that you may perceive the malicious hatred these
Infidels have to Religion and Piety, it may be observed, how they endeavor to
signalize their Cruelty, and gratify their enraged spleen, chiefly on the
promoters of it; For of these 55. Captives, the Minister of the Towns Relations
made up no less then seventeen, viz. Mrs Rowlinson the Ministers Wife, and his
three Children, and two Sisters of her own, with seven, and the other with four
Children; As they were leading them away in this lamentable condition, one of
the Sisters being big with child, going into the Woods to be privately
delivered, the Indians followed, and in a jeering manner, they would help her,
and be her Midwives, and thereupon they barbarously ripped up (...), and burnt
the child before her face, and then in a merciful cruelty, to put her out of
her pain, knocked her o'th head; There was a Report that they had forced Mrs
Rowlinson to marry the one-eyed Sachem, but it was soon contradicted; For being
a very pious Woman, and of great Faith, the Lord wonderfully supported her
under this affliction, so that she appeared and behaved her self amongst them
with so much courage and majestic gravity, that none durst offer any violence
to her, but on the contrary (in their rude manner) seemed to show her great
respect; But who can express the sorrows of her Husband, the Minister, and his
Brother, when returning from Boston, presently after the Engagement, they found
all their Goods destroyed, their Houses laid in ashes, and their dear Wives and
Children thus miserably captivated: This was a fit Scene for Faith and Patience
to be exercised in; In such a juncture of affairs a man had need have a God to
go to for support, and an Interest in Christ to yield him Consolation: Mr
Rowlinson after much pains and trouble ransomed his Wife for Twenty Pounds, and
got her out of their hands, but his children and the rest (if living) remain
still in that most Wretched Slavery.

About the same time one Mr. Clarks Wife, Children, and all his Family at his
Farm-house two miles from Plymouth, were surprised and killed, except one Boy,
who was knocked down, and left for dead, but afterward taken up and revived;
The house they plundered of provision and goods to a great value, Eight complete
Arms, 30 l. of Powder, with an answerable Quantity of Lead for Bullets, and 150
l. in ready money, The said Mr. Clark himself narrowly escaping their Cruelty
by being at that Instant at a Meeting.

Sunday the 26th of March was sadly remarkable to us for the Tidings of a very
deplorable disaster brought unto Boston about 5 a Cloak that afternoon by a
Post from Dedham, viz. That Captain Pierce situate in Plimmouth Colony, having
Intelligence in his Garrison at Seaconicke, that a Party of the Enemy lay near
Mr. Blackstones, went forth with 63 English, and 20 of the Cape Indians, (who
had all along continued faithful, and joined with them); and upon their march,
discovered rambling in an obscure woody place, 4 or 5. Indians, who in getting
away from us halted as if they had been Lame or wounded; But our men had
pursued them but a little way into the woods, before they found them to be only
Decoys to draw them into their Ambuscade; For on a sudden, they discovered
above 500 Indians, who in very good order furiously attacqued them, being as
readily received by ours; So that the Fight began to be very fierce and
dubious, and our men had made the Enemy begin to retreat, but so slowly, that
it scarce deserved that name; when a fresh company of about 400. Indians, came
in, so that the English and their few Indian friends were quite surrounded, and
beset on every side; Yet they made a brave resistance for above Two hours;
During all which time, they did great execution upon the Enemy, whom they kept
at a distance, and themselves in order; For Captain Pierce cast his 63. English
and 20 Indians into a Ring, and fought back to back, and were double-double
distance all in one Ring whilst the Indians were as thick as they could stand
Thirty deep: Over power'd with whose Numbers, the said Captain, and 55. of his
English, and ten of their Indian friends were slain upon the place; which in
such a Cause, and upon such disadvantages may certainly be styled, The Bed of
Honor: However they sold their worthy Lives at a gallant rate; It being
affirmed by those few that (not without wonderful difficulty, and many wounds)
made their escape, that the Indians lost as many Fighting men (not counting
women and children) in this Engagement, as were killed at the battle in the
Swamp near Narraganset, mentioned in our last Letter, which were generally
computed to be above Three hundred.

The same day some Christians going to a Meeting at Springfield with a small
Guard, were ambuscaded by Eight Indians, and a man and woman slain; and the
rest (supposing the Enemies number to have been greater then it was, for in
truth our men were twice as many, yet struck with terror, fled, and left two
women and two Children to the Enemies mercy, whom they carried away captive,
greatly insulting, that so few of them should make so many English fly: Of this
accident Major Savage at Hadly being immediately advertised by a Post, sent
specially on that occasion, dispatched a Party of Horse to pursue the Enemy, and
the next morning found their Track, and soon after discovered them; who seeing
our men approach, took the two poor Infants, and in the sight both of their
Mothers and our men, tossed them up in the air, and dashed their brains out
against the Rocks, and with their hackets knocked down the women, and forthwith
fled: The place being exceeding rocky and a Swamp just by, our horse could not
follow them, and on foot were not able to overtake them; So that the bloody
Villains for the present escaped deserved vengeance; Yet it pleased God, that
both the women revived, and being come again to their understanding, one of
them declared, that she knew every particular person of these Eight Indians,
and that they advised them to put all the men they could light upon to death,
but to save as many women and houses as they could for them, etc.

On Tuesday following, the barbarous Infidels destroyed sixty and six Houses,
besides Barns and Buildings in Seaconicke; but we do not hear of any person
there slain: On Wednesday they stormed Providence, and consumed the greatest
part of the Houses, but without taking away the life of any person, except one
Wright, of whom it is reported, That he was a man of a singular and sordid
humor; of great knowledge in the Scriptures, but of no particular professed
sect or persuasion; one that derided Watches, Fortifications, and all public
endeavors and administrations for the common safety; Insomuch that after all
alarms round about, he refused to bring in any of his Goods (which were of
considerable value) or to shelter himself in any Garrison, but presumed he
should be safe in his own house, where the Enemy found and butchered him: It is
further credibly related concerning him, that he had a strange confidence or
rather conceit, that whilst he held his Bible in his hand, he looked upon
himself as secure from all kind of violence; and that the Enemy finding him in
that posture, deriding his groundless apprehension or folly therein, ripped him
open, and put his Bible in his belly.

But indeed the reason that the Inhabitants of the Towns of Seaconick and
Providence generally escaped with their lives, is not to be attributed to any
compassion or goodnature of the Indians, (whose very mercies are inhumane
cruelties), but (next to Gods providence) to their own prudence in avoiding
their fury, when they found themselves too weak and unable to resist it, by a
timely Flight into Rhode Island, which now became the common Zoar, or place of
Refuge for the Distressed; yet some remained till their coming to destroy the
said Towns; as in particular Mr Williams at Providence, who knowing several of
the chief Indians that came to fire that Town, discoursed with them a
considerable time, who pretended, their greatest quarrel was against Plimmouth;
and as for what they attempted against the other Colonies, they were
constrained to it, by the spoil that was done them at Narraganset; They told
him, that when Captain Pierce engaged them near Mr. Blackstones, they were
bound for Plymouth; They gloried much in their success, promising themselves
the Conquest of the whole Country, and rooting out of all the English: Mr.
Williams reproved their confidence, minded them of their Cruelties, and told
them, that the Bay, viz. Boston, could yet spare Ten thousand men; and if they
should destroy all them, yet it was not to be doubted, but our King would send
as many every year from Old England, rather then they should share the
Country; they answered proudly, That they should be ready for them, or to that
effect, but told Mr. Williams, that he was a good man, and had been kind to
them formerly, and therefore they would not hurt him.

About the latter end of March, came advice from New York, That the Indians in
a bravado had released two English Captives, and sent them down thither to give
Information of what they had seen, which was, That being carried with a Party
three days Journey toward the North East, from the place where King Philip lay
(which was between thirty and forty English miles from Albany; He came up to
an Indian Rendevouz made by a mighty Sachem near Hossicke-River toward Canada,
where one of them told one and Twenty hundred men complete, and the Indians
themselves drawing out into three ranks, that he might view them the better)
made him tell them over three times, who he said were generally well-armed with
good firearms, and most of them young men, few so old as forty; And that
amongst them there were about 500. of those with straws about their noses,
commonly called French-Indians; That neither King Philip, nor that party,
consisting of about four hundred, were then with them, and that the said
Philips own men were not above one hundred; himself being very sickly, and
having but little esteem or authority amongst them.

One of the said released prisoners declared further, that from that rendevouz
he returned with the rest toward Albany, being afterward given by the
North-Indians to the Mahicanders or River-Indians (who have been always
suspected to be too kind to those bloody ones of the North;) And also affirms,
that the said North-Indians at the said rendevouz in a vapouring manner
declared, that their intent was first to destroy Connecticot this Spring, then
Boston in the Harvest, and afterward the Dutch (meaning what the Dutch had
here.)

About the same time also, there was much discourse and consultation about a
project for giving these Northern Indians that thus infested and harassed
New England, a diversion, by engaging the Mohucks (another sort of Indians,
inhibiting toward New York and formerly inveterate enemies to these) ^^ainst
them on the other side; and it was certainly reported, that the ^^vernour of
New York, would upon request and reasonable proposalls freely make use of his
interest amongst that people (which is very great) for effecting so good a
design; Yea, the Pequod Sachem (who always has continued freindly and faithful
to the English, venturing his men on all occasions, who have done very good
service) seemed much to wonder, that we did not carry it on, affirming, that
the said Mohucks were the only persons likely to put an end to the war, by
hindering the Enemy from planting, and forcing them down upon us; but this
counsel (for I know not what good reasons of some amongst us) was not thought
fit (at least for the present) to be so vigourously pursued as some expected:
But to proceed with the Narrative.

On the second of April, Maj. Savage, Capt. Mosely, Capt. William Turner and
Capt. Whitpoll with 300 men marched from Marleborow to Quoboge, where they had
ordered the Connecticot Forces to attend their coming, and accordingly the
parties being joined, endeavored to find out the Enemy and give them battle;
But these Heathens being like wolves and other beasts of prey, that commonly do
their mischiefs in the Night, or by stealth, durst not come forth out of the
woods and Swamps where they lay skulking in small companies; being so light of
foot, that they can run away when they list, and pass boggs, rocky mountains
and thickets where we could by no means pursue them; only now and then we met
with some straglers before they were aware; and one time marching toward
Northampton, had a brisk dispute with a small party, who fell upon our rear,
but we quickly repelled them, and killed about 20. in a hot pursuit after them,
without the loss of one man on our side, and but one wounded.

About the same time Maj. Palmer having been scouring the Narragansets Country,
brought in 30. of the Enemy, and 60. of Ninnicrofts people, which were about
30. fighting men, who delivered up themselves to our protection; we kept their
wives and children safely as hostages, and made the men go abroad with our
parties, who did us great service in clearing the woods; likewise the Pequods
and Mohegins (who proved a good guard to New London, Norwich, and the Rivers
mouth) brought in 27. of the Enemy and much plunder.

April the 6. John Winthrope Esquire a member of the Royal Society, and Governor
of Connecticot Colony, having like a faithful patriot served his Country, dyed
at Boston of a natural distemper after about 8. days sickness, and was there
interred in his fathers Tomb, with an Universal lamentation, and all the
Honors that our distresses and distractions would allow; And though it be
usually said, Inter arma silent Musae, yet could not all our martial confusions
wholly strike our Muses dumb upon so worthy an occasion (enough to make our
Country bathe it self in tears, as it has lately done in blood) but they
appeared in public to pay a Funeral Tribute to his Honorable dust, in a no
less ingenious then passionate and mournful Elegy upon him, Printed here at
Boston.

The next day the Governor intended to have marched out with about 300 English
of his own Colony, and 50 Cape-Indians, and all things were in a readiness
accordingly, but not being supplied with any assistance from us, he wanted
Soldiers to secure his own Towns if they should be attacqued suddenly by the
Indians (who lie in wait for such opportunities) during his absence, and
therefore was forced to let fall his design, and continue at home.

The 11. of April Cap. Denison with an 100. English Volunteers belonging to
Connecticot Colony and as many Indians, of whom some were Mohegins, some
Pequods, and some of Ninnicrofts men that had revolted from him; the said
friendly Indians being commanded by the young Sachem Unkus whose Father (the
only Christian Sagamore) has during all this War continued faithful; Upon
their March, ranging the Narraganset Country near Potuxit, they fell upon a
Party of the Enemy, Commanded by that famous but very bloody and cruel Sachem,
Quononshot, otherwise called Myantonomy, whom the English formerly presented
with a rich Lac't Coat; they fought very obstinately a considerable time, but
at last our men with very small loss obtained the victory, killed above 50 of
the Enemy on the place, and took 40. more alive, and amongst the rest that
insolent Sachem Myantonomy himself, together with another Sachem, and several
other of his chief Counselors and friends; The said Myantonomys carriage was
strangely proud and lofty after he was taken; being examined why he did foment
that War which would certainly be the destruction of him and all the Heathen
Indians in the country, etc. He would make no other reply to any
Interrogatories, but this; That he was born a Prince, and if Princes came to
speak with him he would answer, but none present being such, he thought himself
obliged in honor to hold his tongue, and not hold discourse with such persons
below his birth and quallity; He told them, he wished rather to die then to
continue under confinement; that all he desired was not to be tortured, but
presently put to death, which he requested might be done by young Unkus that
aided us, as acknowledging him his fellow Prince, yet withal threatened, he had
2000. men would revenge his death severely; wherefore our Forces fearing an
escape, put the stoutest men to the Sword, but preserved Myantonomy till they
returned to Stoneington, where our Indian friends and most of the English
Soldiers, declaring to the Commanders their fear, that the English should upon
conditions release him, and that then he would (though the English might have
peace with him) be very pernicious to those Indians that now assisted us, the
said Indians (on these considerations, and the mischiefs and murders he had
done, during this war) permitted to put him to death; and that all might share
in the glory of destroying so great a Prince, and come under the obligation of
fidelity each to other, the Pequods shot him, the Mohegins cut off his head,
and quartered his body, and the Ninnicrofts men made the fire, and burned his
quarters; and as a token of their love and fidelity to the English, presented
his head to the Council at Hartford.

About the same time we had information from an Indian spy taken by our Army,
that the Enemy had a design on the next day to fall upon the Garrison, and some
few houses that remained at Marleborough, to revenge the death of one of their
eminent men that was slain when they were last there (his name being
concealed): Upon which our Major General, who was sent to meet Major Savage,
and accompany him and his Forces to Boston, commanded Capt. Moseley and another
Captain with their Companies thither, to abide and expect the Enemy 24 hours,
but they not coming in that time, our said Forces were called home and
disbanded, to the dissatisfaction of some people who thereupon feared the like
fatal consequences, that but a little before attended the like occasion. Nor
were such their apprehensions vain, for within 4 days afterward news arrived
at Boston, that all the houses at the said Town of Marleborough (except the
Garrison) were destroyed.

April 20. Capt. Wadsworth of Dorchester, being designed with an 100. men to
repair to Marlborough, to strengthen the Garrison, and remove the goods, etc.
there, did accordingly this Evening march with about 70 men from Sudbury, the
rest of his men not appearing; The Enemy who were about a 1000 strong lay near
his passage, but kept themselves undiscovered, and permitted him to pass them
in the night, but in the morning assaulted and burned most of the Houses in
Sudbury (save those that were ingarison'd:) Upon which the Town of Concord
receiving the Alarm, 12 resolute young men hastened from thence to their
Neighbors relief, but were waylaid, and 11. of them cut off; But by the time
Capt. Wadsworth was come to Marlborough, the alarm and news of this disaster
overtook him, and although he had marched all the day and night before, and his
men much wearied, yet he hastened back again and was accompanied by Capt.
Brocklebank Commander of the Garrison at Marleborough, with what small number he
durst spare out of his Garrison, when they arrived within a mile and a half of
Sudbury; The Enemy having hid themselves behind the hills, sent forth 2 or 3 to
cross the March of our forces, and being seen, to counterfeit themselves
affrighted, and fly, thereby to trapan our men into their ambuscade, which
mischievous design succeeded according to their wishes; for our men pursuing
them, and being not above 80 in number, and those miserably tired as well with
tedious marches as for want of sleep, were suddenly set upon, and on every side
encompassed with the Enemy, being about a 1000. strong; yet not at all dismayed
with their numbers, nor dismal shouts, and horrid yellings, ours made a most
courageous resistance; and having gained the top of a hill, they from thence
gallantly defended themselves with the loss of 5 men near 4 hours; The cowardly
Savages disheartened with the sight of so many of their fellows slain in the
first attacque, not daring to venture close upon them, yet (that we may not
think these barbarians altogether unacquainted with stratagems, nor so silly as
to neglect any advantages,) at last they set the woods on fire to the windward
of our men, which by reason of the wind blowing very hard and the grass being
exceeding dry, burnt with a terrible fierceness, and with the smoke and heat
was like to choke them, so that being no longer able at once to resist the
approaching fire, and the cruel enemy, they were forced to quit that
advantageous post in disorder; which the Indians taking advantage of, came on
upon them like so many tigers, and dulling their active swords with excessive
numbers, obtained the dishonor of a victory, our two Captains, after
incomparable proofs of their resolution and gallantry, being slain upon the
place; together with most of their men; but those few that remained, escaped to
a Mill, which they defended till night, when they were hapily rescued by Capt.
Prentice, who coming in the day hastily, though somewhat too late to the relief
of Capt. Wadsworth, having not above Six Troopers that were able to keep way
with him: fell into a pound, or place near Sudbury Towns end, where all
passages were stopped by the Indians; and had not Captain Cowell (who in his
return from Quoboge had avoided the Common Rode providentially, at that instant
come thither with about thirty Dragoons (who were forced to fight their way
through) and two Files of men sent from a Garrison to secure another passage,
which the Enemy hastened to stop against Captain Cowell, both the said Captain
Prentice and his men, and the remainder of the said Captain Wadsworths men in
the Mill, had been all killed or taken alive: Nor did Captain Cowell lose above
six or seven of his men in this Engagement; But so insolent were the Indians
grown upon their first Success against Captain Wadsworth, that they sent us
word, to provide store of good cheer, for they intended to Dine with us upon
the Election-Day.

But for preventing any Danger that might happen on that Occasion, the
following Order was Printed and Published.

At a Council held ar Boston, April 21. 1676.
FOr the Prevention of such Mischiefs as may be designed by the Common Enemy,
and the Securing of the several Plantations upon the Day of Public Election
now drawing near;

It is Ordered, That the Committees of Militia in each Town, do take effectual
Care that the Trained Soldiers be in Arms upon that Day, and keep Watch and
Ward, with all diligence, under the Command of one Commission-Officer at
least, or some other meet Person where no Commission-Officer is to be had;
Which Commander so employed for that Day in every Town, is also strictly
required to forbid and prevent all rudeness by Playing, Drinking, or
otherwise; And for the better Execution of this Order, The Committees of
Militia aforesaid shall take some meet course for the seasonable Publishing the
same to their several Towns; That such of them as are Freemen, may (as many of
them as may be) timely put in their Votes by Proxy, which for this
extraordinary season is most advisable, and hereby Recommended to them to do;
All Soldiers and Inhabitants being hereby enjoined and Commanded in all
respects to yield Obedience accordingly.

By the Council, Edward Rawson, Secr.

April 26. Captain Hinskman having received Commission and Instruction, did
then march for Major Wilberds Funeral (who died in his bed in peace, though
God had honored him with several signal Victories over our Enemies in war) to
Charlestown, and from thence to Concord, the place of Rendevouz. From Mr.
Woodcocks Garrison we hear, that himself and two of his Sons, and some other men
being gone out to labor in the field were about this time surprised, one of
his Sons and another man being killed, and himself and the other Son
dangerously (though as it pleased God, not mortally) wounded, so that there
were only five sound persons left to keep Garrison, besides the old woman and
three daughters, and yet (through mercy) it has always held out.

May the First, Captain Dennison with his Volunteers and Indians fell upon a
Party of the Enemy, and killed Six and twenty of them, and took fifty Captives;
Also we had advice, that the Pequods and other Friendly Indians, had carried
many Prisoners to New London, that some had voluntarily surrendered themselves
to the Magistrates of Connecticot-Colony, and more came in from the Sachem of
Penny-cook.

About a fortnight afterward, the forementioned Captain Turner, by Trade a
Tailor, but one that for his Valor has left behind him an Honorable Memory,
hearing of the Indians being about Twenty miles above them at Connecticot
River; drew out a Party at Hadly and Northampton, where there was a Garrison;
and marching all night, came upon them before daybreak, they having no
Sentinels or Scouts abroad, as thinking themselves secure, by reason of their
remote distance from any of our Plantations; ours taking this advantage of
their negligence, fell in amongst them, and killed several hundreds of them
upon the place, they being out of any posture or order to make any formidable
resistance, though they were six times superior to us in number; But that
which was almost as much, nay in some respect more considerable then their
lives, we there destroyed all their Ammunition and Provision, which we think
they can hardly be so soon and easily recruited with, as possibly they may be
with men: We likewise here demolisht Two Forges they had to mend their Arms,
took away all their materials and Tools, and drove many of them into the
River, where they were drowned, and threw two great Piggs of Lead of theirs,
(intended for making of bullets) into the said River: But this great success
was not altogether without its allay, as if Providence had designed to checquer
our joys and sorrows; and lest we should sacrifice to our own Nets, and say,
Our own Arms or prowess has done this, to permit the Enemy presently after to
take an advantage against us; For as our men were returning to Hadly in a
dangerous Pass, which they were not sufficiently aware of, the skulking
Indians (out of the Woods) killed, at one Volley, the said Captain, and Eight
and Thirty of his men, but immediately after they had discharged, they fled.

In June Major Talkot slew and took captive Four and Twenty of the Enemies in
one Weeks time, and also killed the Old Queen of Narraganset, and an arch
Villain of their Party, that had been with them at the sacking of Providence,
famously known by the Name of Stone-wall or Stone-Layer John, for that being an
active ingenious Fellow, he had learnt the Masons Trade, and was of great use
to the Indians in building their Forts, etc. Likewise Potucke the Great Indian
Counselor (a man considering his Education, of a wonderful subtlety) was
brought Prisoner into Rhode Island.

In July we had very considerable Forces abroad, who took and killed above 200.
of the barbarous bloody Indians, and that cruel Infidel Puncham amongst the
rest.

The Squaw Sachem King Philips Sister, who at first so much promoted this War,
and was since by Treaty with Ninnicroft Sachem of the Narragansets to be
delivered up, has lately surrendered her self, and is come into the Plimmouth
Army, having submitted to the mercy of Major Bradford, who with a small Party
some time since separated himself from the rest of his Narragansets, pretending
(when he found they could not prosper) that he disapproved of their doings, in
breaking their Treaty with the English, has likewise taken shelter under our
Forces at Stoneington, to secure his Life at present; For not only those of his
men that continue in Rebellion still, but likewise those that formerly
surrendered themselves to us, threaten to cut off his Head; the first pretending
that by his treacherous Councils he drew them into this War, and then basely
deserted them; and the second, charging him as a Traitor and Truce-breaker to
the English; Thus abominable is Treachery and Violation of ones Faith even
amongst the most barbarous and savage Infidels.

King Philip and some of these Northern Indians being wandered up toward
Albany, the Mohucks marched out very strong, in a warlike posture upon them,
putting them to flight, and pursuing them as far as Hossicke-River, which is
about two days march from the East Side of Hudsons-River to the N.E. killing
diverse, and bringing away some prisoners with great pride and triumph, which
ill success on that side where they did not expect any enemy, having lately
endeavored to make up the ancient animofities, did very much daunt and
discourage the said Northern Indians, so that some hundreds came in and
submitted themselves to the English at Plimmouth-Colony; and Philip himself is
run skulking away into some Swamp, with not above ten men attending him; Nor
doubt we shortly to have a good account given of that Prime Incendiary, there
being several of our Troops daily abroad in Quest of him.

It is Computed by most Judicious men, That the Indians that were killed,
taken, sent away, and now of late come in by way of submission, cannot in all
(Men, Women and Children) amount to fewer then Six Thousand, besides vast
quantities of their Corn, Houses, Ammunition, and other Necessaries, without
which they cannot long subsist, in Hostility taken and destroyed.

A True but Brief Account of our Losses sustained since this Cruel and
Mischievous War began, take as follows.
In Narraganset not One House left standing. At Warwick but One. At Providence
not above Three. At Potuxit none left. Very Few at Seaconicke. At Swansey two
at most. Marlborough wholly laid ashes, except two or three Houses. Grantham
and Nashaway all ruined but one house or two. Many Houses burnt at Springfield,
Situate, Lancaster, Brookefield, and Northampton. The greatest part of
Rehoboth and Taunton destroyed. Great spoil made at Hadley, Hatfield and
Chelmsford. Deerfield wholly, and Westfield much ruined. At Sudbury many Houses
burnt, and some at Hingham, Weymouth, and Braintree. Besides particular Farms
and Plantations, a great Number, not to be reckoned up, wholly laid waste, or
very much damnified.
And as to Persons, it is generally thought, that of the English there has
been Lost in all (Men, Women and Children) above Eight Hundred since the War
began; of whom many have been destroyed with exquisite Torments and most
inhumane barbarities; the Heathen rarely giving Quarter to those that they
take, but if they were Women, they first forced them to satisfy their filthy
lusts, and then murdered them, either cutting off the head, ripping open the
Belly, or skulping the head of skin and hair, and hanging them up as Trophies;
wearing men's fingers as bracelets about their Necks, and stripes of their skins
which they dress for Belts: They knocked one Youth of the Head, and laying him
for dead, they flead (or skulp'd) his head of skin and hair; After which the
boy wonderfully revived, and is now recovered, only he has nothing but the dry
Skull, neither skin nor hair on his head; Nor have our Cattle escaped the
Cruelty of these worse then brute and savage beasts; For what cattle they took
they seldom killed outright; or if they did would eat but little of the flesh,
but rather cut their bellies, and letting them go several days, trailing their
guts after them, putting out their eyes, or cutting off one leg, etc.

But to reckon up all their Cruelties, would be no less burdensome to
compassionate Christians ears, then too tedious for a Letter, which is already
swelled too big; and therefore I think it now high time to conclude, with
hearty thanks to Almighty God for our late successes against this bloody Enemy,
whereby though not wholly freed from apprehensions of future dangers, yet we
have grounds to hope, that their fury is much quasht and abated, so that (if
our sins obstruct not so great a blessing) we may shortly once again see peace
and safety restored to our (lately disconsolate) habitations in this
Wilderness; For which, as I doubt not of the concurence of yours and all good
Christians prayers, so I shall not fail to recommend you and yours to the same
Almighty protection, and with my hearty respects presented, remain,

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, N. S.

FINIS.

