THE LAWS and ACTS Made in the SECOND SESSION of the FIRST PARLIAMENT Of Our
Most High and Dread SOVEREIGN JAMES VII. By the Grace of GOD, KING of SCOTLAND,
ENGLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith.

Holden at EDINBURGH the 29. of April 1686.

By a Noble Earl, Alexander Earl of MORRAY, Lord Down and Abernethie, etc.
Secretary of State for the Kingdom of Scotland, His Majesty's High Commissioner
for Holding this Parliament, by virtue of a Commission under His Majesty's
Great Seal of this KINGDOM.

With the special Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament.

Collected and Extracted from the Registers and Records of Parliament, by
GEORGE Viscount of Tarbat, Lord McLeod, and Castle-haven, etc. Clerk to His
Majesty's Councils, Registers, and Rolls, etc.

EDINBURGH

Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacr(...)d
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1686. Cum Privilegio.

GOD SAVE KING JAMES, THE SEVENTH.
LAWS and ACTS Made in the SECOND SESSION of the FIRST PARLIAMENT Of Our Most
High and Dread SOVEREIGN JAMES VII. By the Grace of GOD, KING of SCOTLAND,
ENGLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith.
Holden at EDINBURGH the 29 of April 1686.
I. ACT of Dissolution of the Lands of Cesnock and Duchal.
May 18. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Taking into Their
Consideration, That His Majesty's Commissioner, as having special Warrant and
Instruction from His Majesty, Having Proposed and Expounded in plain
Parliament, The Gr(...)t and Faithful Services Done to His Majesty, and His
Royal B(...)there, of ever blessed memory, by John Lord Viscount of Melfor(...)
one of His principal Secretaries of State, and his constant Zeal (...)
Faithfulness to the Interest of the Crown, and particularly, Tha(...) His
Majesty was sensible of the many Journeys made by the said (...)ohn Viscount of
Melfort, from Scotland to the Court of England, upon occasions of great
Importance, to the Service of the Crown and Government, for most of which he
had no allowance, at least none suitable to his Expenses; And that he had
Faithfully executed several Offices of great Trust, as Lieutenant General and
Master of the Ordnance, Lieutenant Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh,
Thesaurer Deput, and Secretary of State for His Majesty's Ancient Kingdom of
Scotland; In which Employments he did very well behave himself; That he was
instrumental in the Defeat of the Rebels at Bothwell-bridge, was diligent
against the Rebels thereafter; And at great Pains and Charges in the Circuits,
for the Shires of Lanerk, Stirling, Renfrew and Dumbarton, in the year 1684.
And that he had performed several other good and acceptable Services. As also
His Majesty's Commissioner, as having special Warrant and Instruction from His
Majesty, Having proposed to the Estates of Parliament, That His Majesty judging
it fit for the Interest of His Crown, and the Good and Welfare of this
Kingdom, To Purchase and Acquire from the said John Viscount of Melfort, the
Lands, Baronies and others aftermentioned, wherein the said Viscount stands
Heretably Infest, viz. The Lands and Barony of Muirhall, Comprehending therein
the Lands of Inverneil, Kilmo^r, Dounanoltich, Craigmoiral, Kilbryd, Kilmorich,
Auchinbreck, Melfort, Kenmore, Knaps, Kilmorie, Kilberrie, Auchinsalloch,
Imstremich, Barleamich, Dounarderie, Eunichan, Kildalban, Dargachie, Cariedale,
Drummoir, Crear, Oib, Muirhall, and several other Lands, Teinds and Rights
mentioned in the Charter thereof, Granted by His Majesty to the said John
Viscount of Melfort, of the Date the nineteenth day of March 1686. Which did
formerly pertain to Sir Duncan Campbel of Auchinbreck, John Campbel of Melfort,
John Campbel of Knap, Dougal Campbel of Kilberrie Patrick Mccairter of
Imstremich, Eivor Mccivor of Askins, Donald Mcaveish of Dounarderrie, Neill
Campbel of Evneichan, Campbel of Kildalban, John Campbell of Dargathie, Duncan
Campbell of Cariedale, Alexander Mcmillan of Douniemoir, Donald Mcneill of
Crear, Alexander Mcerverlich of Oib, Alexander Campbel of Oitter, William
Denholm of Westsheill, Mr. Alexander Campbell Advocat, Collin Campbell elder of
Allangreig, and Duncan Campbell younger thereof, and Stuart younger of
Cultness, And which fell in His Majesty's hands by the Forefaulture of the
forenamed persons; And likewise the Lands and Barony of Melfort,, Comprehending
the Superiorities and the Feu-Duties of the Lands of Rayra, and the Isle of
Loung, The Lands of Torsay, The Lands and Isle of Shennay, The Lands of
Daginneish, Armadie, Auchnasoul, Ragray and of many other Lands, particularly
mentioned in the Charter thereof, Granted by His Majesty, under His Majesty's
Great-Seal, to the said John Viscount of Melfort, of the Date the day of 1685.
Which Superiorities and Feu-Duties pertained formerly to Archibald Campbel,
late Earl of Argile, and fell in His Majesty's hands by his Forefaulture,
Excepting only the Superiorities and Feu-Duties of Glen*Ila, Balquhan,
Spitletown of Balquhan, Edinample and Menstrie, which are Reserved to the said
Viscount of Melfort, The said Lands and Baronies being of a vast and great
extent, and containing great Superiorities, and as lying and being Situat in
the Highlands, and formerly belonging to the late Earl of Argile, and others of
his Party, who were involved in the late Rebellion, and Forefault for their
accession thereto, has always been subject to Disorders, which might endanger
the public Peace, which being in His Majesty's hands. And His Royal Authority
and Interest concurring, may Restrain and prevent the same, and His Majesty
conceiving it just and reasonable, That the said John Viscount of Melfort, in
lieu and place of the foresaids Lands and Baronies formerly belonging to him,
and which at His Majesty's Desire, he is willing to Resign in His Majesty's
Hands, ad perpetuam remanentiam, should have a full Recompense and Satisfaction
for the same. And His Majesty Designing to Give and Dispone in Permutation and
Excambion thereof, The Lands and Barony of Riccartoun; The Lands and Barony of
Cesnock and Galstoun, with the Tower of Cesnock and Pertinents; The Lands and
Barony of Bar; The Lands and Barony of Castlemains and Cumnock; The Lands and
Barony of Hainring* Ross, all lying within the Sheriffdom of Air, formerly
pertaining to Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels, sometime of Cesnock: The Lands
and Barony of Duchall, and the Lands of Porterfield, with the Pertinents which
pertained to Porterfield, sometime of Duchall; and all other Lands, Teinds and
Rights whatsomever, belonging to the said Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels, and
Porterfield; And upon their Forefaulture did come in His Majesty's Hands, and
are Annexed to the Crown by the Forty two Act of the first Session of this
current Parliament, Dated the sixteenth day of June 1685. And albeit His
Majesty be satisfied that the said Transaction and Excambion, is of advantage
to His Majesty and His Crown, and for the Good and Welfare of this Real (...),
upon the Considerations foresaid; And that the Lands and others which the said
Viscount of (...)elfort is willing to Resign in His Majesty's hands, are of
greater yearly Rent and Value; Y(...) His Majesty has thought fit, re integra,
to propose the same in plain Parliament, That they m(...) seriously ponder, and
consider the said particular Services, done and performed by the said
Vi(...)ount of Melfort, to His Majesty and His Crown; And the foresaid
Proposal, as to the Transact(...)on and Excambion abovementioned, and give His
Majesty Their Advice, Judgment and Determination thereanent: And the Estates
of Parliament after mature Deliberation, Treating and Consulting anent the
Premises, being fully satisfied and convinced, That either the said particular
Services, Done and Performed to His Majesty by the said Viscount of Melfort,
(The truth whereof is sufficiently known, and did appear to Them) or the
foresaid Permutation and Excambion, are Just, Sufficient and Important Reasons,
concerning both His Majesty's Interest, and the public Good and Welfare of
this Kingdom, That They should Advise and Consent to His Majestes Giving and
Disponing the said Lands, Baronies and others above-exprest, to the said John
Viscount of Melfort, his Heirs and Assigneys; and for that effect, that the
said Lands should be dissolved from the Crown* and from the said Act of
Annexation. THEREFORE, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Decerns, Ordains and Declares, That the said Lands and Barony of
Riccartoun; The Lands and Baronies of Cesnock and Galstoun, with the Tower of
Cesnock and Pertinents; The Lands and Barony of Bar, The Lands and Barony of
Castlemains and Cumnock* The Lands and Barony of Haining-Ross, all lying within
the Sherifdom of Air, formerly pertaining to the said Sir Hugh and Sir George
Campbels, sometime of Cesnock; And the Lands and Barony of Duchal, and the
Lands of Porterfield, with the Pertinents, which pertained to Porterfield,
sometime of Duchall; And all other Lands, Teinds and Rights whatsomever,
belonging to the said Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels, and Porterfield, may be
Disponed to the said Viscount and his forefaids; And for that effect has
Dissolved, and hereby Dissolves the same from the Crown, and Patrimony thereof;
And from the foresaid Act of Annexation, made the sixteenth day of June One
thousand six hundred eighty five; And from all other Acts of Annexation, and
from all Clauses, Qualities and Conditions therein-contained: And His Majesty,
with Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares, That this
present Act of Dissolution, having proceeded upon the Advice and Deliberation
of the Estates of Parliament, re integra; And found by the said Estates, to be
for Great, Weighty and Reasonable Causes, Concerning the Goop, Welfare and
Public Interest of the whole Kingdom; First Proposed and Advised, and maturely
Pondered and Considered, before any previous Grant, or other Right or Deed,
Given, Made or Done by His Majesty, in Favors of the said Viscount of Melfort
and his foresaids, of the Lands, and others particularly and generally
abovementioned, or any part or portion of the same, Does fully satisfy the
whole Clauses, Conditions and Qualifications contained in the foresaid Act of
Annexation, and shall have the Force, Strength and effect of a general Law or
Act of Parliament, and shall be as valid and effectual to the said Viscount of
Melfort, and his foresaids, for the Security of the Lands, Baronies and others
above-exprest, as any other Act of Dissolution Granted by His Majesty, or His
Royal Ancestors; with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, in
Favors of whatsoever Person at any time hereafter. Likeas, His Majesty with
Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares, That this present Act
of Dissolution, shall not be understood to fall under, or be comprehended in
any Act Salvo jure, To be past in this, or any other Session of this current
Parliament; But is hereby excepted therefrae in all time coming.

II. ACT For the better Inbringing of His Majesty's Supply.
May 26. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, That by a Clause in the Act of Convention of
Estates, July 10. 1678. It is Provided, That Persons liable in payment of the
Supply then Imposed, should not be holden to produce Discharges, or Receipts of
the samen, after the tenth day of June 1686. years. And seeing there is a great
part of the Cess and Supply yet resting unpayed, for which no Diligence is
done; THEREFORE, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Statuts, Ordains and Declares, That the particular Collectors in
each Shire, for whom the Commissioners are answerable, shall be liable in all
time coming, to do Diligence by Quartering, or Denunciation against the
Deficients, at the head Burgh of the respective Shires where they live; And
Declares the said Diligence so to be used, shall be sufficient to stop and
interrupt the prescription, and make the Deficients liable, notwithstanding of
the Clause in the foresaid Act, finding them not liable to produce their
Discharges after the said day: And because the time prescribed by the said Act,
is now near elapsed. THEREFORE, His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid,
Does Prorogat the same until the first day of November next; To the Effect,
the particular Collectors may do Diligence in the mean time. Likeas, His
Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains in time coming,
That all Cess which shall not be paid w(...)thin six Months after the same
falls due, shall bear Annualrent after elapsing of the said six Moan(...)hs,
albeit Horning or other Diligence be not used for the same. And whereas by the
Act 3. Par. 3. Chapter 2. The number of Foot to be employed in Parties for
Quartering upon the Deficients, is Declared to be six Foot for every 1000.
Pounds of Deficiency, and so proportionally; Which number is not sufficient,
nor proportionable to the number of Horses or Dragoons appointed by the same
Act. It is therefore hereby Ordained and Declared, That the number of Foot
hereafter to be employed, shall be fifteen for each 1000 Pounds Scots, and so
proportionally; And the number of Horses and Dragoons to continue as formerly.
And likewise Statutes and Ordains, That if the Parties appointed to Quarter,
shall not exact their Quartering money every twenty days at least, That they
shall not have power to exact the same thereafter, It being always Competent to
the Parties, in case they get not voluntar payment, to poynd therefore (within
the said time) any Goods belonging to the persons on whom they are Quartering,
in the ordinary way appointed by Law. And it is hereby Enacted and Declared,
That Deficient Money shall only be due to Parties, so long as they are actually
Quartering within the Shire, and that the Quartering Money shall commence and
be paid according to the foresaid Act of Convention of Estates.

III. ACT Ordaining Interlocutors to be Subscribed by the Judges.
May 26. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That from and after the first of November next, All
Interlocutors pronounced by the Lords of Council and Session, and all other
Judges within the Kingdom, shall be Signed by the President of the Court, or
the Judge pronouncer thereof: And His Majesty, with Advice foresaid, Prohibits
and Discharges the Clerks upon their peril, to Extract any Acts or Decreets,
unless the Interlocutors, which are the Warrands thereof, be Signed as said is:
Declaring hereby the Extracts which shall be given out otherways, to be void
and null.

IV. ACT Ordaining all Executions to be Subscribed by the Witnesses, without
necessity of Stamping.
May 26. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That in time coming, all Citations before the Lords of
Session, and Citations before any other Judges, Civil or Criminal, which
formerly by Law or Custom used to be in Writ, and all Executions of Letters of
Horning, Inhibition and others whatsoever, be Subscribed by the Executer
thereof, and the Witnesses; Otherwise to be null and void. And that the same
shall not be quarrellable for the want of stamping, any Law or Practick to the
contrary notwithstanding.

V. ACT Anent the Session.
May 26. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statute and Ordain, That the ordinary Dyets for Sitting of the Session, shall
be thus Regulated for the future, viz. The Winter-Session, shall Sit down the
first of November, and Rise the last of February: And the Summer-Session shall
Sit down the first day of June, and Rise the last of July; And that this
present Act shall take effect from the first of November 1686. And that
notwithstanding of the seventh Act of the third Parliament of King Charles the
Second, of ever Glorious Memory, which is hereby Rescinded.

VI. ACT For the Christmas Vacans
May 26. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of His Majesty's Three Estates
Assembled in Parliament, Statutes, Ordains and Declares, That the Christmas
Vacation of the Session or College of Justice, shall yearly, and in all
timecoming, Continue and endure from the Twentieth of December, to the Tenth
day of January inclusive; Any former Law, Act or Custom to the contrary
Notwithstanding.

VII. ACT Of Dissolution of the Lands and Barony of Torwoodlie, in Favors of
Lieutenant General Drummond.
May 28. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Taking into Their serious
Consideration, That His Majesty's Commissioner, as having special Warrant and
Instruction from His Majesty, Having Proposed and Expounded in plain
Parliament, The great and faithful Services done and performed to His Majesty's
Royal Father King Charles the First, and His Royal Brother King Charles the
Second (of ever Blessed memories) and to His Majesty's Self, since His
accession to the Crown, by Lieutenant General Drummond, Commander of all His
Majesty's Forces within the Kingdom of Scotland; And Considering the particular
Services Done by him, in his ready and cheerful joining with the Forces, Levied
in the Year 1648. For Rescuing the Sacred Person of His Majesty's Royal Father,
out of the hands of His Rebellious English Subjects, by whom He was then kept
Prisoner; And with the Forces Levied in Ireland, for the Service of the Crown,
in the year 1649. under the Command of the Duke of Ormond, then Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland; And his brave and cheerful Concurring with the Royal Armies, both
in Scotland and England, in the year 1651. which was the occasion of his
suffering great loss, and a grievous long Imprisonment; And his Resolute and
Courageous appearing in Arms against the Usurpers in the year 1653. being
Clothed with a Commission of Major General: And Considering also, That after
the hopes of the Loyal Party were absolutely cut off, by the prevalency of the
Usurpation, The said Lieutenant General Drummond having endured the greatest
hardships and miseries, under the influence of Tyrannical Powers, made a
generous choice, rather to undergo Exile and Banishment from his own Native
Country, than submit upon any Terms to, or comply with an Unlawful and Usurped
Authority, and that upon a Call from His Majesty's Royal Brother, after His
Restoration, he left a Splendid and Honorable Employment under the Emperor
of Russia, to give Obedience to His Native Prince, and that since his Return to
this Kingdom, he did Good and Signal Service, as Major General in the Defeat of
the Rebels, and Suppressing the Rebellion, raised in the year 1666. And in his
painful and Faithful Performance of the Office of Master-General of the
Ordnance, for diverse years; And in his Good and Successful Conduct of His
Majesty's Forces, as Lieutennant-General against the late Rebels and
Conspirators, who under the Command of the late Earl of Argile, Designed to
Overturn the Government of this Nation; And upon many other occasions, has
given pregnant proofs of a firm and steady Loyalty: And all the said great and
memorable Services and Sufferings, being proposed and laid open in plain
Parliament, to the end, the Three Estates might give His Majesty Their
Judgment, Advice and Determination, re integra, whether the same were True,
Good and Reasonable Causes of publict Government, for Dissolving the Lands and
Barony of Torwoodlie, formerly pertaining to Pringle sometime of Torwoodlie,
with all other Lands, Heretages and Rights, which belonged to him; from the
Crown, and which came in His Majesty's hands, through the Crimes of Treason,
and laese Majesty, Acted, Committed and Done by the said Pringle, and the Doom
and Sentence of Forefaulture, given and pronounced against him for the same,
upon the day of One thousand six hundred eighty five years, and were Annexed to
the Crown by the forty two Act of the first Session of this current
Parliament; And the said Estates of Parliament, after long and mature
Deliberation, and Treating and Consulting anent the Premises, being fully
satisfied and convinced, That the particular Services and Sufferings
abovementioned, Done, Performed and Undergone by the said Lieutenant General
Drummond; The Truth whereof is clearly known and did appear to them, are Just,
Weighty and Important Reasons, concerning both His Majesty's Interest, and the
publict Good and Welfare of this Kingdom, That they should Advise and Consent
to His Majesty's Giving and Disponing the said Lands and Barony of Torwoodlie,
and others above-exprest, to the said Lieutenant General Drummond, his Heirs
and Assigneys; And for that effect, that the said Lands should be Dissolved
from the Crown, and from the said Act of Annexation: THEREFORE, His Majesty,
with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Decerns, Ordains and
Declairs, That the said Lands and Barony of Torwoodlie, and all other Lands,
Heretages and Rights, sometime belonging to the said Pringle late of
Torwoodlie, and which came in His Majesty's hands, and were Annexed to the
Crown in manner foresaid, may be be Disponed to the said Lieutenant General
Drummond, and his foresaids; And for that Effect, has Dissolved, and hereby
Dissolves the same from the Crown, and Patrimony thereof; And from the foresaid
Act of Annexation, made the sixteenth day of June One thousand six hundred
eighty and five years, and from all other Acts of Annexation, and from all
Clauses, Qualities and Conditions therein contained; And His Majesty, with
Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares, That this present Act
of Dissolution having proceeded upon the Advice and Deliberation of the Estates
of Parliament, re integra; And found by the said Estates to be for great,
weighty and reasonable Causes, concerning the Good, Welfare and publict
Interest of the whole Kingdom, first Proposed and Advised, and maturely
Pondered and Considered in plain Parliament, before any previous Grant, Or
other Right or Deed, Given, Made or Done by His Majesty, in Favors of the said
Lieutenant General Drummond and his foresaids, of the Lands and others
abovementioned, or any Part or Portion of the same, Does fully satisfy the
whole Clauses, Conditions and Qualifications contained in the foresaid Act of
Annexation, and shall have the Force, Strength, and Effect of a General Law, or
Act of Parliament, and shall be as valid and effectual to the said
Lieutenant General Drummond, and his foresaids, for their Security of the Lands
and Barony of Torwoodlie, and others above expressed, as any other Act of
Dissolution, Granted by His Majesty, or His Royal Ancestors, with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, in Favors of whatsoever person at any
time heretofore, and that notwithstanding of any former Gift or Grant, Given by
His Majesty's Royal Brother, to the said Lieutenant General Drummond, which
shall no ways weaken or Infringe this present Act of Dissolution, or His
Majesty's Grant of the Lands and others above-exprest, to follow thereupon.
Likeas, His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and
Declares, That this present Act of Dissolution shall not be understood to fall
under, or be comprehended in any Act, Salvo Iure, To be past in this, or any
other Session of this current Parliament, but is hereby excepted therefra in
all time coming.

VIII. Additional Act anent Highways and Bridges.
May 28. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Ratifies and Approves the sixteenth Act of the first Session of the second
Parliament of King Charles the Second, of blessed memory, Entitled, Act for
Repairing Highways and Bridges: And the ninth Act of the second Session of the
same Parliament, and Ordains the same to be duly observed in time coming: And
for the more effectual Prosecution of these Acts, His Majesty, with Advice
foresaid, Does Authorize and Require the Commissioners for His Majesty's Supply
in the several Shires, to meet with the Justices of Peace, and Act in the same
manner as they are warranted to do by the foresaid Acts, with Power to them at
their first Meeting to choose their own Clerk; And Declares, That any five of
the whole number shall be a Quorum, excepting the Shires of Clakmannan, Kinross
and Cromartie, wherein three to be a Quorum; And Ordains the first Diet of
their Meeting for this year, to be the last Tuesday of June next; And that the
Sheriff of the Shire, or his Depute, cause intimate that Diet, and the first
Diet of Meeting yearly thereafter, at each Paroch Kirk, upon the Sunday before,
under the pain of five hundred merks Scots. And in case any of the Justices of
Peace, or Commissioners of Supply, residing within the Shire, shall be absent
the said last Tuesday of June next, or the first Diet of meeting yearly
thereafter, they shall be fined by the Quorum met, in twenty merks Scots, for
ilk Dyets absence; and in case a Quorum of them shall not meet, the Sheriff or
his Depute is hereby empowered to fine each of the absents in twenty merks
Scots; which fines shall be applied for Reparation of the Highways and
Bridges: And whereas by the foresaid Act in the year 1669. The time for the
Inhabitants to work at the Reparation of the Highways, is appointed not to
exceed six Days yearly the first three years, and four days yearly thereafter:
His Majesty in regard of the present Condition of the Highways and Bridges,
Does, with Advice foresaid, Ordain that these working Days shall be six yearly,
for the space of five years, from and after the last Tuesday of June next; and
seeing it falls out sometimes, that Bridges and Ferries are upon the Confines of
two Shires, and it being just that both Shires in that case should be burdened
with the Expense of Reparation; His Majesty with Advice foresaid, Does Ordain
the Justices of Peace, and Commissioners of Supply in both Shires to meet and
adjust the Expense of the said Reparation proportionally according to the
respective Valuations of these Shires; and that the Sheriffs of these Shires or
their Deputs Conveen them; and in case they do not meet, Grants Warrant to
direct General Letters for Charging them to that effect. And His Majesty with
Advice foresaid, Declares, That the several Shires and Burghs, shall be holden
to repair the present standing Bridges within their respective bounds, and
being repaired to uphold the same, and if they suffer them to fall, His
Majesty's Privy Council is hereby Empowered to fine them in as much as will
Repair or Rebuild these Bridges. And it is hereby Ordained, That where Customs
are Collected at Bridges, or Causeys, the same shall be employed in the first
place for Repairing these Bridges and Causeys.

IX. ACT Of Annexation of the Baronies of Muir-hall and Melfort to the Crown.
June 8. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and the Estates of Parliament Considering, That by the
first Act of the present Session of this current Parliament, the Lands and
Barony of Riccartoun, the Lands and Barony of Cesnock and Galstoun, with the
Tower of Cesnock and Pertinents; the Lands and Barony of Bar; the Lands and
Barony of Castlemains; the Lands and Barony of Haining-Ross, and the Lands and
Baronie of Duchal and Porterfield, with all other Lands, Teinds and Rights
whatsomever, which formerly belonged to Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels,
sometime of Cesnock and Porterfield, sometime of Duchall, were Dissolved from
the Crown and Patrimony thereof, To the end the same might be conveyed, and
Disponed in Favors of John Lord Viscount of Melfort, one of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, his Heirs and Successors, as a just Recompense
and Reward of the good and faithful Services, Done and Performed by him to the
Crown and Kingdom, particularly expressed in the said Act, and in lieu and place
of the Lands and Baronies after-mentioned, wherein the said Viscount of Melfort
stood Infest under the Great Seal, and which were found expedient and necessar
by the Estates of Parliament, to be Purchased and Acquired from him by His
Majesty, for the Causes likewise mentioned in the said Act, viz. The Lands and
Barony of Muirhall, comprehending therein the Lands of Inverneil, Kilmoir,
Dounanoltich, Craigmoirall, Kilbryd, Kilmorich, Auchinbreck, Melfort, Kenmore,
Knaps, Kilmorie, Kilberrie, Auchinsolloch, Imstremich, Barleamich, Dannarderie,
Eunichan, Kildalban, Dargachie, Cariedale, Drumoir, Crear, Oib, Muirhall, and
several other Lands, Teinds and Rights, mentioned in the Charter thereof,
Granted by His Majesty to the said John Viscount of Melfort, of the Date the
ninteenth day of March One thousand six hundred eighty six years, which did
formerly pertain to Sir Duncan Campbel of Auchinbreck, John Campbel of Melfort,
John Campbel of Knap, Dougall Campbel of Kilberrie, Patrick Mccairter of
Instremich, Eiver Mceiver of Askins, Donald Mcaveish of Dounarderrie, Neil
Campbel of Evaichan, Campbel of Kildalban, ohn Campbel of Dargathie, Duncan
Campbel of Cariedale, Alexander Mcmillan of Dounie moir, Donald Mcneil of
Crear, Alexander M^erterlich of Oib, Alexander Campbel of Otter, William
Denholm of Westshiell, Mr. Alexander Campbel Advocat, Colin Campbel elder of
Allangreig, and Duncan Campbel younger thereof, and Stuart younger of Cultness,
and which fell in His Majesty's hands, by the Forefaulture of the forenamed
Persons: And likewise the Lands and Barony of Melfort, Comprehending the
Superiorities and Feu-Duties of the Land of Rayra, and the Isle of Loung; The
Lands of Torsay, The Lands and Isle of Shennay, the Lands of Lagianeish,
Armadie, Auchnasoul, Ragray, and of many other Lands, particularly mentioned in
the Charter thereof, Granted by His Majesty, under His Majesty's Great Seal, to
the said John Viscount of Melfort, of the Date, the day of One thousand six
hundred eighty five years; Which Superiorities and Feu-Duties pertained
formerly to Archibald Campbel late Earl of Argile, and fell in His Majesty's
hands by his Forefaulture, excepting only the Superiorities and Feu-Duties of
Glen-Ila, Balquhan, Spittletoun, Ednample and Menstrie, which are reserved to
the said Viscount of Melfort: And also Considering, that in pursuance of the
Design and Intent of the said Act of Dissolution, and in Prosecution thereof,
The Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the said John Viscount of Melfort, have
entered into, and perfected a Contract of the Date the 24. and 28 days of May;
One thousand six hundred eighty six years, whereby His Majesty has Disponed to
the Viscount of Melfort and his Heirs therein mentioned, The Lands and Baronies
of Riccartoun, Cesnock and others above-exprest: And on the other part, The
said Viscount of Melfort has Disponed in favors of Our Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty, and Resigned in His Majesty's hands, ad remanentiam, The Lands
and Baronies of Muirhall and Melfort, Comprehending the whole Lands,
Superiorities and Feu-Duties above-specified, excepting and reserving to the
said Viscount of Melfort, as is before excepted and Reserved; And His Majesty
now intending, That the Lands, Baronies, and others Disponed and Resigned by
the Viscount of Melfort, in favors of His Majesty, should be annexed to the
Crown, and Incorporat with the Patrimony thereof: THEREFORE His Majesty, with
Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Has Annexed, United and
Incorporat, and hereby Units, Annexes and Incorporats to the Crown of this His
ancient Kingdom, to remain inseparable therewith in all time coming, The Lands
and Barony of Muirhall, Comprehending the whole Lands and others
abovementioned, viz. The Lands of Inverneil, Killmore, Dounanoltich,
Craigmuirhall, Kilbryd, Kilmorich, Auchinbreck, Melfort, Kenmore, Knap,
Kilmore, Kilberrie, Auchinsalloch, Instremich, Barleamich, Dounarderie,
Eunichan, Kildalban, Dargachie, Cariedale, Drumoir, Crear, Oib, Muirhall, and
remanent Lends, Teinds, and Rights mentioned in the foresaid Charter thereof,
Granted by His Majesty to the said John Viscount of Melfort; and likewise, The
foresaids Lands and Barony of Melfort, Comprehending the Superiorities and the
Feu-Duties of the Lands of Rayra, and the Isle of Loung, the Lands of Torsay,
the Lands and Isle of Shenney, the Lands of Dagneish, Ardmadie, Auchnasoul,
Ragray; and whole remanent Lands, particularly mentioned in the Charter
thereof, granted by His Majesty, under His Majesty's Great Seal, to the said
John Viscount of Melfort, Excepting only the foresaid Superiorities, and
Feu-Duties of Glen-Isla, Balquhan, Spittletoun of Balquhan, Ednample and
Menstrie, which are reserved to the said Viscount of Melfort; And it is hereby
Statute and Declared, That the said Lands, Baronies and others
abovementioned, with the Teinds thereof, excepting as is before excepted,
shall remain with His Majesty's Crown in all time coming, and that the same, or
any part thereof, shall not, nor may not be given away in Fee and Heretage, nor
in Frank-Tenement, Liferent-pension or Tack, except for the full Duty, which
may be gotten from, and paid by the Tennents, or by any other manner of
Alienation, Right or Disposition whatsomever to any Person or Persons of
whatsomever Estate, Degree or quality they be, without Advice, Decree and
Deliberation of the whole Parliament, and for great, weighty and reasonable
Causes, concerning the good, welfare and public Interest of the whole
Kingdom; First to be proposed, and to be Advised and maturely Pondered and
Considered by the Estates, re integra, before any previous Grant, Right, or
Deed be Given, Made or Done by His Majesty, or His Successors, concerning the
Disposition of the said Baronies, and others foresaids, or any part thereof,
which may any ways predetermin them or the Estates of Parliament, and prejudge
the freedom of their Deliberation and Consent; And if at any time hereafter it
shall be thought fit to Dispon, or Grant any Right of any Part of the said
Lands, Superiorities, Offices, Teinds and others. It is Declared That the
general Narrative of Good Services, Weighty Causes and Considerations shall not
be sufficient; But the particular Causes and Considerations, whereupon His
Majesty, and His Successors may be induced to Grant, and the Estates to Consent
to such Rights, are to be expressed, that it may appear, That the same is not
granted through importunity, or upon private suggestions or pretenses: But for
True, Just, and Reasonable Causes, and Considerations of public Concernment.
And farther, It is Declared, That if any general Act of Dissolution of His
Majesty's Property, shall be made at any time hereafter, The Lands, Baronies
and others abovementioned, now annexed, shall not be understood to Fall, or be
Comprehended under the same; and if the Lands and others foresaids, hereby
Annexed, or any Part thereof, shall be Annalzied or Disponed, or any Right of
the same shall be Granted, otherways than is appointed and Ordained in manner
abovementioned; His Majesty, with Consent foresaid, Does Statute and Declare;
That all Dispositions, Infeftments and other Rights of the said Lands, and
others now annexed, or any Part thereof, which shall be granted contrary to
this present Act, with all Acts of Dissolution and Ratification, and other Acts
of Parliament concerning the same, shall be from the beginning, and in all time
thereafter, void, null, and of no effect; And notwithstanding thereof, It shall
be lawful to Our Sovereign Lord and His Successors for the time, To take back,
and receive at their pleasure, for their own use, without any Process of Law,
The Lands and others above-rehearsed, hereby annexed, or any part thereof,
which shall be Annallzied or Disponed, and these in whose Favors any such
Rights or Alienations shall be made, shall be accomptable for, and liable to
Refound and pay all Profits, Intromissions, or Benefits taken, uplifted or
employed by them, in the mean time; and it is Declared, That all other Clauses,
Articles and Provisions contained in any former Act or Acts of Annexation, to
the advantage of His Majesty, and His Crown, are, and shall be holden as
repeated and insert herein. Likeas His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Does Ratify and Confirm the foresaid Contract, past
between His Majesty and the said Viscount of Melfort, in the whole Heads,
Clauses, Articles, and Provisions of the same, with the Resignation made by
virtue of the Procutry therein contained by the Viscount of Melfort* in his
Majesty's hands, of the foresaids Lands, Baronies, and others hereby annexed to
the Crown, together with the Signature granted by His Majesty to the said
Viscount of Melfort, and his Heirs of the foresaids Lands, Baronies and others
dissolved from the Crown, Dated the day of One thousand six hundred eighty six
years; And the Charter under the Great Seal, Precepts and Instruments of Seasin
to follow thereupon; and Decerns and Declares this present Ratification to be
as valid, effectual and sufficient to all intents and purposes, as if the
foresaid Contract, Signature and other Writs or Rights Confirmed, were all
Verbatim herein Engrossed; and His Majesty and Estates of Parliament Dispenses
with, and supplies the generality of these Presents for now and ever.

X. ACT Ordaining Pursuers to furnish the Act to the Defenders, whereon they
are to Depone.
June 8. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That in Actions before the Lords of Session, and all
other Judges within the Kingdom, where by the Act of Litiscontestation, the
Defenders Oath is only required, and nothing to be proven upon his part; That
the Pursuer shall be obliged to furnish the Defender with the Act, whereon he
is to Depone, within forty eight hours after the Pursuer or his Procurator
shall be required; otherways that the Defender shall not be holden to Depone,
but the Ordinary shall dismiss him, the foresaid Requisition being always made,
after elapsing of the Term assigned by the Act, and before the Term be
circumduced at the the Pursuers Instance; and where the Defenders in
Exhibitions do Depone Negative, and the Defenders in Processes for making
arrested Goods forthcoming, Depone either affirmative or Negative, That the
Clerks and Macers Dues shall be paid by the Pursuer, and not by the Defender;
with Certification, if the Pursuer do not make payment thereof, the Defender
shall not be holden to Depone, but may be dismissed by the Ordinary.

XI. ACT For Winter-Herding.
June 8. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering the Prejudice and Damnage, which the Liedges
do sustain in their Planting and Enclosures, through the not herding of Nolt,
Sheep and other Bestial in the Winter time, whereby the young Trees and Hedges
are eaten and destroyed; Does, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of
Parliament, Statute and Ordain, That all Heretors, Liferenters, Tennents,
Cottars and other Possessors of Lands or Houses, shall cause herd their Horses,
Nolt, Sheep, Swine and Goats the whole Year, as well in Winter as Summer, and in
the Night time shall cause keep the same in Houses, Folds or Enclosures, so as
they may not eat or destroy their Neighbors Ground, Woods, Hedges or Planting,
Certifying such as shall Contraveen, they shall be liable to pay half a Merk
toties quoties, for ilk Beast they shall have going on their Neighbors Ground,
by and attour the Damnage done to the Grass or Planting; And Declares, That it
shall be lawful to the Heretor, or Possessor of the Ground, to detain the said
Beasts, until he be paid of the said half Merk for ilk Beast found upon his
Ground, and of his Expenses in keeping the same; and this but prejudice of any
former Acts of Parliament, made against Destroyers of Planting and Enclosures.

XII. ACT For Cleansing the Streets of Edinburgh.
June 8. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering the many Complaints of the Nastiness of the
Streets, Vinds, Closses and other places of the City of Edinburgh, which is the
Capital City of the Nation, where the chief Judicatories reside, and to which
His Majesty's Liedges must necessarly resort and attend; As also, the great
Trouble that does arise to His Majesty's Liedges, and the Inhabitants, by the
great numbers of clamorous Beggars; repairing in and about the said City of
Edinburgh, THEREFORE, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Decerns and Ordains the present Magistrates of Edinburgh, and their
Successors, to lay down effectual Ways for preserving the said Town of
Edinburgh, Cannongate and Subburbs thereof, from the Nastiness of the Streets,
Vinds, Closses, and other places of the said Burgh, and for freeing and purging
the same of these numerous Beggars which repair in, and about the said Burgh,
and that under the pain of 1000. Merks yearly, To be paid by the Magistrates,
who shall be in Office, to the Lords of Session, to be applied by them for the
end and use foresaid; Declaring, that the Magistrates who are in Office, and who
shall be found negligent of their Duty, shall have no relief of their said
fine, out of the Common Good of the said Burgh, or by Stenting the Inhabitants:
As also, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, for the further
Encouragement of the Magistrates of Edinburgh, present and to come, in the said
matter; Does Statute and Ordain, That the Lords of Council and Session, shall
receive from the Magistrates of the said City, or others; all Proposals which
the said Lords shall judge rational to the effect abovementioned; And for
that effect, Authorizes and Impowers the Lords of Session, with Advice and
Consent of the Magistrates, to impose such Taxes upon all the Inhabitants,
Burgesses and others, within the said Town, Cannongate and Suburbs thereof, as
they shall find just and necessar, for purging and cleansing the said Town of
the foresaid Nastiness, and that all Execution by Horning or summar Poynding,
proceed against the Inhabitants for payment of their Proportions: And
Recommends to the Lords of Session, to meet with the Magistrates, and to Proceed
in the said Matter. as well in time of Vacans, as in the time of Session; And
Ordains the present Magistrates and their Successors, to put all such Acts and
Ordinances as shall be agreed upon, and settled by the Lords of Session, for
the effect abovementioned, to vigorous Execution, under the pain and
certification abovementioned, to be incurred by the Magistrates yearly, in case
the said City of Edinburgh be not effectually cleansed, and purged of the
foresaid Nastiness and Beggars, without any relief to the Magistrates out of the
Common-Good of the said Burgh, or from the Inhabitants.

XIII. ACT Of Dissolution in Favors of the Duke of Gordon.
June 8. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Taking to their Consideration,
the many signal Services done and performed to His Majesty and His Royal
Ancestors by the Family of Huntly, for many ages, with the eminent Sufferings
of several of the Representatives of that Family, for their constant adherence
to the True Interests of the Crown, and the great Services and Sufferings of
George Marquess of Huntly, Grandfather to George now Duke of Gordon, who for
His Loyalty to His Majesty's Royal Father, of blessed memory, was by the then
Rebels Condemned, and thereafter cruelly murdered on a Scaffold: And also,
Taking into their Consideration the constant Loyalty, great Services and Merits
of the said George Duke of Gordon, who has fully answered and improven the high
and honorable Characters of Loyalty and Nobility, Derived unto him by his
Predecessors, and his readiness by himself, his Friends and Followers, in
subduing the late Rebellion. As also, His Majesty and Estates of Parliament,
Considering That Mr. Robert Baillie, sometime of Ierriswood, being upon the 24
day of December 1684 Found guilty by an Assise of the Crime of high Treason,
was Forefaulted by His Majesty's Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and
Commissioners of Justiciary. And by the 42 Act of the first Session of His
Majesty's current Parliament, The Lands and Barony of Mellarstanes, and all
other Lands, Teinds and Rights whatsomever, pertaining to the said Mr. Robert
Baillie, were Unite, Annexed, and Incorporat to the Crown of this His Majesty's
ancient Kingdom; And the said Lands and Barony of Mellarstanes and Fawns, with
the Pertinents lying within the Lordship of Gordon, Huntly, Parochin of and
Sheriffdom of Berwick, did anciently belong to, and were holden of the said
George Duke of Gordon, and his Predecessors, and are specially contained and
ingrost in their, and his Infeftments, under the great Seal of this Kingdom:
And His Majesty's Commissioner, as having special Warrant and Instruction from
His Majesty, Having proposed and Expounded in plain Parliament, That His
Majesty upon the Considerations foresaid, and as a mark of His Royal Bounty and
Favor, resolved to bestow on the said Duke of Gordon, the Lands which did
anciently hold of his Family in the Merse, as well as such as yet hold of
himself, all of which belonged to the said Mr. Robert Baillie, late of
Ierriswood: And the Estates of Parliament, after mature Deliberation, Treating
and Consulting anent the Premises ( re integra) being fully satisfied and
convinced, That the foresaid Services and Sufferings, done and endured by the
said George Duke of Gordon, his predecessors and himself, for His Majesty and
His Royal Ancestors; The truth whereof is sufficiently known, and did appear to
them, are Just, Sufficient and Important Reasons, concerning both His Majesty's
Interest, and the public Good and Welfare of this Kingdom, That they should
Advise and Consent to His Majesty's Giving and Disponing the said Lands and
Barony of Mellarstanes and Fawns, with the Pertinents above-exprest, to the
said George Duke of Gordon, his Heirs and Assigneys: And for that effect that
the said Lands should be Dissolved from the Crown, and from the said Act of
Annexation. THEREFORE His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Decerns, Ordains and Declares, That the said Lands and Barony of
Mellarstanes and Fawns, with the Pertinents formerly pertaining to the said Mr.
Robert Baillie sometime of Ierriswood, may be Disponed to the said George Duke
of Gordon, and his foresaids; And for that effect has Dissolved, and hereby
Dissolves the same from the Crown, and Patrimony thereof, and from the foresaid
Act of Annexation, and from all other Acts of Annexation, and from all Clauses,
Qualities and Conditions therein-contained: And His Majesty, with Advice and
Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares, That this present Act of
Dissolution, having proceeded upon the Advice and Deliberation of the Estates
of Parliament ( re integra) And found by the said Estates, to be for Great,
Weighty and Reasonable Causes, concerning the Good, Welfare and public
Interest of the whole Kingdom, first proposed and Advised, and maturely
pondered and considered, before any previous Grant, or other Right or Deed,
Given, Made, or Done by His Majesty, in favors of the said George Duke of
Gordon, and his foresaids, of the Lands above-written, with the Pertinents, or
any part or portion of the same, Does fully satisfy the whole Clauses,
Conditions and Qualifications contained in the foresaid Act of Annexation, and
shall have the Force, Strength and Effect of a general Law, or Act of
Parliament, and shall be as valid, and effectual to the said George Duke of
Gordon, and his foresaids, for their Security of the said Lands and Barony of
Mellarstanes and Fawns above-exprest, with the Pertinents, as any other Act of
Dissolution Granted by His Majesty, or His Royal Ancestors, with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, in favors of whatsomever person, at any
time heretofore. Likeas, His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds,
Decerns and Declares, That this present Act of Dissolution shall not be
understood to fall under, or be comprehended in any Act Salvo Iure, to be past
in this or any other Session of this current Parliament, but is hereby excepted
therefrom in time coming.

XIV. ACT Against Importing Irish-Victual or Cattle.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Does
Ratify and Approve the 3 Act 3 Sess. Par. 2. Chapter 2. Against the Importing of
Irish-Victual, with this alteration, Viz. That all the Victual that shall be
Imported, shall be sunk and destroyed, and the Seizer or Discoverer, in place
of the third part of the Victual allowed him by the foresaid Act, for his
Reward, shall have the Boat, Bark, or Vessel wherein the said Victual shall be
Imported, to dispose of at his pleasure, together with the half of the Fines,
by the foresaid Act Imposed upon the Importers, Recepters and Heretors, and the
other half of the said Fines to belong to His Majesty: As likewise His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Enacts and Ordains, That no Horse,
Mare, or Cattle whatsomever, shall be Imported from Ireland to this Kingdom,
under the pain and Penalty of Forefaulture, of the Horse, Mares, or Cattle that
shall be Imported, and further of paying the sum of an hundred Merks Scots for
each Beast that shall be so Imported, the one half of both the Beasts and Fines
to belong to the Seizer and Discoverer, and the other half to His Majesty: As
likewise, That no Person within this Kingdom, Resett or Buy any Horse, Mares or
Nolt, That they know to be Imported out of Ireland, under the pain of an
hundred merks Scots for each Beast, besides the Forefaulture of the Beasts
themselves, the one half to belong to the Discoverer, (he always pursuing and
instructing the same Importation within six Months after) and the other half
to His Majesty; And Recommends to the Lords of Council, to nominat and appoint
such Persons as they shall think fit for seeing this Act put in Execution.

XV. ACT Declaring that Inhibitions shall not be prejudged by Recognition.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That in time coming, no Inhibition duly Execute, shall be
prejudged or disappointed by the Debitors, doing Deeds after the Inhibition
inserting Recognition; But that the Lands falling under Recognition, shall be
burdened with the prior Inhibition and ground thereof.

XVI. ACT For Burying in Scots Linen.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, For the Encouragement of the Linen-Manufactures in this
Kingdom, and prevention of the Exportation of the Moneys thereof, by Importing
of Linen, Does, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statute
and Ordain, That hereafter no Corpse of any Persons whatsoever, shall be Buried
in any Shirt, Sheet, or any thing else, except in plain Linen, or Cloth of
Hards, made and Spun within the Kingdom, without Lace or Point; Discharging
from henceforth the making use of Holland, or other Linen-Cloth made in other
Kingdoms, all Silk, Hair, or Woolen, Gold or Silver, or any other Stuff
whatsoever, than what is made of Flax or Hards, Spun and Wrought within the
Kingdom, as said is, and that under the pain and Penalty of 300 Pounds Scots,
toties quoties, for a Nobleman, and 200 Pound for each other Person, whereof
the one half to the Discoverer, and the other half to the Poor of the Parish,
where the said Corpse shall be so Interred: And for the better Discovering of
the Contraveeners, It is hereby further Statute and Ordained, That every
Minister within the Kingdom, shall keep a Book, containing an exact account and
Register of all Persons, buried within their said Parish; As also, That some
one or more of the Relations of the Person Deceated, or other credible Person
(Tennants in the Country and Cottars being always excepted) shall within eight
days after such Interment, bring a Certificat upon Oath in Writing, Witnessed
by two famous Persons to the Minister, Declaring, That the said Person was
Woond or Wrapped in manner herein-prescribed; Which Certificats are to be
Recorded by the Minister or Reader of the Parish gratis, without exacting any
money therefore. And if no Relation of the Party buried, or other Person shall
bring such a Certificat, within the said time of eight days, That then and in
that case, the Goods and Gear of the Party Deceast, shall be, and are hereby
Declared, to be liable to the foresaid Forefaulture, to be pursued at the
Instance of the Minister of the said Parish, before any Judge competent; and in
case the Parties prove litigious by Advocating, or Suspending the said
Sentence; The said Judges are hereby Authorized and Empowered to modifie
Expenses as they shall find cause: And if such persons Died in familia, The
Father and Mother, or other Relations, in whose Family they Die, are hereby
Declared liable for the said Fine: And it is hereby Statute and Ordained, That
if the Minister in whose Parish any such Corpse shall be so Interred, prove
negligent in pursuing the Contraveeners within six Months after the said
Burial, he is hereby Declared liable for the said Fine, the one half to the
Poor, and the other half to the Discoverer, to be divided in manner foresaid.
As also, His Majesty, with Advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That no
Wooden Coffin shall exceed an hundred merks Scots, as the highest Rate for
Persons of the greatest Quality, and so proportionally for others of meaner
Quality, under the pain of two hundred merks Scots for the Contravention.

XVII. ACT For Writing Seasins by way of Book.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Taking into His Consideration, That Seasins do extend to
great length by reason of inserting and repeating of the whole Provisions of
the Charter therein; THEREFORE His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of His
Estates of Parliament, for the more easy and commodious perusal thereof,
Statutes and Ordains, That it shall be lawful for Parties, if they think fit,
To cause Write and Extend their Seasins by way of Book, the attestation of the
Nottar condescending upon the number of the Leafes in the Book, and each Leaf
being Signed by the Nottar and Witnesses, to the giving of the Seasin; And
Ratifies all Seasins already Written by way of Book, by Warrant of His
Majesty's Privy Council.

XVIII. ACT Appointing the Publication of the Testimonies of Witnesses.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering how much it does import and concern the Good
and Interest of His Majesty's Liedges, and the due Administration of Justice,
That Witnesses be distinctly and fully Examined, and their Depositions Written
in plain and clear Words, as they are given; THEREFORE, His Majesty with Advice
and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That in all
Processes presently depending, or to be intented before the Lords of Privy
Council, Lords of Session, and all other Judges within this Kingdom, The
Witnesses who are made use of, and adduced therein, shall be Examined in
presence of the Parties, or their Advocats, they being present at the Diets of
Examination; and that there be publication of the Testimonies of the Witnesses
in the Clerks hands, allowed to the Parties gratis, before Advising, To the
effect Parties may have Copies thereof, if they think fit, any Law or Act of
Parliament, Custom or Usage to the contrary, notwithstanding.

XIX. ACT Anent the Registration of Seasins and Reversions.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, That where Seasins and other Writs and
Diligences appointed to be Registrat, are duly presented to the Keepers of
Registers, it is their Duty to cause carefully Book and Registrat the same, for
the security of the Party, and Intimation of the Liedges; THEREFORE His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and
Ordains, That where Seasins and other Writs are presented to the Keepers of
Registers, and delivered back to the Party, bearing, A Record and Attestation
under their hand that the same are Registrat; It shall make the same sufficient
and valid for the security of the Party, albeit by the omission or negligence
of the Keeper of the Register, or his Deputs, They should not be found Booked
or insert in the Register; And to the effect that all Deputs entrusted with the
care and keeping of the Registers, may Faithfully do, and execute their Office*
His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That in
case by their omission or negligence, any Writs presented to them, and marked
with their hands to be Registrat, shall not be found booked and insert in the
Register, The said Deputs, Guilty of such omission and negligence, shall be
punishable as Forgers of the publict Registers and Records, and shall be liable
in Damnage and Prejudice to any Party who shall be prejudged by the said
omission or negligence. And His Majesty with Advice foresaid, Statutes, Ordains
and Declares, That these Presents shall no ways derogat from the 16th Act of
the 22 Parliament K. Ia. the 6th. Entitled, Act anent the Registration of
Reversions, Seasins and other Writs, which shall remain in its full Force and
Strength in all Points, as before the making of this present Act.

XX. ACT Anent the Nomination of the Clork to the Justices of Peace.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Considering that by a Clause in
the 16th Act of the last Session of this current Parliament, Anent Justices of
Peace; The said Justices are allowed to nominat their own Clerks, which is a
Right and Privilege, belonging to the Secretaries of State, The Clerkships of
the Justices of Peace being Dependences of the Secretaries Office; THEREFORE,
His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Has
Repelled, Cassed and Annulled, and hereby Repells, Casses and Annulls the
foresaid Clause in the Sixteenth Act of the last Session of this current
Parliament, Allowing the Justices of Peace to Nominate their own Clerks, and
Declares the same to have no Force, Strength, nor Effect from the beginning,
and to be null and void in all time coming.

XXI. ACT In Favors of John Adair, Geographer, for Surveying the Kingdom of
Scotland, and Navigating the Coasts and Isles thereof.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Taking into their
Consideration, that exact Geographical Descriptions of the several Shires
within this Kingdom, will be both Honorable and Useful to the Inhabitants; and
the Hydrographical Description of the Seacoasts, Isles, Creiks, Firths and
Lochs, about the Kingdom, are not only Honorable and Useful, but most
necessary for Navigation, and may prevent several Ship-wracks, The want of such
exact Maps, having occasioned great losses in time past: And likewise, thereby
Forraigners may be Invited to Trade with more Security on our Coasts; And
Considering, That John Adair has given notable Experiments of his great Skill,
Diligence, and Qualifications, for performing so good a Work; And having
signified his willingness to perform the same, on allowance of competent
Expense; THEREFORE His Majesty, with Conent of the Estates of Parliament* Does
Ordain and Enact, That one shilling scots be exacted out of ilk Tun, from all
the Ships, and other Vessels above eight Tunns, within this Kingdom, (excepting
Lighters, and Fisher-boats;) and two shilling scots out of each Foreign Ship,
yearly, for the space of five years next ensuing, Commensing from Whitsunday
this year 1686. and this for defraying the Charge of Hydrographical Maps, for
the use of the Seamen, which one shilling, and two shilling respective per
Tun, Is hereby Ordained to be Collected by the several Collectors of His
Majesty's Customs, who are to deliver the same to the general Collector, or
Fermer of His Majesty's Customs, yearly upon Oath, at the Term of Martinmas,
and the same to be paid in to any, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council
shall appoint to receive the same, to be given to the said John Adair, as the
said Lords shall appoint, at the said Term, ilk year, during the space
above-written; and the said Collectors are also to deliver to the said John
Adair, subscribed Lists of the said Ships, with their respective Burdens, as
the ground of their Charge yearly: And the said John Adair is to give account
yearly at Martinmas, of what progress he has made, as to the Hydrographical
Maps to His Majesty's Privy Council, or such as they shall Commissionat for
Inspecting the same. As also, for Defraying his Expense, for drawing of the
Maps of the several Shires, It is Statute and Ordained, That the Sheriffs of
each respective Shire, Baillies of Regality, Stewarts of Stewartry, shall, at
the desire of the said John Adair, when he comes to their Shire or Bounds, for
the end aforesaid, Call the Heretors in the said Shire: And it is hereby
Recommended to them, to appoint a suitable Encouragement for defraying the
Expense of Surveying the said Shire, to be Collected by the Collector of His
Majesty's Supply, immediately after the said Meeting. As likewise, That they
appoint one or two knowing men, in each Paroch, to go along with the said
John Adair, when he is actually Surveying the same, to design unto him the
particular places of each Paroch, for the more exact performance of the said
Work; And Ordains the Collector thereof to deliver what shall be Collected to
the said John Adair, upon his presenting the Draught of the Map, to the
respective Sheriffs, or others foresaid. And likewise, The said John Adair,
giving account yearly to His Majesty's Privy Council of his Diligence therein,
and when the said Geographical and Hydrographical Maps are perfected. The care
of having the same Printed in a good Edition, is Recommended to His Majesty's
Privy Council.

XXII. ACT and Commission for Plantation of Kirks, and Valuation of Teinds.
June 14. 1686.
FORASMUCH, as His Majesty's Father, of ever blessed memory, out of His Royal
Care and Zeal for the Reformed Religion within this Kingdom, and the
Maintenance and Provision of the Ministry and Churches thereof, and the Peace
of the Kingdom, and for preventing and settleing all Differences, that did, or
might arise betwixt Titulars, and others having right to Teinds, and Heretors,
concerning the Leading and Drawing of their Teinds; and immediately after His
attaining and succeeding to the Crown, Gave Forth and Emitted His Royal
Declaration anent the Premises, and the other particulars therein-specified:
And in pursuance of the Ends foresaids, Diverse Laws and Acts of Parliament were
made in the year of our Lord 1633. His said Majesty being then present in His
Royal Person, and since diverse Acts of Parliament, and Commissions have been
Made, Given and Renewed to that purpose, and particularly by the 15 Act of the
3 Session of the 2 Parliament of King Charles the Second, His Majesty's
umquhile Royal Brother, of ever blessed memory. And His Majesty being Resolved,
and desirous to Prosecute so good a Work for the universal Good of His
Subjects, and especially for the Encouragement of the Ministers of the Gospel;
THEREFORE, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Gives full Power and Commission to His Majesty's Officers of Estate for the
time being, and to Or any thirteen of them to be a Quorum, whereof three of
every Estate, with one of the Officers of Estate, to Meet and Conveen at
Edinburgh, the day of years, and such other place or places, times or dyets, as
they shall appoint, To Value and cause be Valued, whatsomever Teinds, great or
small, Parsonage or Viccarage within this Kingdom, which are yet Unvalued;
Declaring, That where the Viccarage of any Paroch is a several Benefice, and
Title from the Parsonage, the same shall be severally Valued, to the effect the
Titulars or Ministers serving the Cure, having Right to the said Viccarage, be
not frustrated of the true worth thereof; With power to the said
Commissioners, or Quorum foresaid, to appoint Committees, or Sub-Committees of
their own number, and to grant Sub-Commissions, and to receive Reports from
them, and to approve or disapprove the same, as they shall find just; And to
Rectify whatsoever Valuations, Led, or to be Led, to the Enorm prejudice of
the Titulars, or the hurt and detriment of the Church, and prejudice of the
Ministers Maintenance and Provisions. Providing always, Likeas it is hereby
expressly Provided and Declared, That where Valuations are lawfully Led against
all persons having interest, and allowed by former Commissions, the same shall
not be drawn in question, nor Rectified upon pretense of Enorm Lesion, at the
Instance of the Minister, (not being Titular) or at the Instance of His
Majesty's Advocat, in respect of His Majesty's Annuity, except it can be proven
that Collusion was used, betwixt the Titulars and Heretors, or betwixt the
Procurator-fiscal and the Heretors and Titulars: Which Collusion is Declared to
be, when the Valuations are Led with the Diminution of the third part of the
just Rent: Which Diminution shall be proven by the parties Oath, and with power
to the said Commissioners, or Quorum foresaid; Where Ministers are not already
sufficiently provided, or have not Localities already assigned to them for
their Stipends, out of the Teinds within the Paroches where they Serve the
Cure, according to the Quantities, Proportions and Rules contained in the 19
Act of the Par. 1633. To modifie, settle and appoint constant local Stipends to
each Minister out of the Teinds of the Paroch where they Serve the Cure; With
Power also to the said Commissioners, to grant Recompense by Prorogation of
Tacks to Parties, for all augmentations of Stipends which are granted since the
year 1630. or shall be granted, and that effeiring to the augmentations already
granted, or to be granted, as the said Commissioners shall think fit. And
sicklike, To Disjoyn too large and spacious Paroches, to cause erect and build
new Churches, to Annex and Dismember Churches, as they shall think convenient;
And to take Order that every Heretor and Liferenter shall have the leading and
buying of their own Teinds, if they be willing, according to the Rules
prescribed by the 19 Act, and Commission granted by His Majesty, with Consent
of His Estates of Parliament, in Anno 1633. And the Acts of Parliament
therein-mentioned: With power to Determine all Questions concerning the prices
of Teinds, betwixt Titulars and others having Right thereto, and the Heretors,
and to appoint such Securities in favors of Titulars and others having Right
to Teinds, for their prices, to be granted to the Heretors, and others liable
in payment of valued Duties, or buyers of the said Teinds, and in favors of
the Ministers, as to their Maintenance, as the said Commissioners shall think
fitting, according to the Rules set down in the said Act 1633. And each
Heretor, whose Teinds belongs to Titulars of Erection, to have power and
Liberty to buy the Teinds of his own Lands, whether Valued or not, within the
space of three years after the Date of this Act, with this Declaration always,
That in case the Impediment, during the time foresaid, flow from the Titular,
by reason of his Minority, or other inability; In that case the Heretor who
offered to buy his own Teinds, within the space foresaid, shall have place so
soon as the Impediment shall be removed, to buy his Teinds, notwithstanding of
the expyring of the years, and space after-exprest. And it is Declared, That if
the Heretor be Minor, and his Tutor neglect the buying of his Teinds within the
foresaid space, the Minor shall have Action for two years after his minority,
to compel the Titular to sell his said Teinds; And generally, with power to
the said Commissioners to Decide and Determine in all other Points, which may
concern the Drawing or Leading of Teinds, the selling or buying of the same, or
payment of the Rates thereof, contained in the former Acts of Parliament, or
set down in the general Determination, given out by His Majesty's Royal Father
of blessed memory; And if any person or persons shall find themselves grieved,
and complain of the Injustice, or Exorbitancy of any Decree or Sentence given
in any of the Commissions during the time of the late Troubles, with power to
the said Commissioners, to take the same to their Consideration, and alter,
anull, or allow the said Decreets and Sentences as they shall find just; And
it is always Provided and Declared, that the Archbishops and Bishops, and
other Beneficed Persons, being Ministers, and their Successors, shall not be
prejudged of the Rents whereof their Predecessors were in actual and real
Possession; and which by the Laws of the Kingdom were due to them in anno 1637.
Or whereof they are presently in Possession, and that they shall be no further
bound, but according to the Conditions and Provisions expressed in the
Submissions made by the Bishops to His Majesty's Royal Father of blessed
memory, of the date, the day of 1628. and Registrat in the Books of Commission
for Surrenders and Teinds, upon the 15 day of July 1631. And whereas it may
fall out, that some of the Commissioners may be unable to attend the Service
through Death, Sickness, or other known Impediment. THEREFORE, His Majesty
Declares, That He shall be careful to fill their places with other persons
qualified, whose Oaths (for faithful Discharging of the same) shall be taken
by the Lord Chancellor, or in his absence by the Lord President of the
Commission for the time; And Ordains this present Commission to endure ay and
while the same be Discharged by His Majesty. And the Acts, Decreets and
Sentences thereof to have the Force, Strength and Effect of a Decree or
Sentence of Parliament; And the Lords of Session to grant Letters of Horning,
Poynding and others necessar to be direct upon the said Decreets and Sentences,
in manner contained in the foresaids Commissions, And His Majesty with Consent
foresaid, hereby Discharges all former Commissions, Declaring the same to be
expyred.

XXIII. Commission for Regulation of Iudicatures.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD from His Royal and Princely Care of the Good and Welfare of
this His ancient Kingdom, being desirous to prevent and Redress all abuses and
unwarrantable exactions within the same, especially in Offices of Public
Trust, and in the Dispensation of Justice, to the effect the same may be
speedily and impartially Administrat with as little trouble and expense to His
Subjects, as the nature of such Affairs and Proceedings can admit of. And His
Majesty likewise Considering, That His dearest Brother, King Charles the Second
of blessed memory, Having by a Commission under the great Seal of this Kingdom,
of the Date the 21 of September 1669. For the same end and design, Empowered
and Authorized the Persons therein-mentioned, to make such Rules, Orders and
Constitutions, as might prevent the same in time-coming; and who in pursuance
of the said Commission, did agree upon cetain Articles of Regulation, relating
to the Session, Justice-Court and Exchequer* All which are Ratified by the 16
Act of the 3 Session of the 2 Parl* K. Chapter the Second: But the said
Commissioners were not able through the shortness of time, fully to perfect and
accomplish so great and necessary a Work, as the Good and Interest of the
Kingdom requires. And His Majesty being now fully Resolved to prosecute so good
a Work for the universal good of His Subjects, and to perfect the same, that
His Subjects may be convinced, and sensible of their great Happiness and
Prosperity under His Protection and Government; THEREFORE His Majesty, with
Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Gives full Power, Warrant and
Commission to Whereof the number of to be a Quorum, to meet and conveen at
Edinburgh, the day of years, and thereafter at such times and dyets as they
shall appoint; And with power to the said Commissioners to take full and exact
Trial of all abuses, and other Exorbitancies or Exactions, which are practiced
in prejudice of His Majesty's Liedges, in any Offices of Judicature, or others
within this His Ancient Kingdom; And to take Trial and Information by all
manner of Probation thereanent, and how the said Abuses have creept in, and
from what time, and to take notice and trial of the Authors and Committers
thereof; and to Transmit an exact and perfect Account of the same to His
Majesty, that He may signify His Royal Pleasure, and give what Directions
therein He thinks just. And for the effectual preventing and restraining the
same in time coming. His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Does hereby
Authorize and Empower the foresaids persons, or Quorum thereof, to make such
Orders, Acts, and Constitutions for Regulating the same in time coming, as they
shall find just, under such Penalties and Certifications to be incurred by the
Contraveeners, as the said Commissioners shall find necessary in that behalf.
All which Acts, Ordinances and Constitutions made by the said Commissioners,
and Approven under His Majesty's Royal Hand. His Majesty, with Advice and
Consent foresaid, Does Ratify, Approve and Confirm, And Decerns and Ordains
the same to be put to Execution, and to have full Force, Strength and Effect
against the Contraveeners in all time coming. As likewise His Majesty, with
Consent foresaid, Does hereby Authorize and Empower the said Commissioners, to
prescrive and set down clear and distinct Rules for the Inferior Judicatures
in this Kingdom, as to their competency, and the Nature of their Jurisdictions,
that His Majesty's Leidges may be at a certainty, and not be put to trouble and
expense by being called and forced to compear and attend before different
Courts for the same cause, hereby Inhibiting and Discharging the said Judges,
to proceed or determine in any other Actions or Causes, than what shall be
found by the said Commissioners to be proper and competent for their
Jurisdictions; Declaring all such Acts and Decreets to be given and pronounced
by them, in matters not competent to their Jurisdictions. to be null and void,
and the Judges to be liable to the damnage and prejudice of the Party grieved,
and to be punishable at the sight of the Lords of Privy Council, for
transgressing their Jurisdiction. And to the effect, so just and necessary a
Work may meet with no obstruction from the negligence, or not attendance of the
foresaids Commissioners. His Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid,
Statutes, Ordains and Declares, That the Commissioners, who without a just and
lawful excuse, (to be allowed by such of the Commissioners who shall meet)
shall not attend the dyets of meeting appointed, or to be appointed for
carrying on of the said Work, shall incur the pain of tolies quoties, to be
disposed of by the Commissioners, as they shall think just; And for which,
Letters of Horning and Poynding are hereby granted: And it is hereby Declared,
That this Commission shall continue and endure, during His Majesty's Pleasure,
and ay and while the same shall be recalled, or discharged by His Majesty.

XXIV. ACT anent an humble Offer to His Majesty for an Imposition upon certain
Commodities, for defraying the Expense of a free Coynage, and other matters
relating to the Mint.
June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and the Estates of Parliament, Considering the great
advantages that may accresce to this His Ancient Kingdom, by encouraging the
Importation of Bullion to be Coined in His Majesty's Mint, and that a free
Coynage is of all others the greatest encouragement for that end. And the
Estates of Parliament taking into their Consideration, That the Charge and
Expenses of a free Coynage cannot be supported, without their giving unto His
Majesty a suitable Found for the same; THEREFORE, They Do out of a due Sense of
His Majesty's great Care for the Prosperity of this His ancient Kingdom, Humbly
offer unto His Majesty twelve shillings Scots for each Ounce of Bullion Imposed
by the eight Act of the first Session of the second Parliament of King Charles
the Second, upon the several Commodities therein-specified, viz. Spainlsh,
Rhenish and Brandy Wines of all sorts, each Tun fourteen pound and eight
shilling scots money; French Wines of all sorts, every Tun seven pound four
Shillings scots; Paper for Printing and Writing of all sorts, every six Rims
twelve shillings scots; Gray-paper every twelve Rims twelve shillings scots;
Dails every thousand, three pounds scots; Single-Trees every thousand three
pounds scots; Double-Trees every thousand six pounds scots; Double
Double-Trees, and all other great Fir-Timber, every thousand twelve pounds
scots; Steel every hundred weight twelve shillings scots; Iron and Iron-Work,
beaten of all sorts, every Tun one pound four shillings scots; Onyons and
Apples, every two Barrels twelve shillings scots; Mum-beer, every Barrel, two
pounds eight shillings scots; Prunes every Tun two pound eight shillings scots;
Raisins, Currants and Figs, every Tun six pounds scots; Iron Pots of all sorts,
every duzon twelve shillings scots; Soap every Barrel, one pound four shillings
scots; Suggar-Candy every hundred weight, six pound scots; Copper-Kettles,
Brass-Pans, and all other made Work in Brass or Copper, yetlin or beaten, every
hundred weight two pound eight shillings scots; Mader, every thousand weight
three pounds scots; Hearts of all sorts, every three dozen one pound four
shillings scots; Window-Glass of all sorts, every Chest twelve shillings scots;
Lemons and Oranges, every thousand twelve shhillings scots; Hopes of all sorts,
every hundredth weight, twelve shillings scots, Spanish-Leather, Marikin,
Tanned-Leather, Wild-Leather, and all other sorts of Leather, except
Muscovia-Leather, every hundred weight twelve shillings scots; Gloves of all
sorts, each duzon twelve shillings scots; Whale-bone, or Ballen, every two
hundred weight twelve shillings scots: And His Majesty, with Advice and Consent
of His Estates of Parliament, Does hereby Rescind and Annull the eight Act of
the second Parliament, first Session of King Charles the second, and in all
time-coming, Statutes and Ordains, That the abovementioned sums upon the
foresaids Commodities, Imported into this Kingdom, shall be* paid in to the
Tacks-men and Collectors of His Majesty's Customs, by the Merchants or other
Importers of the said Goods, before they break bulk, in the same way and
manner that His Majesty's Customs upon Foreign Commodities are paid in by the
Merchants and others; And Ordains the General-Collectors, Tacks-men and Farmers
of His Majesty's Customs, to Count yearly in Exchequer for the whole Imposition
above-specified, according to the rate of twelve shillings scots per Ounce, in
stead of the Ounce of Bullion formerly paid in in specie by the Merchants, and
to make a general AEque for their several Sub-Collectors. And His Majesty, with
Advice and Consent foresaid, Does hereby Annex the foresaid Imposition for ever
unto the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, to remain with His Majesty, His Heirs
and lawful Successors, in all time-coming, for supporting the Charge and
Expense of a free Coynage, and for paying the Sallaries of the Officers of
Mint. And His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Does hereby appropriat and set apart the foresaid Imposition, allanerly for the
use of the said Mint, and the supporting the Charge of a free Coynage. And His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Does hereby Command and Require the
Tacks-men and Collectors of His Customs, and their Deputs, to keep the said
Imposition apart by it self, and to pay the same quarterly to the Lords
Commissioners of His Majesty's Thesaury, Thesaurer-Principal, and
Thesaurer-Deput for the time-being, who are hereby Required to keep the said
Moneys and Imposition apart by it self, separat and distinct from all other
His Majesty's Customs, and Revenues; And His Majesty's Cash-keeper, or
Receivers, are hereby Commanded to keep apart the said Moneys in a secure
Chest by it self, whereof the General, or Master of Mint, is to have one Key,
and the Cash-keeper or Receivers another Key, and the said Chest is not to be
opened without the General or Master of the Mint be present; Nor shall the
said Moneys be delivered but at such times as His Majesty, or His Privy
Council shall think sit, to the General and Master of His Majesty's Mint, for
payment of the Sallaries of the Officers thereof, and for the desraying the
expense and Charge of a free Coynage; And for the further encouragement of
Merchants and others, to Import Bullion, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of
His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That any Merchant or other
Person, as well Strangers as Natives, who shall Import into this Kingdom, and
bring in to His Majesty's Mint, any quantities of Bullion, or Silver of the
finenesse of eleven Deniers, two Grains, which is hereby Declared to be the
Standart of finenesse of this Kingdom in all time coming, they shall receive
out again from the General, or Master of His Majesty's Mint, for all such
quantities Imported by them, Weight for Weight in His Majesty's Coin* of the
Standart of finenesse, and the species aftermentioned; That is to say, for each
pound scots of sixteen ounces, conform to the Standart Pile of scots weight,
now in His Majesty's Mint, one pound of sixteen ounces of His Majesty's current
Coin, without being liable to any charge or expense whatsoever for Essaying,
Melting, Supporting of waist in Coynage of the said quantities of Bullion, or
Silver of the Standart of eleven Deniers, two Grains fine aforesaid; And for
every pound of Silver that shall be brought in to the Mint, to be Essayed,
melted down, and Coined as aforesaid, that shall be finer upon Essay than the
Standart of eleven Deniers, two Grains aforesaid, there shall be delivered for
the same to the Merchants, or other Importers thereof by the Officers of the
Mint, so much more than a pound, as the same does in proportion and value
amount unto the finenesse and value, and for every pound of Silver that shall
be brought in to the Mint to be Essayed, melted down, and Coined as aforesaid,
that shall be courser or baser than eleven Deniers, two Grains fine, there
shall be delivered by the Officers of the Mint, so much less than a pound, as
the same does fall short in fineness and value. It is always hereby Declared,
That it shall not be lawful to the Officers of the Mint, to Import or bring in
to be Coined any Bullion, either in their own name, or in the name of others,
with certification, if they contraveen, it shall be holden a malversation in
their Office, and punished according to the Laws of the Kingdom; And Statutes
and Ordains, That there shall be three Piles of Weight, whereof one to be kept
in Exchequer, one by the Dean of Gild of Edinburgh, and the third in the
Mint-House. And likeas, that there shall be a Standart, or Printed Table kept
in the Mint-House, of the value of Money or Bullion, according to the
Denominations of Weights used in the Mint of Deniers, Grains, Primes and
Seconds; and the ordinary Denominations of Pounds, Ounces, Drops and Grains, by
which Merchants or others may know what they are to give in, or get out, when
their Bullion does arise above, or fall below the Standart appointed. And His
Majesty and Estates of Parliament, Do hereby Statute and Ordain, That there
shall be no preference in point of Essaying, or Coynage; But that all Siler
brought in, and delivered in to the Mint, to be Essayed and Coined, shall be
Essayed, Coined and Delivered out to the respective Importers, according to
their Order and times of bringing in, and Delivering the same to the Mint, and
not otherwise, so as he that shall first bring in and Deliver any Silver to be
Coined, shall be holden and accounted the first person to have the same
Essayed, Coined and delivered, and he or they that shall bring in the Silver
next, to be accounted the second person, to have the same Essayed, Coined and
Delivered, and so successively in course, and that the Silver brought in, and
Coined as aforesaid, shall be in the same Order Delivered to the respective
Bringers in thereof, their Heirs, Executors and Assigneys, successively without
preference of one before another, and not otherways; and if any undue
preference be made in entering of any Silver, or Delivering out of Coined
Money, contrair to the true intent and meaning of this Act, by any Officer, or
Officers of the Mint, or their Deputs and Servants, then the Party or Parties
offending, shall be liable to legal Execution, as for a just Debt, and to pay
the value of the Silver brought in and not entered, and Delivered according to
the true intent and meaning of this Act, with Interest, besides Cost and
Damnages to the Party or Parties grieved, and shall over and above ipso facto
be Deprived, lose and amit their Office or Offices: Providing always, that it
shall not be Interpreted any undue preference, to incur any Penalty, in point
of Delivery of Moneys Coined, if the Officer, or Officers, their Deputs or
Servants shall deliver out, or pay any Moneys Coined to any person or persons
that do come and demand the same upon subsequent Entries before others, that
did not come to demand their moneys in their Order and Course, so as there be
so much money reserved as will satisfy them, which shall not be otherways
Disposed of, but kept for them. And for the better clearing of what quantities
of Bullion, are from time to time Delivered in to His Majesty's Mint: As
likewise, what quantities of Silver do pass His Majesty's Irons, His Majesty,
with Advice foresaid, Does Statute and Ordain, That there shall be a Clerk, or
Book-keeper in the Mint-Office, who shall be obliged to keep two Registers or
Records, in fair Parchment-Books, and in one of them, set down the times of
in-giving the several quantities of Bullion, by the Merchants and others, in
presence of the In-giver; which Book shall be made patent to any that shall
require the same gratis, under the pain of Deprivation: As likewise to receive
subscribed Accounts from the Master-Warden, Counter-Warden, and the
Essay-master, of all the quantities of Silver Coined in His Majesty's Mint,
according to the Standart and fineness; Which Account so given in to him, he is
to Record in his other Register, and the whole Officers of the Mint, or their
Deputs, for whom they shall be answerable, are to subscribe the same quarterly,
to the effect, that it may be known what quantities of Silver are past His
Majesty's Irons from time to time. And likewise, That the several Officers of
the Mint are to keep particular Books of Record in their respective Offices as
formerly; all which Registers are to be made and kept upon their highest
perril; And for the more orderly and clear performance hereof, It is hereby
Statute and Ordained, That the Master of His Majesty's Mint for the time-being,
or his Deput, shall at the time of the Delivery, and Entry of any Silver in the
said Mint, give to the Bringer, or Bringers in thereof to be Coined, a Note, or
Recept under his hand, Denoting the Weight, Fineness, and value thereof,
together with the day and Order of its Delivery in to the said Mint, bearing in
the Body of it, a Clause of Registration; It being always hereby expressly
Provided, That the Master of His Majesty's Mint shall be obliged to Deliver
back again to the In-bringers, any quantity of Bullion he shall Receive from
them, in His Majesty's Coin, within the space of ten days, if the Bullion do
not exceed six thousand pound scots; and on fifteen days, if it do not exceed
twelve thousand pound scots: And in case the quantity be greater, within twenty
days, and in case of Failzie, the Merchants or Importers, shall have legal
Diligence against him, by Charging him with Horning, upon Registration of his
Note aforesaid, with Interest, by and attour Cost and Damnage therefore; And
for the further Encouragement and Assurance of such as shall Import, and bring
in to His Majesty's Mint, any quantities of Silver to be Coined, His Majesty
and Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That'no Confiscation,
Forefaulture, Seizure, Arrestment, Stop, or Restraint whatsomever, shall be
made in the said Mint, of any Silver brought in to be Coined, or by reason of
any Embargo, Breach of Peace, Letters of Mark, or Reprysal, or War with any
Foreign Nation, or upon any other account or pretense whatsoever, public or
private; But that all Silver brought in to His Majesty's Mint, within this
Kingdom to be Coined, shall truly, and with all convenient speed, be Coined and
Delivered out to the In-bringers thereof, their Heirs or Assigneys, according
to the Rules and Directions of this Act. And His Majesty and Estates of
Parliament, further Enact and Declare, That the General, or Master of His
Majesty's Mint, shall be obliged to give the Coynage free to any Merchant,
Strangers, or others Importers, or In-bringers of Bullion; and in case the
General or Master of His Majesty's Mint, shall refuse to accept of, Enter and
Coin any quantity, or quantities of Bullion, to be brought in by the Merchants,
or others into His Majesty's Mint, the General, or Master for such refusal (the
Merchant or Importer taking Instruments in a Nottars hand thereupon) shall ipso
facto be deprived of their Offices respective; It being always hereby Provided,
that in case the quantities of Bullion to be Imported, shall exceed the Stock
of Money granted to His Majesty for supporting of a free Coynage, in that case
the General, or Master of His Majesty's Mint, is to make application to the
Lords of Privy Council, and to acquaint their Lordships therewith, to the end,
that by their appointment, the Commissioners of His Majesty's Thesaury,
Thesaurer-Principal, or Thesaurer-Deput for the time being, may furnish and
advance eighteen pounds Scots money, for every Stone that shall be brought in
by Merchants, or others to be Coined in the Mint, until the next Parliament, or
Session of Parliament thereafter, shall take unto their Consideration, the
manner of Re-imbursing His Majesty for the said Advance. It being always hereby
Declared, That the Officers of the Mint shall not be liable to the Obligation
aforesaid, for refusing to Coin any such quantities brought in to the Mint to
be Coined, in case upon any accident, the Commissioners of His Majesty's
Thesaury, Thesaurer-Principal, or Thesaurer-Deput for the time being, shall
refuse or delay to pay eighteen pound scots per Stone for the Coynage
aforesaid. And His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, for certain weighty
Considerations, Do hereby Statute, Ordain, and Declare, That in all time
coming, the species of Current Coin within this Kingdom, shall be, five
shillings, ten shillings, twenty shillings, forty shillings, and sixty
shillings scots pieces, to be Coined of the Standart of fineness and Weight
aftermentioned, viz. The sixty shillings scots pieces is to Weigh, according to
the Denomination of Weights used in the Mint, twenty one Deniers, eighteen
Grains, ten Primes, eighteen Seconds; and in the ordinary Denomination of
Weights, fourteen Drop, eighteen Grains: And in regard that the sixty shilling
scots piece of the Weight aforesaid, cannot be brought to a certain number, to
make up a scots pound weight, without Fraction; Therefore it is hereby
Declared, that the lesser species of Coin shall be Delivered to the Merchant,
or others Importers of Bullion, to make up the just Weights; and when it shall
fall out, that the Fraction is less than a five shilling scots piece, in that
case the Merchant, or Importer shall have such a proportion of a five shilling
piece clipped off, and delivered to him, as may make up the just quantity of a
pound weight, by which means there will be in a scots pound weight, according
to the Standart Pile of Weights now in the Mint, seventeen sixty shilling
pieces, one twenty shilling piece, one ten shilling piece, one five shilling
piece, and a small Fraction of three shilling four pennies scots; The forty
shilling scots piece is to weigh according to the Denomination of Weights used
in the Mint, fourteen Deniers, twelve Grains, seven Primes, and four Seconds,
and according to the ordinary Denomination of scots Weight, nine Drop, twenty
four Grains, whereof twenty six, and one ten shilling piece, one five shilling
piece, and a small Fraction of three shilling four pennies scots, makes a pound
weight; The twenty shilling piece is to weigh according to the Denomination of
Weights used in the Mint, seven Deniers, six Grains, three Primes, fourteen
Seconds, and according to the ordinary Denomination of scots Weight, four Drop,
thirty Grains, whereof fifty two, and one ten shilling piece, one five shilling
piece, and a small Fraction of three shilling four pennies scots, makes a scots
pound Weight; The ten shilling piece is to weigh according to the Denomination
of Weights in the Mint, three Deniers, fifteen Grains, one Prime, nineteen
Seconds, and according to the ordinary Denomination of scots Weight, two Drop,
fifteen Grains, whereof one hundred and five, one five shilling piece, and a
Fraction of three shilling four pennies scots, makes a scots pound weight; The
five shilling piece is to weigh, according to the Denomination of Weights in
the Mint, one Denier, nineteen Grains, twelve Primes, twenty one Seconds, and
according to the ordinary Denomination of scots weight, one Drop, seven Grains
and a half, whereof two hundred and eleven, and a Fraction of three shilling
four pennies scots makes a scots pound Weight. It is always hereby Provided,
that if upon trial, it shall be found that the weight of the several species of
the money appointed by this Act, shall be any way prejudicial to the Interest
or Trade of this Kingdom, that in that caice His Majesty, with Advice of His
Privy Council, may Rectify or alter the same as they find Cause; But because
it may sometime fall out casually, that money be not Coined and Fabricat
exactly in all things, to the true Standarts of Weight, and fineness above, and
after-specified: THEREFORE His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, Statute and
Ordain, that if it shall casually fall out, that any species of Coin to be
Coined for the future within this Kingdom, be lighter or heavier than the
Standart of Weight aforesaid, the Officers of the Mint may Deliver the same,
providing always it be merely accidental and casual, and do not exceed the
quantities afterspecified, viz. Two Grains over, or under the true Weight of
every sixty or forty shilling piece, One Grain over, or under the true Weight
of every twenty shilling, ten shilling, or five shilling scots piece,
above-specified, appointed to be Coined by this present Act: As also, if the
money in the species foresaid to be Coined, shall fall out accidentally to be a
Grain finer, or courser than the true Standart of eleven Denier, two Grains
upon every twelve Ounces Weight, so to be Coined, the Officers of the Mint may
Deliver out the money to the Merchants, or others, according to these remeeds
of Weight and fineness above specified; It is hereby always expressly provided,
that the Officers of the Mint shall by rio means Work and Fabricat the money
with regard to the Remedies foresaid, as they will be answerable at their
highest peril. And it is Statute and Ordained, That they shall keep an exact
Record of all these Remedies, both of Weight and Fineness, and Count for the
same yearly in Exchequer, for His Majesty's use; And Appoints and Ordains in
all time coming, that the Essay-master shall take two pieces of every Journal,
that he shall cut off so much of one of the pieces as will make an Essay, and
shall put up the remainder, and the other whole piece, with the Reported Essay*
All which shall be put into the Pix, the Wairden, or Counter-Wairden, being
always present, which is to be opened once every year in the month of
December, at the sight of the Privy Council. And it is hereby Declared, That
the trial of the Pix being made, the whole Silver in the Pix is to be returned
to the Master as his own, and the Say-master is to have no part of it; The Pix
shall have three Keys, one to be kept by the Lords of Thesaury, or Thesaurer
for the time being, one by the General, and one by the Warden*principal of the
Mint; And His Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Does Statute and
Ordain, That all the money to be Coined for the time to come within this
Kingdom, shall be Lettered and Grained round the edges, that is to say, the
sixty and forty shilling pieces shall be Lettered, the twenty, ten shilling,
and five shilling scots pieces shall be Grained round the edges, the particular
Impression, Inscriptions, and Reverses; As likewise what poportion of each
species of money shall be Coined in each Stone Weight of Silver, are hereby
left and Recommended to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, who are by
this present Act fully empowered to Consider and Cognosce upon the fineness and
weight of the Gold Coin, when His Majesty shall think fit to Grant Warrant for
the same, and to Regulat, Appoint and Determine the fineness, weight and
species of the said Gold Coin, and to Ordain and Appoint such Impression,
Inscription and Reverse, as they shall see cause. And His Majesty and Estates
of Parliament Do further Statute and Ordain, That no Copper shall be Coined
without His Majesty's express Warrant; And that all Copper which shall be
Coined conform to His Warrant, shall be Coined in two penny and six penny scots
pieces, and that forty of the six penny pieces, and sixscore twelve of the two
penny pieces shall make a pound: And Recommends to the Lords of Privy Council,
to appoint Trial to be taken of the weight of every Journal of Copper, before
it go out of the Mint-House, and what Profit shall arise by the Coynage of the
Copper, the Officers of the Mint shall be liable to count for the same to the
Exchequer. And His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, Do hereby further Statute
and Ordain, That the sum of twelve thousand pounds scots of the Imposition
aforesaid, imposed by this present Act, upon the Commodities above-specified,
shall be in all time coming set apart for payment of the Officers-fees,
maintaining of the Fabric of the Mint, and providing new Tools, and other
incident Charges relating to the Mint, in manner after-specified, viz. The
General of the said Mint, the sum of three thousand six hundred pounds scots as
his Fee and Sallary; the sum of two thousand four hundred pounds scots to the
Master of the Mint, and this over and above the sum of eighteen pounds money
for every stone of Silver that shall be Coined and passed His Majesty's Irons,
to be paid to him out of the remainder of the said Imposition, for supporting
a free Coynage as aforesaid; The sum of one thousand two hundred pounds scots
money to the Principal Wairden; The sum of one thousand two hundred pounds
scots to the Essay-master; The sum of seven hundred and twenty pounds scots
money to the Counter-Wairden; The sum of six hundred pounds scots to the Sinker
or Graver; The sum of four hundred and eighty pounds scots money to the Clerk
or Book-keeper; The sum of three hundred thirty three pounds six shilling eight
pennies scots to the Clerk of the Bullion, who is to be Clerk for the time to
come to this new Imposition, as he was formerly to the Bullion, or twelve
shilling per Ounce paid in lieu thereof; To the Master-Smith, the sum of three
hundred and sixty pounds scots, as their Fees and Sallaries; and the sum of
eleven hundred six pound thirteen shilling four pennies scots, to be paid in
to the General and Master, for maintaining the Fabric of the Mint-House,
providing of new Tools, and other incident Charges reraling to the Mint, for
which they are to count yearly to His Majesty's Exchequer, and the overplus (if
any shall be) To go to the stock of free Coynage aforesaid: The which sum of
twelve thousand pounds scots for the Officers of the Mint, and other expenses
thereof, is to be paid to the General and Master of the said Mint, together
with the sum of eighteen Pounds per stone to the Master for the Coynage of the
Money, at four Terms in the year, viz. Candlemass, Whitsunday, Lambmass and
Martinmass yearly; and the said payment to commence from and after the first of
November next. And His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, further Statute and
Ordain, That no Heads, Sweeps or Chizel of any Gold or Silver to be Coined in
His Majesty's int, shall pass His Majesty's Irons without taking a second Essay
thereof, as if the same were newly brought in to the Mint to be Coined; And to
the effect that all matters relating to the Coynage and Mint, may be equally
Ordered and Regulated according to this present Act, and in such further ways
and manner as His Majesty and His Privy Council shall think fit. It is hereby
Recommended to His Majesty's Privy Council, by some of their number, to try
every Journal of Coin by it self distinctly, and to take exact trial of all
matters relating to the Coynage, both as to the weight and fineness of the
money, and other matters relating to the said Mint, twice every year, viz. In
the months of July and December yearly, and to call before them the whole
Officers of the Mint, and to Examine their Proceedings, and to inspect their
Books, and to sign and subscribe Approbations thereof, as they shall see cause:
And this without prejudice of the said Officers of the Mint, their compting
yearly to the Lords of His Majesty's Exchequer and Thesaury, for all matters
committed to their Trust.

XXV. ACT Rescinding a Clause in the Address, made by the Parliament, against
the late Earl of Argile.
June 15. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Taking into His Consideration the 36 Act of the first
Session of this Parliament, Entitled, Act anent the Address of the Estates of
Parliament, of His Majesty's ancient Kingdom of Scotland, to His Sacred
Majesty, against the Arch-Traitor, Archibald Campbel, sometime Earl of Argile;
And that His Majesty from His unparalleled Clemency, and Goodness, has been
Graciously Pleased to Pardon and Indemnifie several persons, who were
accessorie to, and involved into the said Rebellion, notwithstanding the
Estates of Parliament from their zeal to His Majesty's Service, and Detestation
of the said Rebellion, Did by their Address humbly Desire, they should for ever
be incapable of mercy, and that any of His Majesty's Subjects who should
interceed for them any manner of way, should incur the pain of Treason; and in
regard His Majesty did make no signification of His Royal Pleasure, as to the
said Address: THEREFORE His Majesty with Advice and Consent of His Estates of
Parliament, Casses, Annuls and Rescinds that Clause in the same Address, as to
the exercise of His Majesty's Mercy, or the Intercessions of any of His
Majesty's Subjects, made or to be made in that behalf: And Declares the same
Clause to have no strength, Force, nor effect from the beginning, and to be
null and void in all time coming.

XXVI. ACT Dissolving the Lands and Estates of Earlestoun, Craichlaw, and
Caitloch from the Crown.
June 15. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Taking to His Royal Consideration, that His late Majesty
and his Royal Brother of ever glorious Memory, by Charter under the Great-Seal
of this His Majesty's Ancient Kingdom, of the date at Windsor-Castle, the
eleventh day of May, 1680 years, upon the account of Sir Theophilus Ogilthrop,
Lieutenant Colonel Main, and Captain Hendry Cornowall, their Loyalty and
Service performed to the Crown, Did Give, Grant and Dispone to them, their
Heirs and Assigneys, the Lands and Estates of Earlestoun, Craichlaw and
Caitloch, and others more fully specified in the said Charter, whereupon they
were Infest, and the said Right Ratified in Parliament; And which Lands and
Estates fell in His late Majesty's hands, by the Forefaultur of Mr. William and
Alexander Gordons, elder and younger of Earlstoun, James Gordon of Craichlaw,
and Mr. William Ferguson of Caitloch. Likeas His late Majesty, by His Letter of
the eleventh of May One thousand six hundred eighty Directed to the Lords
Commissioners of His Highness Thesaury, upon Information that the said three
Estates did exceed six hundred pounds Sterling per annum, which His Majesty was
pleased to Promise should be made good unto them, Ordered, That before the said
Gift past in Exchequer, the said Lords should take their Security to pay the
superplus, if any were, that the said Estates should be found to exceed the
foresaid Rent, and the Debts payable out of the same by Law, in such manner,
and to such uses as His Majesty should think fit thereafter to direct. And in
like manner, His Majesty by another Letter, directed to the said Lords, of the
15th of February 1681. Required them to take sufficient Security of the said
persons for payment of their share of the expense disbursed out of His late
Majesty's Thesaury, toward the suppressing of the Rebellion in the year 1679,
not exceeding two years Rent of the said Forefaulted Estates, and accordingly
the said Donatars granted Security to the said Lords in the Terms foresaids.
As also, OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, That His Majesty by His Letter of the
last of October 1685. upon the Consideration that the said Estates did not
exceed, but are rather considerably short of the said six hundred pounds
Sterling per annum, and of the great trouble and expense, the said Sir
Theophilus (who also acquired the other two Parts from Main and Cornowall) was,
and is exposed to, in attaining to the Possession of the said three
Forefaulted Estates, and being desirous the same should be made fully effectual
to him, free of all future trouble and inconvenience. THEREFORE, as a further
Mark of His Favor to the said Sir Theophilus, and in Consideration of his
great Loyalty and Service, Authorized and Required William Duke of
Queensberrie, His Majesty's Thesaurer-Principal for the time, Thesaurer-deput,
and remanent Lords of Exchequer, to deliver to him the said Security, and
Ordained the same to be delet out of the Records of Exchequer, which
accordingly was done, and an Act thereupon past the eight of January last; And
further upon Consideration of the said Sir Theophilus his constant loyalty and
adherence to the Crown, and signal evidence given by him thereof in the late
Rebellion of the late Duke of Munmouth, Did Order his Right Trusty and Familiar
Cosen and Counselor, Alexander Earl of Murray, Conjunct-Secretary of State
for the Kingdom of Scotland, and his Majesty's high Commissioner therein for
the time, to represent the matter in Parliament for a Dissolution of the said
three Forefaulted Estates from the Crown, to which the same were Annexed in the
last Session of Parliament, holden at Edinburgh the sixteenth day of June, One
thousand six hundred eighty five years, Which Annexation proceeded upon a
Supposition that the yearly Rent exceeded six hundred pound Sterling a year;
Whereas now upon serious Examination it is found short; Which Considerations
being this day Proponed in plain Parliament, and the Estates of Parliament
having fully pondered and Considered the whole matter, and the truth thereof
being sufficiently known, and made appear to them, by production of the
foresaid Charter, Act of Exchequer, and other Evidences requisite; And by the
said Lord high Commissioner his Grace, his Declaration in pluin Parliament, in
name of, and by Warrant from His Majesty: His Majesty and Estates of
Parliament, after mature Deliberation, Finds the same just, sufficient, and
reasonable Causes for Advising His Majesty to Dissolve the said three
Forefaulted Estates, all particularly mentioned in the said Charter, from the
Crown, that the same may pertain, and belong to, and remain with the said Sir
Theophilus Ogilthrop and his foresaids, as their own proper Heretage, heretably
and irredeemably in all time coming; And THEREFORE, His Majesty with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, has Dissolved, and hereby Dissolves the
same Lands and three Forefaulted Estates aforesaid from the Crown and Patrimony
thereof, and from the said Act of Annexation, and from all Clauses, Conditions
and Qualifications therein-contained; And Finds, Decerns and Declares, that the
foresaid Dissolution having proceeded upon the Grounds, Causes, and
Deliberation aforesaid in plain Parliament, Does satisfy all the Conditions,
Clauses and Qualifications contained in the foresaid Act of Annexation, past
the said last Session of Parliament, and shall have the Force, Strength, and
Effect of a General Law and Act of Parliament, and shall be as valid and
effectual to the said Sir Theophilus Ogilthrop and his foresaids, for their
Security of the said Lands and Estates as any Dissolution Granted by His
Majesty or Royal Ancestors, with Advice and Consent of Their Estates of
Parliament for the time, in Favors of whatsomever person or persons at any
time heretofore, and that notwithstanding of any Clauses, Conditions, or
Qualifications contained in the said Act of Annexation; And notwithstanding of
any Security granted by the said Donatars, or any of them in Exchequer. And
His Majesty with Consent foresaid, hereby Ratifies, Approves and Confirms the
said Act of Exchequer, and Grounds thereof in all Points. And Lastly, His
Majesty and Estates of Parliament, Finds and Declares, That this present Act
shall not fall under the Act Salvo Iure, to be past in this, or any other
Session of this Current Parliament, but is hereby excepted forth thereof, in
all time coming.

XXVII. ACT of Dissolution of the Lands of Grange in Favors of Sir Thomas
Kennedy, Lord Provost of Edinburgh.
June 15. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament taking into their serious
Consideration, That His Majesty's Commissioner, as having special Warrant and
Instruction from His Majesty, having proposed and proponed in plain Parliament,
the Loyalty and Fidelity of Sir Thomas Kennedy Lord Provost of Edinburgh, and
the good and acceptable Services performed by him to the Crown and Kingdom, in
the diligent Suppressing of the late tumult within the City of Edinburgh, and
since; And Considering also the Service done by the said Sir Thomas Kennedy,
against the Rebels at Bothwell-Bridge; And likewise the constant Loyalty and
eminent Services and Sufferings of Lieutenant-Collonel Thomas Kennedy of
Kirkhill his Father, and his Firm Adherence to the Crown, in so far as the said
Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy having attended the late King of ever blessed
memory at Worcester Fight, he was then taken Prisoner, and detained eighteen
Months in the Kingdom of England, and afterward sent Prisoner to Leith, from
whence after he had stayed some while, he was transported to Air, and kept
Prisoner there until the year 1659. And his Estate in the mean-time Sequestrat,
and possessed by the Usurpers, and himself absolutely ruined: All which Services
and Sufferings being proposed and laid open in plain Parliament, to the end the
three Estates might give His Majesty their Advice, Judgment and Determination
re integra, whether the same were good and reasonable Causes for Dissolving
from the Crown, the Lands of Grange, formerly pertaining to Thomas Kennedy
sometime of Grange, with all other Lands, Heretages and Rights which belonged
to the said Thomas, and which fell in His Majesty's Hands, through the Doom and
Sentence of Forefaulture, given and pronounced against him upon the day of One
thousand six hundred years, by the Lords of Justiciary for the Crime of Treason
and Laes-Majesty, committed by the said Thomas, and were annexed to the Crown
by the forty two Act of the first Session of this Current Parliament: And the
said Estates of Parliament, after mature Deliberation, and Treating and
Consulting anent the Premises, being fully satisfied and convinced, That the
said particular Services and Sufferings, Done, Performed and Undergone by the
said Sir Thomas Kennedy, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, and Lieutennant Colonel
Thomas Kennedy his Father, the truth whereof is sufficiently known, and did
appear to them, are just, sufficient and important Reasons, concerning both His
Majesty's Interest, and public Good and Welfare of this Kingdom, That they
should Advise and Consent to His Majesty's Giving and Disponing the foresaids
Lands of Grange, and others above-exprest, to the said Sir Thomas Kennedy, his
Heirs and Assigneys; And for that effect, that the said Lands should be
Dissolved from the Crown, and from the said Act of Annexation. THEREFORE His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Decerns, Ordains
and Declares, That the said Lands of Grange, formerly pertaining to the said
Thomas Kennedy sometime of Grange, and all other Lands, Heretages and Rights,
which belonged to him, and which came in His Majesty's hands, and were annexed
to the Crown in manner foresaid, may be Disponed to the said Sir Thomas Kennedy
Lord Provost of Edinburgh, and his foresaids; And for that effect, has
Dissolved, and hereby Dissolves the same from the Crown and Patrimony thereof,
and from the foresaid Act of Annexation, made the sixteenth of June One
thousand six hundred and eighty five, and from all other Acts of Annexation,
and from all Clauses, Qualities and Conditions therein contained: And His
Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares, That
this present Act of Dissolution having proceeded upon the Advice and
Deliberation of the Estates of Parliament re integra, and found by the said
Estates to be for Great, Weighty and Reasonable Causes, Concerning the Good,
Welfare, and public Interest of the whole Kingdom, first Proposed and Advised,
and maturely Pondered and Considered, before any previous Grant, or other Right
or Deed, Given, Made or Done by His Majesty, in Favors of the said Sir Thomas
Kennedy and his foresaids, of the Lands and others abovementioned, or any part
or portion of the same, Does fully satisfy the whole Clauses, Conditions and
Qualifications contained in the foresaid Act of Annexation, and shall have the
Force, Strength and Effect of a General Law or Act of Parliament, and shall be
as valid and effectual to the said Sir Thomas Kennedy and his foresaids, for
their Security of the Lands and others above-exprest, as any other Act of
Dissolution past by His Majesty, or His Royal Ancestors, with Advice and
consent of the Estates of Parliament, in favors of whatsomever person or
persons at any time heretofore; And Declares that this Act shall not be
comprehended under the Act of Salvo Iure, to be past in this present Session,
or any subsequent Session of this Current Parliament, but is hereby excepted
therefrom.

XXVIII. ACT Dissolving the Lands of Cultness, North-Berwick and Goodtries from
the Crown
June 15. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Taking into their
Consideration, that His Majesty's Commissioner, as having special Warrant and
Commission from His Majesty, Having proposed and expounded in plain Parliament,
the great and Faithful Services done to His Majesty, and His Royal Brother of
ever blessed memory, by James Earl of Arran, First Gentleman of His Majesty's
Bedchamber, and his constant Zeal and Faithfulness to the Interest of the
Crown; And particularly, the said Earl of Arran his extraordinary expenses,
when Employed by His Majesty's said Dearest Brother, as Envoy to the French
King, and of his activeness against the late Earl of Argile, and the other
Rebels associat with him in the year 1685. For which he had no allowance, at
least not suitable to his expenses; and that he had faithfully executed the
said Offices, and did very well behave himself therein; and that he was
Instrumental in the Defeat of these Rebels, and had performed several other
good and acceptable Services: All which being Proposed and laid open in plain
Parliament, to the end the Three Estates might give His Majesty their
Judgment, Advice and Determination re integra, whether the same were True,
Good and Reasonable Causes of public Concernment, for Dissolving the Lands and
Barony of Cultness, lying within the Sheriffdom of Lanerk, and the Lands of
North-Berwick, lying within the Constabulary of Haddingtoun, and als the Lands
of Goodtries, with the Teinds and Pertinents thereof, lying within the
Sheriffdom of Edinburgh, sometime pertaining to Thomas and David Stuarts, late
elder and younger of Cultness, together with all other Lands, Annualrents, and
others pertaining and belonging to them, from the Crown, and which fell and
became in His Majesty's Hands, through the Crimes of Treason and Laes-Majestie,
Acted, Committed and Done by them, and either of them, and the Doom and
Sentence of Forefaulture, Given and Pronounced against them for the same, upon
the and days of and 1685 years, and were Annexed to the Crown, by the forty
two Act of the first Session of this Current Parliament, and by the Act of this
present Session of Parliament: And the said Estates of Parliament, after long
and mature Deliberation, Treating, and Consulting anent the Premises, being
fully satisfied and Convinced, that the particular Services and Expenses
abovementioned, Done, Performed and Expended by the said James Earl of Arran,
the truth whereof is clearly known, and did appear to them as Just, Weighty and
Important Reasons, concerning both His Majesty's Interest, and the Public Good
and Welfare of this Kingdom, that they should Advise and Consent to His
Majesty's Giving and Disponing the said Lands of Cultness, North-Berwick,
Goodtries, and the other Lands above-written, with the Pertinents, to the said
James Earl of Arran, his Heirs or Assigneys; And for that effect, that the
said Lands should be Dissolved from the Crown, and from the said two Acts of
Annexation: THEREFORE, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Decerns, Ordains and Declares, That the said Lands and Barony of
Cultness, and Lands of North-Berwick and Goodtries above-written, sometime
belonging to the said Thomas and David Stuarts, late elder and younger of
Cultness, with all other Lands, Heretages, Annualrents and others belonging to
them, or either of them, which came in His Majesty's Hands, and were Annexed to
the Crown in manner foresaid, may be Disponed to the said James Earl of Arran
and his foresaids; and for that effect, Have Dissolved, and hereby Dissolves
the same from the Crown and Patrimony thereof, and from the said two Acts of
Annexation, the one made the 16 day of June 1685. And the other made the day of
May 1686. And from all other Acts of Annexation; and from all Clauses,
Qualities and Conditions therein contained. And His Majesty, with Advice and
Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares this present Act of Dissolution,
having proceeded upon Advice and Deliberation of the Estates of Parliament re
integra, and found by the said Estates, to be for Great, Weighty and
Reasonable Causes, concerning the Good, Welfare and public Interest of the
whole Kingdom, first Proposed, Advised and maturely Pondered and Considered in
plain Parliament re integra, and found by the said Estates to be for Great,
Weighty and Reasonable Causes, before any previous Grant, or other Right or
Deed, Given, Made or Done by His Majesty, in favors of the said James Earl of
Arran, and his foresaids, of the Lands and others abovementioned, or any Part
or Portion of the same, Does fully satisfy the whole Clauses, Conditions and
Qualifications contained in the two foresaids Acts of Annexation, and shall
have the Force, Strength and Effect of a general Law and Act of Parliament, and
shall be as valid and effectual to the said James Earl of Arran and his
foresaids, for their Security in the said Lands of Cultness, North-Berwick,
Goodtries, and others above-exprest, with the Pertinents, as any other Act of
Dissolution Granted by His Majesty, or His Royal Ancestors, with Advice and
Consent of Their Estates of Parliament, in Favors of whatsoever Person at any
time heretofore. Likeas, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds,
Decerns and Declares, That this present Act of Dissolution is, and shall not be
understood to fall under, or be comprehended in any Act Salvo Iure, to be past
in this, or any other Session of this Current Parliament, but is hereby
excepted therefrom in all time coming. It is always hereby Declared, That this
Act of Dissolution of the Lands of North-Berwick, which did once belong to the
said Thomas Stuart, sometimes of Cultness, shall not prejudge the Senators of
the College of Justice, as to their Right and Interest in these Lands, who are
hereby Declared preferable for the same.

XXIX. ACT of Dissolution in Favors of the late Earl of Tarras.
June 15. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and Estates of Parliament taking into their Consideration,
That His Majesty's Commissioner, as having special Warrant and Instruction from
His Majesty, having proposed and expounded in plain Parliament, the great
benefit and advantage that did arise to the Crown and Government of this
Kingdom, by the full and sincere Confession made by Walter late Earl of Tarras,
of several Matters and Circumstances, relating to the late horrid Conspiracy,
the Discovery whereof, did in a great measure contribute toward the preventing
the fatal Consequences and Effects, which so apparently Threatened the Peace of
His Majesty's Dominions: As also the Promises and Assurances given to him at
the time of the said Discovery of his Princes Bounty and Favor upon that
account: All which being proposed and laid open in plain Parliament, to the end
the three Estates might give his Majesty their Judgment, Advice and
Determination re integra, whether the same were True, Good and Reasonable
Causes, for Dissolving from the Crown, the Lands of Robertoun, Howcleuch and
Borthwick-mains, with the Pertinents which formerly appertained to the said
Walter, late Earl of Tarras, and came in his Majesty's Hands through the Doom
and Sentence of Forefaulture, given and pronounced against him before the Lords
of His Majesty's Justiciary, upon the day of One thousand six hundred years,
and were annexed to the Crown, by the 42 Act of the first Session of this
Current Parliament: And the said Estates of Parliament, after mature
Deliberation, and Treating and consulting anent the Premises, being fully
satisfied and convinced, that the particular Services done and performed by the
said Walter, late Earl of Tarras, in his Confession and Discovery foresaid, and
the benefit and advantage thereby accruing to the Crown and Kingdom, and the
Promises and Assurances given to him of his Princes Bounty and Favor, the
Truth whereof is sufficiently known, and was made appear to them, are Just.
Weighty and Important Causes, concerning both His Majesty's Interest, and the
public Good and Welfare of this Kingdom, that they should Advise and Consent
to His Majesty's Giving and Disponing the said Lands of Robertoun, Howcleuch
and Borthwick-mains, with the Pertinents, to the said Walter late Earl of
Tarras, his Heirs and Assigneys: And for that effect, that the same should be
Dissolved from the Crown, and from the foresaid Act of Annexation. THEREFORE,
His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Decerns,
Ordains and Declares that the said Lands of Robertoun, Howcleuch and
Borthwick-mains, with the Pertinents, may be Disponed to the said Walter, late
Earl of Tarras, and his foresaids; And for that effect, has Dissolved, and
hereby Dissolves the same from the Crown and Patrimony thereof, and from the
foresaid Act of Annexation, made the sixteenth day of June One thousand six
hundred eighty five, and from all other Acts of Annexation, and from all
Clauses, Qualities and Conditions therein-contained. And His Majesty, with
Advice and Consent foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares, That this present Act
of Dissolution, having proceeded upon the Advice and Deliberation of the
Estates of Parliament re integra; And found by the said Estates, to be for
Great, Weighty and reasonable Causes, concerning the Good, Welfare and Public
Interest of the whole Kingdom, first Proposed and Advised, and maturely
Pondered and Considered before any previous Grant or other Right or Deed,
Given, made or Done by His Majesty, In Favors of the said Walter late Earl of
Tarras, and his foresaids, of the Lands and others abovementioned, or any Part
or Portion of the same, Does fully satisfy the whole Clauses, Conditions, and
Qualifications contained in the foresaid Act of Annexation, and shall have the
Force, Strength, and Effect of a General Law, or Act of Parliament, and shall
be als Valid and Effectual to the said Walter late Earl of Tarras, and his
foresaids* for their Security of the Lands and others above-exprest, as any
other Act of Dissolution, Granted by His Majesty, or His Royal Ancestors, With
Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, in favors of whatsoever
Person at any time heretofore. Likeas, His Majesty with Advice and Consent
foresaid, Finds, Decerns and Declares, that this present Act of Dissolution
shall not be understood to fall under, or be comprehended in any Act Salvo Iure,
to be past in this, or any other Session of this Current Parliament, but is
hereby excepted therefrom in all time coming.

XXX. ACT Anent the Measure of Bark*
June 15. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and Estates of Parliament, Taking to their Consideration
the great prejudice that does arise through the uncertainty of the measure of
Bark within this Kingdom; Do Statute and Ordain, That the constant measure of
Bark in all time coming shall be as follows, viz. That twenty two Gallons shall
be the measure of one Boll of unbeaten Bark, and so proportionally for lesser
measures, and that the Linlithgow Barley measure, shall be the measure for all
small beaten mallowie Bark; And prohibites and Discharges all Persons
whatsomever, to make use of any other measures than the measures aforesaid, in
buying or selling of Bark in time coming, under the pain of an hundred Pounds
scots, toties quoties, beside the Forefaulture of the Bark, so bought or sold.

XXXI. ACT In Favors of John Meikle Founder, and others of that Trade.
June 15. 1686.
HIS MAJESTY and Estates of Parliament taking to Consideration, the great
advantage that the Nation may have by the Trade of Founding, lately brought
into this Kingdom by John Meikle, for casting of Bells, Cannons, and others
such useful Instruments, Do for Encouragement to him, and others in the same
Trade, Statute and Ordain, That the same shall enjoy the benefit and
privileges of a Manufacture in all points, as the other Manufactures newly
Erected, are allowed to have by the Laws and Acts of Parliament, and that for
the space of nineteen years next following the date hereof.

XXXII. ACT Salvo I^re Cujuslibet.
June 15. 686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Taking to Consideration, That there are several Acts of
Ratifications, and others past and made in this Session of Parliament, in
favors of particular persons, without calling or hearing of such as may be
thereby concerned or prejudged; Therefore His Majesty, with Advice and Consent
of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That all such particular
Acts, and Acts of Ratification past in manner foresaid, shall not prejudge any
third Party of their lawful Rights, nor of their Actions and Defenses competent
thereupon, before the making of the said particular Acts, and Acts of
Ratifications; And that the Lords of Session, and all other Judges of this
Kingdom, shall be obliged to Judge betwixt Parties, according to their several
Rights, standing in their Persons, before the making of the said Acts: All
which are hereby Exponed, and Declared to have been made, Salvo Iure Cujuslibet.

XXXIII. ACT of Adjournment.
June 15. 1686.
THE Kings Majesty Declares this Parliament Current, and Adjourns the same to
the 16 day of August next, 1686. And Ordains all Members of Parliament to
attend that Day: And that there be no new Election of Commissioners from Shires
or Burghs, except upon the Death of some of the present Commissioners.

Collected and Extracted from the Registers and Records of Parliament, by
TARBAT, Cls. Reg.

A TABLE Of the Printed ACTS.
1 ACT of Dissolution of the Lands of Cesnock and Duchal. Page 3 2 Act for the
better Inbringing of His Majesty's Supply. Page 5 3 Act Ordaining Interlocutors
to be Subscribed by Judges. Page 6 4 Act Ordaining all Executions to be
Subscribed by the Witnesses, without necessity of Stamping. Page Ibid. 5 Act
anent the Session. Page Ibid. 6 Act for the Christmas Vacans. Page Ibid. 7 Act
of Dissolution of the Lands and Barony of Torwoodlie, in Favors of Lieutenant
General Drummond. Page 7 8 Additional Act anent Highways and Bridges. Page 8 9
Act of Annexation of the Baronies of Muir-hall and Melfort to the Crown. Page 9
10 Act Ordaining Pursuers to furnish the Act to the Defenders, whereon they are
to Depone* Page 11 11 Act for Winter-Herding. Page Ibid. 12 Act for Cleansing
the Streets of Edinburgh. Page Ibid. 13 Act of Dissolution in Favors of the
Duke of Gordon. Page 12 14 Act against Importing Irish-Victual, or Cattle. Page
13 15 Act Declaring that Inhibitions shall not be prejudged by Recognition.
Page Ibid. 16 Act for Burying in Scots* Linen* Page 14 17 Act for Writing
Seasins by way of Book. Page Ibid. 18 Act appointing the publication of the
Testimonies of Witnesses. Page 15 19 Act anent the Registration of Seasins and
Reversions. Page Ibid. 20 Act anent the Nomination of Clerks to the Justices of
Peace. Page Ibid. 21 Act in Favors of John Adair, Geographer, for Surveying
the Kingdom of Scotland, and Navigating the Coasts and Isles thereof. Page 16
22 Act and Commission for Plantation of Kirks, and Valuation of Teinds. Page 17
23 Act for Regulation of Judicatures. Page 18 24 Act anent an humble Offer made
to His Majesty for an Imposition upon certain Commodities, for defraying the
expense of a free Coynage, and other matters relating to the Mint. Page 20 25
Act Rescinding a Clause in the Address, made by the Parliament, against the
late Earl of Argile. Page 24 26 Act Dissolving the Lands and Estates of
Earlstoun, Craichlaw, and Caitloch from the Crown. Page 25 27 Act of
Dissolution of the Lands of Grange in favors of Sir Thomas Kennedy, Lord
Provost of Edinburgh. Page 26 28 Act Dissolving the Lands of Cultness,
North-Berwick and Goodtries from the Crown. Page 27 29 Act of Dissolution in
favors of the late Earl of Tarras. Page 28 30 Act anent the Measure of Bark.
Page 29 31 Act in favors of John Meikle Founder, and others of that Trade.
Page Ibid. 32 Act Salvo Iure Cujuslibet. Page Ibid. 33 Act of Adjournment. Page
30
A TABLE Of the Acts and Ratifications Past in the second Session of His
Majesty's first Parliament, and which are not here Printed.
PRotestation by some Noblemen and others, concerning their Precedence in the
Rolls of Parliament. His Majesty's Letter to the Parliament, with the
Parliaments Answer. Act for several yearly Fairs and Weekly Mercats to some
Noblemen and others. Act of Dissolution of the Lands of Ochiltrie, in favors
of William Cochran. Act Dissolving from the Crown, Lands which held of other
Superiors than the King. Act in favors of the Duchess of Hamilton, anent the
Office of Justice-General, in the Isle of Arran. Act and Reference to the
Council anent the Importation of Prohibited Goods. Act in favors of the Shire
of Ross. Act Rescinding a Commission Granted the last Session of Parliament
anent the Estate of Argile. Act Rescinding the 33 Act of the first Session of
this Current Parliament. Act adding some Commissioners of Supply and Justices
of Peace to several Shires. Act in favors of Monsieur Culbert, Marchio de
Schanko. Act in favors of Sir Alexander Gibson. Act for Rebuilding the Bridge
of Ugie. Act in favors of Robert Cuninghame of Achinhervie. Act in favors of
the Duke of Gordon. Act in favors of Mr. Walter Birnie Minister. Act
appointing the Earl of Morray, and Lord Down in his absence, Conveener in the
Shire of Inverness. Ratification in favors of the Duke of Gordon. Ratification
in favors of the Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor. Two Ratifications in
favors of the Duchess of Buccleugh. Ratification in favors of the Earl of
Middletoun. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Dumbartoun. Two
Ratifications in favors of the Viscount of Melfort. Two Ratifications in
favors of the Viscount of Tarbat. Ratification in favors of General Drummond.
Ratification in favors of the Lord of Balnagoun. Ratification in favors of
Sir Thomas Stuart of Gairntullie. Ratification in favors of Sir James Stuart
of Bute. Ratification in favors of Sir James Caddel of Muirtoun. Ratification
in favors of Sir Colin Campbel of Aberurquhile. Ratification in favors of Sir
Archibald Cockburn of Langtoun. Ratification in favors of Sir Thomas Kennedy,
Lord Provost of Edinburgh. Ratification in favors of Sir Charles Stuart and
Sir William Ker. Ratification in favors of Sir William Sharp of Stonny-hill.
Ratification in favors of Sir John Gordon Advocat. Ratification in favors of
the Lord of Inverneity. Ratification in favor of Hugh Mcleod of Cambiscurrie.
Ratification in favors of Mr. Alcxander Mclean of Ottar. Ratification in
favors of John Reid of Bara. Ratification in favors of Captain Edward Burd.
Ratification in favors of Mr. William Gordon Advocat. Ratification in favors
of George Keith of Criechie. Ratification in favors of James Urquhart of
Knockleith. Ratification in favors of Robert Miln his Majesty's Mr. Mason.
Ratification in favors of Lady Mary Bruce and William Cochran.
FINIS.

