C2 R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn
The Copy of an ACT of PARLIAMENT passed in Scotland the 29th of August 1681,
for Security of the Protestant Religion against Papists and Ph^naticks:
Together with the OATH to be taken by all Persons in Public Trusts.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with his Estates of Parliament, considering that albeit by
many good and wholesome Laws made by his Royal Grandfather and Father, of
Glorious Memory, and by himself, in this and his other Parliaments, since his
happy Restoration, the Protestant Religion is carefully asserted, established,
and secured, against Popery and Phanaticisme; yet the restless Adversaries of
our Religion do not cease to propagate their Errors, and to seduce His
Majesty's Subjects from their Duty to God and Loyalty to his Vicegerent, and to
over-turn the Established Religion, by introducing their Superstitions and
Delusions into this Church and Kingdom; and knowing that nothing can more
increase the numbers and confidencies of Papists and Schismatical Dissentors
from the Established Church, than the supine neglect of putting in Execution
the good Laws provided against them, together with their hopes to insinuate
themselves into Offices and Places of Trust and Public Employment: THEREFORE
His Majesty, from his Princely and Pious Zeal to maintain and preserve the True
Protestant Religion contained in the Confession of Faith recorded in the First
Parliament of King JAMES the Sixth; which is founded on, and agreeable to, the
Written Word of God, does with Advice and Consent of his Estates of Parliament,
Require and Command all his Officers, Judges, and Magistrates, to put the Laws
made against Popery and Papist Priests, Jesuits, and all Persons of any other
Order in the Popish Church; especially against Sayers and Hearers of Mass,
Venters and Disposers of Forbidden Books, and Ressetters of Popish Priests and
Excommunicate Papists, as also against all Phanatical Separatists from this
National Church, against Preachers at House or Field Conventicles, and the
Resetters and H^rbourers of Preachers who are Intercommuned, against Disorderly
Baptisms and Marriages, and Irregular Ordinations, and all other Schismatical
Disorders, to full and vigorous Execution, according to the Tenor of the
respective Acts of Parliament there annent provided.

AND that His Majesty's Princely Care to have these Laws put in Execution
against these Enemies of the Protestant Religion, may the more clearly appear,
he does with Advice and Consent foresaid, STATUTE and ORDAIN, That the Minister
of each Parish give up once in October yearly to their respective Ordinary,
tru^ and complete Lists of all Papists and Schismatical With-drawers from the
Public Worship in their respective Parishes; which Lists are to be subscribed
by them: and that the Bishops give in a Double of the said Lists subscribed by
them to the respective Sheriffs, Stuarts, Bailies of Royalty and Regality, and
Magistrates of Burghs, to the effect the said Judges may proceed against them
according to Law; as also the Sheriffs and other Magistrates foresaid, are
hereby ordained to give an Account to His Majesty's Privy Council in December
yearly of their Proceedings against these Papists and Phanatical Separatists,
as they will be answerable at their highest Peril; and that the diligence done
by the Sheriffs; Bailies of Regalities, and other Magistrates foresaid, may be
the better inquired into by the Council, the Bishops of the respective
Diocesses are to send exact Doubles of the Lists of the Papists and Phanaticks
to the Clarks of the Privy Council; whereby the diligencies of the Sheriffs and
other Judges foresaid, may be Comptrolled and Examined: And to cut off all
hopes from Papists and Phanaticks of their being employed in Offices and Places
of Public Trusts, it is hereby STATUTE and ORDAINED, That the following Oath
shall be taken by all Persons in Offices and Places of Public Trust, Civil,
Ecclesiastical, and Military; especially by all Members of Parliament, and all
Electors of Members of Parliament; all Privy Counselors, Lords of Session,
Members of the Exchequer, Lords of Justiciary, and all other Members of these
Courts, all Officers of the Crown, of State, all Archbishops and Bishops, and
all Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel what somever, all persons of this
Kingdom named or to be named Commissioners for the Borders; all Members of the
Commission for Church Affairs, all Sheriffs, Stuarts, Bailies of Royallities
and Regallities, Justices of Peace, Officers of the Mint, Commissioners and
their Deputies, their Clerks and Phefcalls, all Advocates and Proctors before
any of these Courts, all Writers to the Signet, all Public Notaries; and other
Persons Employed in Writing and Agenting. The Lion King at Arms, Heralds,
Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms; all Collectors, Sub-Collectors, and Farmers
of his Majesty's Customs and Excise. All Magistrates, Deans of Guilds,
Counselors, and Clerks of Burghs, Royal Regallity and Barony, and Deacons of
Trades, and Deacons Conve^ners i(...) the said Burghs; all Masters and Doctors
in Universities, Colleges, or Schools; all Chaplains in Families, Pedagogues
to Children; and all Officers and Soldiers in Arms, Forts, or Militia; and all
other persons in any Public Trust or Office within this Kingdom, who shall
publicly swear and subscribe the said Oath as follows: Viz.

The Arch Bishops, Chief Commanders of the Forces, and Officers of the Crown
and State, and Counselors, before the Secret Council, all the Lords of
Session, and all Members of the College of Justice, and others depending upon
them, before the Session. The Lords of Justiciary, and those depending on that
Court, the Lords and other Members of Exchequer before the Exchequer. All
Bishops before the Arch Bishops, all the Inferior Clergy, Commissaries,
Masters and Doctors of Universities and Schools, Chaplains and Pedagogues,
before the Bishops of the respective Diocesses: Sheriffs, Stuarts, Bailies of
Royallity and Regallity, and those depending on these Jurisdictions, before
these respective Courts.

All Provosts, Bailies and Ushers of the Burghs before the Town Council: All
Collectors and Farmers of the Rings Customs and Excise, before the Exchequer;
the Commissioners of the Borders before the Privy Council, all Justices of
Peace before their Conveener, and the Officers of the Mint, before the General
of the Mint; and the Officers of the Forces before the Commander in Chief, and
Common Soldiers before their Respective Officers, the Lion before the Privy
Council, and Heralds Persuivants and Messengers at Arms before the Lion: And
his Majesty with Consent foresaid STATUTES and ORDAINS, That all those who
presently possess or enjoy any of the foresaid Offices, Public Trusts, or
Employments, shall take and subscribe the following Oath in one of the foresaid
Offices in manner before prescribed, betwixt and the First of January next;
which is to be recorded in the Register of the respective Courts and Extracts
thereof, under the Clarks hand, to be reported to His Majesty's Privy Council,
betwixt and the First of March next 1682, and thereafter in any other Courts,
whereof they are Judges or Members, the first time they shall sit or exercise
in any of these respective Courts. And ORDAINS, That all who shall hereafter be
promoted to, or employed in any of the foresaid Offices, Trusts, or
Employments, shall at their Entry into, and before their Exercising thereof,
take and subscribe the said Oath in manner foresaid, to be recorded in the
Registers of the respective Courts, and reported to His Majesty's Privy
Council, within the space of (...) after their taking the same: And if any
shall presume to exercise any of the said Offices or Employments, or any
Public Office or Trust within this Kingdom (the Kings lawful Brothers and Sons
only excepted) until they take the Oath foresaid and subscribe it; to be
recorded in the Register of the respective Courts, they shall be declared
incapable of all Public Trusts thereafter, and be further punished with the
loss of their Movables, the one half whereof to be given to the Informer, and
the other half to belong to His Majesty. And His Majesty, with advice foresaid,
Recommends to his Privy Council, to see this Act put to due and vigorous
Execution.

I A. B. Solemnly Swear in Presence of the Eternal God, whom I Invocate as
Judge and Witness of my Sincere Intentions in this my Oath;

That I Allow and Sincerely Profess the True Protestant Religion contained in
the Confession of Faith Recorded in the First Parliament of King James the
Sixth; And that I believe the same to be founded on and agreeable unto the
Written Word of God; And I Promise and Swear, That I shall Adhere thereto all
the days of my Lif^-^ime; And shall endeavor to Educate my Children therein;
And shall never consent to any Alteration contrary thereto; And that I Disallow
and Renounce all such Principles, Doctrines or Practices, whether Popish or
Fanatical,which are contrary unto, and inconsistent with the said Protestant
Religion, and Confession of Faith.

And for Testification of my Obedience to my most Gracious Sovereign CHARLES
the Second, I do Affirm and Swear by this my Solemn Oath, That the Kings
Majesty is the Only Supreme Governor of this Realm, over all Persons, and in
all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; And that no Foreign Prince,
Person, Pope, Prelate, State or Potentate, has, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or
Civil, within this Realm; And therefore I do utterly Renounce and Forsake all
Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities.

And do promise that from henceforth, I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to
the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Lawful Successors; And to my Power shall All
it and Defend all Rights, Jurisdictions, Prerogatives and Privileges,
Preheminencies and Authorities belonging to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and
Lawful Successors.

And I further Affirm and Swear by this my Solemn Oath, That I judge it
Unlawful for Subjects, upon Pretense of Reformation, or any other Pretense
whatsomever, to enter into Covenants or Leagues, or to Convocate, Conv^^n^, or
Assemble in any Councels, Conventions, or Assemblies, to Treat, Consult, or
Determine in any matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastical, without His
Majesty's Special Command, or Express License had thereto; or to take up Arms
against the King, or those Commissioned by Him; And that I shall never so rise
in Arms, or enter into such Covenants or Assemblies.

And that there lies no Obligation on me from the National Covenant, or the
Solemn League or Covenant, [so commonly called] or any other manner of way
whatsoever, to endeavor any Change or Alteration in the Government either in
Church or State, as it is now Established by the Laws of this Kingdom; And I
Promise and Swear, That I shall with my utmost Power Defend, Assist and
Maintain His Majesty's Jurisdiction aforesaid; And I shall never decline His
Majesty's Jurisdiction, as I shall answer to God.

And Finally, I Affirm and Swear, That this my Solemn Oath is given in the
plain, genuine Sense and Meaning of the Words, without any Eq^ivocation; Mental
Reservation, or any manner of Evasion whatsoever; And that I shall not accept
or use any Dispensation from any Creature therefore.

So help me God.
London, Printed for Randal Tailor. 1681.


