C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT of Council,
For burning the Solemn League and Covenant, and several other Traitorous
Libels.
At Halyrude-house, the 14th. day of January, 1681/2.
FOrasmuch, As albeit by the seventh Act of the Sessions of His Majesty's first
Parliament, and the second Act of the second Sessions of that same Parliament;
that Oath and Combination commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, is
condemned as Treasonable, and taking and renewing thereof by any of the
Subjects, is declared to be High Treason: Yet in the Year 1666. and since,
several desperate and incorrigible Traitors, have taken upon them to Renew and
Swear the said Covenant, to emit and publish several Treasonable and scandalous
Libels, founded thereupon, as particularly those Treasonable Declarations
published at Rutherglen and Sanquhair, the Libel called Cargil's Covenant, and
the late Declaration published at Lanerk upon the twelfth of this instant,
Entitled The Act and Apologetick Declaration of the true Presbyterians of the
Church of Scotland, His Royal Highness His Majesty's High Commissioner, and
Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to Evidence the great abhorrence they
have of these Treasonable Libels, do Ordain, that upon Wednesday next, being
Mercat-day, the said Treasonable Libels, viz. The Solemn League and Covenant,
The Rutherglen and Sanquhair Declarations, The Libel called Cargil' s Covenant,
and the late Treasonable Declaration at Lanerk, be publicly burnt at the Cross
of Edinburgh, by the hand of the common Hangman. And Ordains the Provost,
Bailiffs, and Council of Edinburgh, to be present, and to see the same solemnly
done the said day, betwixt Eleven and Twelve a clock in the Forenoon, and to
report an account of their Obedience to the Council, the next Council day
thereafter. And that these Presents be Printed and Published. Extracted by me.

WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edenbrough Printed by the Heirs of Andrew Anderson, 1682.


