THE LAWS and ACTS Made in the FIFTH SESSION of the FIRST PARLIAMENT Of Our
Most High and Dread SOVEREIGN WILLIAM, By the Grace of GOD, KING of SCOTLAND,
ENGLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith.

Holden and Begun at EDINBVRGH, May 9. 1695. By JOHN Marquess of Tweeddale,
Earl of Gifford, Viscount of Walden, Lord Hay of Yester, and Lord High
Chancellor of this Kingdom.

His Majesty's High Commissioner for Holding the same, By Virtue of a
COMMISSION under His Majesty's Great Seal of this Kingdom.

With the special Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament.

Collected and Extracted from the Registers and Records of Parliament, by
GEORGE Viscount of Tarbat, Lord McLeod, and Castlehaven, etc. Clerk to His
Majesty's Councils, Exchequer, Registers and Rolls, etc.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOMINI 1695.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

LAWS and ACTS Made in the FIFTH SESSION of the FIRST PARLIAMENT Of Our Most
High and Dread SOVEREIGN WILLIAM, By the Grace of GOD, KING of SCOTLAND,
ENGLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith.
Holden at EDINBVRGH the 9 Day of May, 1695.

I. ACT For a Solemn Fast. May 16. 1695.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT, taking to their Consideration, the great Important
War, wherein His MAJESTY continues to be necessarly Engaged, for Defense of
the True Reformed Religion, the Safety of this, and His other Kingdoms, and the
Recovery and Establishment of the Rights, Liberties and Peace of the rest of
Christendom, so much at this time Invaded and Disturbed, with the continual
Hazards, to which His Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby exposed; As likewise
the Dangers which do thence threaten this Kingdom, and all that can be dear to
his Majesty's good Subjects therein, either as Christians, or Men, both by
Invasion from abroad, and the froward Disaffection, and restless Machinations
of evil and unnatural Contrymen at home; And how much it is the Duty and
Interest of all good Men, for these Causes, and on this Occasion, to implore
the Mercy, Favor and Blessing of Almighty GOD, for Preservation of His
Majesty's Royal Person, and Directing, Assisting and Prospering Him in all His
Counsels and Undertakings: And more especially, that GOD would countenance and
assist Him in the present War, give Him Success to His Arms by Sea and Land,
and defeat all the Designs, Counsels and Practices of His secret and open
Enemies, both at home and abroad, for the Preservation of the True Protestant
Religion, securing the Safety of these Kingdoms, and the happy restoring the
Peace of Europe. And the Synod of Lothian and Tweeddale, now met at Edinburgh,
having made Application to my Lord Commissioner for this end: Therefore His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, does hereby
Command and Appoint, that the second Thursday of June next, being the
thirteenth day of the said Month, be set apart as a day of Solemn Fasting and
Humiliation, for making Prayers and Supplications to GOD, for the Ends
abovementioned; and that the said day be Religiously and Strictly Observed by
all Persons within this Kingdom: And Ordains all Ministers to read these
presents publicly in their Congregations a Sunday at least before the said
second Thursday of June next, appointed for keeping the said Fast; Certifying
such of the Leidges who shall not give due Obedience, or shall Contemn or Neglect
the Keeping and Observing the said Day and Duties, that they shall be proceeded
against by Fyning, not exceeding One hundred Pounds Scots Money, And Warrands
and Commands the Sheriffs, Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of
Regalities, and their Deputs, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs within
their several Jurisdictions, to proceed against the Persons guilty, and exact
the Fines accordingly, to be applied, the one half to the Judge, and the other
half to the Poor of the Paroch; And certifying such Ministers as shall fail in
their Duty, in not Reading this Proclamation, and observing the Duties therein
prescribed, they shall be processed before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council. And hereby requires all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords and Baillies of
Regalities, and their Deputs Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, and their
Clerks, to make Report to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, of these
Ministers who shall fail of their Duty herein. And Ordains these Presents to be
Printed, and Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and hail remanent
Market Orosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, that none may pretend Ignorance: And that Copies be dispatched in
the usual manner, to the Sheriffs and Stewarts, Baillies of Regalities, or
their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs; as likewise to all Ministers, that they
may seriously exhort all Persons to a sincere and devout Observance of the
Premises.

II. ACT Regulating Citations before the Parliament. May 28, 1695.
HIS MAJESTY, with the Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, finding
it necessary that the order of summonding private Parties to appear before them
be cleared and regulat, Do therefore STATUTE and ORDAIN, that the manner of
summonding private Parties, in Actions raised either before, or during the
sitting of the Parliament, shall be for hereafter, and from the Day and Date
hereof in this manner, viz. That in prosecution of Protests for remeid of Law,
the Party at whose instance Summonds is to be granted, may give in his Bill,
containing the matter of his Cause or Complaint, Signed by himself, or an
Advocat for him, which being subscribed by one of the six Clerks of Parliament,
and presented before the sitting of the Parliament, to any of the Officers of
State, or the time of the sitting of the Parliament, to the Lord Chancellor, or
President of the Parliament for the time, or any of the said Officers of State,
the same may be by them past in Course, and that as to all other Causes that
may be brought before the Parliament, Summonds and Warrands for Citation shall
for hereafter only be granted by deliverance either of Parliament in time of
Parliament, or of the Lords of Session upon a summar Citation, to abide neither
Continuation or Roll, in praesentia, in the Recesses and Intervalls of
Parliament, upon a Bill containing Subscribed and Presented as above, and no
otherwise: which Warrands for Citation being granted, Summonds in his Majesty's
Name shall be thereon directed, to Macers, if the Party cited be within the Town
of Edinburgh, for summonding the said Party, if within the said Town of
Edinburgh, on forty eight hours, and if elsewhere within the Kingdom,
(excepting Orkney and Zetland) upon fifteen days warning, or if in Orkney or
Zetland, upon forty days personally, or at his dwelling House; or if without
the Kingdom, upon sixty days warning, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh and Peer
and Shore of Leith, to compear before His Majesty, and the said Estates of
Parliament, where and when the Parliament shall be appointed to meet, or shall be
met for the time, with continuation of days, and with certification. And also,
for summonding of Witnesses, as is usual before the Lords of Council and
Session, which Summonds to be expede by deliverance, as said is, shall pass
under the Signet of the Session; and the Party at whose instance the same is
raised, shall pay to the Clerk of Parliament or Session aforesaid, for writing
and subscribing of the Bill and Letters, the Sum of twelve Pound Scots and no
more, on any pretense whatsoever, and for affixing the Signet the Sum of three
Pounds Scots and no more: Declaring that if any Adjournment of Parliament one
or more shall happen to interveen, betwixt the giving of Citations, in manner
foresaid, and the day of Compearance, the foresaid Summonds shall nevertheless
still stand in force, for obliging the Parties and Witnesses summoned to
compear at the day to which the Parliament shall be adjourned, and when ever the
same shall first meet. And further, it is hereby declared, that at the said day
of Compearance before the Parliament, being so met, or any other lawful day
thereafter, it shall be leasome to the Clerks of Parliament, at the desire of
the Party pursuer, to call the foresaid Summonds, after the opening of the
House, and before the sitting down of the Parliament, at the patent Gate of the
Parliament House, and if the Party summoned compear, to mark the same, that the
Summonds with the Executions, and the other Pieces produced by the Pursuer may
be given out to see and answer, to the effect the same may be seen and
returned, within six days in the Common Form, and so the Cause or Complaint may
be ready prepared for the Parliament, to proceed therein, when the same shall be
again called in their presence: providing always, that no Decreets be given out
in absence, but upon special Application to, and Sentence pronounced by the
Parliament, and no otherwise. And excepting always from this Act, all Summonds
of Treason, and for other public Crimes, and Executions, and Processes
thereupon, which are to proceed as formerly. And lastly, providing that the
foresaid Citations to be made by deliverance of the Lords of Session, shall
found no exception of Prejudiciality against any Party, in any Action, may be
raised, until the foresaid Citation be called before, and sustained by the
Parliament.

III. ACT Adjourning the Summer-Session till the first of July 1695. May 30.
1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering that the sitting of the Parliament, begun the
ninth of May instant, may continue for the Month of June next, whereby the
Leidges cannot attend the Summer Session in its ordinar time; Do therefore;
with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Adjourn the Session,
(which should be in course the first of June next) to the first of July next,
continowing all Actions and Causes depending before the Lords of Session to the
said first of July: And his Majesty dispenses in the mean time, with the
sitting of all inferior Courts, as if the Session had not been adjourned, and
notwithstanding of the sitting of the Parliament: And further Declares, that
the time and space to run, betwixt the said first of June and the first of
July, shall not be reckoned in any short Prescription. And Ordains these
Presents to be published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to be forthwith
Printed, that the Leidges may be thereby certified thereof.

IV. ACT Anent the Justice Court. June 7, 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, for the better Regulating of the Justice Court, and
Facilitating and more sure Ordering of the Form and Method of Process therein
used: Do therefore, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statute and Ordain, that in all time coming, the Use and Custom hitherto
observed in that Court of Advocats or Procurators their Dictating, and the
Clerks writing of the Defenses, Duplies, Triplies, Quadruplies and so forth for
the Defender and Pursuer be discharged and laid aside, and that in place
thereof, His Majesty's Advocat or other Advocats or Procurators for the
Pursuer, with the Advocats or Procurators for the Defender or Panel debate the
Relevancy viva voce, and that after the said Dispute viva voce is ended, then
time be allowed by the Lords and Judges of the said Court, to the effect
after-mentioned, and that the Kings Advocat, or Advocats, or Procurators for
the Pursuer, do within the space of forty eight hours, give in to the Clerk
his Information in writing subscribed with his hand, that the Advocats or
Procurators for the Panel may take it up, and give in their Answers in writing
also under their hands, within other forty eight hours, which Information and
Answers, shall be by the Clerk recorded in the Books of Adjournal, in place of
the foresaid written Dispute formerly in use, and then at the Advising the said
Information and Answers, shall be first read in open Court, and if any thing be
found new on either side, and not noticed by the other Party, the Parties or
Judges shall point the same to the other Party concerned, and hear both Parties
thereon viva voce, the Clerk Minuting in presence of, and at sight of the said
Judges what is so further Debated, and then the said Judges shall proceed to the
Advising. And His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Ratifies, Approves,
and Confirms the whole Rights, Powers and Privileges of the said Court of
Justice, and of the Lord Justice General, Lord Justice Clerk and other Judges,
and all other Members thereof. And it is further hereby Statute and Ordained,
that in all capital Crimes wherein inferior Criminal Courts were hitherto
restricted, to try and execute within three Suns, this time shall be hereafter
restricted to the Trial and Sentence only, but not to the time of Execution,
which is hereby left to the Discretion of the Judge, not exceeding nine days
after Sentence.

V. ACT Anent Principals and Cautioners. June 7. 1695.
HIS MAJESTY and the Estates of Parliament, Considering the great Hurt and
Prejudice, that has befallen many Persons and Families, and often times to their
utter Ruin and Undoing, by men's Facility to engage as Cautioners for others,
who afterward failing, have left a growing Burden on their Cautioners without
Relief: Therefore, and for Remeid thereof, His Majesty with Advice foresaid,
Statutes and Ordains, that no man binding and engaging for hereafter, for and
with another Conjunctly and Severally, in any Bond or Contracts for Sums of
Money, shall be bound for the said Sums for longer than seven years after the
date of the Bond, but that from and after the said seven years, the said
Cautioner shall be eo ipso free of his Caution; And that whoever is bound for
another, either as Express Cautioner, or as Principal, or Co-principal, shall
be understood to be a Cautioner, to have the benefit of this Act; Providing,
that he have either Clause of Relief in the Bond, or a Bond of Relief apart,
intimat Personally to the Creditor at his receiving of the Bond, without
prejudice always to the true Principals, being bound in the whole Contents of
the Bond or Contract; As also, of the said Cautioners being still bound,
conform to the Terms of the Bond within the said seven years, as before the
making of this Act; As also providing that what Legal Diligence by Inhibition,
Horning, Arrestment, Adjudication, or any other way, shall be done within the
seven years by Creditors against their Cautioners, for what fell due in that
time, shall stand good, and have its Course and Effect after the expyring of
the seven years, as if this Act had not been made.

VI. ACT Regulating the Sale and Payment of Bankrupts Estates. June 18, 1695.
HIS MAJESTY with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, for the
further Clearing and Explaining of former Laws, anent the Sale of Bankrupts
Estates, Statutes, Enacts, and Declares, that it shall be lawful to all
Purchasers of Bankrupts Estates, after the space of one year, counting from the
Decree of Sale, and to such as have obtained Decreets of Sale, after the Term
of Whitsunday one thousand six hundred and ninety six years, to consign the
whole Price offered, with the Annualrent due at the time of the Consignation,
or so much thereof, as remains in the hands of the Purchaser, over and above
what is warrantably paid to Creditors preferred by the Lords of Session, in
the hands of the Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh, and their Thesaurer
for the time, who are hereby obliged and ordained to receive the same, upon
their Receipt in the Terms after-mentioned: And for the greater benefit of the
Creditors, are further allowed to keep in their hands the consigned Money, for
the space of a year from the next Term of Candlesmass, Whitsunday, Lambmass, or
Martinmass after the Consignation, upon payment of three per Cent of
Annualrent, ay and while it be called for: And the said Magistrates, Town
Council, and Thesaurer of Edinburgh for the time, shall be, and are hereby
obliged to make forthcoming, the consigned Money in whole, or in part, with the
Annualrent thereof, at three per Cent as said is, according as they shall be
ordered by the said Lords of Session, with Certification if they failzie, that
they shall be charged with Horning for that effect, and shall be thereafter
liable, not only in the tenth part of the principal Sum, called for in name of
Penalty; But also in the ordinary Annualrent of the said principal, ay and
while the complete payment thereof. And because Purchasers of Lands affected
with Liferents, have Retention of a share of the Price: It is hereby Declared,
that the Purchaser shall be allowed to consign what remains in his hands, after
the Decease of the Liferenter in manner foresaid; he always, making due
Intimation of the Consignation to the Creditors who got the rest of the Price.
And His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Statutes, Enacts, and Declares, that the
Purchaser paying the Price offered to the Creditors, according as they are or
shall be Ranked and Preferred by the Lords of Session, or consigning the same
in manner foresaid, shall be for ever exonered, and the Security given for the
Price, shall be delivered up to be cancelled, and the Lands and others
Purchased and Acquired, disburdened of all Debts or Deeds of the Bankrupt or
his Predecessors, from whom he had Right, and that the Bankrupt, his Heirs, or
appearand Heirs, or Creditors without Exception of Minority, not compeating or
conceiving themselves to be prejudged, shall only have Access to pursue the
Receivers of the Price and their Heirs, and reserving to the Minor Leased his
Relief as accords: And further, His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid,
does hereby Authorize the Lords of Session, to grant warrant for charging the
Magistrates and Thesaurer of Edinburgh for the time, to make payment of the Sums
consigned to the several Creditors according to their Preferences, upon the
said Creditors their several Applications to the Lords, and consigning in the
Clerks hands, Dispositions and Conveyances in favors of the Purchasers, in so
far as their several Rights may affect the Purchase; As also, in case any
Debate remain undetermined amongst the Creditors anent their Preferences, it
shall be lawful to the said Lords, upon Application of the said Creditors, to
grant warrant for uplifting and employing the Sums consigned, upon sufficient
Security bearing Annualrent.

VII. ACT For six Months Supply upon the Land-Rent. June 20. 1695.
THe Estates of Parliament taking into their Consideration, the Dangers that
still threaten this Kingdom, by reason of the Continuance of the present War,
which visibly require the keeping up of the standing Forces, and the Supplies
necessary for their Maintenance; Do therefore humbly and cheerfully for
themselves, and in name of this Kingdom whom they represent, make offer to His
Majesty of a Supply of Four hundred thirty two thousand pound, extending to six
Months Cess; which new Supply, is to be raised and uplifted out of the Landrent
of this kingdom in the same manner, and conform to the Proportions of the
Shires and Burghs contained in the sixth Act of the second Session of this
Current Parliament, dated the seventh day of June 1690, providing always that
the Proportions of Burghs, be rated and paid as their Tax-roll now is, or that
be settled by themselves; and this Supply to be paid in two parts, either
answering to three Months Cess, viz. Two hundred and sixteen thousand pounds as
being the first half thereof, to be paid betwixt and the first day of August,
in this present year One thousand six hundred and ninety five: and the other
two hundred and sixteen thousand pound, as the other half thereof, betwixt and
the first of February, One thousand six hundred ninety six years. And His
Majesty considering, that this Supply is granted for such a necessary use, Does
with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Declare, that no Person
or Persons shall be Exempted from payment of their Proportions of this Supply
for their Lands, upon any pretext whatsoever (excepting Mortified Lands, and
the Lands of New-milns, belonging to the WoolenManufactory there, for which
Mortified Lands, and Lands of New-milns, Deduction is to be allowed in the
Quota of the respective Shires) notwithstanding of any former Law, Privilege,
or Act of Parliament in the contrary. And His Majesty with Advice and Consent
foresaid, does Nominat and Appoint the same Persons, who are named in the
foresaid Act of Parliament, who are alive, and have qualified themselves
according to Law, or shall qualify themselves betwixt and the last Tuesday of
July next to come, and such others as have been since Nominat by the Privy
Council, to be Commissioners for ordering and uplifting this Supply; with the
same power to them, to Choice their own Clerk, and to do every thing that may
concern the said Supply, as is prescribed and appointed by the said Act,
holding the same as repeated herein, and Ordains the same Execution to pass for
In-bringing thereof, as is provided by that Act in all points. And Ordains the
first Meeting of the said Commissioners for the Shires, to be at the Head
Burghs thereof upon the third Tuesday of July next, at ten of the Clock, for
the Shires on this side of the River of Tay: And the last Tuesday of July next,
for the Shires benorth Tay. And requires the Sheriffs and Stewarts, or their
Deputs, to intimat the same to the Commissioners of the respective Shires and
Stewartries, with power to them to appoint their subsequent Dyets of Meeting
and their Conveener from time to time: And also to appoint Collectors with
sufficient Caution, as they shall think fit. And commits to His Majesty's Privy
Council, upon the Death or not Acceptance of any of the Commissioners of
Supply, appointed by this Act, to Nominat and Appoint others in their places.
And His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, does Declare, that all
Clauses contained in the former Acts of Parliament, and Convention of Estates,
in relation to the inbringing of the Cess, and Quartering, and anent Ryding
Money, shall stand in full Force as to this Supply now imposed, in the same
manner as if they were insert herein; except in so far, as these Acts of
Parliament or Convention, are Innovat or Altered by the foresaid sixth Act of
the second Session of this Current Parliament. And it is hereby Declared, that
no Persons liable in payment of this Supply, shall be holden to produce their
Discharges or Receipts of the same, after three years from the respective Terms
of payment, unless Diligence be done by Denunciation before elapsing of the
said three years. And because by the Supply hereby granted, the Land-rent and
Burghs of this Kingdom are only burdened; and it being just that the Personal
Estates in Money, should bear some Proportion of the Burden: Therefore, His
Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that every
Debtor owing Money within the Kingdom at six per Cent of Interest, shall in
the payment of his Annualrents for one year, have Retention in his own hands of
one of six of the said Annualrents, and this Retention to be for the whole
year, viz. from Whitsunday One thousand six hundred and ninety five, to
Whitsunday One thousand six hundred and ninety six years. And it is hereby
Declared, that it shall be Usury for any Creditor, not to grant the said
Retention.

Follows the Quota of Supply, payable Monthly by the several Shires of the
Kingdom.
THe Sheriffdom of Edinburgh, the sum of three thousand one hundred and eighty
three Pounds, eight shillings Scots money Monthly.

The Sheriffdom of Haddington, the sum of two thousand seven hundred and eighty
two Pounds, six shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Berwick, the sum of two thousand eight hundred and thirteen
Pounds, one shilling.

The Sheriffdom of Roxburgh, the sum of three thousand six hundred and eighty
six Pounds, seventeen shillings, six pennies.

The Sheriffdom of Selkirk, the sum of nine hundred and four Pounds, nine
shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Peebles, the sum of one thousand and forty two Pounds,
eight shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Lanerk, the sum of three thousand and ninety one Pounds,
twelve shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Dumfreis, the sum of two thousand seven hundred and twelve
Pounds, seventeen shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Wigton, the sum of one thousand and four Pounds, fifteen
shillings.

The Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, the sum of one thousand six hundred and
seventy four Pounds, eleven shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Air, the sum of three thousand eight hundred and seventy
Pounds, five shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Dumbarton, the sum of seven hundred and sixty four Pounds,
ten shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Bute, the sum of three hundred and eight Pounds, eight
shillings, and eight pennies.

The Sheriffdom of Renfrew, the sum of one thousand three hundred and fifty
three Pounds, seven shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Striviling, the sum of one thousand seven hundred and fifty
four Pounds, four shillings, and six pennies.

The Sheriffdom of Linlithgow, the sum of one thousand one hundred and sixty
nine Pounds, eighteen shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Perth, the sum of five thousand and thirty eight Pounds,
fourteen shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Kincardine, the sum of nine hundred and eighty four Pounds,
one shilling.

The Sheriffdom of Aberdeen, the sum of four thousand and seventy seven Pounds,
nineteen shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Inverness, the sum of one thousand two hundred and thirteen
Pounds, one shilling, and six pennies.

The Sheriffdom of Ross, the sum of one thousand one hundred and thirty one
Pounds, six shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Nairn, the sum of two hundred and seventy seven Pounds,
sixteen shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Cromarty, the sum of two hundred and fourteen Pounds.

The Sheriffdom of Argyle, the sum of one thousand nine hundred and forty
seven Pounds, ten shillings, and nine pennies.

The Sheriffdom of Fife and Kinross, the sum of five thousand one hundred and
seventy two Pounds.

The Sheriffdom of Forfar, the sum of three thousand two hundred and seventy
three Pounds, fifteen shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Bamff, the sum of one thousand one hundred and fifty Pounds,
four shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Sutherland, the sum of three hundred and thirty six Pounds.

The Sheriffdom of Caithness the sum of five hundred and ninety nine Pounds,
five shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Elgin, the sum of one thousand and fifty nine Pounds, five
shillings.

The Sheriffdom of Orkney and Zetland, the sum of one thousand and eighty eight
Pounds, ten shillings.

And the Shiriffdom of Clackmannan, the sum of three hundred and fifty two
Pounds, seven shillings and three pennies Scots money.

Follows the Quota of Supply, payable Monthly by the several Burghs of the
Kingdom.
The City of Edinburgh, the sum of three thousand eight hundred and eighty
Pounds Scots Monthly.

The Burgh of Perth, the sum of three hundred and sixty Pounds.

The Burgh of Dundee, the sum of five hundred and sixty Pounds.

The City of Aberdeen, the sum of seven hundred and twenty six Pounds.

The Burgh of Stirling, the sum of one hundred and seventy two Pounds.

The Burgh of Linlithgow, the sum of one hundred and fifty six Pounds.

The City of St. Andrews, the sum of seventy two Pounds.

The City of Glasgow, the sum of one thousand and eight hundred Pounds.

The Burgh of Air, the sum of one hundred and twenty eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Haddington, the sum of one hundred and ninety two Pounds.

The Burgh of Dysart, the sum of thirty Pounds.

The Burgh of Kirkaldy, the sum of two hundred and eighty eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Montrose, two hundred and forty Pounds.

The Burgh of Couper, one hundred and eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Anstruther-Easter, eighteen Pounds.

The Burgh of Dumfreis, the sum of two hundred and thirty Pounds.

The Burgh of Inverness, the sum of one hundred and eighty Pounds.

The Burgh of Burnt-Island, the sum of seventy two Pounds.

The Burgh of Innerkeithing, the sum of thirty Pounds.

The Burgh of Kinghorn, the sum of forty two Pounds.

The Burgh of Breichin, the sum of fifty four Pounds.

The Burgh of Irwine, the sum of sixty Pounds.

The Burgh of Jedburgh, the sum of one hundred and two Pounds.

The Burgh of Kirkcudbright, the sum of thirty six Pounds.

The Burgh of Wigton, the sum of thirty six Pounds.

The Burgh of Dumfermling, the sum of ninety Pounds.

The Burgh of Pittenweem, the sum of thirty Pounds.

The Burgh of Selkirk, the sum of seventy two Pounds.

The Burgh of Dumbarton, the sum of thirty Pounds.

The Burgh of Renfrew, the sum of thirty six Pounds.

The Burgh of Dumbar, the sum of sixty Pounds.

The Burgh of Lanerk, the sum of sixty Pounds.

The Burgh of Aberbrothock, the sum of fifty four Pounds.

The Burgh of Elgin, the sum of one hundred and thirty eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Peebles, the sum of sixty six Pounds.

The Burgh of Crayl, the sum of thirty six Pounds.

The Burgh of Tain, the sum of thirty Pounds.

The Burgh of Culross, the sum of twenty four Pounds.

The Burgh of Bamff, the sum of forty two Pounds.

The Burgh of Whythorn, the sum of eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Forfar, the sum of twenty four Pounds.

The Burgh of Rothsay, the sum of thirty Pounds

The Burgh of Nairn, the sum of nine Pounds.

The Burgh of Forres, the sum of twenty four Pounds.

The Burgh of Rutherglen, the sum of twelve Pounds.

The Burgh of North-Berwick, the sum of six Pounds.

The Burgh of Anstruther-Wester, the sum of six Pounds.

The Burgh of Cullen, the sum of eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Lauder, the sum of thirty Pounds.

The Burgh of Kintore, the sum of nine Pounds.

The Burgh of Annand, the sum of twelve Pounds.

The Burgh of Lochmabban, the sum of eighteen Pounds.

The Burgh of Sanquhar, the sum of six Pounds.

The Burgh of New Galloway, the sum of six Pounds.

The Burgh of Kilrenny, the sum of eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Fortrose, the sum of eighteen Pounds.

The Burgh of Dingwal, the sum of eight Pounds.

The Burgh of Dornoch, the sum of eighteen Pounds.

The Burgh of Queens-ferry, the sum of fifty four pounds.

The Burgh of Inveraray, the sum of twenty four Pounds.

The Burgh of Inverury, the sum of twelve Pounds.

The Burgh of Week, the sum of twenty pounds.

The Burgh of Kirkwal, the sum of seventy two Pounds.

The Burgh of Inverbervy, the sum of six Pounds.

The Burgh of Stranraer, the sum of twelve Pounds.

Mr. John Buchan Agent for the Burrows to make up the Quota for the Burrows One
thousand two hundred Pounds Scots.

Follows the Commissioners of Supply, Ordered by the Parliament to be given in
by the Noblemen and Commissioners from the several Shires; in place of those
dead, or not Qualified, since the Year 1690.
For the Shire of Edinburgh.
THE Lord Ross, Sir John Gibson, Dalmenie, Sir Robert Dickson of Sornebeg, Sir
George Hamilton of Barnton, Carlops, Rickarton-Craig, James Murray of Poltoun,
Mr. James Dalrymple of Killoch, Baillie Alexander Calderwood in Dalkeith, Sir
James Stewart His Majesty's Advocat, Sir William Baird of Newbyth, Baillie John
Nairn in Dalkeith.

For the Shire of Haddingtoun.
The Earl of Roxburgh, Lord Alexander Hay, Mr. Alexander Hume of Crichne^,
William Purvis younger of Ewfoord, James Moor of Bourhouses, John Hay of
Athirstoun, John Hay of East-hope, James Rue of Chesters, Mr. Hugh Dalrymple of
North-Berwick, Sir John Clerk of Pennycook, James Hume of Gamilshiels, David
Maitland of Soutrac, William Skirvine of Plewlandhill, Thomas Hamilton of
Olive-slob, Hoptouns Chamberlain, Patrick Cockburn of Clerkingtoun younger,

Wauchope of Stotincleugh, James Mcmorlan of the Earl of Haddingtouns
Chamberlain.

For the Shire of Roxburgh.
The Earl of Roxburgh, the Lord of Riddel younger, the Lord of Mangertoun,
the Lord of Boon-jedburgh, the Lord of Timpenden, John Scot of Weems, William
Turnbull of Langraw, Walter Cairncross of Hilslop, James Lithgow of Drygrains
younger, Robert Davidson of Hownam, Andrew Young of Oxnam-side, Robert Davidson
of Marchcleugh, Mr. Archibald Douglas brother to Cavers, Gideon Eliot of
Northsymptoun, William Scot of Burnhead.

For the shire of Selkirk.
The Earl of Roxburgh, Francis Scot of Balzielie, William Eliot of
Borthwick-brae, George Curror of Hartwood-burn, William Ogilvy of
Hartwood-myres, the Lord of Gala younger, the Eldest Baillie of Selkirk for
the time, Mr. John Murray Sheriff Deput of Selkirk.

For the shire of Peebles.
Adam Murray of Cardon, Alexander Monteith of Chappel-hill, Alexander Veitch
younger of Glen, William Burnet of Barns, John Law of Netherurd.

For the shire of Lanerk.
The Earl of Wigtoun, the Earl of Selkirk, James Master of Carmichael the Lord
of Lee, Sir William Hamilton of Whitelaw, one of the Senators of the College
of Justice, Sir William Stewart of Castle-milk, John Baillie of Welstoun, John
Somervel of Gladstones, Allan Lockart younger of Cleghorn, Gawin Hamilton of
Raploch, the Lord of Blackwood younger, the Lord of Ferm younger, the Lord
of Shiel-hill, William Somervel of Corehouse, Mr. Archibald Hamilton of
Dalserff, the Lord of Munkland, the Lord of Boigs, John Hamilton of Udstoun,
James Anderson of Stobcorss, the Lord of Cultness younger, John Wardrop of
Drummarnock, the Lord of Mauldsly, the Lord of Braidisholm.

For the Shire of Wigtoun.
James Earl of Galloway, William Stewart younger of Castle-^ewart, Patrick
Mcdowal of Culgrot, John Dalrymple Son to the Master of Stairs.

For the Shire of Air.
The Earl of Lowdoun, the Lord Kennedy, the Lord Bargeny, Mr. William Cochran
of Kilmaronock, the Lord of Langshaw younger, the Lord of Dunlap, the Lord
of Ralstoun, Sir Archibald Muir of Thorntown, James Crawfurd of Newark, Thomas
Boyd of Pitcoun, the Lord of Crawfurdland younger, Mr. Alexander Crawfurd of
Fergusnil, John Crawfurd younger thereof, James Cochran of Mayns-hill, Neivin
of Munkriding, William Cunninghame of Ashinyards, John Dalrymple Son to the
Master of Stairs, Sir John Cochran of Ochiltrie, John Cochran of Waterside,
Faucher of Gilmils-croft, William Baillie of Munktoun, James Campbel of
Iurebank, the Lairds of Logan elder and younger, Hugh Crawfurd of Drumdow, Hugh
Dowglass of Garallan, Adam Aird of Catharin, James McAdam of Waterhead, the
Lord of Dunduff, Kennedy younger of Drumellan, James Riddoch of Midtown
Baillie of Cumnock, Mr. William Crawfurd of Dalragills, David Boswal of
Brae-head, David Kennedy of Kirkmichael, Mr. John Schaw of Drumgrains, Hugh
Kennedy of Bennan.

For the Shire of Renfrew.
Porterfield of Duchil, James Hamilton of Aikenhead, Gawin Ralstoun of that
Ilk, Ludovick Houstoun of Iohnstoun younger, Hall of Fulbarr Maxwells of
Southbarr elder and younger.

For the Shire of Stirling.
The Lord Forrester, the Lord Cardross, the Lord of Bedlormie, John Ross of
Nuick, Archibald Buntin of Balglass, George Buchannan of Ballachrum, Thomas
Buchannan of Roquhan, John Buchanan of Cralgyvairn, Walter Buchannan of
Balfunning, John McLauchlan of Auchintroig, Duncan Buchannan of Harperstoun,
John Forest of Pardiven, David Forrester of Denovane, John Cuthil of
Stonniewood, James Rankin of Balhumilzear, Thomas Crawfurd of Manuel-miln, John
Campbel younger of Douan, Robert Forest of Bankhead, Mr. John Areskin present
Governor of the Castle of Stirling, Robert Hay of Candy, Archbald Naper of
Bankell.

For the Shire of Linlithgow.
The Earl of Annandale, the Lord Cardross, Lord John Hamilton, Lieutenant
Colonel John Areskin, John Dalrymple Son to the Master of Stairs, James
Dowglass of Pompherstoun, David Dundass of Philipstoun, Patrick Dickson of
Westbinnie, James Hamilton of Badderston, James Carmichael of Pottieshaw, the
Lord of Duntarvie, the Lord of Barbachlay, the Lord of Wrae, the Lord of
Duddingstoun younger, Patrick Dundass of Breastmiln.

For the Shire of Kincardine.
John Arbuthnet of Fordown, George Allardice of that Ilk, Mr. James Keith of
Auchorsk Sheriff-deput of Kincardine, William Forbes younger of Moniemusk,
Alexander Ross of Tullisnaucht, David Melvil of Pitgarvie, William Strauchan of
Strath.

For the Shire of Aberdeen.
Mr. Patrick Ogilvie of Cairnbulg, William Frazer of Broadland, the Lord of
Innercald, Mr. James Scougal, Mr. Robert Forbes of Birsmore, the eldest Baillie
of Frazersburgh for the time being, the Lord of Mouny, John Forbes of
Tulliegrig, Alexander Leslie of Little-Wartle, Mr. Alexander Frazer of Powis,
John Forbes of Innerdraen, Alexander Keith of Kidshill, William Hay of Earnhill.

For the Shire of Inverness.
James Grant of Gallowie, Patrick Grant of Rothiemurchus, Robert Grant of
Garthinmore, Patrick Grant of Raick, James Grant of Tulloch, William Grant of
Dalliechappel.

For the Shire of Cromartie.
Hugh Rose of Kilravock, John Urquhart of Craighouse, Alexander Mackenzie of
Bellon, AEneas Mackleod of Catboll, Mr. Roderick Mackenzie in Tarrel, Kenneth
Mackenzie of Culbo, Adam Gordon of Dalfollic, Roderick Mackenzie of Navitie.

For the Shire of Argile.
James Campbel younger of Ardkinglass, Patrick Campbel of Duntroon, Colin
Campbel Chamberlain to the Earl of Argile, Dougal Campbel younger of
Kilberrick, Neil Macneil Fiar of Teynish, Robert Campbel Fiar of Carrick,
Archibald Campbel of Clunes Baillie of Yla, Ronald Campbel of Laggan-Lochan,
George Campbel of Dall, Archibald Campbel of Shindarlin, Donald Campbel of
Glencaradel, John Campbel Baillie of Jura, Archibald Campbel of Craigage, Angus
Campbel younger of Skipnedge.

For the Shire of Fife.
The Lord Yester, the Master of Yester, the Lord of Lundie, Sir Alexander
Bruce of Broomhall, Mr. Alexander Anstruther of Newark, the Lord of Durie, Mr.
John Prestoun of Drumraw, Thomas Beaton of Tarvit, the Lord of Murdocairnie,
Macgill younger of Rankeillor, the Lord of Kirkness, the Lord of Dowhill, Mr.
Robert Beaton of Craigfoodie younger, the Lord of Bannochy younger, the Lord
of Dinboig, Mr. David Scrimzeour of Kirkmore, John Dempster younger of
Pitliver, Weems of Bogie younger, the Lord of Bandone, John Melvil of
Carskirdo, the Lord of Balcanquel younger, Mr. John Mitchel of Balbairdie,
Lundie of Baldastard, George Moncreiff of Sauchope, John Hay of Naughtoun
younger, Walter Boswell of Balbertoun, Alexander Swinton of Strathore, James
Maxwel of Achibank, James Clelland of Piddennis.

For the Shire of Forfar.
The Lord of Loggie younger, the Lord of Strickathro, the Lord of
Smiddiehill younger, the Lord of Rossie younger, Mr. James Lyel of Balhall.

For the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright.
James Earl of Galloway, Lord Bazile Hamilton, Patrick Horron of Kirrachtrie,
John Mackie of Palgown, Alexander Mackie younger of Palgown, Mackulloch of
Bareholm, William Muir Tutor of Cassincarrie, William Gordon of Schirmoirs,
Robert Gordon of Garerie, James Gordon of Largmoir, Robert Gordon of Airds,
William Maxwel younger of Newlands, Robert Macklellan of Barmagaleim, Charles
Macklellan of Collin, Andrew Corsan of Balmagan, Grier of Dalscerth.

For the Shire of Sutherland.
George Monro of Culrain, AEneas Mackleod of Catboll, David Ross of
Innerchasly, and David Sutherland younger of Kinnald.

For the Shire of Caithness.
Alexander Sinclair of Braibster, Mr. John Campbel Commissar of Caithness,
James Murray of Clairdon, Mr. William Caldell of Galshfield, Daniel Budge of
Tostingall, William Sutherland of Geese, John Sinclair of Forss, Donald
Williamson of Banaskirk, Patrick Murray of Pennyland, George Sinclair of
Barroch, David Sinclair of Freswick.

For the Shire of Elgin.
Ludovick Dumbar of Grainge, Joseph Brody of Milntown, the Lord of Innes
younger, Alexander Brody of Duncairn, Robert Cumming of Relugus.

For the Shire of Ross.
The Lord of Gairloch, John Mackenzie of Cowle younger, Colin Mackenzie Uncle
to the Lord of Gairloch, Mr. Simon Mackenzie of Allans, George Monro of
Lamelair younger, Colin Robertson of Kindeis, Lauchlan Mackenzie of Assin
younger, David Monro Tutor of Fyress, Robert Monro of Auchnagart, Hector Monro
of Daan younger, AEneas Macleod of Catboll, William Ross of Easterfearn, Mr.
Charles Mackenzie of Loggy, Mr. Alexander Mackenzie of Dachmaluick younger, Mr.
Alexander Ross of Pitkearie, Abraham Lesly of Findrossie, Mr. George Mackenzie
of Bellamuckie, Roderick Macleod of Cambuscutrie, Ronnald Bayn of Knockbayn,
John Bayn younger of Tulloch, Mr. Colin Mackenzie of Muir, Alexander Forrester
of Cullinald younger.

VIII. ACT For a Company Tradeing to Africa and the Indies. June 26. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Taking into His Consideration, That by an Act past in this
present Parliament, Entitled Act for encouraging of Foreign Trade; His
Majesty for the Improvement thereof, Did with Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament, Statute and Declare, That Merchants more or fewer may Contract
and enter into such societies and Companies, for carrying on of Trade, as to
any subject of Goods or Merchandise to whatsomever Kingdoms, Countries, or
parts of the World, not being in War with His Majesty, where Trade is in use to
be, or may be followed, and particularly, beside the Kingdoms and Countries of
Europe, to the East and West- Indies, the Streights, and to Trade in the
Mediterranian, or upon the Coast of Africa, or in the Northern parts, or
elsewhere as above: Which Societies and Companies being Contracted and entered
into, upon the terms and in the usual manner, as such Companies are Set up, and
in use in other parts consistant always with the Laws of this Kingdom: His
Majesty with Consent foresaid, did Allow and Approve, giving and granting to
them and each of them all Powers, Rights and Privileges, as to their persons;
Rules and Orders, That by the Laws are given to Companies allowed to be Erected
for Manufactories; And His Majesty for their greater encouragement, did promise
to give to these Companies, and each of them his Letters patent under the great
Seal, Confirming to them the whole foresaid Powers and Privileges, with what
other encouragement His Majesty should judge needful, as the foresaid Act of
Parliament at more length bears. And His Majesty understanding that several
persons as well Forraigners as Natives of this Kingdom, are willing to Engage
themselves with great Sums of Money in an American, Affrican, and Indian Trade
to be exercised in and from this Kingdom; if enabled and encouraged thereunto
by the Concessions, powers and privileges needful and usual in such Cases.
Therefore, and in pursuance of the foresaid Act of Parliament, His Majesty with
Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, Does hereby make and
constitute John Lord Belhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun, Lord Justice Clerk,
Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir Robert
Chiesly present Provest of Edinburgh, John Swintoun of that Ilk, George Clark
late Baillie of Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blakewood, and James Balfour Merchants in
Edinburgh, and John Corss Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson Esquire, James
Fowlis, David Nairn Esquires, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Cheisly, John Smith.
Thomas Coutes, Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohaine, Daves Ovedo, and Walter Stuart
Merchants in London, with such others as shall join with them within the space
of twelve Months after the first day of August next, and all others, whom the
foresaid Persons and these joined with them, or major part of them being
assembled, shall admit and join into their Joint Stock and Trade, who shall all
be Repute, as if herein originally insert to be one Body Incorporate, and a
free Incorporation, with perpetual Succession, by the Name of The Company of
Scotland Trading to Africa, and the Indies: Providing always, Likeas, it is
hereby in the first place provided, that of the Fond or Capital Stock that
shall be agreed to, be Advanced and Employed by the foresaid Undertakers, and
their Copartners; the half at least shall be appointed and allotted for
Scottish men within this Kingdom, who shall enter and subscribe to the said
Company, before the first day of August, one Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety
Six Years: And if it shall happen, that Scots Men living within this Kingdom,
shall not betwixt and the foresaid Term, subscribe for, and make up the equal
half of the said Fond or Capital Stock, Then and in that case allannerly, It
shall be, and is hereby allowed to Scots Men residing Abroad, or to
Forraigners, to come in, Subscribe, and be assumed for the Superplus of the
said half, and no otherwise: Likeas, the Quota of every man's part of the said
Stock whereupon he shall be capable to enter into the said Company, whether he
be Native or Forraigner, shall be for the least one Hundred lib. Sterling. And for
the highest, or greatest three Thousand lib. Sterling. and no more directly nor
indirectly in any sort: with power to the said Company to have a common Seal,
and to alter and renew the same at their pleasure, with advice always of the
Lion King at Arms; as also to Plead and Sue, and be Sued; and to Purchass,
Acquire, Possess, and enjoy Lordships, Lands, Tenements, or other Estate real
or personal of whatsoever nature or quality, and to dispose upon and alienate
the same, or any part thereof at their pleasure, and that by Transferrs and
Assignment, made and entered in their Books and Records without any other
formality of Law, Providing always, that such Shares as are first Subscribed
for, by Scots Men within this Kingdom shall not be alienable to any other than
Scots Men living within this Kingdom; That the foresaid Transfers and
Convoyancies as to Lands and other real Estate (when made of these only and a
part) be perfected according to the Laws of this Kingdom anent the convoyance
of Lands and real Rights, with power likewayes to the foresaid company, by
Subscriptions or otherways, as they shall think fit to raise a joint Stock or
capital Fond of such a sum or sums of Money, and under and subject unto such
Rules, Conditions and Qualifications, as by the foresaid Company, or major part
of them when assembled shall be limited and appointed to begin, carry on and
support their intended Trade of Navigation, and whatever may contribute to the
advancement thereof. And it is hereby declared, that the said joint Stock or
capital Fond, or any part thereof, or any estate, real or personal, Ships,
Goods, or other Effects of and belonging to the said Company, shall not be
liable unto any manner of confiscation, Seizure, Forfaulture, Attachment,
Arrest or Restraint, for and by reason of any Embargo, breach of Peace, Letters
of mark or reprisal, Declaration of War with any foreign Prince, Potentate, or
State, or upon any other account or pretense whatsomever; but shall only be
transferable, assignable, or alienable in such way and manner and in such parts
and Portions, and under such restriction, rules and conditions, as the said
Company shall by writing in and upon their Books, Records and Registers direct
and appoint, and these Transfers and Assignments only, and no other shall convoy
the right and Property, in and to the said joint Stock, and capital Fond and
effects thereof abovementioned, or any part of the samen, Excepting always as
is above-excepted, and that the Creditors of any particular Member of the
Company may by their real Diligence affect the share of the profit falling, and
pertaining to the Debtor, without having any further Right or Power of the
Debitors part and Interest in the Stock or capital Fond, otherwise than is
above-appointed, and with this express provision, that whatever charges the
Company may be put to, by the contending of any of their Members Deceased, or
of their Assigney, Creditors or any other persons in their Rights: The Company
shall have retention of their Charges and Expenses in the first place, and the
Books, Records, and Registers of the said Company or authentic Abstracts, or
Extracts out of the same are hereby Declared to be good and sufficient for
evidents in all Courts of Judicator, and else where. And His Majesty with
Advice foresaid, farther Statutes and Declares, that the said John Lord
Beilhaven, Adam Cockburn of Ormistoun, Lord Justice Clerk, Mr. Francis
Montgomery of Giffen, Sir John Maxwel of Pollock, Sir Robert Chiesly present
Provost of Edinburgh, John Swintoun of that Ilk, George Clark late Baillie of
Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Blakewood, and James Balfour Merchants in Edinburgh, and
John Corss Merchant in Glasgow, William Paterson Esquire, James Fowlis, David
Nairn Esquires, Thomas Deans Esquire, James Chiesly, John Smith, Thomas Coutes,
Hugh Frazer, Joseph Cohaine, Daves Ovedo, and Walter Stuart Merchants in
London, and others to be joined with, or assumed by them in manner
abovementioned, and their Successors, or major part of them assembled in the
said Company, shall and may in all time coming by the plurality of Votes agree,
make, constitute, and ordain all such other Rules, Ordinances and Constitutions
as may be needful for the better Government and Improvement of their joint
Stock, or capital Fond in all matters and things relateing thereunto: To which
Rules, Ordinances, and Constitutions, all persons belonging to the said
Company, as well Directors as Members thereof, Governors, or other Officers,
Civil or Military, or others whatsoever shall be subject, and hereby concluded;
As also to administrat and take Oaths de fideli, and others requisite to the
management of the foresaid Stock and Company. And the said Company is hereby
empowered to Equipp, Fit, Set out, Fraught, and Navigat their own, or hired
Ships, in such manner as they shall think fit, and that for the space of ten
years from the date hereof, notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament one
thousand six hundred and sixty one Years, Entitled Act for encouraging of
Shipping and Navigation, where with His Majesty with Consent foresaid dispenses
for the said time allanerly, in favors of the said Company, and that from any
of the Ports or Places of this Kingdom, or from any other parts or places in
Amity, or not in Hostility with His Majesty, in Warlike or other manner to any
Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places in Asia, Africa, or America, and there to
Plant Collonies, build Cities, Towns, or Forts, in or upon the places not
Inhabited, or in, or upon any other place, by consent of the Natives and
Inhabitants thereof, and not possessed by any European Sovereign, Potentate,
Prince, or State, and to provide and furnish the foresaid Places, Cities,
Towns, or Forts with Magazines, Ordinances, Arms, Weapons, Ammunition, and
stores of War, and by force of Arms to de end their Trade and Navigation,
Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, and other their effects
whatsoever; as also to make Reprisals, and to seek and take Reparation of
Damnage done by Sea, or by Land, and to make and conclude Treaties of Peace,
and Commerce with the Sovereigns, Princes, Estates, Rulers, Governors, or
Proprietors of the foresaid Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places in Asia,
Africa, or America; Providing always, Likeas, It is hereby specially provided,
that all Ships employed by them shall return to this Kingdom with their
effects, under the pain of Confiscation, Forefaulture, and Seizure of the Ship
and Goods, in case of breaking of Bulk before their Return, excepting the case
of Necessity, for preserving the Ship, Company and Loadning allanerly. And His
Majesty with Consent foresaid, does farther Statute and Ordain, that none of the
Leidges of this Kingdom shall, or may Trade or Navigat to any Lands, Islands,
Countries, or Places in Asia, or Africa, in any time hereafter, or in America,
for, and during the space of thirty one years, to be counted from the passing
of this present Act, without License and Permission in writing from the said
Company: Certifying all such as shall do in the contrair hereof, that they
shall Forefault and Omit the third part of the Ship, or Ships, and of the
Cargo, or Cargoes therein Employed, or the Value thereof, the one hal to His
Majesty as Escheat, and the other half to the Use and Benefit of the said
Company: For the effectual Execution whereof, it shall be lawful to the said
Company, or any Employed by them, to Seize the said Ships and Goods in any
place of Asia, or Africa, or at Sea upon the Coasts of Asia, or Africa, upon
the transgression foresaid, by force of Arms, and at their own hand, and that
without the hazard of incurring any Crime, or Delinquency whatsomever on
account of the said Seizure, or any thing necessarly done in Prosecution
thereof, excepting always, and without prejudice to any of the Subjects of this
Kingdom to Trade and Navigat, During the said space to any part of America,
where the Collonies, Plantations, or Possessions of the said Company shall not
be settled. And it is further hereby Enacted, that the said Company shall have
the Free and Absolute Right and Property, only Relieving and Holding of His
Majesty, and His Successors in Soveraignity, for the only acknowledgment of
their Allegiance, and paying yearly a Hogshead of Tobacco, in name of
Blenchduty, if required allanerly, in, and to all such Lands, Islands,
Collonies, Cities, Towns, Forts, and Plantations, that they shall come to
Establish, or Possess in manner foresaid; As also, to all manner of Treasures,
Wealth, Riches, Profits, Mines, Minerals, Fishings, with the whole Product and
Benefit thereof, as well under as above the Ground, and as well in Rivers and
Seas, as in the Lands thereto belonging, or from, or by reason of the same in
any sort, together with the Right of Government and Admirality thereof; and
that the said Company may by virtue hereof grant and delegat such Rights,
Properties, Powers, and Imunities and permit and allow such sort of Trade,
Commerce, and Navigation into their Plantations, Collonies, Cities, Towns, or
Places of their Possession, as the said Company from time to time shall judge
fit and convenient: With power to them to impose and exact such Customs, and
other Duties upon and from themselves, and others Treading with, and coming to
the said Plantations, Cities, Towns, Places and Ports, and Harbors thereof, as
the Company shall think needful for the maintenance and other public uses of
the same, Holding always, and to hold the whole Premises of His Majesty, and
his Successors Kings of Scotland, as Sovereigns thereof, and paying only for
the same, their acknowledgement and allegiance, with a Hogshead of Tobacco
yearly, in name of Blench Duty, if required, for all other Duty, Service, Claim
or Demand whatsomever. With power and liberty to the said Company to Treat for,
and to procure and purchase such Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions and
other Grants, as may be convenient for supporting, promoting, and enlarging
their Trade and Navigation from any foreign potentate or Prince whatsoever, in
amity with his Majesty; for which the general Treaties of Peace and Commerce
betwixt His Majesty and such Potentates, Princes, or States shall serve for
sufficient Security, Warrant and Authority, and if contrair to the said
Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions, Grants, or Agreements, any of the
Ships, Goods, Merchandise, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever, belonging to
the said Company, shall be slopt, detained, embazled, or away taken, or in any
sort prejudged or damnified; His Majesty promises to interpose his Authority,
to have restitution, reparation and satisfaction made for the Damage done, and
that upon the public Charge, which His Majesty shall cause depurse, and lay out
for that Effect. And farther, it is hereby Statute, that all Ships, Vessels,
Merchandise, Goods, and other Effects whatsoever belonging to the said Company,
shall be free of all manner of Restraints, or Prohibitions, and of all Customs,
Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, or other Duties Imposed, or to be Imposed by Act of
Parliament, or otherwise, for and during the space of twenty one years,
excepting alwise the whole Duties of Tobacco and Suggar, that are not of the
Growth of the Plantations of the said Company. And farther, it is Enacted, that
the said Company by Commission under their common Seal, or otherwise as they
shall appoint, may make and constitute all and every their Directors,
Governors, and Commanders in Chief, and other Officers Civil or Military by
Sea, or by Land; As likewise that the said Company may Inlist, Inroll, Agree
and Retain all such persons Subjects of this Kingdom, or others whatsoever, as
shall be willing and consent to enter in their Service or Pay, providing always
that they Uplift or Levy none within the Kingdom to be Soldiers, without Leave
or Warrant first obtained from His Majesty, or the Lords of His Privy Council,
over which Directors, Governors, Commanders in Chief, or other Officers Civil
or Military, and others whatsoever in their Service and Pay, the Company shall
have the Power, Command and Disposition both by Sea and Land. And it is farther
Statute, That no Officer Civil or Military, or other Person whatsoever within
this Kingdom, shall Impress, Entertain, Stop or Detain any of the Members,
Officers, Servants or others whatsoever, off, or belonging to the said Company,
And in case the said Company, their Officers or Agents, shall find or understand
any of their Members, Officers, Servants, or others aforesaid to beImpressed,
Stopped or Detained, they are hereby Authorized and Allowed to take hold of,
and Release the foresaid Person Impressed or Stopped in any part of this
Kingdom, either by Land or Water; and all Magistrates and others His Majesty's
Officers Civil and Military, and all others are hereby required in their
respective Stations, to be Aiding and Assisting to the said Company, under the
Pain of being liable to all the Loss, Damage, and Detriment of the said
Company, by reason of the foresaid persons their neglect. And farther that the
said Company, whole Members, Officers, Servants, or others belonging thereto,
shall be free, both in their Persons, Estates, and Goods, Employed in the said
Stock and Trade, from all manner of Taxes, Cesses, Supplies, Excises,
Quartering of Soldiers Transient or Local, or Levying of Soldiers, or other
Impositions whatsoever, and that for and during the space of twenty one years.
And lastly, all Persons Concerned or to be Concerned in this Company, are
hereby Declared to be free Denizons of this Kingdom, and that they with all
that shall Settle to Inhabit, or be Born in any of the foresaid Plantations,
Collonies, Cities, Towns, Factories, and other Places that shall be Purchased and
Possessed by the said Company, shall be repute as Natives of this Kingdom, and
have the Privileges thereof. And generally, without Prejudice of the
Specialities foresaid, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Gives and Grants to
the said Company, all Power, Rights and Privileges, as to their Persons,
Rules, Orders, Estates, Goods and Effects whatsoever, that by the Laws are
given to Companies allowed to be Erected for Manufactories, or that are usually
given in any other Civil Kingdom or Commonwealth, to any Company there Erected
for Trade and Commerce. And for the better Establishment and greater Solemnity
of this Act and Gift, in Favors of the said Company, His Majesty does farther
Ordain Letters Patent to be expede hereupon, containing the whole Premises
under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, for doing where of Per Saltum* Their
Presents shall be sufficient Warrant both to the Director and Chancellor, or
Keeper of the Great Seal, as use is in like Cases.

IX. ACT Adjourning the Session till the First Day of November 1695. June 27.
1695.
WHereas, by a former Act in this Session of Parliament, the sitting of the
Session was Adjourned until the first day of July next, which time being found
yet too short, His Majesty, with Advice of the Estates of Parliament, continues
the foresaid Adjournment until the first Day of November next to come, in the
Terms, and with the Qualifications contained in the said first Act of
Adjournment of the Session in all Points.

X. ACT for Pole Money. June 27. 1695.
THe Estates of Parliament taking to their Consideration, that in regard of the
great and eminent Dangers that threaten this Kingdom from foreign Enemies, and
intestine Disaffection, and the Designs of Evil Men, and that our Coasts are
not sufficiently Secured against Privateers; and that therefore it is Necessar,
that a complete Number of Standing Forces be maintained, and Ships of War
provided for its necessary Defense; as also considering, that beside the
Supply upon the Land-Rent, other Fonds will be requisite for the foresaid End,
do for one of these Fonds freely and cheerfully offer to His Majesty an Subsidy
to be uplifted by way of Polemoney, and for making of which Offer Effectual,
His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament foresaid,
does Statute and Ordain, That all Persons of whatsoever Age, Sex, or Quality,
shall be subject and liable to a Pole of Six Shilling, except Poor Persons who
live upon Charity, and the Children under the Age of Sixteen years, and in
familia of all these Persons whose Pole does not exceed One Pound Ten Shilling
Scots.

That beside the said Six Shilling imposed upon all the Persons that are not
excepted: A Cottar having a Trade shall pay Six Shilling more, making in the
hail Twelve Shilling for every such Cottar.

That for Each Servant shall be paid by the Master, for which the Master is
empowered to retain the fourtieth Part of his yearly Fee, whereof Bountieth to
be reckoned a part, (excepting Livery Clothes) in the Number of which Servants
are understood, all who receive Wages or Bountieth for any Work, or Employment
whatsoever, for the Term or the Year as they have, or shall serve, and in Case
they be not Alimented in Familia with their Masters, then if they be not above
the Degree of a Cottar or Hynd, they are to have two third Parts of Wages and
Bountieth, or if above the said Degree one Third part of Wages and Bountieths,
first deduced for their Aliment.

That all Seamen pay Twelve Shilling Scots in name of Pole.

That all Tennents pay in name of Pole to the King, the hundredth part of the
valued Rent, payable by them to the Master of the Land, and appoints the Master
of the Ground to adjust the Proportions of this Pole amongst his Tennents,
according to the respective Duties payable by them in Money or Victual,
effeiring to his valued Rent.

That all Merchants, whether Seamen, Shopkeepers, Chapmen, Tradesmen and
others, whose free Stock and Means (not Including Workmens Tools,
Houshold-plenishing, nor Stocks of Tennents upon the Farms and Possession) is
above five hundredth Merks, and does not extend to five thousand Merks, shall be
subject and liable to two pound ten Shilling of Pole.

And that all these (not including as above) whose free Stock and Means is
above five thousand Merks, and does not extend to ten thousand Merks, shall be
subject to four pound of Pole.

That all Merchants, whether Seamen, Shopkeepers, Chapmen, Tradesmen and
others (not including as above) whose free Estate and Stock extends to, or is
above ten thousand Merks in Worth and Value, shall be liable to ten pound of
Pole.

That all Gentlemen so holden and repute, and owning themselves to be such, and
who will not renounce any pretense they have to be such, and which
Renunciations shall be recorded in the Herald. Register gratis, shall be subject
and liable to three pound of pole money, if they be not otherways classed, and
upon another Consideration be subject to a greater Pole.

That all Heretors of twenty pounds, and below fifty pounds of valued Rent, be
subject and liable to twenty Shilling of Pole Money.

That all Heretors of fifty pounds and below two hundred pounds of valued Rent,
be subject and liable to four pounds of Pole Money.

That all Heretors of two hundred pounds, and under five hundred pounds of
valued Rent, be liable to nine pounds of Pole Money.

That all Heretors of five hundred pounds or above the same, and under one
thousand pounds of valued Rent, be subject and liable to twelve pounds of
pole money, and that they pay half a Crown for each of their Male-Children
living in familia.

That all Heretors of one thousand pounds of valued Rent, and above the same,
and all Knight Baronets and Knights, be subject and liable to twenty four
pounds of Pole Money, and that they pay for each of their Male-Children in
familia three pounds.

That all Lords pay forty pounds of Pole Money.

That all Viscounts pay fifty pounds of Pole Money.

That all Earls pay sixty pounds of Pole Money.

That all Marquesses pay eighty pounds of Pole.

That all Dukes pay an hundred pounds of Pole.

That the Sons of Noblemen pay according to their Ranks, viz. All Dukes eldest
Sons as Marquesses, and their youngest Sons as Earls. All Marquesses eldest
Sons as Earls, and their youngest Sons as Viscounts. All Earls eldest Sons as
Viscounts, and their younger Sons shall be liable in twenty four pounds of Pole.
All Viscounts, and Lords Sons shall be liable in twenty four pounds of Pole.

That all Widows whose Husbands would have been liable to one pound ten
shilling of Pole or above, are to be subject and liable to a Third-part of
their Husbands Pole, except Heiresses, who shall be subject to the same Pole
their Predecessors would have been.

That all Nottars and Procurators before Interior Courts, and Messengers at
Arms, are to be subject and liable to four pounds of Pole Money.

That all Writers not to the Signet, Agents and Clerks of Inferior Civil
Courts, and Macers and Under-clerks of Session, shall pay six pounds of
Pole Money.

That all Advocats, Clerks of Sovereign Courts, Writers to the Signet, Sheriffs
and their Deputs, Commissars and their Deputs, Doctors of Medicine,
Appothecaries, Chyrurgeons, and others repute Doctors of Medicine, pay twelve
pounds of Pole.

That all Commissionat Officers of the Army upon Scots pay shall be liable in
two days Pay for their Pole.

That all persons who are to pay the said respective Poles, tho they be Poled
in different Capacities, are only to pay at the highest rate abovementioned,
and that always over and above the general Pole.

And for the better Stating, Ordering and Uplifting of the said Pole, His
Majesty with Advice foresaid, a Statutes and Ordains, that the Commissioners of
Assessment or their Quorum, shall meet and conveen at the ordinar place of
their Meeting, upon the second Tuesday of August, One thousand six hundred
ninety five years; or shall appoint such other Heretors as they shall think
fit, and there shall divide the whole Commissioners, whether present or absent,
or shall appoint such other Heretors as they shall think fit, into such
Divisions as they shall think meet, appointing Paroches one or more for
Commissioners one or more, as they shall see convenient, to meet the last
Tuesday of the said Month of August, at the respective places to be appointed,
impowering the said Commissioners to take up Rolls and Lists of all the
Poleable persons within the respective Bounds appointed to them, containing the
Names, Qualities and Degrees of the several persons, and of the value of the
Estates belonging to them, conform to the said Act. And ordains the Magistrates
of Burrows Royal to meet the Third Tuesday of the said Month of August, and to
take up Rolls and Lists of all the Poleable persons within the respective
Burghs, containing their Names, Qualities and Degrees, and the value of their
Estates; And which Commissioners and Magistrates of Burghs are to give
Intimation at the Kirk-door upon a Sunday, upon three days warning at least to
the persons to be Poled, to compear before them at the Paroch-Church, and give
up their Names, Qualities, Degrees, and Values of their Estates, to the effect
the respective Poles may be stated and set down by the said Commissioner, or
Commissioners of Assessment, or Magistrates of Burghs respective, and which
Rolls the said persons are to give up, or send under their hand, if they can
write, otherwise if they cannot write, their Name, Quality, Degree, and Estate,
shall be marked by the Clerk, as they give it up, excepting Tennents, whose
Names, and the Pole Money payable by them, shall be given and sent by their
Masters under their Hand, with Certification, that such as do not Compear, or
send under their Hands their Names, Qualities, and value of their Estates, or
do give up their Quality, Degree, or Value of their Estates, otherways than it
should be, they shall be liable in the Quadruple of their Pole, the equal half
whereof shall belong to the Informer, who shall make the same appear. And which
Lists and Rolls, being so made up within the respective Sub-divisions, shall be
Recorded and Booked in a Register of the Shire, or Burgh for that purpose:
whereof there shall be an Abstract sent to the Lords of the Thesaurie, betwixt
and the first of October, one thousand six hundred ninety five years,
containing the number of the persons in the several Classes and Ranks above
specified, with the Extent of their Pole.

And his Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament,
Ordains the foresaid Pole Money to be paid at the Term of Martinmass, one
thousand six hundred ninety five years, or within thirty days thereafter, at
the respective Paroch kirks, where the persons concerned dwell, for which
Discharges are to be given to the Payers gratis. And requires the Commissioners
of Assessment, and Magistrates of Burghs, or the Farmers, in case the same shall
be set in Farm, to cause Intimation to be made for the payment thereof, at the
Kirk-Doors of the several Paroch-Kirks upon the first Sunday of October one
thousand six hundred ninety five. Certifying such as shall not make punctual
payment at the said Term of Martinmass, one thousand six hundred ninety five,
or within the said thirty days thereafter, shall be liable in the double, if
paying within other thirty days thereafter, or if failzieing after both the
said thirty days, in the quadruple of their Pole: and ordains Execution to be
used against them for the same, by Poynding of their readiest Goods, or
Imprisoning their Persons; the foresaid Poynding and Imprisonment always
proceeding upon the Sentence of one of the Commissioners for the Assessment, or
any other inferior Judge where the person lives.

Likeas His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, hereby impowers the Lords
of Privy Council, to order and appoint such further methods and courses as they
shall judge fit for stateing and inbringing of the Pole Money aforesaid, and to
allow out of the said Pole Money such Charges and Expenses as shall be
necessary for Execution of this Act.

And His Majesty and Estates aforesaid, do hereby strictly appropriat,
destinat, and appoint the Sums to be raised by this Act, for the ends and uses
above-specified, conform to His Majesty's Letter, whereof Three hundred
thousand Pound to be bestowed in the first place, for providing and maintaining
of the Ships of War for one year, and which Money the Lords of Thesaury are
hereby ordained to furnish and answer to the Commissioners of Admirality, when
called for, to the effect above-specified: and also the Lords of Privy Council
are hereby fully empowered to decide and determine all Questions and
Difficulties hereby undetermined, that may arise anent the premises.

And lastly, it is hereby declared, that no persons liable in payment of this
Pole, shall be holden to produce their Discharges, or Receipts of the same,
after the Term of Martinmass, one thousand six hundred ninety six years,
conform to His Majesty's Letter.

XI. ACT Against Blasphemy. June 28. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, does
hereby Ratify, Approve, and Confirm the twenty first Act of the first Session
of the first Parliament of King Charles the second, Entitled, Act against the
Crime of Blasphemy, in the hail Heads, Clauses, and Articles thereof, and
Ordains the same to be put to Due and Punctual Execution: And farther, His
Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that whoever
hereafter, shall in their Writing or Discourse, Deny, Impugn, or Quarrel,
Argue, or Reason against the Being of God, or any of the Persons of the
Blessed Trinity, or the Authority of the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments, or the Providence of God in the Government of the World, shall for
the first Fault be punished with Imprisonment, ^ay and while they give Public
Satisfafaction in Sackcloth to the Congregation, within which the Scandal was
committed. And for the second Fault, the Delinquent shall be fined in an Years
Valued Rent of his Real Estate, and the twentieth part of his free Personal
Estate, (the equal half of which Fines, are to be Applied to the Use of the
Poor of that Paroch, within which the Crime shall happen to be Committed, and
the other half to the Party Informer,) besides his being Imprisoned, ay and
while he make again Satisfaction ut supra. And for the third Fault, he shall be
punished by Death as an obstinat Blasphemer: Likeas, His Majesty with Advice
and Consent foresaid, hereby Authorizes, and Strictly Requires, and Enjoins all
Magistrates, and Ministers of the Law, and Judges within this Kingdom, to put
this present Act in Execution as to the first Fault. And does hereby Empower
and Require all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries, and Regalities,
and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, to put this present Act in
Execution as to the second Fault. And as to the third Fault, His Majesty with
Advice and Consent foresaid, Remits the Execution of this present Act to the
Lords of His Majesty's Justiciary.

XII. ACT Against irregular Baptisms and Marriages. June 28. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, that the Baptizing of Children, and
Solemnizing of Marriage by the Laws and Custom of this Kingdom, and by the
Constitutions of this Church, have alwise been done by Ministers of the Gospel
Authorized by Law, and the Established Church of this Nation* And that
notwithstanding thereof, several Ministers now outed of their Churches do
presume to Baptize Children, and Solemnize Marriage without Proclamation of
Banns, or Consent of Parents, and sometimes within the forbidden Degrees:
Therefore, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Strictly Prohibits and Discharges all outed Ministers, to Baptize any Children,
or Solemnize Marriage betwixt any Parties in all time coming, under the Pain of
Imprisonment, ay and while he find Caution to go out of the Kingdom, and never
to return thereto, and remits the Execution of this Act to the Ministers of the
Law, who are to assist to the Execution of the twenty third Act of the fourth
Session of this Parliament, for Settling the Quiet and Peace of the Church:
Declaring alwise, that this present Act is without prejudice to the Acts of
Parliament already made against private and Clandestine Marriages, which are
hereby Declared to stand in full force, and that Execution may proceed on the
said Acts at the Instance of the Parties concerned, or of the
Procurator-Fiscals of the Jurisdictions, where they shall happen to be
questioned.

XIII. ACT Against Profaneness. June 28. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, considering that the Twenty
fifth Act of the Second Session of this current Parliament, Entitled, Act
against Profaneness, And the Acts Generally and Particularly therein-ratified,
has not taken the wished Effect, through the negligence of the Magistrates,
Officers, and others concerned to put the same in execution; Do hereby
Authorize, and strictly Require and Enjoin all Sheriffs and their Deputs,
Stewarts and their Deputs, Baillies of Baillities and Regalities and their
Deputs, Magistrates of Burghs-Royal and Justices of Peace within whose Bounds
any of the Sins forbidden by the said Laws shall happen to be committed, to put
the said Acts to exact and punctual Execution, at all times, without necessity
of any dispensation; and against all persons, whether Officers, Soldiers, or
others without exception; with this Certification, that such of the said
Judges as shall refuse, neglect or delay to put the said Laws in execution,
upon application of any Minister, or Kirk-Session, or any Person in their name,
giving in Information, and offering sufficient Probation against the Offender,
that every one of the said Judges swa refusing, neglecting, or delaying, shall
toties quoties be subject and liable to a Fine of One hundred Pounds Scots, to
be applied for the use of the poor of the Parish, where the Scandal complained
on was committed: Declaring hereby That the Agent for the Kirk, the Minister of
the Parish, or any other Person, having Warrant from him, or from the Kirk
Session within the Parish whereof the Scandal complained on was committed, shall
have good interest to pursue before the Lords of Session, any of the foresaid
Judges, who shall happen to refuse, neglect, or delay to put the said Laws
against Profaneness to exact and punctual execution, who are hereby ordained
to proceed summarly, without the order of the Roll, and that it shall be a
sufficient Probation of their refusal, neglect or delay, if the Pursuer
instruct by an Instrument under a Nottars hand, and Witnesses thereto
Subscribing and Deponing thereupon, that he did inform the said Judges of the
said Scandal, and offered a sufficient Probation thereof, unless the Judge swa
pursued condescend and instruct, that within the space of ten Days after the
said Application, he gave order to Cite the Party Complained on, to compear
before him, within the space of ten Days, and that at the day of Compearance he
was ready and willing to have taken Cognition and Trial of the Scandal
complained on, and Instruct and Condescend on a relevant Reason, why the said
Laws were not put in execution against the Person complained on.

XIV. ACT For restraining the profanation of the Lords Day, by keeping
Weekly-Mercats on Monday and Saturnday. June 28. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, that there is much occasion given for
Profanation of the Lord's Day, by keeping of Weekly-Mercats on Monday and
Saturnday, and that for preventing of this Abuse, there are several Acts of
Parliament prohibiting the keeping of Weekly-Mercats the said Days within
Royal-Burghs; But the said Acts not comprehending the Burghs of Regality and
Barrony, and Weekly-Mercats in Villages and Kirk-Towns, the said Burghs,
Villages and Kirk-Towns are necessitate to keep their Weekly-Mercats on the
said Days, conform to the special Acts of Parliament made in their Favors;
And yet many of the said Burghs, Villages and others would most willingly
alter and change the said Market Days, if they were but empowered and
authorized for that effect. Therefore, His Majesty with the Advice and Consent
of the Estates of Parliament, Does not only Ratify and Approve the said Acts
of Parliament made against the keeping of Weekly-Mercats upon Mundays and
Saturndays within Royal-Burghs, But likewise does declare it leisume and lawful
to all Burghs of Regality and Barrony, and Villages, and Kirk-Towns, whose
Weekly-Mercats are kept the said Days, to change and alter the same: And the
said Burghs, Villages, and others are hereby Authorized to choice and appoint
any other Days of the Week they think fit for the keeping and holding of the
said Weekly-Mercats, they always making timous Intimation of the said Change
to the next adjacent Burghs, and providing they pitch not upon the Mercat-Day
of any Burgh-Royal next adjacent, or of an other Mercat-Town within four Miles.
And that this Act be not extended against Fleshers within Royal-Burghs, who may
keep Mercats of Fleshes in their respective Burghs, upon these days, this Act
notwithstanding.

XV. ACT For Encouragement of Preachers at Vacant Churches be-north Forth. July
5. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering that there are many Churches vacant upon the
North-side of the Water of Forth, which cannot be soon legally Planted, nor in
the interim otherways Supplied than by the Presbytries in whose Bounds they ly,
theit Employing some Preachers who are not Settled in Churches to Preach in the
said Vacant Churches for some time, and that the Intertaining of these
Preachers out of the first end of the Vacant Stipends of the Paroches to which
they Preach, during their Service, is a most proper Pious Use within the
Paroch: Therefore His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, for Encouraging of the said Preachers swa to be Employed by the
Presbytries, Does hereby Destinat, Appoint and Allow out of the first end of
the Vacant Stipends of the respective Churches, at which they shall Preach by
Invitation or Appointment, of the respective Presbytries within whose Bounds
the samine do ly, to every one of the said Preachers Twenty Merks Scots, for
their Preaching each Lords Day, Forenoon and Afternoon, in the said Vacant
Churches, and that whether the said Preachers be Employed by the Presbytry to
Preach at one Church, or at several Churches by Turns within their Bounds;
Declaring hereby a Testificat under the Presbytries Hands, bearing that such a
person has upon their Invitation Preached so many Lords Days at such a Church
within their Bounds, or at such and such Churches within their Bounds by Turns,
shall be a sufficient Probation thereof, whereupon the said Preachers shall by
virtue of this present Act, have Power and Undoubted Right to als many Twenty
Merks, out of the first and readiest of the Vacant stipends of the respective
Paroch-Churches, as the said Certificats shall bear them to have Preached Lords
Days thereat: And for preventing the Trouble and Expenses the said Preachers
would be put to in recovering Payment of the said Allowances hereby granted
effeiring to their Services, if each of them should Pursue for their own part,
out of the particular Vacant Stipends of the respective Churches at which they
shall Preach. His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Does hereby Empower
the respective Presbytries within whose Bounds the respective Vacant Churches
do ly, to grant Commissions to such Persons as they sha'l think fit for
uplifting als much out of the first end of the Vacant Stipends, within their
Bounds where the said Preachers shall serve at their Invitation, as will Pay and
Satisfy the said Allowances hereby granted to the persons invited by them to
Preach thereat, Accompting ut supra for each Lords Days service; with Power to
the said Factors, to Uplift, and if need be, to Pursue for the same before the
Judge Ordinary of the Bounds; Discharging all Advocations, as also Suspensions,
save upon Consignation, and with this Declaration, that if at the discussing of
the Suspension, the Letters shall be found orderly proceeded, the wrongous
suspender shall be Decerned in a Fifth part more, which Factor shall be obliged
to Count to the said Preachers, who shall be Employed by the Presbytries for
the said Allowances, to be uplifted by them* according to the number of Days to
be contained in the Presbytries Certificat. Likeas, His Majesty with Advice and
Consent foresaid, for Encouragement of the said Factors, and Defraying their
Expenses, Does hereby Allow to every one of the said Factors so to be appointed
by the said Presbytries, as much as corresponds to a Tenth part of the said
Allowances, which they are to Uplift further for their own use, out of the
first end of the said Vacant Stipends, and with the benefit of the Provisions
abovementioned.

XVI. ACT Anent the Ease of Annualrents Due by Persons Restored, and anent the
Creditors Diligence to be Used against them. July 5. 1695.
FOR AS MUCH As by the General Act Rescissory of Fines and Forfaultures in this
current Parliament, the Consideration of the Ease that was to be given to the
persons thereby Restored of the bygone Annualrents due by them, and if the same
ought to be granted to their Cautioners, and what time Diligence should be
superseded against them, for payment of their principal sums, and such
Annualrents to which they were to be liable, was Remitted to the Commission of
Fines and Forfaultures therein-named, that they might Report their Opinion
thereof to the Parliament, which is not yet done; and it being the Interest of
the persons restored, and their Creditors, to have the same now Determined:
Therefore His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, that during the time the persons Restored by this present
Parliament were dispossessed of their Estates, they and their Cautioners are to
be free of the payment of Annualrents, unless that the Party Restored either
has recovered all or some part of his Rents, from which he was excluded by the
Forfaulture; in which case the person Restored, and not the Cautioner, shall be
liable to the payment of the Annualrents during the time of his being
dis^ossest, in swa far as he has recovered the same, or otherways that the
Party Restored may recover all or some part of the said Rent due during the
years that he was dispossessed, in which case the Party Restored shall have no
ease of any by gone Annualrents, but upon his Assigning to his Creditors, with
Warrandice from his own Fact and Deed, any Action competent to him for
recovering all or any part of the said Rents due during the time of his being
dispossessed; Declaring always, that when a Cautioner for a person Restored, did
actually pay without Collusion before the Revolution, either principal Sum or
by gone Annualrents* or any part thereof, or had his Lands Adjudged therefore
before the said Revolution, or having given a Bond, or suffered Decree before
the Revolution, has made Payment, or had his Lands Adjudged since the
Revolution, the foresaid Ease and Benefit granted in favors of the person
Restored, is no ways to be Obtruded against the Cautioner in that case. As
also, It is hereby Statute and Ordained, That where persons Restored have made
Payment since the Revolution of any Annualrents, for these years during which
they were dispossessed of their Estates, it shall be leisume for them to retain
als much in their own Hand of the principal Sums and Annualrents yet resting,
as extends to the foresaid Annualrents swa paid by them, (the Annualrents
unpayed being always discounted in the first place) and where the Debt is
altogether paid, the Party Restored shall by virtue of this Act, have Action
of Repetition against his Creditor, for refounding the said Annualrents paid
out by him for the years during which he was excluded from the Possession of
his Estate by the Forfaulture. Likeas, His Majesty with Advice and Consent
foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That it shall be leisume to the Creditors of
persons Restored by this Parliament, to affect the Debitors Estate for payment
of their principal Sums and Annualrents resting (except such Annualrents
whereof they are liberat by this present Act,) and that immediately forth and
after the Date hereof, Discharging hereby all personal Execution against the
persons Restored for payment of any principal Sums due by them before their
Forfaulture, till Wh^^sunday next to come, in the Year of God One thousand six
hundred and fourscore sixteen years, after which all personal Diligence shall
be competent against the persons Restored, unless they dispone and put the
Creditor in Possession of as much of their Estate (whereof the Creditor is to
have his Election, except as to the House, Park and Mains) as will satisfy the
principal Sum and Annualrents thereof resting, and not hereby given down at the
ordinar rate of the Country where the Lands ly, and that free of Encumbrances,
which is to be done at the sight of the Lords of Session in a Suspension, to be
raised by the persons Restored, upon the said offer redeemable, nevertheless
within the space of Five Years for payment of what is resting of the Creditors
Debt, discounting his Intromissions; And Declaring always, that how soon the
Creditor shall be excluded from the possession of the said Lands swa to be
disponed to him by the person Restored, It shall be leisume to the Creditor,
immediately thereafter, to use all manner of Diligence personal and real for
recovering of his Debt for which the Lands were disponed to him. Likeas, His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That where a
person Restored offering to dispone his Lands to his Creditors, cannot purge
and disburden the Lands offered of real Encumbrances, by the sight of the
Lords, and put the Creditor in the free Possession thereof, swa that he will be
liable to the personal Diligence of his Creditors after Whitsunday One thousand
six hundred fourscore sixteen years, that then if he demand the benefit of a
Cessio bonorum, the Lords of the Session are hereby allowed to grant the same
to him upon his calling of his Creditors, and making Faith, and Disponing in
the common Form, without necessity of his being Imprisoned the time of raising
or obtaining thereof, or of wearing the Habit, after obtaining of the same. And
likeways, It is hereby Declared, that where any person during the standing of
the said Forfaulture now rescinded, did Acquire any Debts due by the person
Restored, they shall have Action allannerly against the person Restored for the
Sums truly paid out by them, and Annualrent thereof, and shall lose all
benefit of their Compositions and Eases, And His Majesty and the Estates of
Parliament, Do hereby remit the Case of the deceast William Muir of Caldwell,
for Repetition of bygone Rents, and all other Cases of Forfault persons
Restored depending before them, to be Determined by the Lords of Session,
excepting such Cases wherein Reports have been prepared by the Commission for
Fines and Forfaultures for the Parliament, in which the Pursuer may at his
Option futher Insist, till the Decision thereof before the Parliament or Lords
of the Session.

XVII. ACT anent the Mint. July 5. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, considering that by the Act of Parliament One thousand six
hundred and eighty six Entitled, Act anent an humble Offer to his Majesty for
an Imposition upon certain Commodities, for defraying the Expense of a free
Coinage, and other matters relating to the Mint; The foresaid Expense of a free
Coinage, and several matters relating to the Mint were indeed settled, but
neither so perfectly nor so fully as Experience has since discovered, but that
there is still need and place for a further Regulation: Does therefore, with
Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statute and Ordain, That
notwithstanding it be recommended by the said Act to the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, to try by some of their Number, every Journal of Coin by it self
distinctly, and that twice every year, Viz. In the Month of July and December
yearly, yet seeing the foresaid distinct Trial of every Journal has been found
both a tedious and superfluous Labor, and is not practiced any where else, it
shall be leisom for the said Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to make the
said Trial by such of their number as they shall think fit, not of every Journal
of Coin by it self distinctly, but by taking and making Trial of any one or
more single Journals, as they shall think fit, and then to cause melt down in
one Mass or Lignat, the rest of the Journals, to be at that time tried, and to
take an Essay of the Mass so melted down, as said is, which shall stand for the
whole, but prejudice always to the said Lords of Council to make distinct
Trials of the hail foresaid Journals, as they shall see cause, As also, still
recommending to them the exact Trial of all Matters relating to the Coinage, at
the foresaid two times above-specified, in manner mentioned in the said Act,
and that notwithstanding of the foresaid Act, which is innovat in so far as the
same is inconsistent with this present Act.

XVIII. ACT anent the Quorum of the Commission of Teinds. July 5. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD the Kings Majesty, considering that there are many Actions
depending before the Lords, and others Commissioners, for Plantation of Kirks,
and Valuation of Teinds, which cannot be decided and determined, in respect
that the said Commissioners have not met so frequently as was necessary, by
reason of the difficulties of getting a Quorum, whereby the Leidges have been
much prejudged; for Remei^ing whereof, Our Sovereign Lord, with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That Seven
Commissioners, whereof one of every State shall be an sufficient Quorum, who
being present at the down-sitting and constituting of the Meeting: the
withdrawing of one or more of any of the three States, after constituting of
the Meeting, shall not breach the Quorum, seven of the Commissioners of the
other State or States being still present, without prejudice to the Officers of
State to be still Members of the said Commission, tho the presence of one or
more of them be not necessary to constitute the foresaid Quorum. And His
Majesty, with consent foresaid, does hereby Ratify and Approve the Twenty
fourth Act of the Fourth Session, and Thirtieth Act of the Second Session of
this current Parliament, in the hail Heads, Articles, and Clauses thereof,
excepting in so far as the samen is innovat be this present Act; And the said
Commissioners are hereby appointed to meet every Wednesday in the afternoon,
during the sitting of the Session.

XIX. ACT anent the Duty on Scots Muslin. July 5. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statute and Ordain, That in all time coming, all Muslin, plain or stripped, or
Camrick, and all sorts of Linen under whatsomever Name or Designation,
Manufactored within the Kingdom, shall at the exporting thereof pay Custom only
as Scots Linen, conform to the Book of Rates.

XX. ACT Anent the Post Office. July 5. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD considering, that for the Maintenance of Mutual
Correspondence, and preventing of many Inconveniences that happen by private
Posts, several public Post-Offices have been heretofore erected, for Carrying
and Receiving of Letters by Posts to and from most parts and places of this
Kingdom, and that the well ordering thereof, is a Matter of general Concern,
and of great Advantage, as well for the Conveniences of Trade and Commerce, as
otherways; and to the end that speedy and safe Dispatches may be had, and that
the best Means for that end, will be the Settling and Establishing a General
Post Office: Therefore, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Statutes, Ordains, and Appoints an General Post Office to be be
kept within the City of Edinburgh, from whence all Letters and Pacquets
whatsoever, may be with Speed and Expedition sent into any part of the Kingdom,
or any other of His Majesty's Dominions, or into any Kingdom or Country beyond
Seas, by the Packet that goes Sealed for London, at which said Office, all
Returns and Answers may be likeways received; as also, that a Master of the
said General-Letter-Office shall be from time to time appointed by His Majesty,
His Heirs, and Sucessors, by Letters, Patents, under the Privy Seal of this
Kingdom, by the Name and Title of His Majesty's Post-Master-General; or
otherways, that the said Office may be set in Tack by the Lords of His
Majesty's Thesaury and Exchequer, as His Majesty and His said Successors shall
think most expedient: And that the said Master of the said Office, or Tacks-man
for the time respectively, and his Deput or Deputs authorized by him for that
effect, and his and their Servants, and no other person or persons whatsoever,
shall from time to time have the Receiving, Taking up, or Ordering,
Dispatching, Sending Posts with Speed, and Delivering of all Letters and
Pacquets whatsoever, which shall from time to time be sent to and from, all and
every the parts and places of this Kingdom, to and from His Majesty's
Dominions, or places beyond Seas, where he shall Settle, or cause to be
Settled, Posts or running Messengers for that purpose: Excepting such Letters
as are sent by any person or persons, to and from any place within this Kingdom
by their own Servants, or by Express sent on purpose about their own Affairs,
and Letters directed along with, and relating to Goods sent, or to be returned
by common Carriers allenarly: And where Post-Offices are not erected, and Posts
settled, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, allows the Custom of sending by
Carriers or others as formerly, ay and while such Offices be established and no
longer. And farther, His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes and
Enacts, that the said Post-Master-General, or Tacks-man and their respective
Deputs and Substitutes, and no other person or persons whatsoever, shall
provide and have in readiness, sufficient Horses and Furniture for ryding Post
to all persons, ryding to and from all the parts and places of Scotland where
any Post Roads are, or shall be settled and established: But prejudice to the
use of hyring of Horses, which are not to ride Post as formerly. And sicklike,
His Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes, Enacts, and Ordains,
that it shall be lawful for the said Postmaster General, or Tacks-man and
their said Deputs, to ask, exact, and receive, for the Portage and Convoyance
of all such Letters, which he or they shall so Convoy, Carry, or send Post as
aforesaid, and for providing and furnishing Horses for ryding Post as
aforesaid, according to the several Ra^es and Sums after-mentioned, which they
are not to exceed, viz. all single Letters to Berwick, or any part within fifty
Miles of Edinburgh two shilling, double four shilling, and so proportionally;
all single Letters to any place above fifty Miles, and not exceeding a hundred
Miles, to pay three shilling, double six shilling, and so proportionally, all
single Letters to any place in Scotland above a hundred Miles, to pay four
shilling, double eight shilling, and so proportionally: Declaring nevertheless,
that all single Letters with Bills of Loadning or Exchange, Envoys, or other
Merchant Accounts enclosed and sent to any place within the Kingdom, shall be
only considered as single Leters; all Pacquets of Papers to pay each one as
triple Letters: And it shall be lawful for the said Post-Master-General,
Tacks-man, and their Deputs, to ask, exact, take, and receive from every
person, to whom he or they shall furnish Horses, Furniture, and Guide for
ryding Post in any of the Post Roads aforesaid, three shilling Scots for ilk
Horse hire for Postage for every Scots Mile. And in like manner, His Majesty
with Advice and Consent foresaid, strictly Prohibits and Discharges, all other
person or persons whatsoever, as well single, as Bodies Pollitick or
Incorporat, excepting the said Post-Master-General, or Tacks-man, and their
Deputs, and the Servants of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, in the Cases
particularly above-excepted allenarly, to carry, receive, or deliver any
Letters for hire, or to set up or employ any Foot Post, Horse Post, or to
settle Post-Masters within their Jurisdictions, under the penalty of twenty
Pounds Scots for every Transgression, and an hundred Pounds Scots for each
Months Continuance thereof, after Intimation be is made to them in the
contrair, and the said penalties to be pursued for, before any Judge
competent, the one half thereof to be applied for the use of the Informer, and
the other half for the use of the said Post-Master-General, or Tacks-man
respective; and that no common Carrier presume to carry any Letters to, or from
any places within this Kingdom, where Post-Offices are settled, excepting the
case aforesaid: Certifying all such as do in the contrary, that upon Seizure of
any such Carrier with the Letters about him, or being convicted thereof before
any Judge competent, he shall be imprisoned six days for ilk fault, and fined
in the Sum of six Pounds Scots, toties quoties: And because, it is not only
expedient for His Majesty's Government, but likeways for the Advancement of the
Trade of this Kingdom, that a settled Correspondence by Weekly Posts, be
established with His Majesty's Subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland, and that the
said Kingdom of Ireland, will not be at the expense for maintaining the Packet
Boats for passing to and from this Kingdom; Therefore, His Majesty with Advice
and Consent foresaid, Ordains and Appoints the said General-Post-Master or
Tacks-man, to keep and maintain Packet Boats to go Weekly, (Wind and Weather
serving,) from Port-Patrick in this Kingdom to Donachadee in Ireland, to carry
and receive all Letters to be sent betwixt this Kingdom and the Kingdom of
Ireland, and that the expense bestowed on these Packet Boats, be allowed to
the said General-Post-Master or Tacks-man, in part of his Intromissions with
the profits of the said General-Letter Office, or out of the Tack Duty when the
same is set in Tack or Farmed, not exceeding the sum of sixty Pounds Sterling
Money Yearly. And His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Ordains and Commands all
the Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Regalities or Royalties, Magistrates of
Royal Burghs, Justices of Peace, and all other Judges and Magistrates
whatsoever, als well in Burgh a^ Landward, to concur with and assist the
Post-Master-General, Tacks-man and their Deputs, in the Discharging of his
Trust, for rendering this Act effectual for the ends above-written, and putting
the same to all due and lawful execution within their respective bounds. And
His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that no person or
persons of whatsoever Degree or Quality, presume to stop, molest, hinder, or
impede the several Posts, als well Foot Posts, as Horse Posts authorized by, or
bearing Warrant from the said Post-Master-General, Tacks-man, or their
Successors in Office, by night or by day, under the pain and penalty of one
thousand Pound Scots, attour the Reparation of the Damnages to any Party lesed
thereby; far less to detain, rob, or take away any Pacquets, under the pains
contained in the Acts of Parliament. And His Majesty with Consent foresaid,
Ordains and Appoints the said Post-Master-General, Tacks-man and his said
Deputs, and their Successors in their several Offices, to take the Oath of
Allegiance and subscribe the same with the Assurance, appointed to be taken by
all persons in public Trust, by the third Act of the third Session of this
current Parliament. And His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Ordains General
Letters to be directed at the Instance of the said General-Post-Master, or
Tacks-man, and their Successors in Office, against their several Deputs, for
the Tack-Duties of their respective Offices, as is allowed for In-bringing any
part of His Majesty's Revenue. And Lastly, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, are hereby Authorized and Empowered to take care, that particular
Post-Offices be established over all the Kingdom at places most convenient, and
the times of parting of Posts with Letters, and of their running, be duly
settled and published; And generally, that this Act be punctually observed and
execute, and do all other things to make the same effectual for the true end
and intent thereof. And Ordains this present Act to be Published and Printed,
that none may pretend ignorance.

XXI. Explanatory Act anent the Excise of Brandy. July 5. 1695*
FORASMUCH AS many Actions have been Commenced and Pursued before the Lords
Commissioners of Thesaury and Exchequer, to the great Vexation and Expense of
the Leidges, anent the Meaning of the Act of Parliament first of December 1673,
Entitled, Act concerning the Importation and Excise of Brandy; by which Act
six Shilling Scots are imposed upon each Pint, to be paid by the Retailers in
smalls; and under pretense of the word Retailers in the said Act, the
Sub-taxmen and Collectors have forced the Leidges to pay for the same two or
three times, and the Merchants Importers have been likewise charged therefore,
notwitstanding that by the said Act Retailers are only liable. For remeid of
which, OUR SOVEREIGN LORD with Consent of the Estates of Parliament, does
hereby Declare, that the six Shilling upon the Pint of Brandy, shall hereafter
be payable only by Toppers and Retailers in smalls, who sell Brandy by Pints,
Gills, and lesser Quantities than Pints in Taverns, Shops, Cellars, and the
like, where the same is immediately consumed, and by no others, notwithstanding
of any former Practice in the contrair.

XXII. ACT Against Intruding into Churches without a Legal Call and Admission
thereto. July 5. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, that Ministers and Preachers, their Intruding
themselves into vacant Churches, Possessing of Manses and Benefices, and
Exercing any part of the Ministerial Function in Paroches, without a Legal Call
and Admission to the said Churches, is an high Contempt of the Law, and of a
dangerous Consequence tending to perpetuat Schism. Therefore, His Majesty with
Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Declares, that
whoever hereafter shall intrude themselves into any Church, or shall Possess
Manse or Benefice, or shall Exercise any part of the Ministerial Function
within any Paroch, without an orderly Call from the Heretors and Eldership, and
Legal Admission from the Presbytry within whose bounds it lies, shall be
incapable of enjoying any Church, or Stipend, or Benefice within this Kingdom,
for the space of seven years after their Removeal from the Church, and quiting
Possession of the Stipend and Benefice into which they intruded: Likeas, His
Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, does hereby remit the Execution of
this present Act to Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries, and
Regalities, and their Deputs, and to Magistrates of Burrows Royal, who are
hereby Authorized and Required, to remove and declare incapable, ut supra, all
these, who shall hereafter intrude into Churches within their respective
Jurisdictions, upon Complaint from the Presbytry, or any person having Warrant
from the Presbytry, within whose bounds the said Intrusions shall happen to be
made hereafter; and that upon Citation of ten days: Ordaining hereby Letters of
Horning and Caption to be direct in communi forma, upon Decreets to be given by
the said inferior Judges, for compelling the said Intruders to remove from
the said Churches and Manses, and to quite Possession of the said Stipends
and Benefices, and to desist and cease from Exercing any Ministerial Acts
within the said Paroches, into which they shall hereafter intrude. Likeas, His
Majesty does hereby Recommend to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council to
remove all these, who have already, since the Establishment of this present
Church Government, intruded into Vacant Churches, without an orderly Call from
the Heretors and Eldership of the Paroch, and a Legal Admission from the
Presbytry within whose bounds the said Churches lies: As also, to take some
effectual Course for stopping and hindering these Ministers, who are, or shall
be hereafter Deposed by the Judicatories of this present established Church;
from Preaching or Exercising any Act of their Ministerial Function, which they
cannot do after they are Deposed, without a high Contempt of the Authority of
the Church, and of the Laws of the Kingdom establishing the same.

XXIII. ACT Anent Lands lying Run-rig. July 5. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and the Estates of Parliament taking into their
Consideration, the great Disadvantage, arising to the who^e Subjects, from
Lands lying run-rig, and that the same is highly prejudicial to the Policy and
Improvement of the Nation, by Planting and Enclosing, conform to the several
Laws and Acts of Parliament of before made thereanent: For remeid, His Majesty
with the Advice and Consent of the said Estates, Statutes and Ordains, that
wherever Lands of different Heretors ly run-rig, it shall be Leisum to either
Party to apply to the Sheriffs, Stewarts, and Lords of Regality, or Justices of
Peace of the several Shires where the Lands ly; to the effect, that these Lands
may be divided according to their respective Interests, who are hereby
Appointed and Authorized for that effect; and that after due and lawful
Citation of all Parties concerned, at an certain day, to be prefixed by the
said Judge or Judges. It is always hereby Declared, that the said Judges, in
making the foresaid Division, shall be, and are hereby restricted, so as
special regard may be had to the Mansion-Houses of the respective Heretors, and
that there may be allowed and adjudged to them the respective parts of the
Division, as shall be most commodious to their respective Mansion-Houses and
Policy, and which shall not be applicable to the other adjacent Heretors: As
also, it is hereby Provided and Declared, that their Presents shall not be
extended to the Burrow and Incorporat Acres, but that notwithstanding hereof,
the same shall remain with the Heretors to whom they do belong, as if no such
Act had been made.

XXIV. ACT for Obviating the Frauds of appearand Heirs. July 10. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering the frequent Frauds and Disappointments that
Creditors do suffer, upon the Decease of their Debitors, and through the
Contrivances of appearand Heirs, in their prejudice: For Remeid thereof, and
also for facilitating the Transmission of Heretage in Favors of both Heirs and
Creditors, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That if any man since the first of January One thousand
six hundred and sixty one, have served, or shall hereafter serve himself Heir;
or by Adjudication on his own Bond, has since the time foresaid succeeded, or
shall hereafter succeed, not to his immediate Predecessor, but to one remoter,
as passing by his Father to his Goodsire, or the like; then, and in that Case,
he shall be liable for the Debts and Deeds of the Person interjected, to whom he
was appearand Heir, and who was in the Possession of the Lands and Estate to
which he is served, for the space of three years, and that in so far as may
extend to the value of the said Lands and Estate, and no further; deducing the
Debts already paid: As also, with this order, as to the time past, that all
the true and lawful Debts of the appearand Heir, entering as said is, and
already contracted, with the true and real Debts of the Predecessor to whom he
enters, shall be preferred in the first place. As also, His Majesty, with Advice
and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That if any appearand Heir for
hereafter, shall without being lawfully served or entered Heir, either enter to
possess his Predecessors Estate, or any part thereof, or shall purchase, by
himself, or any other to his Behoove, any Right hereto, or to any Legal
Diligence, or other Right affecting the same, whether Redeemable or
Irredeemable, otherwise than the said Estate is exposed to a lawful public
Roup, and as the highest Offerer thereat, without any Collusion; his foresaid
Possession or Purchase shall be repute a behavior as Heir, and a sufficient
passive Title to make him represent his Predecessor universally, and to be
liable for all his Debts and Deeds, sicklike as if the said appearand Heir,
possessing or purchasing, as said is, were lawfully served and entered Heir to
his said Predecessor: Declaring always, Likeas, it is hereby declared, that the
said appearand Heir may bring the said Estate to a Roup, whether the Estate be
Bankrupt or not. And it is further Statute, that where Rights or Legal
Diligences, affecting their Predecessors Estates, shall be found settled in the
Person of any such near Relation, to whom the appearand Heir to the foresaid
Predecessor may also succeed as Heir, the appearand Heirs possessing by virtue
of the said Rights and Diligences, except upon Lawful Purchase by public Roup,
as said is, shall not only be a passive Title, but the said Rights and
Diligences in the Person of the said near Relation, shall only be sustained as
valid to exclude the Predecessors Creditors, in so far as can be qualified and
instructed, that these Rights and Diligences were truly and honestly purchased
for payment of Sums of Money, and no further. And moreover, His Majesty, with
Advice and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That for hereafter any
appearand Heir shall have free liberty and access to enter to his Predecessors
cum beneficio inventarii, or upon Inventary, as use is, in Executories and
Movables, allowing still to the said appearand Heir, year and day to
deliberate, in which time he may make up the foresaid Inventary, which he is to
give up upon Oath, full and particular as to all Lands, Houses, Annualrents, or
other Heretable Rights whatsoever, to which the said appearand Heir may, or
pretends to succeed; which Inventary to be subscribed by him before Witnesses,
duly insert and designed, shall be given in to the Clerk of the Sheriff Court of
the Shire, where the Defuncts Lands and Heretage lie; or in case the Defunct
had no Lands or Heretage requiring Seasin, to the Clerk of the Shire, where the
Defunct deceased: To which Inventary, the Sheriff, or Sheriff-Deput, with the
Clerk of the Court, shall also subscribe in Judgment, and record the same in
their Registers, and give Extracts thereof, for all which, the upgiver of the
said Inventary shall pay no more to the Court and Clerk thereof, on any account,
than the ordinary price of Extracts in that Court, for an extract of the said
Inventary: and this Inventary is to be given in, recorded, and extracted as
said is, within the said year and day, to deliberat; and thereafter the
foresaid Extract thereof, shall within forty days after the expiration of the
said year and day, be again presented and registrated in the Books of Council
and Session, in a particular Register to be appointed by the Clerk Register,
for that effect: And the appearand Heir entering by Inventary, in manner
foresaid, is hereby declared to be only liable to his Predecessors Debts and
Deeds, secundum vires Inventarii, and in as far as the value of the Heritage,
given up in Inventary, will extend, and no farther. Providing always, Likeas,
it is hereby specially provided, that if the aforesaid appearand Heir shall have
any intromission with the Defuncts Heretable Estate, or any part thereof,
otherways than necessary intromission, for Custody and Preservation, before his
giving in, recording and extracting of the said Inventary in manner foresaid;
or if he shall fraudfully omit any thing out of the said Inventary, that is,
which yet he shall be found to have intrometted with, or possessed, then, and in
either of these Cases, he shall lose the benefit of the Inventary, and be
universally liable, as if entered Heir without Inventary. And farther, that if
any part of the said Heretable Estate shall be without fraud omitted to be given
up by him in the foresaid Inventary, and shall not in the mean time be affected
by the diligence of a lawful Creditor, he shall have Liberty, so soon as he
comes to the knowledge thereof, and within forty days thereafter, to make an
Eik of the same, to the said Inventary; which Eik is to be made and subscribed,
given in and recorded, in the same manner with the Principal Inventary
abovementioned. And lastly, it is hereby declared, that appearand Heirs, if
they please, may enter without Inventary as formerly in all points, and that
whether they enter with or without Inventary, they are still to enter by
Service and Retour, or by Precepts of Clare constat, in manner formerly
accustomed.

XXV. ACT anent the Repetition of Fines. July 10. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD considering, that by the Eighteenth Act of the Second
Session of this current Parliament, Entitled, Act Rescinding the Forefaultures
and Fines, past since the Year One thousand six hundred sixty five; All Fines
then unpayed, which were imposed by Sentences, from the first day of January
One thousand six hundred sixty five, to the fifth of November One thousand six
hundred eighty eight upon any person or persons for Church Irregularities or
Non-conformities, or refusing of Public Bonds, Subscriptions or Oaths, or for
not obeying Acts, Proclamations and Orders thereanent, Resetting or Conversing
with Rebels, for the Causes foresaid, refusing to depone in Lybels against
themselves, in Capital Cases, albeit restricted to an Arbitrary Punishment;
with all Hornings, Denunciations and Intercommunings, given, pronounced, and
issued forth in Parliament, or by an other Court or Commission against any
Persons, for the said Causes, are expressly discharged: And further, that by
the foresaid Act, it was remitted to the Commission, appointed for Fines and
Forefaulters, to consider the Grounds of repetition of such of the said Fines
as were paid to Donators, or others having Right from them, and other private
Parties: And also considering that the said Commission has given no Decision
or Determination upon the foresaid Remit, whereby the Parties lesed, who made
payment of the said Fines in manner foresaid, to Donators, and others, have as
yet received no redress: Therefore His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Does Statute and Declare, That where Fines were imposed
by Sentences from the first of January One thousand six hundred sixty fives to
the fifth of November One thousand six hundred eighty eight, upon any Person
for Church Irregularities and Non-conformities, or refusing of public Bonds,
Subscriptions and Oaths, for not obeying Acts, Proclamations and Orders
thereanent, Resetting of, or Conversing with Rebels for the Causes foresaid,
refusing to depon upon Lybells against themselves in Capital Cases, albeit
restricted to an Arbitrary Punishment, and that the Persons so fined, have made
payment of the hail of the said Fines, or any part thereof, to Donators or
others, that it shall be leasom for them to pursue the said Donators or others
for repetition, and who are hereby declared liable to refound what they have
received, together with the Annualrent thereof since Martimass One thousand six
hundred eighty eight. And further, His Majesty, and the Estates of Parliament,
having considered the Act made in the year One thousand six hundred and ninety,
Rescinding Fines and Forefaulters, and that thereby the forefaulted Persons are
restored to their Lands, Rents and Possessions, and the Composition made by
them or others in their Name, ordained to be repayed by the Donators or others;
and seeing it is just, that the Annualrents of the said Compositions, since the
date of the foresaid Act be likewise paid. Therefore, His Majesty, with Advice
and Consent foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that Annualrent from the Date of
the said Act be repayed, with the Compositions themselves, excepting always
forth and frae this Act, all Fines imposed by Mr. John Meinzies Advocat, while
Sheriff-Deput of Lanerk, in regard it is notorly known he fined not for any
advantage to himself, but for prevention of rigorous Execution from others, and
remits all Causes for repetition of Fines depending before the Parliament or
Commission to be discussed by the Lords of Session summarily, without abiding
the course of the Roll. And it is further declared, that where any Person
forefaulted and restored as above, shall be found to be postponed in diligence,
either for his Payment as a Creditor, or his Relief as a Cautioner, by reason
of his forefaulture, he shall now, after his Restitution be in the same Case for
preference, as if he had done all Diligence possible for him, if not
forefaulted.

XXVI. ACT Discharging Popish Persons to prejudge their Protestant Heirs in
Succession. July 11. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD understanding, that Parents, and others of the Popish
Religion, and that are so affected, Do restrain and overawe their Children, and
appearand Heirs, so as they cannot, though convinced in their Consciences, by
the Light of the Truth, abandon the Popish Errors and Superstitions of their
said Parents, for fear that they may be by them dis-inherited, and deprived of
any Benefit of Succession, that they may have, by their said Parents, and
others foresaid; Do therefore, and for Remeid thereof, Statute and Ordain, with
Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, that it shall not be leisom,
nor in the power of any professed or known Papist, to make any Gratuitous Deed,
or Disposition in prejudice of their appearand Heirs, and the Benefit they may
have, by their Succession to, and in Favors of any other Person, or Persons
whatsomever; Declaring, Likeas, it is hereby declared, that no such Disposition
or Deed, shall be of any force, but shall be judged to be gratuitous, unless that
both the Person granter, and the Writer and Witnesses in the Deed, shall declare
upon Oath, and also qualify satisfyingly, before the Judge Ordinary of the
Bonds, that the foresaid Disposition and Deed was made and granted, for true,
onerous, and adequat Causes; or otherways that the same shall be null and void,
in manner above-Statute.

XXVII. ACT Concerning the Church. July 16. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Being sensible of the Hurt and Mischief that may Ensue,
upon the exposing of the Peoples Minds to the Influence of such Ministers, who
refuse to give the Proofs required by Law of their Good Affection to the
Government; And withal desirous, that in the first place, all gentle and easy
Methods should be used to reclaim men to their Duty, whereby the present
Establishment of this Church, may be more happily preserved, the knowledge of
the Truth, with the practice of true Piety more successfully advanced, and the
peace and quiet of the Kingdom more effectually settled: Has thought good to
allow, and with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, hereby allows
to all Ministers that were at the time of His Majesty's happy Accession to the
Crown, and have since continued actual Ministers in particular Paroches, and no
Sentence either of Deposition or Deprivation past against them, and have not
yet Qualified themselves, conform to the Act of Parliament 1693, Entitled, Act
for taking the Oath of Allegiance and the Assurance, a new and farther day,
viz. the first of September in this present year 1695, to come in and take the
said Oath of Allegiance, and to subscribe the same with the Assurance betwixt
and the said day, and that either before the Sheriff, or Sheriff-Deput of the
Shires, or the Provost or Baillies of the respective Burghs, or any other
Inferior Magistrate of the bounds where they live, or before any Privy
Counselor, with a Certificat under the hand of the said Inferior Judges, or
Privy Counselor, to be reported to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
or their Clerk, within the space of twenty one days after the date of the said
Certificat: Declaring, that all such as shall duly come in and qualify
themselves as said is, and shall behave themselves worthily in Doctrine, Life
and Conversation as becomes Ministers of the Gospel, shall have and enjoy His
Majesty's Protection, as to their respective Kirks and Benefices, or Stipends,
they always containing themselves within the Limits of their Pastoral Charge
within their said Paroches, without offering to Exerce any power, either of
Licensing, or Ordaining Ministers, or any part of Government in General
Assemblies, Synods, or Presbytries, unless they be first duly assumed by a
competent Church Judicatory; in which Case, it is hereby farther Declared, that
the foresaid Ministers first qualifying themselves as above, may be assumed by
the respective Church Judicatories to which they belong, and shall apply to
partake with them in the present Established Government thereof: Providing
nevertheless, that as the said Ministers who shall qualify themselves as said
is, are left free to apply or not, to the foresaid Church Judicatories: So the
said Church Judicatores are hereby also Declared free to assume, or not assume
the foresaids Ministers, though qualified as they shall see cause: WITH
CERTIFICATION, that such of the said Ministers, as shall not come in betwixt
and the said day, are hereby, and by the force of this present Act, ipso facto,
Depriof their respective Kirks and Stipends, and the same Declared vacant
without any further Sentence. And His Majesty being purposed, that His Grace
shall be still patent to all; does further Declare and Statute, with Consent
foresaid, that at what time soever any Minister, either settled in a Church, or
not, shall upon application, be judged fit to be assumed by any competent
Church Judicatory as said is, the foresaid Minister, upon a Certificat thereof
from the said Judicatory, shall be admitted and allowed to qualify himself, by
taking the Oath of Allegiance, and subscribing the same with the Assurance in
manner foresaid, albeit the said first of September be past and elapsed. And
His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Allows, Declares, and Statutes as above, any
thing in the foresaid Act 1693, or in the other Act of the same Session of
Parliament, Entitled, Act for Settling the Quiet and Peace of the Church,
notwithstanding. And His Majesty with Consent foresaid, for the greater
encouragement of all Ministers of the Gospel, not only ratifies the Act of
Parliament 1669, forbidding all Suspensions of special Decreets and Charges for
Ministers Stipends, or the Rents of their Benefices, except on production of
Discarges, or upon Consignation in manner therein provided: But further
Statutes and Ordains, that there be no Advocation, or Sist of Process granted
of Actions for the said Stipends, or Rents of Benefices, when pursued before
Inferior Judges, and that in the case of a Decree, there be neither Suspension
nor Sist of Execution granted, except on production of clear Discharges or
Consignation as said is, and if any Suspension be past, that the same be
summerly discussed at the Instance of the Charger, without abiding the Order
and Course of the Roll: And that if the Letters be found orderly proceeded, the
Suspender be also Decerned at least in a fifth part more than the Sums charged
for, with what more the Lords shall judge reasonable to be paid to the Charger
for his Expense and Damnage. and if any Minister shall happen to pursue for his
Stipend by way of ordinary Action before the Lords, it is hereby farther
Ordained, that the same be summarly proceeded in, and discussed without abiding
the Course of the Roll. And Lastly, for a more ample Declaration of an Act made
in this Session of Parliament, for encouraging of Preachers at Vacant Churches
be North Forth, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, extends the same not only to
Preachers who are not settled in Churches, but also to such Ministers who
though settled in Churches, are yet sent from time to time from any Presbytry
or Synod of this Church, without their own Presbytry, to supply the said
Vacancies, to the effect, that the said Ministers settled, as well as the said
Preachers not settled, may equally have the benefit of the said Act, in the
terms thereof.

XXVIII. ACT For the Additional and Annexed Excises. July 16. 1695.
THE Estates of Parliament, taking to their Consideration, that for the
Maintaining of the present standing Forces, and the necessary Defense of the
Kingdom, and Coasts thereof, against the Dangers that continue to threaten from
the present War; an Additional Fond, to the Supplies already given, in this
present Session of Parliament, is requisite: Do therefore, for the said Fond,
and over and above the Excise of two merks upon the Boll of Malt, and the
Excises on strong Waters and Brandy, and Foreign Beer annexed to the Crown,
heartily offer to His Majesty, an Additional Excise of two pennies upon the
Pint of Ale and Beer, browen to be vended and sold; As also, of two shilling
upon each Pint of Aquavitae and strong Waters, brown or made of Malt, to be
vended and sold within the Kingdom: And likewise an Additional Excise of two
shilling upon each Pint of Aquavitae and strong Waters brown, not made of Malt,
excepting what is made of Wine; and that during the space of twelve Months,
commencing from the first day of September next. And His Majesty, and Estates
of Parliament, considering the Advantages of a greater Consumption, and better
Liquor arising, both to the Heretors, Brewers, and the whole Leidges of the
Kingdom, by laying all Excises upon the Liquor, and not upon the Malt; as also
the manifest convenience that the said Annexed Excise formerly on the Malt be
converted upon the Liquor, that both these Excises may be uniformly raised and
uplifted, with less Charges and Expenses, with which Reasons, and the Truth
thereof, after mature Deliberation, the Estates of Parliament are satisfied,
and fully convinced, that His Majesty getting an Equivalent, the same are just
and important, concerning both His Majesty's Interest and the public Good and
Welfare of this Kingdom. Therefore His Majesty, with consent of the said
Estates, has dissolved, and hereby dissolves the foresaid Annexed Excise of
two Merks upon the Boll of Malt, from the Crown and Patrimony thereof.
Rescinding, likeas, His Majesty hereby rescinds the Act of Parliament 1685,
giving, and annexing the foresaid Excise of two Merks upon the Boll of Malt to
the Crown, in so far as, it gives and annexes the same allannerly, and no
farther: Together with all Tacks, Contracts or Commissions, made, or granted,
of, or concerning the foresaid annexed Excise, hereby Dissolved and taken away;
Declaring the said Tacks, Sub-tacks, Contracts, and Commissions to be fallen
therewith in Consequentiam, after the first day of September aftermentioned: In
place of the which annexed Excise, and as an Equivalent, in Lieu thereof, the
Estates of Parliament, for the usefulness of this Grant, to support the
Interest of the Crown, do humbly and unanimously offer to His Majesty, over and
above the foresaid two pennies, and other additional Excises abovementioned, an
Excise of three pennies more upon the Pint of all Ale and Beer browen to be
vended and sold as said is; As also, of three shilling more upon ilk Pint of
Aquaviae or strong Waters, not made of Malt browen and sold within this
Kingdom: six shilling upon ilk Pint of Foreign Aquavitae, Brandy, or strong
Waters; and thirty shilling upon ilk Barrel of imported Foreign drinking Beer;
and this Excise hereby given in Lieu of the foresaid annexed Excise of two
Merks upon the Boll of Malt, and Ordained to commence from the foresaid first
day of September: His Majesty, and the Estates of Parliament, by the force of
this present Act, have United and Annexed, and Unites and Annexes the same to
the Crown of this Realm, to remain therewith, as annexed Property in all time
coming. And His Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, do appoint the
payment of the said Two Excises, unannexed and annexed, extending to five
pennies upon the Pint, so long as they shall Concur, to be as follows, viz. For
the first two Months, upon the first day of November next to come, and
thereafter quarterly, and proportionally, so long as they shall concur, and
stand together; and thereafter the foresaid new annexed Excise to be paid at
such Terms as His Majesty and Successor: shall please to appoint; And for making
of the said two Excises effectual for their respective Endurances, His Majesty,
with Consent foresaid, does Impose and Ordain the foresaid two Excises upon Ale
and Beer, to be raised and uplifted from all Brewers of the said Liquors, brown
and made to be vended and sold, as said is; and the said Excises upon Aquavitae
and strong Waters to be raised and uplifted from all Retailers thereof. And for
the raising and inbringing of the said Excise, His Majesty, and the Estates of
Parliament do hereby Appoint and Authorize the Commissioners of the new Supply,
appointed in another Act of this present Session of Parliament to be the
Commissioners of the Excise, during the respective Endurances of the said two
Excises, for the several Shires, for the end foresaid, and the Royal Burghs to
have the same number of Commissioners, as was appointed by the fourteenth Act
of the Parliament 1661, impowering them fully for that effect, conform to the
Rules and Orders formerly Enacted for raising and inbringing the former annexed
Excise upon Malt: As also to set down and cause observe such other Rules as
they shall judge necessary, agreeable always to the Acts of Parliament already
made about the foresaid Excise. And that the said Excises on Liquor may arise
more equally, it is hereby Statute, That during the Concurrence of the said two
Excises, the lowest Price of Ale or drinking Beer to be brewed and vented and
sold for hereafter, shall in all Burghs, where the Burgh has an particular
Imposition on Malt or Liquors, be twenty eight pennies for the Pint, to be
paid by the Buyer to the Ventner or Tapster, and in all other Places, both to
Burgh or Landward, two shilling the Pint, with Certification that the Ventner
transgressing, by selling under the said Rates, shall be fined by the said
Commissioners in the Sum often pound Scots at the instance of any other Brewer
or other Complainer toties quoties, to be applied by the said Commissioners
for Pious and Public Uses, within their respective Shires; and further, be
either put under sufficient surety to observe this Rule for hereafter, or if he
cannot find surety, discharged to brew in time coming, at the fight of the
said Commissioners. And further, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent
foresaid, does hereby Declare and Enact, that if any Brewer in use to brew for
sale and Change, shall give over brewing after the date of this Act, without an
Allowance in writing from the Commissioners of Excise, for good and seen
Causes, the said Brewer shall not be permitted to brew for Change, for the space
of five years thereafter; but shall be, and is hereby Discharged and rendered
incapable to do the same; As likewise, it is hereby Statute and Ordained, that
no person whatsoever, who have not been in use to brew for the service of
themselves and their Family in time by past, shall presume to brew after the
first day of September next to come, for their own and their Families use, and
if they contraveen, that they shall be liable in payment of the value of what
they shall brew. And his Majesty, with consent foresaid, does Ordain the said
Commissioners to meet the first Tuesday of September next, at the Head Burgh of
every Shire respective, and afterward upon the first Tuesday of ilk Month
where they shall appoint. And it is hereby specially provided, that if either
Collector or Farmer, shall presume to raise or Levy the said Excise upon the
Malt, or otherwise than upon the Liquor, he shall incurr the pain of an 100
Merks, toties quoties, to be decerned and exacted by the said Commissioners, or
by the Lords of Privy Council, in case the said Commissioners shall overlook
the same: as also, that the Brewer assenting thereto, or complice therein, shall
incurr the pain of fifty Merks, and also amitt and lose the Liberty of brewing,
which Fines are also hereby appointed to be applied ut supra: And it is hereby
Declared, that if any Tacks-man or Collector, or other Person shall exact any
thing over and above his Excise for the Discharges thereof, or for the
Discharge of any other public Dues whatsoever, it shall be repute as
Oppression, and punished accordingly by the said Commissioners, who are hereby
empowered to proceed against the persons guilty. And His Majesty, with Advice
and Consent foresaid, do Authorize and Empower the Lords of Privy Council to
prescribe such other Methods and Orders as they shall judge necessary for making
this Act effectual.

XXIX. ACT For Continuing the Additional Excise till March 1697, with Three
Months farther Cess. July 16. 1695.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT Taking to their further Consideration, the present
State of the Kingdom, and public Exigencies thereof; Have thought fit to
Offer, and do hereby Humbly and Heartily Offer to His Majesty, that the
Additional Excise of Two Pennies upon the Pint of Ale and Bear, and other
Liquors Imposed for an Year, beginning the first of September next, by an Act
of this Session of Parliament, be Continued from and after the expiring of the
said Year, until the first of March 1697. And sicklike, the Sum of Two Hundred
and Sixteen Thousand Pound, being Three Months Cess upon the Land-rent of this
Kingdom, payable at the Term of Lambmas 1696 years, and that over and above the
Six Months Cess already granted by another Act of this Session of Parliament:
And accordingly His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the said Estates,
Statutes and Ordains, That the said Additional Excise hereby Continued as said
is, and the said Three Months Cess payable at Lambmas 1696, granted by this
present Act, shall be raised, uplisted and ingathered from the persons liable
in payment, in manner and for the ends appointed by the said two respective
Acts abovementioned.

XXX. ACT For Preservation of Meadows, Lands and Pasturages lying adjacent to
Sand-Hills. July 16. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering that many Lands, Meadows and Pasturages lying
on the Seacoasts, have been ruined and overspread in many places of this
Kingdom, by Sand driven from adjacent Sand-hills, the which has been mainly
occasioned by the pulling up by the Root of Bent, Juniper and Broom-Bushes,
which did loose and break the Surface and Scroof of the said Hills; and
particularly Considering that the Barony of Cowbin, and House and Yards
thereof, lying within the Sheriffdom of Elgin, is quite ruined and overspread
with Sand, the which was occasioned by the foresaid bad practice of pulling the
Bent and Juniper. Therefore His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament, for preventing of the like Prejudices in time coming; Does
strictly Prohibit and Discharge the pulling of Bent, Broom, or Juniper off
Sand-hills for hereafter, either by the Proprietors themselves, or any other
whatsomever, the same being the natural Fences of the adjacent Countries to the
said Hills; Certifying such as shall Contraveen this Act, they shall not only
be liable to the Damages that shall there-through inshew, but shall likeways
be liable in the Sum of Ten Pounds of Penalty; the one half thereof to belong
to the Informer, and the other half to the Judge within whose Jurisdiction the
said Contravention shall be committed.

XXXI. ACT For turning the Tack of the Pole 1693, into a Collection. July 16.
1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, that albeit the Pole granted by Act of
Parliament, in the year 1693, was Set by the Lords of Thesaury and Exchequer,
to the Lord Ross, Sir John Cochran of Ochiltrie, and others mentioned in the
Tack thereof, for the Sum of Forty four thousand one hundred Pounds Sterling
of Tack-Duty, as the Tack in it self bears: Yet the Levying of Money by Pole
being new, and the Country and others concerned, not observing the Rules and
Ordinances contained in the Act of Parliament thereanent, but through their
Failzying, incurring the Quadruples appointed by the said Act by way of
Penalty; the foresaids Tacks-men were not able to pay the foresaid Duty,
unless they had been allowed to exact the foresaid Quadruples, which had
visibly tended to the great oppression and disturbance of the whole Kingdom.
THEREFORE, and in so singular a Case, which His Majesty is resolved shall never
be drawn into Example, His Majesty with the Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament has Liberated and hereby Liberates the foresaid Tacks-men, and
all others concerned therein, from the said Tack and Tack duty, Discharging
and Exonoring them of the Samen, but with this Condition and Provision. Likeas
His Majesty with Advice foresaid, hereby Statutes and Provides, That the
foresaid Tacks-men shall make just Count and Reckoning of all their
Intromissions with the said Pole Money, Sicklike as if they had only been
Collectors, and instead of the said Tack had got a Commission allanerly for
that Effect, with and under always the Particular Conditions following, First,
that the said Tacksmen be Liable for all the Sub-Collectors and Managers
Employed by them. Secondly, that all their Books be made Patent, and Examined.
And that the Tacks-men and their Sub-Collectors be examined upon Oath, as to
the verity thereof, and whether there be any thing Omitted. Thirdly, that in
case it be found, there was any thing Received from the Country, not given up
in the Books: That the Tacks-men, or their Sub-Collectors be liable in Twenty
Shilling, for each Shilling so Omitted. Fourthly, that the Rolls of the
Poleable persons taken up by the several Justices of Peace, Magistrates of
Burghs, and others be produced to be compared with the Books. Fifthly, That a
few Comptrollers be appointed to examine Books, and Accounts, and adjust the
whole Matter, and that the Leidges be Invited and Encouraged to Comptroll the
said Accounts, and that they be patent at a public Office for a reasonable
time to all the Leidges for that end. Sixthly, that the Order of Payment, viz.
of the Country in the First place, and then of the Forces, as Prescribed by
Act of Parliament, be duly and strictly observed by the Commission
after-mentioned. Seventhly, that upon Accounts Instructed and Liquidat, in due
manner, Retention be allowed by the commission to those to whom the said
Accounts are due, in the Terms of the Act of Parliament. Eighthly, that where
any Sub-tack has been Set by the said Tacks-men, the Sub-tacksmen have in
their Option, either to pay the Sub-tack-duty, or make Count, Reckoning and
Payment of their Intromission, as Sub-collectors. Ninthly, that no Sallaries be
allowed, or given to the said Tacks-men, or their Sub-tacks-men for their
Collecting. And to the Ef-fect, the said Count and Reckoning may proceed; His
Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid; Hereby Nominats and Appoints the Duke
of Queensberry, the Earls of Linlithgow and Levin, Sir John Lauder of Hattoun,
the Lord of Livingstoun, the Lord of Torwoodlie, Sir William Hamilton, Sir
Archibald Mure, and William Menzies Commissioners, three of every State, Chosen
by the Parliament, for that Effect, whereof any five to be a quorum, to meet at
Edinburgh the first Lawful day after the Riseing of this Session of Parliament,
and thereafter at such days as the said Commission shall Appoint. Likeas one of
the Commissioners of His Majesty's Theasury is Allowed to be Present, with
Right to Vote, But so as his Presence shall not be necessary to make up the
foresaid quorum, with Power to the said Commissioners to take in the Accounts
of the said Tacks-men their Intromission, as if they had been Collectors, and
to make them Account for their Collection, in manner, and under the Conditions
Above set down; And to Determine all Differences betwixt the said Tacks-men and
the Country, and the Officers, and Soldiers, anent the Premises: As also
with Power to the said Commissioners to do every thing necessary, for
Inbringing of what, is yet resting unpayed of the said Pole by the Country,
and for making the same effectual; and also to Decide, and finally Determine
all Questions, that may arise concerning the Preferrence of the Officers of the
Army Interested, or their being brought in equality to get their Shares of
Payment out of the Subject of the said Pole, as likeways with Power to them, to
allow, or not to allow Expenses for Inbringing the said Pole to the said
Tacksmen, and their Subtacksmen now turned to Collectors, and Sub-collectors as
they shall see Cause: And generally to do all other things anent the Premises,
that they may bring the foresaid Tacksmen their Intromission and Collection to
a clear State and Balance, and also for In-gathering what shall be found
Resting of the said Pole Money, either in the hands of the said Tacksmen, or in
the hands of any other Person liable therein, and cause pay in the same to His
Majesty's General-Receiver of the Crown Rents, providing that the said
Commissioners use the same and no other Method or Diligence for Ingathering
than what is Prescribed for In-gathering of the New Pole: The Quadruples in the
Act anent the Pole 1693 being hereby Expressly Discharged, and farther, with
Power to apply the whole neat Product thereof by Precepts on the said
General-Receiver, Conform to the Destination contained in the Act of
Parliament, and in the Order, and under the Certification therein specified:
And it is hereby farther Declared, that for what shall be still found Resting by
the said Tacks-men, after Just Count and Reckoning, their Cautioners for the
foresaid Tack-dutie shall be liable therefore, notwithstanding that the foresaid
Tack be hereby Disolved and turned to a Commission or Collection as said is;
and it is farther hereby provided that the Commissioners abovenamed shall be,
and are hereby Appointed to be, Commissioners for Calling for, Examining, and
Concluding the Accounts of the three Months Cess, viz. And of the Hearth-money,
Imposed in the year 1690, with Power to them to call all Collectors,
Intromettors, and other Persons concerned, in so far as they have not Compted
to, and got Discharges from the Lords of Thesaurie, and make them Count,
Reckon, and Pay as accords; and farther to take such Methods as they shall think
fit, to uplift and bring in the Rests of the said Hearth-money yet Resting by
the Country, according to the Orders and Proclamations already given and
Emitted in that Matter, and to Appoint Collectors for that End, or Farm the
same as they shall think fit, and Generally to do all other things necessary,
for the full and final Clearing of the said three Months Cess and Heart-money;
and farther the said Commissioners are hereby Empowered to put the whole of the
said Pole Money hereby Ordered to be Compted for, to a Roup, and Assign, and
ajudge the same to the highest Offerer, with this provision that it shall not be
Rouped for less than Thirty thousand Pound Sterling, and that the said highest
Offerer have the, whole Powers hereby given to the said Commission for
In-gathering thereof, and this Power is also extended to the Rouping of the
Rests of the said Hearth-money as they shall see Cause. And lastly it is hereby
Declared, that if any of the said Commissioners shall happen to Depart this
Life, His Majesty shall have the Naming and Appointing of one in his place out
of the same state to whom the Person Deceasand belonged.

XXXII. ACT For Encouraging the Exportation of Victual. July 17. 1695.
HIS MAJESTY AND ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT Considering, That the Grains of all
sorts, are the greatest Product and Commodity of this Nation; and Considering
how necessary it is for the Promoving of Tilladge, and Improvement of Trade, to
the best Advantage of the Kingdom, that an effectual Encouragment be granted
for Exportation of Corns and Victual forth thereof. Therefore His Majesty, out
of his Royal Bounty, with Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statute and
Ordain, that all sorts of Grains exported out of the Kingdom after Martinmas
1696, shall be free of any Dues formerly payable for Exportation; and that for
encouraging Export after the said Term, there shall be given out of the Customs
to the Exporter, upon his Oath of Verity, of the number of the Bolls exported,
Subscribed with his Hand, and Attested by the Collector of the next adjacent
Custom-house, Eight Merks for ilk Chalder of Grain, that shall be exported by
Sea or Land, when they shall not exceed the Prices following, viz. when Wheat
is at or under Twelve Pound the Boll; Bear, Barley, and Malt, at or under Eight
Pound per Boll; Pease, Oats, and Meal, at or under Six Pounds per Boll; all the
said Grains being of Linlithgow Measure. With this Provision always, that the
said Exportation shall be by Scots Men, or in Scots Ships; and that the Master
and Three Fourth Parts of the Seamen of the said ships, shall be Scots Men: As
also, with this Provision, that when the Grains exceed the foresaids Rates, the
Lords of His Majesty's Secret Council may Discharge the Exportation of Victual
of all sorts, ay and till the Grains fall to the Prices foresaid.

XXXIII. ACT For the Levies. July 17. 1695.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT Considering how necessary it is, that during this
present War, which so much concerns the Defense and Security of the Protestant
Religion, and of His Majesty's Kingdoms, certain Rules and Orders should be
laid down for Recruits and Levies, as they shall be found needful, whereby both
the Kingdom may be delivered from the frequent Disorders and Oppressions of
pulling away poor Men from their Wives and Children, that cannot subsist
without their Handy-Labour, and the Engaging and Seizing of other unfit men, no
ways proper for the Service, which hitherto has been found a most sensible
Grievance, and whereby also His Majesty's Service, for the Maintaining and
Carrying on of the said War, may be more effectually Promoted: And the said
Estates taking likeways into their Consideration, that all Heretors, and the
superior sort of His Majesty's Leidges, do really Contribute to the foresaid
War, by their paying of Supplies, Pole Money and Excise, and other public
Burdens; whereby it seems most reasonable, that the inferior sort, that
Contribute little or nothing, specially such who are young Men, without Wives
or Children, and do Earn their Living by Daily Wages, or Termly-hire for their
Handy work, and who by the Laws of the Land may be compelled to serve, His
Majesty's other good Subjects should be made liable to contribute their Service
for a certain space in the foresaid War, which is manifestly most necessary for
the Defense and Security of themselves and the whole Kingdom, beside the other
Advantages of Profit and Honor that thereby may accrue to them. Therefore His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and
Ordains, that until the next Session of this Parliament, and for the Service of
the present War, either at Home or Abroad, there shall be furnished to His
Majesty, the Number of One Thousand Men Yearly, when His Majesty shall Require
them, to be Proportioned and Levied, conform to the Rules and Proportions
contained in the Act 1663, Entitled, An Humble Tender to His Sacred Majesty of
the Duty and Loyalty of His ancient Kingdom of Scotland, as to the Twenty
thousand Foot therein-mentioned; which Thousand Bodies of Men, shall be
Furnished and Levied, without any Charge or Burden of Money on the Country
whatsomever, in this manner, Viz. That the Commissioners of Supply for the
respective Bounds where the said Proportions shall fall, first design, and
cause be given, the Idle, Loose and Vagabond Persons, liable by former Acts of
Parliament, to be seized by Sheriffs, and who have not Wife and Children, to
make up the foresaid Number; and in the next plate, shall cause all the young
Feasible Men of the Bounds, not having Wife and Children, and who are not
Menial or Domestic Servants to any Heretor, but Earn their Living by Daily
Wages, or by Termly Hire paid them by other Masters for their Handy-Labour; to
meet at certain Days and Places, and there by Lot, and throwing of the Dyce, or
otherways as they shall think fit, Determine which of them shall go forth to
serve as Soldiers, with this Provision, that the foresaid persons being all
first listed by the said Commissioners, and appointed to Meet as said is, if
any of them shall be absent, any Heretor to be appointed by the said
Commissioners, shall throw for him, and if the Lot shall fall on that person
absent, or if he shall be otherways designed to be put forth by the said
Commissioners, he shall be liable in all time thereafter as a Deserter,
sicklike as if he had been present; and with this Encouragement to the whole
foresaid Persons, to be put forth in manner foresaid, that they shall have
Twenty Pounds Scots paid them in ready Money, by the Officer who receives
them, at the sight of one of the said Commissioners; and in the next place,
that their being put forth and engaged as said is, shall not oblige them longer
to be and continue Soldiers, then for the space of Three Years, and the first
of November after the said years, from the time of their said Engagment, at
which time they shall have an authentic free Pass, unless they Subscribe a new
Consent to continue longer in the Service. And the further Execution of this
Act, that the foresaid Levies and Recruits may be effectually raised in the
most easy manner, is Referred and Recommended to the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, who are hereby thereto fully Empowered, during the continuing of
this War, and no longer. And after so just a Condescendance for Facilitating of
Levies and Recruits, It is hereby Statute and Ordained, that no Officer, either
at Home, or from Abroad, offer to take on or press any free Leidge to be a
Soldier, unless the Man be ta^en on by Agreement, owned by him in presence of
the Judge of the Bounds; and if any Officer shall Contraveen this Order, and
Press or Compel any Man, contrait to the Rule hereby established, that it be
reckoned Oppression, and the Transgressor punished by the Fine of a Months Pay,
and farther by Imprisonment, or Breaking and Casheiring, as the Lords of Council
shall think fit. And it is farther hereby Statute and Ordained that all Officers
exacting Lodging, Coal and Candle gratis, for themselves, their Wives or
Children, shall loss and tyne their Commission; and that all Soldiers Exacting
Lodging, Coal and Candle gratis, for their Wives and Children, shall be liable
for the Parties Damage, to be paid by their Commanding Officers, at the sight
and appointment of any Magistrate within Burgh, or other Judges to Landward;
Certifying the Officer failieing herein, that he shall be liable in Three
Months Pay, and farther punished as the Lords of Council shall appoint; which
Fines are also to be applied for reparation of the Parties in the first place,
and the Superplus as the Council shall think fit.

XXXIV. ACT For Additional Imposition upon Foreign Commodities Imported. July
17. 1695.
THE Estates of Parliament, Considering the great Concessions granted by His
Majesty in this present Session of Parliament, in Favors of the natural
Product of this Kingdom, by the Encouragment given for the Exporting of Corns,
and the many Privileges allowed for the Improvement of Trade and
Manufactories, and that it is reasonable, there should be such Additional
Duties and Customs laid upon Foreign imported Commodities, in requital for His
Majesty's gracious favor, Do with all humble Duty and Thankfulness, Offer to
His Majesty the additional Duties upon the Foreign Commodities
after-mentioned, and that by and attour what they were formerly liable unto by
Acts of Parliament preceding the Date hereof, as by the following Table, Lib.
sh. d. Imprimis, Upon all Wine imported from France of New-Duty 18 00 00 Which
with the 30 lib. scots formerly imposed by the Privy Council upon the account
of the Sumptuary Act, makes in all per Tunn 48 00 00 Item, Spanish Wine from
Spain, the Imposition formerly imposed by the Council, is hereby ratified,
which is per Tunn. 30 00 00 Item, On Brandy, the former Duty of Twenty pound
sterling, being ordinarily reduced by the Lords of Thesaury and Farmers to
Twelve pound sterling; there is added of New-Duty per Tunn, by and attour the
said 12 lib. 72 00 00 Item, Upon Mum-Bear, over and above the old Duty, there
is hereby added of New-Duty per Barrel 06 00 00 Item, On Tobacco in Leaf, not
from the Plantations of New Duty per pound 00 02 00 Item, On Tobacco in Roll
not from the Plantations, of New-Duty per pound 00 04 00 Item, On all French
Wines imported from Holland, or any where else not of the Growth of the place
from whence it is Exported, by and attour the above-written Duty, there is
added of New-Duty per Tunn 30 00 00 Item, On all Spanish Wine from any place
except Spain of New-Duty per Tunn. 48 00 00 Item, On Raisins and Currens from
any place not of the Growth from whence they are Exported per hundred Weight,
of New-Duty. 02 8 00 Item, On Figgs imported after the same manner per 100
Weight of New-Duty 01 8 00 Item, On Sugar in Loaf imported, of New-Duty per 100
Weight 03 00 00 Item, On Soap imported, of New-Duty per Barrel. 02 00 00 Item,
On all sorts of Wrought Silks, Silk-Plushes, Stockings, of New-Duty per pound
weight 01 10 00 Item, On all sorts of Silks wrought of Gold and Silver, per
pound weight of New-Duty 03 00 00 Item, On all Silver and Gold Fringes, Silver
and Gold Laces, Gallouns and Embroideries imported, per pound weight of
New-Duty 03 00 00 Item, On all Foreign Laces and Points imported, of New-Dutty
Ten per Cent value Item, On all Foreign Woollen Cloth imported, of New-Duty
per Eln 00 12 00 Item, On all Foreign Sarges and Worsted-Stuffs imported, of
New-Duty per Eln 00 06 00 Item, On all Foreign Flannels, Fingrums, of New-Duty
per Eln 00 04 00 Item, On all Linen-Cloath imported from Foreign Countries, of
New-Duty per whole Piece at 36 Elns 12 00 00 Item, On the Half-Piece of
Foreign imported Linen-Cloath of New-Duty 06 00 00 Item, On all
Silesia-Linnen, of New-Duty per Piece being 5 Elns, 01 00 00 Item, On all
Thread imported, of New-Duty five per Cent value

Which Duties and Customs above specified, Our Sovereign Lord with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statute and Ordain to be paid by all
Merchants and other Importers of the said Foreign Commodities, in the same
manner as the other Duties to which they were formerly liable; And Ordains all
Farmers, Collectors, Surveyers and others, to In-gather the same, and that
after the same manner they do His Majesty's other Duties upon Foreign imported
Commodities, and that from and after the Term of Martinmass 1696 years: And
hereby Discharges the said Collectors, Farmers, Surveyers, and other
In-bringers of His Majesty's Customs to Transact, Abate or allow of any
Defalcation of the Additional Duties above-specified, under the pain of
Deprivation of their Offices, and losing the Benefit of their Tacks.

XXXV. ACT Anent burying in Scots Linen. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, for
the better improvement of the Manufactory of Linen within the Kingdom, and
restraining the Import of all Foreign Linen, Does hereby Ratify and Approve
the sixteenth Act of the Parliament 1686 Entitled, Act for burying in Scots
Linen, in the hail Heads and Articles, thereof; Ordaining the same to be put to
strict Execution in all Points, with this Addition, that none presume to cause
bury any in Scots Linen, in value above Twenty Shilling Scots per Ell, under
the same pains set down in the foresaid Act against burying in Foreign Linen:
And for the better discovery of the said Transgression, and Execution of the
foresaid Act, and the Addition hereby made to it, His Majesty, with Consent
foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That the nearest Elder, or Deacon of the
Parish, with one Neighbor or two, be called by the Persons concerned, and
present to the putting of the dead Corpse in the Coffin, that they may see the
same done, and that the foresaid Act, with this present Addition is observed,
and subscribe the Certificat, mentioned in the foresaid Act, and that whatever
Relation, or other Friends of the Defunct present, and having the Charge of the
burying, shall either fail in observing the foresaid Act, with this Addition, or
to call the Elder or Deacon, with such Neighbors as may be Witnesses, or to
send and give in the Certificat, appointed by the said Act, he or they shall be
holden as Transgressors, and liable in the Pains thereof; which Pains are also
hereby entirely applied, and given to the Poor of the Parish: and any Elder or
Deacon of the Parish is empowered to pursue for the same, for their use, nor
shall any Pursuit for the said Fines be Advocat from the Inferior Judge
Competent, nor any Sist of Process given, nor shall any Decree therefore be
Suspended, but upon Discharge or Consignation allanerly. And it is further
hereby Statute, That it shall not be leisom to any Person, to make or sew any
sort of dead Linen, contrair to the foresaid Act, and this present Addition,
under the pain of Forty Merks toties quoties, for the use of the Poor, as said
is.

XXXVI. ACT Anent the Skinners. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD the KINGS MAJESTY, with Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament, in pursuance of the many Good Acts made for the setting up, and
maintaining of Manufactories, and particularly, of the Act 1661, Entitled Act
for Erecting of Manufactories; and for the greater Encouragement of the
Skinners of this Kingdom, toward the improvement of the Native Commodities of
Wild-Skins and Lamb Skins, and the Art of that Craft, Do hereby Discharge all
and every Person whatsomever, Native or Stranger, to Export out of this Kingdom
any Wild-Skins, such as Wild-hyds, Dae and Rae, Roe and Roe-Buck, and Kid, with
the Hair upon them, until they be made in Work, or dressed Leather, to the good
of the Kingdom. As also, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid,
Discharges all and every Person, Native or Stranger, to import any Foreign
made Gloves, of whatsomever sort, Certifying such as shall do in the contrair,
either by Export or Import, as said is, that they shall not only forefault the
foresaids Goods, exported or imported, or the just value thereof, the one half
to His Majesty, and the other half to the Informer, who shall prosecute the same
before His Majesty's Exchequer, but also be further liable to such Pecunial
Fines, or other Punishments, as the Lords of His Majesty's Exchequer shall think
fit to inflict: Declaring that this Act shall commence and take effect after the
first day of August next to come; and impowering the said Skinners, and any
Merchands, or any others concerned with concurse of a Magistrate, to search for,
and make seizure of the foresaid Goods hereby prohibited to be exported or
imported. For the more effectual Execution of the Premises, and for the better
Improvement of the said Skins, Our Sovereign Lord, hereby Ratifies and Approves
the Act made be the Convention of Burrows, anent the sufficiency of Skins, and
Ordains the Magistrates of all Burghs to put the said Act to due execution in
all Points. And Lastly, it is hereby Declaired, that the foresaid Act of
Parliament, for Erecting of Manufactories, and any allowance that may be
therein given, for the Manufactoring of the said Skins, shall be but prejudice
to the Rights and Privileges of the Craft and Incorporation of Skinners, in
all, or any of the Burghs of this Kingdom.

XXXVII. ACT Anent the Iusticiary of the Highlands. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, That there was an Act of Parliament, made in
the year 1693, for the Justiciary in the Highlands; Declaring, That His
Majesty, by virtue of His Prerogative Royal, might grant Commissions of
Justiciary for the said Bounds, with all Power, necessary and usual: Excepting
thence, from the Bounds lying within the Heretable Right of Justiciary General,
pertaining to the Earl of Argile, or any other Person, providing nevertheless
that the foresaids Persons, whose bounds were excepted, should for the space of
two years, be obliged to grant Commissions to the same persons, whom it should
please his Majesty to Commissionat for their said Bounds and Lands, which two
years being now near expired, and it being necessary that the foresaids
Commissions, after their expiration should be renewed: Therefore, His Majesty,
with Advice and Consent foresaid, Does hereby prorogate the foresaid Provision,
to the effect, and in the Terms aftermentioned, viz. That when the Commissions
are granted by His Majesty, for the necessary repressing of the Depredations
and Robberies, so frequently committed in the Highlands, for the said Bounds
not above excepted, the foresaids Persons having Right to the said Heretable
Justiciaries General, shall grant ample Commissions for their respective Bounds
at the same time, and to the same Persons (at least to so many of them as are
willing to act, by virtue of the said Justiciaries Commissions) to the effect
the said Commissioners, acting unanimously, within any part of the whole
foresaid Bounds, the said Crimes may be the more effectually punished and
restrained, and that these Commissions may, and shall be granted, as said is,
for the space of three years; which is to begin after the present Commission
granted by His Majesty is expired: Which Commissions shall continue all Powers
necessary and usual in Commissions of Justiciary, without prejudice always to
the whole foresaid Persons, and Lords of Regality, and all others of their
several respective Rights and Jurisdictions, and also reserving the Right of
Prevention, and the Right of Casualities and Escheats, in manner provided in
the said Act.

XXXVIII. ACT Concerning the Dividing of Commonties. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of the ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT, for
preventing the Discords that arise about Commonties, and for the more easy and
expedit Deciding thereof, in time coming, STATUTS and ORDAINS, That all
Commonties, Excepting the Commonties belonging to the KING and Royal-Burrows;
that is, all that belongs to His MAJESTY in Property, or Royal-Burrows in
Burgage, may be divided at the Instance of any having Interest, by Summons
raised against all Persons concerned, before the Lords of Session^ who are
hereby Empowered to discuss the Relevancy, and to determine upon the Rights and
Interests of all Parties concerned, and to value and divide the same, according
to the value of the Rights and Interests of the several Parties concerned, and
to grant Commissions to Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Regality and their
Deputs, Justices of Peace, or others, for perambulating and taking all other
necessary Probation, which Commissions shall be reported to the said Lords, and
the said Processes ultimatly Determined by them. And where Mosses shall happen
to be in the said Commonties, with Power to the said Lords, to divide the said
Mosses, amongst the several Parties having Interest therein, in manner
foresaid; or in case it be instructed to the said Lords, that the said Mosses
cannot be conveniently divided, His MAJESTY, with Consent foresaid, Statuts and
Declares, that the said Mosses shall remain Common, with free Ish and Entry
thereto, whether divided or not, Declaring also, that the Interest of the
Heretors, having Right in the said Commonties, shall be estimat according to the
Valuation of their respective Lands or Properties, and which Divisions are
appointed to be made, of that part of the Commonty that is next adjacent to
each Heretors Property.

XXXIX. ACT Discharging the Venting of Rum. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, that the Brandy commonly called Rum made of
Molossus, does hinder the Consumpt of strong Waters made of Malt, which is the
Native Product of this Kingdom: As also, that the said Rum is rather a Drug
than Liquor, and highly prejudicial to the Health of all who drink it.
Therefore, His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Prohibits and Discharges the making of Rum, except allenarly for Export:
Certifying the Contraveeners, that they shall lose and amit their Privileges
granted to them as Manufactories, and be otherways punished as the Lords of
Privy Council think fit.

XL. ACT Anent Letters Passing the Signet. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, for
Reviving and Preserving the good Order that ought to be kept in the Passing of
Writs under the Signet, Statutes and Ordains, that all Writs Passing under the
Signet, called the Signet of the Lords of Session, be Subscribed by a Writer as
Clerk to the said Signet: Excepting allanerly herefrom, Letters of Diligence in
Processes before the Session, and Letters of Citation before the Parliament,
which are to be Subscribed by the Clerks of Session. And His Majesty with
Advice foresaid, Prohibits the Keeper of the said Signet, to affix the same to
any Letters not Subscribed as above, any Custom or Practice in the contrary
notwithstanding, and that as he will be answerable upon his Peril.

XLI. ACT Anent Executry and Movables. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, that the Law is Defective, as to the Affecting
with Legal Diligence, the Moveable Estate which pertained to a Defunct, either
for his own, or his nearest of Kins Debt, in such manner as a Defuncts
heretage, may be affected by Charging to Enter Heir in the known manner: Does
therefore, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statute and
Ordain, that in the case of a Moveable Estate left by a Defunct, and falling to
his nearest of Kin, who lies out, and does not confirm, the Creditors of the
nearest of Kin, may either require the Procurator-Fiscal to Confirm and Assign
to them, under the Peril and Pain of his being liable for the Debt, if he
refuse; or they may obtain themselves Decerned Executors Dative to the Defunct,
as if they were Creditors to him: With this Provision always, that the
Creditors of the Defunct, doing Diligence to affect the said Moveable Estate
within year and day of their Debitors Decease, shall always be preferred to the
Diligence of the said nearest of Kin. And it is further Declared, that in the
case of any Depending Cause or Claim against a Defunct the time of his Decease,
it shall be Leisum to the Pursuer of the said Cause or Claim, to Charge the
Defuncts nearest of Kin to Confirm Executor to him within twenty days after the
Charge given, which Charge so execute, shall be a Passive Title against the
Person Charged, as if he were a Vicious Intromettor, unless he Renunce, and
then the Charger may proceed to have his Debt constitute, and the Haereditas
Iacens of Movables Declared liable by a Decree Cognitionis Causa, upon the
obtaining whereof, he may be Decerned Executor Dative to the Defunct, and so
affect his Movables in the common Form.

XLII. ACT Allowing the Administrators of the Common Good of Burrows, to
Adventure their Stocks, or any part thereof, in the Company of Foreign Trade.
July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, for
the Encouragement of the Undertakers for Foreign Trade, conform to an Act made
in their Favors in this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, Act for a
Company Tradeing to Africa and the Indies, does hereby Statute and Declare,
that it shall be Leisum to the Magistrates and others, the Administrators of the
Common Good of Burghs; As also, to the Deacon, Masters, and other
Administrators whatsoever of any Incorporation, or Body, or Company Incorporat,
or Collegiat within this Kingdom, to Adventure and put in Money belonging to
their respective Administrations, for a Share and Part to be Purchased to the
said Burghs and Incorporations in the said Company mentioned in the said Act,
bearing the name of the Company of Scotland Tradeing to Africa and the Indies,
in the Manner and in the Terms provided within the said Act, and that their
putting in the Money of the said Burghs. Incorporations, under their Care and
Charge, and Adventuring the same in the said Company, shall be repute and held
for a Deed of lawful Administration, and though the Success and Event thereof,
should happen not to be Prosperous, yet it shall never be construed to be a
Deed of Lesion against the said Administrators, but their Acting in this
Behalf, is hereby Declared to be Lawful and Warrantable, for the Security of
the foresaid Persons in all Events.

XLIII. ACT Anent the Poor. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, does
hereby Ratify, Approve, and Revive all Acts of Parliament, and Acts and
Proclamations of Council, for Maintaining of the Poor, and Repressing of
Beggars, and Ordains them to be put to Vigorous Execution in all Points. And
further, Impowers the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to take the most
effectual Course to make the said Acts and Proclamation effectual, conform to
the true Design thereof.

XLIV. ACT Salvo Jure Cujuslibet. July 17. 1695.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering, That there are several Acts and others Past
and Made in this Session of Parliament, in favors of particular Persons,
without Calling or Hearing of such as may be thereby Concerned and Prejudged:
Therefore His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That all such particular Acts and others past in manner
foresaid, shall not Prejudge say Third Party, of their Lawful Rights, nor of
their Actions and Defenses competent thereupon, before the making of the said
particular Acts; And the Lords of Session, and all other Judges within this
Kingdom, shall be Obliged to Judge betwixt Parties, according to their several
Rights standing in their Persons, before the Making of the said Acts; all which
are hereby Expounded and Declared to have been Made Salvo Iure Cujuslibet.

XLV. ACT Of Adjournment. July 17. 1695.
THE KINGS MAJESTY Declares this Parliament current, and Adjourns the same to
the Seventh Day of November, next to come; Ordaining all Members of Parliament,
Noblemen, Commissioners from Shires and Burghs, and all others having Interest,
to Attend at Edinburgh that Day, at Ten a Clock; and that there be no new
Elections in Shires or Burghs, except upon the Death of any of the present
Commissioners.

Collected and Extracted from the Registers and Records of Parliament, by
TARBAT, Cls. Registri.

A TABLE Of the Printed Acts.
Page 1 ACT for a Solemn Fast. 1 2 Act Regulating Citations before the
Parliament. 3 3 Act Adjourning the Summer-Session till the first of July 1695.
4 4 Act anent the Justice-Court. 5 5 Act anent Principals and Cautioners. 6 6
Act Regulating the Sale and Payment of Bankrupts Estates. 7 7 Act for Six
Months Supply upon the Land-Rent. 8 8 Act for a Company Tradeing to Africa and
the Indies. 17 9 Act Adjourning the Session till the first day of November
1695. 23 10 Act for Pole Money. Ibid. 11 Act against Blasphemy. 27 12 Act
against Irregular Baptisms and Marriages. 28 13 Act against Profaneness. 29 14
Act for Restraining the Profanation of the Lords Days, by keeping Weekly
Mercats on Monday and Saturnday. 30 15 Act for Encouragment of Preachers at
Vacant Churches be-north Forth 31 16 Act anent the Ease of Annualrents Due by
Persons Restored, and anent the Creditors Diligence to be Used against them. 32
17 Act anent the Mint. 34 18 Act anent the Quorum of the Commission of the
Teinds. 35 19 Act anent the Duty on Scots Muslin. 36 20 Act anent the
Post Office. Ibid. 21 Explanatory Act anent the Excise of Brandy. 39 22 Act
against Intruding into Churches without a Legal Call and Admission thereto. 40
23 Act anent Lands lying Run-rig. 41 24 Act for Obviating the Frauds of
appearand Heirs. 42 25 Act anent the Repetition of Fines. 44 26 Act Discharging
Popish Persons to prejudge their Protestant Heirs in Succession. 45 27 Act
concerning the Church. 46 28 Act for the Additional and Annexed Excises. 48 29
Act for Continuing the Additional Excise till March 1667, with Three Months
farther Cess. 51 30 Act for Preservation of Meadows, Lands and Pasturages lying
adjacent to Sand-Hills. 52 31 Act for turning the Tack of the Pole 1693, into a
Collection. Ibid. 32 Act for Encouraging the Exportation of Victual. 55 33 Act
for the Levies. 56 34 Act for Additional Imposition upon Foreign Commodities
Imported. 58 35 Act anent burying in Scots-Linen. 60 36 Act anent the Skinners.
61 37 Act anent the Justiciary of the Highlands. 62 38 Act concerning the
dividing of Commonties. 63 39 Act Discharging the Venting of Rumm. 64 40 Act
anent Letters Passing the Signet. Ibid. 41 Act anent Executry and Movables. 65
42 Act allowing the Administrators of the Common Good of Burrows, to Adventure
their Stock, or any part thereof, in the Company of Foreign Trade. 66 43 Act
for Reviving the Acts of Council made anent the Poor. Ibid. 44 Act Salvo Iure
Cujuslibet. 67 45 Act of Adjournment. Ibid.
A TABLE Of the Acts and Ratifications past in the Fifth Session of His
Majesty's first Parliament, which are not here Printed.
HIs Majesty's Commission to John Marquis of Tweeddule produced. The Earl of
Annandale named President to the Parliament. Protestations several Noblemen,
for their Precedencies in the Rolls of Parliament. Several Excuses offered for
several absent Members, and received. His Majesty's Letter, appointing the Lord
Yester to sit and Vote in Parliament, in place of the Lord High Thesaurer. His
Majesty's Letter to the Parliament. Address of Condoleance for the Death of the
Queen. Act anent the Election of the Burgh of Anstruther-Easter. An Address by
the Parliament to His Majesty's High Commissioner, for transmitting their
humble Thanks to His Majesty, for ordering an Enquiry in the matter of Glenco.
Act anent the Lords of Session who are upon Committees. Act in Favors of Evan
Mcgrigor. Decree Sir William Scot of Hardin, against George Mckenzie of
Rosebaugh. Warrant the Shire of Clackmannan for a new Election. Warrant for
pursuing the Earl of Broadalbane. Act for a General Contribution for relief of
some Captives. Recommendation in Favors of Mrs. Martin. Decree Sir James
Ramsey and his Lady, against the Earl and Countess of Seaforth. Act in Favors
of Sir Thomas Livingston. Decree against Mr. Thomas Craven, Mr. Andrew Burnet,
and Mr. Alexander Thomson. Decree the Earls of Roxburgh, Haddington, Galloway,
and others, against the Earl of Lothian. Decree in favors of Mr. Thomas
Skeen. Protestation the Earl of Lothian, against the Earl of Roxburgh and
others. Act in favors of the Kings College of Old Aberdeen. Decree the
Coheirs of Carnock, against Nicolson of Tilly-Cultry. Act in favors of the
Children of the first marriage of the Earl of Melfort. Decree of Forefaulture,
against the Earls of Midleton^ Melfort, and Sir Adam Blair. Act in favors of
Colonel Hill. Reference the City of Edinburgh and Earl of Melvill.
Recommendation in favors of Sir David Carnegy of Pittarow. Recommendation in
favors of the Lord of Lundy. Act in favors of Gilbert Meuzies of Pitfoddels.
Act in favors of Mr. Thomas Craven, Mr. Andrew Burnet, and Mr. Alexander
Thomson. Act and remit the Town of Edinburgh and AEneas Mcleod. Act in favors
of James Lyel. Act in favors of Sir Alexander Hope of Kerse and others: Remit
Process of Forefaulture against the Rebels in France, depending before the
Parliament to the Justice Court. Order for apprehending Lieutenant Colonel
Hamilton. Order anent Mr. Alexander Barclay. Act anent Mr. Bernard Mckenzie.
Order anent Mr. Gilbert Ramsey. Act in favors of the Burgh of Cullen. Order
for re printing of the Act for the Supply. Address to His Majesty anent the
Slaughter of the Glencoe-men. Protection in favors of the Glencoe-men.
Recommendation in favors of the Lord of Grant. Act for a Manufactory of
White-paper. Order anent the Clerks and Collectors of Supply. Act and remit the
Lord of Rothemay and Abernethy of Mayens. Act in favors of the
Linen-manufactory. Act in favors of the Lord Frazer. Decree Sir John Dempster
of Pitliver, against the Earl and Countess of Seaforth. Remit in favors of the
Lady Dowager of Beilhaven. Remit Clara and Patricia Ruthvens, and Sir Alexander
Hope of Kers. Recommendation in favors of Alexander Duff of Braco.
Recommendation in favors of the Synod of Argile. Recommendation in favors of
the late Bishop of Argile. Order and Warrant anent John Dick and the Town of
Stirling. Recommendation in favors of Heriots Hospital. Act in favors of the
Lord of Hoptoun. Act and Commission for reviseing the Laws. Act in favors of
His Majesty's Advocat. Act in favors of the Town of Air. Act in favors of the
City of Aberdeen. Act in favors of the Town of Irwin. Act in favors of the
Lord of Colloden. Act in favors of the Earl Marischals College of Aberdeen.
Recommendation in favors of Sir Thomas Stewart of Kirkfield. Recommendation in
favors of Sir Colin Campbel of Abberuchil. Recommendation in favors of Duncan
Forbes of Culloden. Recommendation in favors of the Children of the first and
second Marriage of Sir Andrew Dick. Recommendation in favors of Elizabeth
Duncan and her Son. Recommendation in favors of Mrs. Gillespy. Recommendation
in favors of Captain Walter Lockhart of Kirktoun. Remit Mr. James Da^s and
James Hay of Carribber to the Session. Act and recommendation in favors of
James Bain. Remit in favors of James Crawfurd of Montquhanny, Sir Thomas
Kennedy, and others. Recommendation in favors of the Lord of Kilmaronock.
Remit in favors of the Lord of Glenkindy and Sir Adam Blair. Remit Mr.
Alexander Heggins and John Callender. Act in favors of George Baylie of
Ierviswood. Recommendation in favors of William Boig. Recommendation in
favors of the Lord of Culbin. Order the City of Edinburgh and the Lord of
Comistoun. Act in favors of the Lord of Langtoun. Act in favors of William
Beatty. Recommendation in favors of the Burgh of Fortross. Recommendation in
favors of John Spotswood. Decree in favors of Mrs. Lilias Stewart. Act in
favors of James Curry late Provost of Edinburgh. Act in favors of
Comb-makers. Act in favors of Alexander Fearn. Act in favors of William Scot
and John Heislop. Act anent the Earl of Broadalbane. Recommendation in favors
of the Macers and Keepers of the Parliament House. Act in favors of Robert
Douglass. Act in favors of John Adeir and Captain Slezer. Act in favors of
Whitefield Heyter, and others. Act in favors of the Heirs of Taylzie of
Mauldsly. Act for erecting a public Bank. Act in favors of the Burgh of
Dysart. Act in favors of the Burgh of Culross. Acts for several Fairs and
Weekly Mercats. Act and Ratification in favors of Sir John Hall of Dunglass.
Ratification in favors of the Chyrurgions and Chryurgion-Apothecaries of
Edinburgh. Protestation the Town of Edinburgh against the same. Ratification in
favors of the Nine Trades of Dundee. Protestation the Walkers and Litsters of
Dundee against the same. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Breichen.
Ratification in favors of the Candlemakers of Edinburgh. Ratification in
favors of the Walkers and Litsters of Dundee. Protestation the Town and Trades
of Dundee against the same. Ratification in favors of Alexander Spittel of
Leuchit. Ratification in favors of the Piriwig-makers of Edinburgh.
Ratification in favors of James Lindsay of Dovehill. Ratification in favors
of the Cowpers of Glasgow. Protestation the Town of Glasgow against the same.
Ratification in favors of William Rai^ly of Brunsfield. Ratification in
favors of the Lord of Rowallan. Ratification in favors of Sir William
Stewart of Castle-milk. Ratification in favors of the Viscount of Tarbat.
Protestation the City of Edinburgh against the same. Ratification in favors of
Sir James Falcon^r of Ph^sdo. Ratification in favors of William Cunningham
Brother to Gilbertfield, of the Lands of Kilbryde. Ratification in favors of
James Turner.
FINIS.
These are Allowing the Two Acts, past in Parliament on the Twenty second Day
of July, One thousand six hundred and ninety Years, in Favors of Sir Patrick
Home of Polwarth, now Lord Polwarth, to be Printed.

TARBAT, Cls. Registri.

ACT Rescinding the Forefaulture of Sir Patrick Home of Polwarth. Edinburgh,
July 22. 1690.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and LADY the KING and QUEENS Majesty's, and the ESTATES of
PARLIAMENT Considering, That the Meeting of the ESTATES of this Kingdom, In the
Claim of Right, Dated the Eleventh of April, One thousand six hundred eighty
and nine years, Have declared, that the causing Pursue and Forefault Persons
upon weak or frivolous Pretenses, or upon lame and defective Probation, is
contrary to Law; And also, that all Forefaultures are to be considered, and the
Parties laesed to be redressed: And having considered the Process of
Forefaulture led and deduced before the Three Estates of Parliament, upon the
twenty second of May, One thousand six hundred eighty and five years, against
Sir Patrick Home of Polwarth in absence, with the Decree and Doom of
Forefaulture following thereupon, and that the Pretenses insisted upon in the
said Process of Forefaulture, against the said Sir Patrick Home, Viz. His
meeting with the deceast Mr. Robert Martine, and other Persons at the Places
therein Lybelled, and discoursing with them of the extreme Hazard that
threatened the Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom; in
case James then Duke of York would succeed to the Crown, and of the Ways and
Methods then talked of in England, and such as might be taken in Scotland for
preventing the same, and for his exclusion from Succession to the Crown; are
weak and frivolous Pretenses, to infer the Crime of Treason* As Likewise, that
the Probation wa^ lame and defective, seeing it did confe^^ of the Depositions,
and Testimonies of Persons, who a little before hade been accused of the same
pretended Crimes, and who, after submission made, and when their Lives and
Fortunes were at the late Kings Mercy, had predetermined themselves by their
Confessions and Depositions then emitted; For albeit they were secured, as to
their Lives, when they deponed before the Parliament, yet they having emitted
their Declarations, when they were under the fear and apprehension of being
Forefaulted themselves, and when they renewed their Confessions before the
Parliament, they could make no alteration, unless they had declared themselves
to be perjured, they having only adhered to the very same Testimonies formerly
emitted, by them except the Earl of Tarras, who depons of new, and not upon his
Declaration formerly emitted, but proves nothing against the said Sir Patrick
Home. And also considering, that there is nothing proven by the Witnesses, in
habit, as they were against the said Sir Patrick, of his being upon, or privy
to any Design or Contrivance against the Person and Life of King Charles the
Second, and that the Testimonies do not concur and agree in any particular
Fact, which by the Common Law or Custom could infer the Crime of Treason
against the said Sir Patrick. And likeways having considered the Act of
Adjournal of the Justice Court, of the date the day of One thousand six hundred
eighty years, upon which the said Sir Patrick Home was denounced Fugitive, for
not compearance; and that there was no relaxation raised, until a few Days
before the diet of Compearance in Parliament; though neither he had the offer
of an Indemnity, nor was for the time in open Rebellion, so that he had not
tutus accessus, and that the said pretended Crimes, lybelled in the said Act
of Adjournal, are the same contained in the foresaid Sentence of Forefaulture
before the Parliament. Therefore, Their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of
the Estates of Parliament, Do hereby, by way of Justice, Rescind, Retreit,
Cass, and Annull, the foresaid Decree, and Sentence of Forefaulture,
pronounced against the said Sir Patrick Home, and all Gifts of Forefaulture, if
any be granted, by the late King James, of the said Sir Patrick his Estate, or
any part thereof, to any Person or Persons whatsomever: And the foresaid Act of
Adjournal, with all that has followed, or may follow thereupon: And declares
the said Decree and Sentence of Forefaulture, and Act of Adjournal to have
been from the beginning, to be now, and in all time coming void, null, and of
no avail, force, strength nor effect: and restores the said Sir Patrick Home,
his Children and Posterity against the same, in integrum; and Rehabilitating
them to their Blood-right, and Benefit of Succession, Name and Fame, sick-like,
and as freely in all respects, as if the said Decree and Doom of Forfaulture
had never been given, nor pronounced. Rescinding hereby the Act of Annexation
of the said Sir Patrick, his Estate to the Crown; and dissolving the same
therefrae. As also, Their Majesty's, with Consent foresaid, Decerns and
Ordains, all the Intrometters with the Lands, Rents, Goods and Gear, or other
Estate, moveable or immovable, pertaining and belonging to the said Sir
Patrick Home, to be liable for, and refound the famine to him, his Heirs,
Executors or Assigneys, and that Letters may be direct for that effect, in Form
as effeirs? And their Majesty's, and Estates of Parliament, Statute and Ordain,
that this present Act shall have full force, strength, and effect of a public
Law, in favors of the said Sir Patrick Home, and others aforesaid. And it is
hereby Declared, That this present Act is, and shall be understood to be
excepted from the Act Salvo Iure to be past in this present Parliament.

ACT Dissolving Sir Patrick Home of Polwarth his Estate from the Crown. July
22. 1690.
FOrasmuch as, by an Act and Sentence of this present Parliament, the Doom and
Sentence of Forefaulture, pronounced in anno One thousand six hundred eighty
and five, against Sir Patrick Home of Polwarth, is ex Iustitia, Reduced and
Rescinded: and that by an Act of the Sixteenth of June, One thousand six
hundred eighty and five, the Estate and Lands belonging to the said Sir Patrick
Home were formerly annexed to the Crown; Which Act of annexation is now also by
the said Act Reductive in his Favors, Rescinded, and declared void: Therefore,
and for the said Sir Patrick his more full and effectual Restitution, and
without any derogation to the said Act Reductive, in his Favors, but
accumulating Rights to Rights, Our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queens
Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, have
dissolved, and hereby dissolves from the Crown and Patrimony thereof, the Lands
and Barrony of Polwarth, the Lands and Barrony of Grein-Law and Reid-Path, with
the Right of Patronages, and whole Pertinents thereof; And Lands of with all
other Lands, Rights and Estate, pertaining to the said Sir Patrick Home, and
that in Favors of the said Sir Patrick himself, that he may bruick and enjoy
the same as if he himself had never been forefaulted, or as if the said Lands
and Estate had never been annexed. Declaring that this present Act shall have
the strength and effect of a General Law and Act of Parliament; and shall be als
Valid and Effectual to the said Sir Patrick, his Heirs and Successors, for
their Security of the whole Premises, as any other Act of Dissolution made and
enacted at any time bygone, in Favors of whatsomever Person: and conform to
all the Conditions required by Law, in Acts of that Nature. And farther, that
this present Act of Dissolution, is, and shall be understood to be excepted from
the Act Salvo Iure, to be past in this present Parliament.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by George Viscount of Tarbat,
Lord McLeod, and Castlehaven, etc. Clerk to the Parliament, and to his
Majesty's Councils, Registers and Rolls.
