THE DREADFUL and TERRIBLE VOICE of GOD Uttered From the Throne of his Justice;
As the Voice of a Mighty Thunder, and as the Voice of many Waters Rumbling.
ABout the twentieth'day of the tenth Month, 1660. soon after the twelfth hour
of the day, the Word of the Lord sprang up in me, which made the earthly part
to shake. And I was filled with the Words of his Holiness; and a necessity was
laid upon me from the Dreadful God, that made Heaven and Earth; To proclaim the
day of Judgment, and was made to go Bare-headed; and the Word of the Lord
Sounded through me: The Dreadful, and Terrible day of the Lord is coming
terrible; Terribly, Terribly will the Lord shake the Earth, and the Graves
shall open, and the dead shall rise and come to Judgment. And these words were
added: O Earth, Earth, Earth, Here the Word of the Lord, and all the
Inhabitants therein, awake, and ^and up to Judgment, For the hour of his
Judgenient is come; and the Lord will Plead through the Dark Clouds; and there
will be nothing able to cover in that day, but the Covering of the Spirit of
God. And further, the Word of the Lord was Sounded through me; Woe, Woe, Woe to
all the workers of Iniquity, they must all depart from the living God; and the
Vialls of the Wrath of the Almighty are to be poured forth upon the Sea, and
upon the Earth, and upon the Fountains of Waters: So all people upon the face
of the whole earth, fear God, and give glory unto his Name; and worship him who
made the Heavens and the Earth; whose Name is, The Lord of Hosts, who lives for
ever and ever: This was the Word of the Lord that passed through me, which
shall stand for ever.

And further, the Lord Revealed in a Vision, things that must shortly come to
pass: Two days after as I was lying in my Bed, Meditating upon my God, the
Dread of the Almighty came over me; the power of the Lord came so over me, that
I was bowed down by the Power of God; and as I was bound down by the Power, the
God of Israel appeared as in Mighty Thunders, which was exceeding terrible unto
me; I saw as if Chariots of fire, and the Hosts of Heaven Moving; and the Lamb
appeared with his Brightness, clearer than the Sun at Noonday; and the Light
shone about me, and I say an Innumerable Multitude which Assembled to the Mount
Sion, where the Lamb stood, with a Rod of Iron in, his Hand, who was to bruise
the Nations, (and to crumble them under his feet) that will not that he should
Reign: And behold, He uttered his Voice, and the Mountains trembled, and made
the Hills to shake, and all the Beasts of the Field to tremble: So that none
could endure his Voice, but they who were gathered into his Light; to them his
voice was sweet. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

And as I was lying, behold, in their streets I heard Joy and Mirth; but it is
that Mirth and Joy, that must be turned into Sorrow: For it Wounded my Soul,
and I was much smitten in the inward man; yet standing still in the patience,
and waiting to what the Lord would have done by me, the Word of the Lord sprung
up in me; Have I called you ^o Fasting, and Mourning, and Girding with
Sackcloath? but you call for Joy and Gladness, and Mirth, slaying of Oxen, and
killing of Sheep: Verily, Says the Lord God, This Iniquity shall not depart
from you, till ye die, unless ye speedily Repent. Thus says the Lord, Are you
feeding your selves for the Slaughter? This is the way to bring the Plague upon
you, feeding your lusts to the full. And further, the Lord has Revealed unto
me, what is to come upon these Nations; especially the Priests and Professors
of all sorts, under what name soever, whether Teachers of others, or Hearers,
that is not in the possession, Life and power of Righteousness; Such an
overturning as was not since Ezekiel did declare of the captivity to come; for
the Lord will overturn all your buildings, and all your false covers shall be
taken off: yea, He will shake all foundations which are not upon the Rock,
Christ, and shame shall cover the face of the Hypocrite; it will not be the Arm
of flesh that you have so long trusted in, neither the great Multitude of
Hosts, nor your Strength which you have so long Gloryed in, that will deliver
you; nay, your Strength shall be turned into Weakness, and your Glory into
shame, and the Lord will awake you by his Righteous Judgments; yea, Famine is
coming upon you; yea, a Famine of the Word, and of the Gospel, though you
preach your selves up, to be the Church of God, and Preach up the Sabbath in
the Shadow which in the Substance is the Rest which you are out of: And the
Lord made me a true Sign unto you; for as a Necessity was laid upon me, as to
go several days without my Hat, so will your Heads be open to the Storm and
Hail, and Tempest of Gods Eternal Wrath; it is surely to come upon all the
ungodly.

And further, The Lord laid a necessity upon me, both to Fast and to Mourn,
and to Gird with Sackcloth, and that for several days, that happily some
might consider.

For a Necessity was laid upon me, to Gird with Sackcloth upon my Loins, after
I had Fasted, and besought the Lord with Prayer, Tears, Sighs, and Groans; at
last the Lord cleared unto his Servant, what his Will was and I, was made
willing, through his Righteous Judgments, even freely to give up, Life and All;
and so went on in Obedience to the Motion of the Spirit of God, to the Town
Rippon, and there I was moved to be a Sign of the Downfall of Babilons Priests
and Professors: And when I came there, I girded Sackcloth upon my Loins, and
was to go bareheaded. And thus the Word of the Lord came unto me, This is a
Rebellious People, they will not hear my Word, (says the Lord) They have
rejected my Servants, and slighted those whom I sent unto them: Therefore have
I sent thee to be a Sign unto them. Fear not, go on, and prosper.

And I was moved to take up a Lamentation over them; Alas, your Calamity is
coming, and your Day is almost spent, and the Just Judgments of the Lord are
near to be executed. Thus I was made to go about the Market in Mourning over
them, till I came near to the Masse-house (called a Church) where I was made to
be a sign of their Fall, lying for several hours upon the Ground, with a
Stone under my Head, giving my back to the Smiter, and my Cheek to him that
pulled off the Hair, and Hundreds of People pressed about me; yet the Lord
sweetly preserved me, that I received no hurt; and I was moved to Lie the most
part of one Day: But the People that were Moderate and Tender were much
reached, the Witness of God being much raised in them, was made to say, There
is great work to be done.

And after I had finished my Testimony, I had Great Peace: So, Blessed are they
that know the Commands of Christ, and keep them, and are willing to follow him
where ever he goes, if it be to the laying down of the Life, such shall find
it again: I can say, that Scripture was fulfilled in me; for it was as death
unto me, till I was given up to do the will of God, in that service; but after
I was given up, the burden was light. (And so it is) For the Way of the Lord
is delightful to all the Faithful and Obedient.

So all sober people, consider your Ways, and while you have time, prize it,
and turn your minds to within, to the pure Light of Christ, which reveals
things to come, to all them that abide in it; yea, the Secrets of the Lord are
with them that fear him: and the Lord revealing this unto me, it lay upon me
for to give it forth that it might do its service, to whom it is sent, that
people may know, that the Lord has raised up Prophets in this Day, to warn the
people of the evil that is coming upon them, who live in Pride, covetousness,
Envy, and Wrath, and Cruelty, these be fruits of the corrupt Tree. And as your
Minds are kept to Gods pure Witness, you will see your selves, whether you be
but in the Profession, or you be in the possession: So nothing will stand you
instead, in the Day of Gods Trial, but the Life it self.

R.S.


A few words to the Mayor of London, so called.
RICHARD BROWN,
COme down to Gods Witness, the Light of Jesus Christ in thy Conscience, and
there Wait to receive in, the Wisdom of God to Order thee, and to Preserve thee
in Gods Feat, that the Witness of God may arise to stop thee from thy Rage and
Envy against the Righteous Seed, Lest thou bringst Innocent Blood upon thine
own Head: And this in Love unto thy Soul, I am made to lay before thee, that
thou may stay thy Hand from shedding Innocent Blood, lest so thou bringst
down the Judgment of God upon thine own Head. Stand still a little, and
Consider what thou art doing; we are an Innocent and Harmless People, who seek
the good of all Men: if we are Imprisoned, Persecuted or Abused, we leave all
unto the Lord, who will Avenge our Cause, and Plead our Innocence. So this is a
Warning to thee, before the Plague break forth upon thee, that thou may
Repent, and Turn to the Lord, before the Door of Mercy be shut. For the Lord
has given thee a Day to Try thee, and thou art Weighed in the Balance of
Equity, and art found too Light, and with the same Measure thou have Measured,
shall be met to thee when the Lord comes to Judgment; then must every one
receive according to his Works: So come down to that of God, and read thy
Portion. This is Written in tender love to thy Soul, that thou may Repent
and Live.

Which is given forth from the Spirit of Truth, from one who is a Sufferer; for
the Seed of God, till it be wholly gathered into Covenant with him; which seed,
is that which Breathes, and Hungers after Righteousness in any one.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill, in
Martins Le Grand.


