A DECLARATION OF THE COMMITTEE of ESTATES Of the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND, TO
THE Honorable Houses of the PARLIAMENT, And to all their Brethren of ENGLAND,
Concerning The Necessity, Grounds, and Ends of their Engagement, and of the
RETURN of the SCOTS ARMY into ENGLAND.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1648.

GOD save the KING
royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

A Declaration of the COMMITTEE of the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland,
To the Honorable Houses of the PARLIAMENT, and to all their Brethren of
England.
AFter so long a continuance of the sad calamities that have almost wasted
these three Kingdoms, and the uninterrupted endeavors of this Nation to have
all the causes of them removed; We cannot possibly express with what grief of
soul we find them still more likely to be increased than diminished; Neither
did any part of our former sufferings more deeply afflict us, then again to be
necessitated to Expressions and Actions, that by some will rather be looked
upon as Incentives of new troubles, then means to quiet and calm the present
distempers. Therefore we have thought fit to offer this ensuing Declaration to
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and to our Brethren of England, for
satisfaction of all religious, loyal and honest men; that Heaven and Earth may
bear witness with us of the necessity of our Engagement and undertakings at
this time, and of the candor of our Intentions and Resolutions.

After that by the blessing of God upon the endeavors of this Nation and their
Armies at home and in England in two several Expeditions, a happy Peace was
settled, Religion and the just Liberties of this Kingdom established, a
Parliament called in England, and great progress made toward the redress of
all grievances, and reforming abuses both in Church and State: It pleased the
Lord again to call us to new troubles: For the differences betwixt the King and
Parliament being increased and heightened into a bloody War, the many Addresses
of this Kingdom to His Majesty and the two Houses for an amicable composure of
differences having proved fruitless and ineffectuall, and the Parliament
reduced to a low condition, This Kingdom was invited to the assistance of their
Brethren, large Professions by them were made of their desires of unity and
uniformity in Religion, of a nearer conjunction with this Kingdom, and the
dangers were fully represented to us of a prevailing Party in England,
different from us in Religion and Church Government: It was then acknowledged,
that the same fate in Religion attended both: And because it was well known,
that although unhappy differences had arisen betwixt his Majesty and his
Subjects of this Kingdom, yet Scotland could never be drawn into any action
against His Majesty, or that fidelity and subjection which they owe to Him and
his Posterity; large professions were therefore made by the two Houses of their
loyalty to their King, whose greatness and authority they professed they never
intended to diminish, as may more fully appear in the several Declarations;
Commissioners were sent into this Kingdom, Invitations renewed, a Treaty made,
and a Covenant solemnly signed and sworn for Reformation and defense of
Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, and the peace and safety of
the Kingdoms.

Thus both Kingdoms were equally and mutually engaged, and in pursuance of the
Covenant and Treaty an Army marched into England in the hardest Season; and
both Kingdoms in their joynt-Declaration, Jan. 6. 1643/4. obliged themselves
and decreed never to lay down Arms, till Truth and Peace by the blessing of God
were settled in this Island upon a firm foundation for the present and future
Generations. Although we shall not mention what success that Army had, what
Blood they lost both in Scotland and England, what hardships they endured, and
how much this Kingdom was thereby impoverished: yet we cannot but remember,
how that by the blessing of God upon the joint Councels and Forces of both
Kingdoms, the two Houses of Parliament were recovered into a condition of
making good those Engagements, and with what unity both Kingdoms proceeded
toward the attaining of those Ends, until that Party in the Houses, who since
have declared themselves Independents (who seemed forward in the engaging of
this Kingdom, and at first professed greatest care of our Army) had attained to
power, discovered their intentions, and interrupted all these fair beginnings,
They created and fomented jealousies against the Scots, and by their influence
on the two Houses cashiered all in England by Sea and Land, how eminent, how
faithful soever, that they could not confide in; And by the success of their
new-modelled Army, for the most part Sectaries, they engrossed all power
Military and Civil into their own and their Creatures hands: the Propositions
formerly agreed on by both Kingdoms and treated on at Vxbridge, were altered;
yet this Kingdom and those employed by them were content so far to deny
themselves and their own interests, as to wave the Propositions most
advantageous to Scotland, and for witnessing their desire of Peace, to join in
those framed by the two Houses, where the Independents had got such a power:
And for the greatest testimony of our confidence in the Honorable Houses of
Parliament (notwithstanding the many injuries and discouragements received in
England from the then and still prevailing party in the English Army and their
Abetters, who were grown Anti-Covenanters, and threatened a disappointment of
all the Ends of the Covenant) upon the public faith of the Houses, given to us
for the preservation and safety of His Majesty's sacred person, and of making
joint addresses to His Majesty for settling a safe and well-grounded Peace, and
free access of all employed by this Kingdom to his Majesty, the Armies of
Scotland returned from England, and left the King with the English
Commissioners; most of our Army were immediately thereafter disbanded, and no
more kept on foot but so many as were necessary for reducing some Scots Rebels,
and Irish, Subjects of the Crown of England (whom by the large Treaty England
was bound to reduce) We expected that the like course would have been taken for
disbanding of the Armies in England, and none kept on foot but such as were
necessary for the Garrisons and safety of the Kingdom, (there being then no
professed Enemy in Arms) and those to have been such as both Kingdoms might have
confided in, for affection to Religion and Monarchy: whereunto the Honorable
Houses of Parliament did effectually apply themselves, as appears by their
Declaration of the 28. of May 1647. But the Independent party were as diligent
to hinder it; First by contriving and procuring a Petition from the Army
against their disbanding, which by the Houses was Voted mutinous, and the
Abetters of it enemies to the State, 200000 l. was provided and Commissioners
sent down to the Army for disbanding it, and engaging a considerable Supply for
Ireland under the Command of Generall-Major Skippon, and Lieut. General
Massey, 167 Presbyterian Officers engaged for Ireland and gave obedience to the
commands of the Parliament: but on a sudden, the Sectaries of that Army drew
themselves together, entered into a solemn Engagement against the Resolutions of
the Parliament, cashiered all the Prerbyterian Officers who had adhered to the
Parliament or subscribed for Inland, placed Sectaries in their Charges, erected
a supreme Council of Agitators, and then grew indeed into a complete new
Model: Soon thereafter, a Party out of several Regiments, (commanded by a
Tailor, a Cornet of theirs, one Joyce) violently seized on the Person of the
King, and carried him from his house at Holdenby, against his own will and the
Protestation of the Commissioners then attending upon him, and against the
declared resolutions of both Kingdoms: and though this action was at first
disavowed by the GENERAL, yet it appears to have been done by some underhand
Warrant; for the King was kept still within the Army's Quarters, strong Guards
placed about him; and when the Houses thought fit to command the Army not to
come within thirty miles of London, and to Vote his Majesty's coming to
Richmond, They by threatening Messages forced the recalling of these Votes, and
carried the King along with them to Hatsield and other places at their
pleasure. The Houses did then justly think it necessary to look to their own
preservation, lest they should be served as his Majesty was: And upon the 11.
of June 1647. they appointed a Committee of Safety to meet with the Militia of
London, and consider upon the preservation of the Parliament and City, the
great work of the Army being to New-model the Parliament as well as they had
done Themselves, and to subdue and enslave that great and glorious City: In
order whereunto, they first began with a false and frivolous general Charge
against diverse Members of the Houses, eminent for affection and actions in this
Cause, and violently pressed their suspension from the House; but upon a full and
free debate it was Voted to be against the Law, to suspend any Member upon a
general Charge, without bringing in and proving of particulars. This procedure
did not fit the Armies occasions: Therefore by several threatening Messages,
That they would march to Westminster, That they would purge the House, and that
they must take extraordinary courses, They force the Houses to recall their
Votes for a Committee of safety, to disband what forces they had drawn together
under Presbyterian Officers, they compel the eleven Members to withdraw from
their attendance in the House, And the Militia of London at the unanimous
desire of the Common-Counsel, being then settled in the hands of such persons as
the City might most conside in, the Army to perfect their designs upon them,
enforces the Houses to a new model of that Militia. Having thus in their power
the Person of His Majesty, and having overawed the Parliament and City they
disperse themselves in the several Counties about London, list and raise daily
more forces, and revolves to settle, or rather to alter and subvert Religion
and Government after their own will, as is held forth in their Proposalls,
which they first presented to His Majesty, and afterward sent them to the
Houses, as that which they would have the ground of Peace: But the City was so
enraged at the change of the Militia, that they came down to Westminster to
petition against it, and the Prentices (who had learned from the Army the
powerfullest Arguments to persuade) came in multitudes and pressed the granting
of the Common-Counsells Petition. Thus on the 26th of July 1647, the Houses
again settled the Militia as formerly, many in London entered into an in
Engagement, but the Militia of London quieted all Tumults, settled orderly
guards, and the next day the House of Commons sat quietly; yet it was resolved
by that party that the two Speakers and the friends of the Army should fly
thither, which they did: The Houses notwithstanding sat, choosed new Speakers,
revived the Committee of safety, and put themselves in a posture of defense,
and upon the desires of the Commissioners of this Kingdom, they invited His
Majesty to come to London with Honor, Freedom and Safety. The Army drew
together, refused to own the Parliament, declared against them, printed their
own Proposalls, cried out against a new War, And in the mean time them and
their friends that lied to them, being engaged by a writing to live and die
together, marched up against the Parliament and City, who seemed to have been
in a readiness to oppose them, until by the endeavors of some, that were
better friends to the Sectaries; then to the Parliament and City, by their many
adresses to the Army and returns, the City was surrendered, and the Sectaries
having ^rought up the Speakers and Members that fled to them, marched in
triumph through London with Laurells in their hats; Sir Thomas Fairfax was made
Captain-Generall of all England, Constable of the Tower of London and Commander
of all the Garrisons in England; he put out an honest faithful Citizen, and
put in a Sectary Livetenant of the Tower, and then they fell afresh upon the
purging of the House (as they called it) Seven Lords were impeached of a new
pretended Treason, the eleven Members forced to fly, and after a fourtnights
debate, and being often carried in the negative (for a little Liberty yet
remained) At last by a threatening Declaration from the Army, and the Sword-mens
coming into the House, all Orders past in absence of the old Speakers, were
repealed and some of the activest of the Houses, the Lord Major, three honest
Aldermen and d^vers Common-Counsellours of London charged and imprisoned, the
Officers of the City altered, and all upon general accusations for raising a
new War; but indeed really for being zealous for the ends of the Covenant and
for defense of the Privileges, yea the being of the Parliament, against the
violence and insolence of this Shismatick Army.

The liberty of the Parliament being thus destroyed by their own Servants,
contrary to their many professions, the famous City of London enslaved to
Sectaries, and not only those privileges taken from them, which by their
faithfulness to the Parliament, and with the expense of so much Blood and
Treasure they had merited, but even their ancient Liberties troaden on, and all
things governed at Westminister and London according to order from the Court of
War, who also by a reigning spirit of Levelling Democraty, were, or seemed to
be overruled be the new-supreme Counsel of Agitators, who had been Soldiers
and now were turned superlative Commanders: As the labor of the Independent
Junto, was to court the people and the soldiery by Declarations and
engagements (which they as soon falcified) and even to trade with the Papists
(as was informed) so they studied to interest the Kings party, and cajolled
some of them to purpose that were most obnoxtious to the Parliament, and
excepted in the Propositions: But they soon manifested to the World, what their
intentions were to the King, for after they had made use of the detaining of
His Majesty's Person in their Army, and of pretending for His interests and
party to enable them to subdue the Parliament and City; That work being over,
they first grew severer to His party (except such as they still made very good
use of) and then endeavored by threatening to fright him away from
Hampton Court; The power of the Levellers was much talked of until His
Majesty was sure in the I Will of Wight, and then their Lievetenant-Generall
found a means to quiet them: In the I Will of Wight they first made His Majesty
Prisoner, without any known authority, and then got the Houses to own and order
it, And by the prevalency of the Independent party, Votes were past making
another kind of new high Treason, to make any application to the King, to write
to him, or receive letters from him (a severity greater then is usual against
malefactors) and for justifying of these votes, a Declaration was published,
with many false scandals cast upon his Majesty, and it is even declared they
will put no more trust in his Majesty, yea now we are informed, that by horrid
treachery and poison, endeavors are used to take away his life.

As that Independent party, has endeavored to subvert the begun Reformation
of Religion, to destroy the King and Monarchy, and overthrow the Parliament,
and persecute honest men, so it has been their study even since the removal
of the Scots Army, to break the happy union betwixt the kingdoms, to lay aside
the Covenant, disappoint all the ends of it, and violate all treaties betwixt
the kingdoms; we shall not need to repeat the jealousies they created and
fomented against Scotland, and the Scots Commissioners; and our Army, whilst it
was there, how they withheld the maintenance from them due by the Treaty, that
by free quarters they might grow burdensome and odious to the people, nor need
we now to mention any violation of the large Treaty concerning the remainder of
money due upon the Brotherly assistance, nor of the money due by Treaty for our
Army in Ireland, or by the late Treaty upon the march of our Army; nor shall We
now insist on the Breach of that Article of the large Treaty, by which the
Houses were obliged to pursue, take, and punish the Irish Rebels, Subjects of
the Crown of England, who so long infested us: We have already declared what
Breaches they have made of the solemn engagements for the King, and when our
Commissioners at London demanded whither the votes against all application to
his Majesty, did extend to his Subjects of Scotland, to debar such as are
warranted by the Parliament of this kingdom, or their Committes from free
access to, or intercourse with his Majesty, or that he should be hindered from,
and so made incapable of any Act of Government, in relation to the Affairs of
Scotland? No Answer was then nor as yet is returned thereunto, but before that
time, not only such as had warrants for access to him were debarred thereof,
notwithstanding of the engagement of the House 27. of January 1647. to the
contrary; But even the Earl of Lawderdaill a public Minister of this kingdom,
contrary to that engagement, and to the Law of Nations, was violently removed
by a party of the Army from Woburn, where his Majesty then was, and not
suffered to have access to him, and though reparation was therein desired by
the last Committee of Estates, yet none was given; And although by the 8.
Article of the Treaty 1643. It is agreed that no cessation, pacification, nor
agreement for peace whatsoever shall be made by either kingdom, or the Armies
of either kingdoms, without the mutual advice and consent of both kingdoms,
which engagement the Houses of Parliament also repeated in their letter of the
27. of January 1647. to observe that Article after the removal of our Army out
of England; yet contrary thereunto the Sectaries and their adherents framed
proposals destructive to the ends of the Covenant, which were presented to his
Majesty without the advice or consent of the kingdom of Scotland, and having
cunningly inserted therein some things more pleasing to his Majesty, then the
propositions of both kingdoms were, it was their study to persuade his Majesty
in his answer to the Propositions at Hampton Court, to throw himself on the
proposals, and thereby unsatisfy both his kingdoms, which as soon as the King
had done, they themselves laid them aside and used his Majesty as we have
before expressed. And whereas the Houses of Parliament, whilst in liberty, made
it their work, first to disband the Army, before any applications to be made to
his Majesty, the Independent Army having the King within the quarters of their
Army, and the City reduced, pressed vehemently the sending of the Propositions of
both, kingdoms, whilst themselves were fastest trinketing with their Proposals;
a short and peremptory day: was set for delivery of the Propositions, without
the advice or consent of the Commissioners of the kingdom of Scotland then at
London; and Instructions given, That if the Scots Commissioners were not there
present at that day, the Propositions nevertheless should be delivered without
them: And as we have great reason to believe, that it was the study of the
Sectaries and those that were their Instruments in that Treaty, that His
Majesty should not satisfy his Parliaments by his Answer; yet upon that
Answer, by the power and prevalencie of that Party, the Houses of Parliament
laid aside the Propositions agreed on by both Kingdoms, and have (contrary to
the Treaty) framed and presented Propositions and Bills to His Majesty, against
which the Commissioners of this Kingdom declared, and thereafter by order
according to their Instructions protested against them in the Isle of Wight, as
being destructive to Religion, the Crown, and union of the Kingdoms, as may at
large be seen in that printed Answer to the new Propositions, which the
Parliament here have owned and approved as the sense of this Kingdom, and which
we hold as here repeated:

The Parliament of this Kingdom taking into their consideration the dangers
thus threatening Religion, His Majesty's sacred Person and Posterity, yea
Monarchy and all Government; how that by the injustice, violence and treachery
of the Independents and their adherents in Parliament and Army, the Covenant
was laid aside, all the ends of it frustrated, Toleration countenanced and by
the new Propositions endeavored to be settled, His Majesty imprisoned and such
height of insolences committed against him, The privileges, yea the being of
the Parliament being in a manner destroyed, and the foundations of it razed,
The famous City of London (to whom this Nation and all that are faithful in
this Cause must needs acknowledge so great obligations) enslaved, its Liberties
trodden on, and many of the best affected to the Covenant, in Parliament and
City, for their fidelity persecuted and driven away, The Treaties with and
engagements to this Nation broken, The public Faith of England, yea almost all
Laws divine and humane violated, The people of England oppressed with
Free Quarter and Taxes, and the union and brotherly correspondence betwixt the
Kingdoms much weakened and endeavored to be taken away; And being very
sensible of the many injuries and affronts done to this Nation, their Army, and
those employed by them; weighing also well how fruitless all their endeavors
by way of Treaty and Messages for curing those evils and removing those
differences had proven, and how little regard was had to our Commissioners and
their endeavors at London of late, Thought it high time to look to their own
preservation, and to put this Kingdom into a posture of Arms. Yet before any
further Engagement, they resolved to try, if by the Three just and necessary
Demands of the 26. of April made to the Houses of Parliament, it were possible
in an amicable way to compose those differences and provide for the security of
Religion, of His Majesty, and of the peace and union of the Kingdoms: To the
which had a satisfactory Answer been returned, all the Inconveniences that may
ensue, might have been prevented, which we have still since that time patiently
expected.

But in stead of security to Religion according to the Covenant against the
dangers on all hands; In stead of freeing His Majesty from his base
imprisonment, that he may come to some of his houses in or near London with
Honor, Freedom and Safety, where both Kingdoms may make their applications to
him for settling Religion and a well-grounded Peace; In stead of disbanding the
Army of Sectaries, by whose power and tyranny all those evils are come upon
us, and further threaten us, without taking any notice at all of what upon so
just and necessary grounds we demanded, without any reparation given of the
many injuries done to this Kingdom and those employed by them, or any Answer
to that demand made by our Commissioners, Whether it was intended that His
Majesty should be debarred from exercising any act of Government in relation
to this Kingdom, Or whether Scots men employed and allowed by Scotland might
have free access to him: In stead (we say) of all these, we have received
three Propositions to be presented to His Majesty, that after His Majesty
assent thereto, and to such Acts of Parliament as shall be offered by both
Houses for confirmation thereof, then both Houses will treat with his Majesty,
(without telling him or us, where or with what security to either) concerning
the future settlement of the Government of the Church, and the settlement of
the Militia, and the rest of the Propositions formerly tendered at
Hampton Court; And a desire from the English Commissioners residing here, for
us to prepare such Propositions as we shall judge fit and necessary for this
Kingdom, that they may be sent to His Majesty with all convenient speed: They
did also communicate to us some Votes of the two Houses; and the Committee of
Estates told them, That they could return no Answer, till first they received
satisfaction to the Demands of this Kingdom of the 26. of April, And these are
as little satisfied, Religion, the King and his Kingdoms as little secured, and
the solid grounds of a Religious and good Peace, as little provided for now as
formerly.

We shall not much insist on the particulars of these three Propositions: Our
Commissioners did on some of them so fully express themselves, especially that
of the Militia, in their late Answer to the Propositions, before they went to
the I Will of Wight (which we here hold as repeated) But we cannot conceal, how
very unsatisfactory that concerning Religion is; and we are sorry to see other
Interests still so carefully provided for, and so little security to Religion,
which indeed was the main and principal cause of our Engagement in the late
wars. In these Propositions we still find the Covenant omitted, one end of it
only mentioned by way of Narrative, and the Propositions for Uniformity
according to the Covenant, with all the other Propositions of Religion left to
the future Treaty, and all that is now desired, is, That Presbyteriall
Government be confirmed by Act of Parliament in such manner as both Houses of
Parliament have agreed in several Ordinances of Parliament, That is to say,
etc. The Commissioners of the Parliament and General Assembly of this Kingdom
have several times expressed their sense of these Ordinances, which we shall not
here repeat: But we doubt this new etc. be of a larger extent, and relates to
that impious Toleration settled by both Houses, so contrary to Covenant, so
destructive to the ends of it, and for ought we know not yet repealed, against
which this Kingdom has so fully declared in the forementioned Answer to the
new Propositions: for it was then brought in as a part of the Proposition for
settling Presbyteriall Government, as the way that both the Houses then agreed
to: And seeing the same over-awing power continues, which first brought in that
Toleration avowedly, we have reason to apprehend it still remains, but is now
covered and rolled up in this new etc. And we have the greater reason to be
unsatisfied, that Presbyteriall Government is only demanded for three years,
and in the end of the Propositions it is professed, that the Houses will treat
with his Majesty concerning the future settlement of the Government of the
Church, without relating to the Covenant as a rule of the Government, or the
Propositions formerly agreed upon by both Kingdoms, but in such a general as
may overthrow all the Reformation established, and open a door to Hierarchy or
Anarchy, to Episcopacie or Independencie, and to Toleration, All abjured in our
solemn Covenant.

And seeing no satisfaction is given to the so just and necessary demands of
the Parliament of the 26 of April, either for Religion or the Kings Majesty,
but that Religion is still in as much hazard as ever, the King still
barbarously detained in his base imprisonment, and as we are credibly informed,
daily in hazard of his life by Treachery and Poison, and that Army of Sectaries
(the great cause of all our evils and dangers) still kept up, strengthened, and
a great part of it now marched close to our Border: Though this Kingdom shall
never be averse from giving and receiving mutual satisfaction by Treaty; yet
we cannot agree to these Propositions, nor join with the two Houses in
presenting of them to His Majesty, whilst neither King nor Parliament enjoy
their liberties. THEREFORE we can no longer, as unconcerned spectators, be
witnesses to the loss and ruin of all, which by the oath of God that lies
upon us in our solemn League and Covenant, and by many other obligations, we
are bound to endeavor to preserve: And the ends being now the same for which
we were invited, and in prosecution whereof we lost so much Blood, did undergo
so many hardships, and so much impoverished our own country, and being engaged
by the joint Declaration of both kingdoms, never to lay down Arms, till Truth
and Peace be settled in the Island, upon a firm foundation for the present, and
future Generations, being also invited thereunto by many of that kingdom joined
in Covenant with us. Our forces are again in England, and in discharge of our
duties to God, our Native King, our own country, and our Brethren in England,
we have undertaken this so necessary engagement, in prosecution of those just,
pious and loyal ends, to which we are so solemnly sworn. And although we have
not at all departed from our good old Principles, and that our Demands and
Desires are contained in our several Declarations, Papers, and addresses this
time past to the Houses of Parliament, yet seeing by the malice of our enemies,
many false and scandalous aspersions are cast upon us, our Actions and
intentions traduced, and jealousies raised in the minds of many good (though
too credulous) men both at home annd abroad; for satisfaction of all that are
satisfiable, and to witness the sincerity of our intentions and resolutions,
we shall here repeat our most material desires, and the grounds of our
undertakings.

1. We declare before God and all the world, that we are resolved sincerely,
really and constantly, to maintain and preserve inviolably with the hazard of
our Lives and Fortunes, and all that is dearest unto us the Reformation of
Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, as it is by the
mercy of God, and his Majesty's goodness established by Law amongst us; and
never to suffer it by fraud or force to be taken from us, nor yet to endure the
bringing in of Episcopacy, the Book of Common Prayer, or any other of these
Innovations and Superstitions, thrown out of this Church, (as some have bin so
impudent to aver) And also with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy,
in our places and callings, to the uttermost of our power faithfully to
endeavor the confirming what is already done in the work of Reformation,
establishing the Covenant, and attaining all the ends of it in England and
Ireland, particularly Reformation of Religion and Uniformity according to the
Covenant.

2. We do also declare that we will endeavor the Rescue of his Majesty's
Person from his base imprisonment, that he may come with Honor, Freedom and
Safety to some of his own Houses in or near London, that the Parliaments of
both kingdoms may make their applications to him for obtaining his Royal
Assent to such desires as shall be by them presented to him, for establishing
Religion as is above expressed; and settling a well-grounded Peace, that so his
Majesty may live in the Splendour and Glory of his Royal Progenitors, as
beseems his Royal Place and Dignity. That all differences and troubles may
end in mutual confidence and rejoicing, the King may enjoy the comfort of his
Royal Consort and children, with other contentments. And We after so great
distractions and long continued sufferings may reap the blissed fruits of Truth
and Peace under his Government. For however the late procedure of this
kingdom, may have been misunderstood, yet God knows that we have never
admitted of any thoughts to the prejudice of our Gracious Sovereign, his Person
and Government, to whom we pray that the Lord would grant a long and happy
Reign, and that there may not want one of his seed to rule over us rightly, and
to sit upon his Throne, while the Sun and the Moon endures.

3. That the two Houses of Parliament may be restored to their Freedom, that
all Members who have been faithful to this Cause, may freely and safely attend
their charges; That the Parliament being Masters of their own Counsels and
Results, they may together with the advice and consent of the kingdom of
Scotland, conclude in a Treaty with his Majesty, all other things expedient to
a thorough setlement.

4. That the City of London, which has expended so much in Blood and Treasure,
may have their former Propositions presented to the King at Oxford and
Newcastle, and pressed as was formerly intended.

5. That the Army of Sectaries under the command of The Lord Fairfax of Camron
be disbanded, and none employed either in relation to the prosecution of the
War in Ireland, or the necessary Garrisons and forces, but such as have or
shall take the Covenant, and are well affected to Religion and Government, that
so the people of England may be eased of taxes, free quarter, and other great
Impositions under which they have so long groaned.

6. And although the interest of Religion, King and Kingdoms, and the settling
of a solid Peace, be the cause of this undertaking: yet we do not doubt but due
regard will be had to the concernments of Scotland contained in our several
former demands, both in relation to what is due to this Kingdom and their
Armies here and in Ireland, as also what is necessary for the better safety,
union and Government of the Kingdoms.

We have now expressed the true grounds and reasons of this Engagement, and the
Ends we propose to our selves. And we do expect that none, who will not
declare themselves Enemies to God, the King, the Parliament, and peace of these
kingdoms, will oppose us in this so pious and necessary an undertaking: And
therefore we hope all jealousies and misunderstandings w^ll be laid aside, and
that we shall meet with a hearty concurrence, both of all the Subjects of this
kingdom and our Brethren of England. And we do declare, That it shall be our
endeavor to protect in their persons and goods, all of the English Nation, who
shall join in Covenant with us, and for prosecution of those Ends: and that we
do no prejudice nor use violence to none (as far as we are able) but such as
oppose us or those Ends above mentioned. Particularly we shall endeavor, that
the Arrears due to all Soldiers who have served the Parliament of England in
this Cause (excepting such as have engaged and abetted the Army in their
courses, and shall not immediately desert them) may have their accounts
audited, part of the Arrears paid, and security for the rest with full
indemnity.

And because our Army will be necessitated to live upon the Country, until a
Regular course be taken for their maintenance: We do declare, that it shall
be our care, that they carry themselves as soberly, and be as little
burdensome as is possible; and before we return, we shall labor to see the
Northern Counties satisfied for what extraordinary burdens they sustain.

To conclude, We declare before God and the world, That we resolve by Gods
assistance in all our proceedings never to break on our parts the union betwixt
the kingdoms, nor to encroach upon the National rights of the Subjects of
England, or entrench upon their just Liberties: much less is it our intention
at all to make a National enengagement against the Parliament and kingdom of
England, but for them, whose freedom, privileges, and happiness, shall ever
be as dear to us as our own; And our desires being provided for and secured,
then immediately our Army shall depart the kingdom of England, and return
peaceably home again; whereof we have twice already given real testimonies, our
intentions being ever the same with our professions, resolving still to
continue steadfast in the prosecution of them, for the accomplishment whereof we
shall be ready to sacrifice both our Lives and Fortunes.

ARCH. PRIMEROSE.

FINIS.

