THE DECLARATION OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, CONCERNING The present Expedition
into England, according to the Commission and Order of the Convention of
Estates, from their meeting at Edinburgh, August 1643.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1643.

THe Committee of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Ordaines the
following Declaration to be forthwith printed both in English and Latin.

Archbald Primerose. royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSEThe DECLARATION of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
IT is now, we suppose, known to the Christian world, and will be known to
after ages, what have been the dangers and distresses of this Kirk and
Kingdom, in their Religion and Liberties; What their endeavors and wrestlings
have been for deliverance, and how mercifully and marvellously the good hand of
God did settle their Religion and Peace, against the devices, attempts and
practices of Papists, Prelates and Malignants: who, had they not been given up
to incurable blindness and hardness of heart, would have seen and
acknowledged the hand of God working against them, and themselves fighting
against God. But these enemies of all righteousness, full of all subtilty and
mischief, do not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord. Their great
project and main design against the Reformed Religion and People of God, is
not altered, but continues one and the same: their fury and malice is not
abated, and their plots and policies deeper, and more wicked then before; only
finding their fraud frustrated, and their forces beaten back upon one side;
they have with new stratagems, fresh resolutions, and greater power, assaulted
another part of the wall, and have made the breach so wide and large, that they
have entered, and begun to roar in the midst of the Congregations of Gods
People, and are setting up their Ensigns for Signs, which to the unspeakable
grief of all who are not both void of Grace, and deprived of natural
affection, is to be seen this day in miserable Ireland, and distressed England;
and, unless it be prevented by their timeous and speedy deliverance, shall
(we know not how soon) be seen and felt in this Kingdom; where, as the
enemies did begin, so shall they end this bloody, barbarous, and Antichristian
tragedy, if the Authors be not interrupted and driven from the Stage, before
they bring it to their intended conclusion and hellish applause.

It is we confess, no small comfort to this Kirk and Kingdom, that we have
been willing and ready by all good means from the beginning, to quench this
unnatural fire; all who have had place and public interest, the Lords of his
Majesty's privy Council, the Commissioners for conserving the peace, and the
General Assembly of this Kirk and their Commissioners, having with all care
and faithfulness applied themselves from time to time, to use all good means;
such as are their humble desires, their Supplications, Declarations and
Remonstrances to his Majesty for a blessed Pacification: And after all these
had proved ineffectuall, Commissioners were sent to represent, how much this
Kirk and Kingdom from their interest in the preservation of their own
Religion, the safety of his Majesty's Person, and their near relation to their
Brethren of England, were concerned in the unhappy differences, betwixt his
Majesty and the houses of Parliament, and in all humility and tenderness, to
make offer of their mediation and national intercession, for removing them in
such a way as might most serve for his Majesty's honor, and the good of his
people; but after long attendance, much contrary to their desires and hopes,
and to the expectation of all his Majesty's good Subjects in both Kingdoms (so
prevalent were the Counsels of the Popish Prelaticall, and malignant party,
apprehending their own troubles and misery, in the public peace and happiness
of the King and his People) the offer of their humble service and faithful
endeavors, was utterly refused and rejected, upon no other reason, but that
they had no warrant nor capacity for such a mediation, although authorized by a
Commission from his Majesty and Parliament for that effect; and that the
intermixture of the government of the Church of England with the civil
government, was such a mystery as could not be understood by them; although it
be true which was then often replied, that in the eighth demand of the Treaty
of Peace, the desire of uniformity in Kirk-government was kindly entertained,
and received such an answer, as has been since a door of hope to this Kirk and
Kingdom of obtaining their desires; and although the Houses of Parliament, who
are best acquainted with the constitution of that Kingdom, and whom it most
concerned, have passed their Bill, for abolishing of Episcopal government, not
only as a great impediment to the perfect Reformation and growth of Religion
(which in a Christian Kingdom is a sufficient ground) but also, as very
prejudicial to the civil State and Government.

The Commissioners having returned from Oxford without success, and the
miseries of Ireland, the troubles of England, and the dangers and pressures of
this Kingdom more and more increasing; the Lords of his Majesty's Council,
the Commissioners for conserving the Peace, and the Commissioners for the
Common burdens, all entrusted with the public affairs of the Kingdom
respectively, found themselves pressed above their place and power, with
difficulties, which required the Common Counsel, consent and resolution of the
Estates of the Kingdom, and were necessitate according to the practice of
former times (his Majesty having denied a Parliament, being supplicated for
that effect) to call a Convention of the Estates, that by their wisdom they
might consider of the Common duty, and provide for the public safety of the
Kingdom, in a time of such extremity. No sooner did the Convention of Estates,
which was met with more then ordinary frequency and alacrity, enter into
public consultation, but the good providence of God still watching over this
Country for good, did bring to their hand, a discovery of diverse treacherous
attempts, against the Kirk and Kingdom; as if the Convention had been called
to receive Information of the dangers, and to provide remedies, for the safety
of the public. Like as the dangers discovered unto them, were made publicly
known, and with the advice of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, the
remedies also were a greed upon, and published in print.

Amongst these remedies a chief one was, to consider of the renewing of a
League and Association with England, for defense of Religion, and the mutual
peace of the Kingdoms against the common Enemy, and how far the same might
be extended against Prelacie and Popish Ceremonies for uniformity in
Kirk-government, and the external Worship of God, as is more fully expressed
in the Remonstrance of the remedies of the dangers of Religion. But before the
Convention of Estates had entered upon this grave consideration Commissioners
came from both Houses of the Parliament of England, warranted and authorized to
propound their desires of the same union and strait Conjunction of the two
Nations, against Papists, and Prelates, with their adherents; and to consider
with the Estates of this Kingdom, of such Articles or Propositions, as might
make the assistance and union betwixt the two Nations more beneficial and
effectual for the common security of Religion and Liberty. Upon the
manifestation of this concourse of the strong inclinations and desires of the
Estates of both Kingdoms, with which the General Assembly, did most
unanimously and heartily join their desires, counsels, and prayers, a
Committee of the Convention of Estates, and a Committee of the General
Assembly, were appointed to meet with the Comissioners of the Houses of
Parliament, for considering the best and readiest ways, by which these common
desires and conceptions might be ripened and brought forward toward perfection,
and (if it were possible) to birth and action, for the comfort of both
Kingdoms, in Religion and Peace. These three Committees after some meetings
for debate and deliberation, did resolve in end, that, according to the
commendable practice of the two Kingdoms in former times of distress and
danger, the example of the People of God in other Nations, in the like case;
and the late example of the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, the best and most
effectual means for preserving Religion, and both Kingdoms from utter ruin
and destruction, and for procuring Peace, and all other blessings, were: That
both Kingdoms enter into a solemn League and Covenant to be sworn and
subscribed by his Majesty's Subjects of all degrees in both Kingdoms, who love
the true Protestant, reformed Religion, His Majesty's honor and safety, and
their own happiness: And therefore they did with common consent agree upon the
fist lineaments and principal parts of a Covenant, to be offered to the view,
and to be considered by the wisdom of the full Assembly of the Kirk, and
Convention of Estates, which, how soon it was presented unto them, and read
once and again in their audience, did so affect their hearts, that the fire
which had made them to melt in tears at the solemnizing of the National
Covenant of this Kingdom, did begin to burn again, and bring forth the
sparkles of the like affection; and withal did fill them with confidence and
hope, that the Lord, inclining the hearts of the Houses of Parliament, and of
the gracious and well-affected People of England, to join in this Covenant, they
will thereby find an answer from Heaven to all the prayers, which they have
offered up with strong crying and tears, a deliverance from all their
sufferings and fears, and the beginning of a new World of joy and peace, which
the Lord will create for their comfort.

But we know on the other part, upon the swearing and subscribing of this
Covenant by true Christians and Patriots; the opposite and malignant party of
Papists, Prelates, and others the sons of defection and contention their
adherents, will rage and tumultuate more then ever before. And therefore,
unless we will either betray our Religion, Liberties, and Laws, and all that
we and ours do possess, into their hands, and suffer our selves to be cut off
and massacred by such bloody and barbarous cruelty, as they have executed this
time past in Ireland and England, there is a necessity of taking of Arms for
mutual defense, in the cause of Religion, of the Kings honor, of the liberty
and peace of the Kingdoms, and of every one of us in our own private estate
and condition. In this case it is most necessary, that every one against all
doubting be persuaded in his mind of the lawfulness of his undertaking, and
of the Cause maintained by him, which is no other, then the good of Religion in
England, and the deliverance of our Brethren out of the depths of affliction,
the preservation of our own Religion, and of our selves from the extremity of
misery, and the safety of our Native King, and his Kingdoms from destruction
and desolation: Any one of which, by all Law divine and humane, is too just
cause of taking of Arms, how much more when all of them are joined in one?
Whosoever with-draweth and hides himself in such a debate and controversy,
let him consider, whether he be not a hater of his Brethren, against Christian
and common charity; An hater of himself and his posterity, against the law and
light of nature; A hater of the King and his Kingdoms, against loyalty and
common duty; And a hater of God, against all Religion and Peace.

Concerning the first, The question is not, nor need we dispute, whether we may
propagate our Religion by Arms, but whether, according to our power, we ought
to assist our Brethren in England, who are calling for our help, and are
shedding their blood in defense of that power, without which Religion can
neither be defended nor reformed, nor unity of Religion with us, and other
reformed Kirks, be attained, who have in the cause of Religion, and the like
exigence, assisted us and other reformed Kirks; to whom, of old and of late, we
have made promises of the real Declarations of all Christian duty and
thankfulness; And who, upon our desires and their endeavors for unity in
Religion, have often warned us, that the malignant party would bend all their
invention and forces to interrupt the work, and to ruin and destroy them in
the undertaking of it, which we see this day come to pass. The question is no
sooner rightly stated, but it is as soon resolved: the Lord save us from the
curse of Meroz, who came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the
mighty: when they look upon the Cause which they maintain, the prayers, tears,
and blood which they have poured forth, and the insolences and blasphemies of
the enemies, we cannot doubt, but enlargement and deliveverance shall arise
unto England; but we have reason to fear, if we upon so fair a calling, sit
still and hold our peace, this Kirk and Kingdom shall perish by the hand of
the same enemy, and there shall be none to deliver us: And who knows, whether
the Lord has granted us mercy, furnished us with men of War, put Weapons in
our hands, and called this great Council of the Estates, for warrant and
direction for such a time as this? God forbid, and be it far from us to sit
down at ease (if we may promise to our selves ease) on this side of Jordan,
till our Brethren be possessed in the liberties of the Kingdom of Christ.

Neither concerning the second, is the question (as our enemies would make it)
whether we shall enter into England, and lift Arms against our own King, who
has promised and done as much as may secure us in our Religion and Liberties;
but whether against the Popish, Prelaticall, and Malignant party their
adherents, prevailing in England and Ireland, we be not bound to provide for
our own preservation, although it had not been often told us from England, and
the reformed Kirks in other places, we might of our selves have known from our
continual experience ever since the time of our first Reformation, especially
after the two Kingdoms have been united under one Head and Monarch, from the
Principles of our own Declarations, in the time of our late troubles and
dangers, from the vindictive disposition of the enemies of this Kirk and
Kingdom, which they conceive to be the fountain whence have issued all these
evils, and from the grounds of common reason, That we cannot long like Goshen,
enjoy our light, if darkness shall cover the face of other reformed Kirks?
that Juda cannot long continue in liberty, if Israel be led away in captivity,
and that the condition of the one Kirk and Kingdom, whether in Religion or
Peace, must be common to both? If England shall subdue the enemies of Religion
without that assistance which they call for from us at this time, what help can
we expect from them in the hour of our tentation, which we have deserved, and
the Lord may bring upon us when he will. God forbid, that we should give them
cause to laugh at our calamity, and mock when our fear comes; and if they
shall be given over into the hand of the Enemy (which God in his mercy avert)
will not the enemy strengthened with increase of power, be the more insolent
and unresistable, and will not the power of England, turned into the hands of
Malignants, turn also enemy against this Kirk and Kingdom, and upon such
pretenses as be already invented, and yet (they will allege) according to the
late Treaty of Peace, within three months space, denounce a National War
against us.

And concerning the third, the question is not, whether we should presume to be
Arbitrators in the matters now debated by fire and sword; betwixt his Majesty
and the Houses of Parliament, which may seem to be foreign and extrinsecall
to this Nation, and wherein we may be conceived to have no interest, but
whether our mediation and intercession being rejected by the one side, upon
hope of victory; or suppose, by both sides, upon confidence of their own
strength, and several successes, it be not our duty, it being in our power, to
stop or prevent the effusion of Christian blood? Or whether we ought not to
endeavor to rescue our Native King, his Crown and Posterity, out of the midst
of so many dangers, and to preserve his People and Kingdom from ruin and
destruction? If every private man be bound in duty to interpose himself as a
reconciler and sequestrator betwixt his neighbors, armed to their mutual
destruction? If the son ought to hazard his own life for the preseration of his
father and brother at variance the one against another? Shall a Kingdom sit
still, and suffer their King and neighboring Kingdom to perish in an
unnatural war? In the time of animositie and appetite of revenge, such an
interposing may be an irritation: But afterward, when the eyes of the mind no
more bloud-run with passion, do discern things aright, it shall be no grief,
nor offense of heart, but matter of thanksgiving to God, and to the Instruments
which have kept from shedding of blood, and from revenge.

The Covenant is now solemnly taken in England, and is countenanced there
already from Heaven with mavelous success. The Propositions and Articles of
the Treaty are with wonderful unanimitie concluded in both Houses of
Parliament, Cessation of Arms is agreed upon with the Irish Rebels, and they,
notwithstanding all the barbarous and unparalleld cruelty exercised by them
upon the Protestants and people of God in that Kingdom, honored with the
title of his Majesty's Subjects: It is therefore now high time for all
true-hearted Scottish men, and good Patriots abroad, especially such as upon
fair and plausible pretenses have been formerly mistaken or seduced to take
arms against this Cause of God and Religion, timely to remember their National
Covenant, and seriously to bethink themselves of the duty, which, by so
manifold Obligations they owe to their Religion and Native Country in this
time of so great distress and danger to both: lest despising or neglecting
this our warning and intimation, they either perish by wilful persisting in
their own ways against God, their Country, and Covenant, or come too late,
and there be no place left for repentance. It is also most necessary for all
good people of all ranks and degrees within the Kingdom, to deny themselves
and their own ease, or what earthly thing is dearest unto them, to lift up
their eyes and behold the Work of God unto which they are called, and with
heart and hand to join in this so religious, so just, and so necessary
Expedition, and which upon the truth of God, our own late, comfortable, and
never to be forgotten experience, and the prayers of the people of God, we may
be assured, will in end, against all difficulties and oposition, be crowned
with such success, as may be honor to God, confusion to his presumptuous and
incorrigible enemies, propagation to the true Religion, and comfort to all the
unfeigned lovers of truth and peace, which against all calumny and
contradiction has been, is, and shall be the sum of our desires.

FINIS.

