ACT of COUNCIL, Explanatory of the TEST: WITH His Majesty's LETTER Containing
His Royal Approbation thereof.

C R

(...) SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.

Act of Council, Explanatory of the TEST.
Edinburgh the third day of November, 1681.
FORASMUCH, as some have entertained Jealousies and Prejudices against the Oath
and Test, appointed to be taken by all Persons in public Trust, Civil,
Ecclesiastic, or Military, in this Kingdom, by the sixth Act of His Majesty's
third Parliament, as if thereby they were to Swear to every Proposition or
Clause in the Confession of Faith, therein-mentioned; or that Invasion were
made thereby upon the Intrinsic Spiritual Power of the Church, or Power of the
Keys; or as if the present Episcopal Government of this National Church, by Law
Established, were thereby exposed to the hazard of Alteration, or Subversion;
all which, are far from the Intention and Design of the Parliaments Imposing
this Oath, and from the Genuine Sense and Meaning thereof: Therefore, His Royal
Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of Privy Council, Do
Allow, Authorize and Empower, the Archbishops and Bishops, to Administer this
Oath and Test, to the Ministers and Clergy in their respective Diocesses, in
this Express Sense; that though the Confession of Faith, Ratified in
Parliament, one thousand five hundred sixty and seven, was framed in the
Infancy of Our Reformation, and deserves its due Praises; yet by the Test We do
not Swear to every Proposition or Clause therein-contained; but only to the
true Protestant Religion, Founded on the Word of GOD, contained in that
Confession, as it is opposed to Popery and Phanaticisme. Secondly, That by the
Test, or any Clause therein-contained, no Invasion or Encroachment is made, or
intended upon the Intrinsic Spiritual Power of the Church, or Power of the
Keys, as it was Exerced by the Apostles, and the most pure and Primitive Church
in the first three Centuries after Christ, and which is still reserved entirely
to the Church. Thirdly, That the Oath and Test, is without any prejudice to the
Episcopal Government of this National Church, which is declared by the first
Act of the second Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, to be most
agreeable to the Word of God, and most suitable to Monarchy, and which upon all
occasions, His Majesty has Declared, He will inviolably and unalterably
Preserve. And appoints the Archbishops and Bishops, to require the Ministers
in their respective Diocesses, with the first convenience to obey the Law, in
Swearing and Subscribing the foresaid Oath and Test; with certification, that
the refusers shall be esteemed persons disaffected to the Protestant Religion,
and to His Majesty's Government, and that the punishment appointed by the
foresaid sixth Act of His Majesty's third Parliament, shall be impartially and
without delay, inflicted upon them. Extracted forth of the Records of Privy
Council, by

WILL. PATERSON. Cl. Sti. Concilij.

His Majesty's Letter of Approbation.
CHARLES R.

MOST Dear, and most entirely beloved Brother; Right Trusty and well beloved
Cousins and Councellers, Right Trusty and well beloved Counselors, and Trusty
and well beloved Counselors, We Greet You well; Whereas, by one of your
Letters, Directed unto Us, bearing Date the eight Instant; We do find that some
having entertained Scruples and Prejudices against the Test, by mistaking the
true Sense and Meaning thereof: And others having put false and unjust Glosses
and Senses upon it, tending to defeat its excellent Design, for the Security of
Our Government; and that upon this account, you found it necessary, by an Act
of that Our Council (which We have seen) to Declare its True and Genuine Sense,
and to allow and Empower the Bishops to Administer the same, in this Sense to
the Clergy, in their respective Diocesses: We are so well pleased with that
Explanatory Act, that We will not delay to send you Our Cheerful Approbation
thereof, with Our hearty Thanks, for your Zeal in Our Service upon all
occasions, especially, in what relates to the Security of the Persons, Rights,
Interests and Privileges of Our Orthodox Clergy; which We do now (as We have
often done before) in a particular manner, Recommend to your Care, as a matter
wherein you may render unto Us the most acceptable Services; And therefore, We
do expect, that you will upon all fit Occasions, give them all possible
Encouragement, as these whom We have received, and will constantly Shelter
under Our Royal Protection, against all their Enemies. So We bid you heartily
Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the fifteenth day of November, One thousand
six hundred eighty and one. And of Our Reign, the thretty three year. By His
Majesty's Command. MORRAY.
Directed Thus, To Our most dear, and most entirely beloved Brother, Our right
Trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counselors, Our right Trusty and well
beloved Counselors, and Our Trusty and well beloved Counselors, James Duke of
Albany and York, Our High Commissioner, and the Lords of Our Pilvy Council, of
Our Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND.



FINIS.

