CERTAIN Cases of Conscience RESOLVED, Concerning the Lawfulness of Joining
WITH Forms of Prayer IN Public Worship. PART I. VIZ. I. Whether the using of
Forms of Prayer, does not stint and limit the Spirit. II. Whether the using
Public Forms of Prayer be not a sinful omission of the Ministerial Gift of
Prayer. III. Whether Praying by a Public Form does not deaden the Devotion of
Prayer.


LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Jun. for Fincham Gardener at the White Horse
in Ludgate Street, 1683.

Books Printed by FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleets
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

A Persuasion to Communion with the Church of England.

A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion.

The Case of indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and
Stated by considering these Questions, etc.

A Discourse about Edification.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England' s
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it Unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

A RESOLUTION OF THE Cases of Conscience, Which concern the Use of FORMS of
PRAYER.
ONE of the main Points which our dissenting Brethren insist on to justify
their Separation from our Church, is, That our Public Worship is performed in
a Form of Words of Man's Invention; which, they conceive, is unlawful; for
hereby, say some of them, the Holy Spirit, who inspires our Prayer, is stinted
and limited, and hereby the Gift of Prayer, say others, which the Holy Spirit
communicates to Ministers, to enable them to express the Devotions of their
Congregations to God, is rendered useless; and not only so, but even the
Devotions of the Congregation too are mightily deaden'd, by being continually
expressed in the same form of words: besides, that the wants of Christians
being various, casual, and emergent, cannot be so fully represented in a fixed
Form, as in conceived Prayers, which upon the account of their variation in
Expressions, may be the better extended to the continual variations of Men's
cases and circumstances: besides all which, say they, we have no warrant for
the use of Forms, either in Scripture, or pure Antiquity; and if we had, yet an
universal imposition of them, can by no means be lawfully compli'd with: this,
according to the best recollection I can make, is the sum of what our Brethren
urge against the lawfulness of joining with us in a stated Liturgy, or Form of
Public Worship: and therefore, in order to the satisfying their Consciences in
this matter, I shall reduce their whole Plea to these following Cases, and
endeavor a plain and clear resolution of them.

1. Whether Praying in a Form of Words, does not stint or limit the Spirit of
Prayer? 2. Whether the Use of Public Forms of Prayer, be not a sinful neglect
of the Ministerial Gift of Prayer? 3. Whether the constant Use of the same Form
of Prayer, does not very much deaden the Devotion of Prayer? 4. Whether the
common wants of Christian Congregations may not be better represented in
conceived Prayer, than in a Form of Prayer? 5. Whether there be any warrant for
Forms of Prayer, either in Scripture, or pure Antiquity? 6. Whether, supposing
Forms to be lawful, the imposition of them can be lawfully compli'd with?
Case I. Whether Praying in a Form of Words, does not stint and limit the
Spirit of Prayer?
In order to the resolution of this Case, it will be necessary to explain
first, what it is that the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer; and
secondly, what is meant by stinting or limiting the Spirit in Prayer.

1. What is it that the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer? I answer,
there are some things attributed to him which were extraordinary, and
temporary; and others that are ordinary, fixed, and standing: The through state
and distinguishing of which will very much contribute to the resolution of this
present Case, and therefore I shall insist more largely upon it.

First, I say there are some things attributed to the Holy Spirit in this
matter of Prayer which were extraordinary and temporary; and that was the
immediate Inspiration of the matter of Prayer, together with an ability to
express and utter it in known or unknown Languages: thus as for the immediate
inspiration of the matter of Prayer, we read in the Old Testament of Prayers
and Praises, which, upon special occasions, were immediately indicted by Divine
Inspiration: for so when Hannah presented her Son to the Lord in Shiloh, the
Text only says, that she praid, and said; but the Targum paraphrases it, that
she praid by the Spirit of Prophecy, and accordingly praying and praising by
immediate inspiration, is frequently called prophesying: So 1 Samuel 10. 5. The
Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shall prophecy; that is, as
Expositors generally interpret it, thou shall utter Spiritual Psalms and Hymns
by immediate inspiration on the place; and to the same purpose is the word used
Numb. 11. 25. 1 Chronicles. 25. 1. and accordingly in the New Testament it is said
of Zacharias, that he was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying,
blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. The matter of all which Prayers and
Praises, together with those in the Book of Psalms, and sundry others recorded
in Scripture, was immediately dictated to those inspired persons by the Holy
Ghost, and delivered by them without any recourse to their own invention or
consideration, though as to the words of them, it may be justly questioned,
whether they were not left to their own composure, as it seems very probable,
the words of all other inspirations were; for considering how the inspired
persons differed in their style, according as they differed in their education,
in their natural parts, and intellectual improvements, it is very likely they
themselves composed and worded their own inspirations, the Spirit of God taking
care only so to oversee and direct them, that their words might not
misrepresent their matter; and if so, how much less reason have we to suppose,
that the Spirit inspires the words of our Prayers: but this I shall not insist
on.

However, after that great descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, wherein the
Gift of Tongues was communicated to enable the first Planters of the Gospel, to
propagate it through the World, it is certain that not only the Matter of their
Prayers, but even the very Language too in which they express them, was
immediately inspired, insomuch that they were not only enabled to Pray upon the
place in apt and fluent Expressions, but also to Pray in Languages, which they
never understood before, and which even then they understood but very
imperfectly, and also to interpret those Prayers into the vulgar Language,
which themselves or others had uttered in unknown Tongues; and this, among
others, the Apostle calls a Spiritual Gift, 1 Cor. 12. 1. which, as I remember,
is the only place where the Gift of Prayer is mentioned in Scripture: and in 1
Cor. 14. 14. it is also called a Spirit, where he gives us an account at large
of this miraculous way of praying.

Now that this miraculous Gift of praying in, and interpreting Prayers out of
unknown Tongues was extraordinary, and temporary, and peculiar to the Primitive
Ages of Christianity, is evident, because the design of it was not only to
enable the first Planters of the Gospel to perform their Ministerial Office in
the vulgar Languages of the several Nations they were sent to, but also to be a
sign from God, as all other Miracles were, for the confirmation of the Gospel;
for so the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 14. 22. That Tongues were for a sign, not
to them that believe, but to them that believe not: and therefore since it is
granted of all hands, that the Gift of Miracles was extraordinary, and intended
only for a demonstration of the Gospel to the Infidel World, and after that to
cease, there can be no doubt but this miraculous Gift of Prayer was so too.

But that the Spirits inditing the Matter, and, if you will, the words of those
inspired Prayers, was also extraordinary, will require a larger proof; because
it is looked upon by many of our dissenting Brethren as an ordinary and
standing Gift, which the Spirit does and will communicate to all successive
Ages of the World. Against this Opinion of theirs therefore I shall briefly
offer these following Reasons to their consideration:

1. That there is no promise of any such Gift, and therefore no reason to
expect the continuance of it. For whatsoever standing and ordinary benefits we
receive from God, we receive them by virtue of the New Covenant, in which he
has promised to us all those good things which we can reasonably expect at his
hands; and the promise of God being the only foundation of our hope, it is
presumption to promise our selves what he has not promised us: but now in all
the New Covenant we have not the least intimation of any such promise, viz.
That the Spirit will immediately indite to us the Matter and Expressions of our
Prayers; For as for that of Zachary 12. 10. which is the only promise that is
pretended in the case, it is evident, at first sight, that it is nothing to the
purpose; I will pour out upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace
and Supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn. What is all this to the immediate inspiration of the Matter and
Expressions of our Prayer, when it is plain, that the Spirit of Supplication
here is the same with the Spirit of Grace, or of inward Piety and Devotion?
even as the following words imply, and they shall look upon me whom they have
pierced, and mourn: that is, for their horrid sin of crucifying me. But that
there is no such promise in the New Covenant is evident, from what is
acknowledged of all hands, viz. That there are many good Christians who could
never pretend to any such inspiration, who are some of them fain to be
beholding to their own recollection and invention for the Matter and Words of
their Prayers, and others, for want of a sufficient quickness of invention, to
be beholding to Forms of Prayer of other men's composure; neither of which they
need, were they immediately inspired: And I am very confident 'twould be looked
upon by all sober Diffenters as a very rash and unjust censure to affirm, that
a man cannot be a good Christian, who does not pray by immediate inspiration,
but is always fain to depend either on his own invention, or a Form of Prayer
for the Matter and Expressions of his Devotions: and if so, how can this
consist with a standing promise of immediate inspiration of Prayer in the New
Covenant? unless we will suppose that there are Blessings promised in the New
Covenant, to which good Christians may have no right or title, and of which
they may never actually partake, which is utterly to destroy the nature of the
Covenant, which extends to all who perform the conditions of it, and to cut off
all our dependence upon it.

2. That as there is no promise, so there is no need of any such immediate
inspiration. It Is true, Christ has promised by his Spirit, to be with us to
the end of the World, and assured us, that he will give his Spirit unto every
one that asks, and to what end has he promised this, but only to supply our
Necessities, and enable us to perform those Duties, which, through our own
impotency, we cannot perform without him? for so he argues from the readiness
of Parents, to supply their Children with what is necessary to their bodily
life and subsistence, to the readiness of God to bestow his Spirit (that is to
all the purposes that are necessary to their Spiritual Life, as the parallel
plainly implies) upon them that ask him. So that all we can expect by virtue of
these promises is only this, That the Spirit of God will be ready to aid and
assist us in all those necessary cases, wherein our Duty and Spiritual Life is
concerned; and therefore if there be no necessity of an immediate inspiration
of either Matter or Words to enable us to Pray, it is an unwarrantable
presumption to expect it by virtue of these or such like promises.

And that there is no necessity, I conceive, is very apparent; for,

First, As for the Matter of our Prayers, the Holy Spirit has already
sufficiently revealed it to us in the Gospel, and as plainly instructed us what
we are to pray for, as he can be supposed to do by any immediate inspiration:
so that with a very little consideration, we may thence easily recollect what
it is that we need, and what we are warranted and commanded to pray for; and
for a summary of the whole, we need go no further than our Churches Catechism,
which in answer to that Question, after the Lord's Prayer, What desire thou
of God in this Prayer? sums up the whole matter of our Prayer in a few, plain,
and easy words. And to suppose, after such a clear revelation of the matter of
Prayer, a necessity of immediate inspiration of it, is in effect to suppose,
that we have neither reason enough to understand the sense of plain words, nor
memory enough to retain and recollect it. But against this, that passage of St.
Paul is objected by our Brethren, Romans 8. 26. We know not what we should pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with
groanings, which cannot be uttered. From which words, We know not what to pray
for as we ought, they infer, that how plainly soever the matter of Prayer is
revealed to us, we cannot in all cases know what it is without an immediate
inspiration: which must either suppose, that all matter of Prayer is not
plainly revealed to us, or that though it be, we cannot understand it; whereas
the Apostles words imply neither the one nor the other, for it is plain those
words, we know not what to pray for, are not to be understood simply, but with
reference to, as we ought; (...) (...), for what to pray for as we ought, we
know not; which plainly refers to the manner, and not to the matter of our
Prayer, how to pray for any thing with that fervency of desire, that dependence
upon, and resignation to God, as we ought, of our selves, we know not without
the assistance of the Spirit of God; if therefore the Spirit has already
sufficiently revealed to us, what the matter of Prayer is, (as he must be
supposed to do, if the Scriptures be sufficient) I see no necessity why he
should reveal it again by immediate inspiration; and if there be no necessity
of it, I know no warrant we have to expect it: But then,

2. As for the Words of Prayer, by which we are to express the Matter of it,
what necessity can there be that these should be immediately dictated to us,
when as if we have not quickness enough of fancy and invention to express our
wants and desires in our own words, we may readily supply that defect by Forms
of Prayer of other Men's composure, which with very short additions and
variations of our own, we may easily adapt to all our particular cases and
circumstances? and to imagine that with such helps and assistances we cannot
word our desires to God without an immediate inspiration, is to suppose, that
we are mere whispering Pipes, that can breath out nothing but what is breathed
into us.

3. That as there is neither promise, nor need of any such immediate
inspiration of Prayer, so there is no certain sign or testimony of it remaining
among us: whenever God inspired men with Divine matter and words, his way was
always to attest the divinity of their inspiration with some certain sign by
which themselves, and others, might be well assured of it; and though at this
distance from the inspired Ages we cannot certainly determine by what token it
was that the Prophets knew the divinity of their own inspirations while they
were seized with them; yet this we know, that after they were delivered of
them, God always took care to attest them by some miraculous operation: for so
Miracles are styled by the Apostle, the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, as being the constant signs and tokens of Divine inspiration; and
indeed without such signs to distinguish it from false pretenses, we were
better be without inspiration, than with it, because we shall be left under an
unavoidable necessity, either of admitting all inspirations which pretend to be
divine, or of rejecting all that are truly so: as to instance in this case of
Prayer, we know it is possible for men to have the matter and words of it
dictated to them by a natural, or Diabolical, as well as a Divine Enthusiasm,
and therefore it is highly requisite if such Divine Enthusiasm, or Inspiration,
be continued to us, that the proper signs and testimonies of it should be
continued too, that so we may be able to distinguish that which is divine, from
that which is natural or diabolical; otherwise we must either conclude them all
to be natural, or diabolical, or believe them all to be divine, and entertain
them accordingly.

If you say there is no need of either, because the Scripture is sufficient to
distinguish them; I answer, that though the Scripture may be sufficient to
distinguish the matter of the inspiration, whether it be true or false, yet it
is not sufficient to distinguish the inspiration it self, whether it be divine,
or natural, or diabolical: For

First, As for natural Enthusiasm, it is not at all impossible for a man to
pray agreeably to Scripture by natural inspiration, by which I mean a natural
or accidental fervency of temper, arising either from a constant heat of
constitution, or a casual agitation of the spirits, occasioned either by
vapors of heated melancholy, or an intermixture of sharp and feverish humors
with the blood; which as all men know, who understand any thing of the nature
and composition of humane bodies, naturally heightens and impregnates the
fancy, and causes the images of things to come faster into it, and appear more
distinct in it, and consequently produces a very ready invention of matter and
extraordinary fluency of words: so that if under a fit of this natural
fervency, a man's fancy happens to run upon God and Religion, he cannot fail to
pray with great readiness and fluency, and sometimes with that extraordinary
passion and enlargement, as shall cause him assuredly to believe himself
immediately inspired by the Spirit of God: of the truth of which, instances
enough might be given not only among Christians, but also among the Devoto's of
Mahomet, and the Poets and Orators of the Heathens, whose fancies have been
very often so strangely exalted by the fervor of their temper, or disease,
that not only they themselves, but they that heard them, believed that they
were inspired by God. Supposing then, that under a fit of this natural
Enthusiasm a man should pray agreeably to Scripture, how shall he be able to
know by Scripture whether the present inspiration he is under, be natural, or
divine? and how will it be possible for him to avoid, many times, attributing
the natural effects of his temper, or disease, to the immediate operation of
the Spirit of God?

But you will say, we all agree that the Spirit of God inspires good men with
holy and fervent affections in their Prayers, and yet it cannot be denied that
this fervency of affection does sometimes also proceed from the present temper
of our bodies, notwithstanding which, we have no other sign or testimony
besides that of Scripture, whereby to distinguish when it is divine, and when
natural; does not therefore the want of such sign as effectually conclude
against the Spirits inspiring the fervor of our Prayers, as against his
inspiring the matter and words of them? I answer, no; For, as for the former,
we have a sure word of promise, which we have not for the latter; and therefore
if we can claim the promise, we have just reason to conclude when we feel our
affections actually excited, that how much soever other causes might contribute
to it, the Holy Spirit was the principal cause; but where we have no promise,
we have no ground for such conclusion: besides which, we have no such need of
signs to enable us to distinguish in the one case, as in the other; For as for
the inspiration of affection, we may easily distinguish whether it be natural
or divine, by our own sense; if our present fervor be accompanied with a fixed
and constant devotion of soul, we may certainly conclude, that the same Spirit
which inspired the one, inspired the other; and whether it be so accompanied or
no, that natural sense and feeling we have of our own motions and affections,
will quickly inform us, and we have no more need of an outward sign to satisfy
us in this matter, than we have to know whether we are hungry or thirsty: but
if the present fervor of our affections in Prayer be only a sudden fit and
pang of devotion, that finds and leaves us habitually indevout, we have just
reason to conclude, that it is entirely owing to our present bodily temper:
whether therefore our affections in Prayer are inspired by God, our own sense
will inform us, if we impartially consult it; but whether our matter and words
are so, no sense we have can resolve us: we may feel the matter of our Prayer
pour in upon us with extraordinary readiness, and be enabled to pour it out
again with extraordinary fluency, and yet all this may proceed from our own
fancy and invention, quickened and enlarged by merely natural Enthusiasm; and
therefore, unless we had some other sign, besides that of Scripture, 'twill be
impossible for us to distinguish between a divine and natural inspiration of
matter and words, because that which is natural, may be as agreeable to
Scripture, as that which is supposed to be divine; and God has given us no
inward sense to distinguish between one and the other: and can it be imagined
that had he meant to continue this Gift of inspiration to us, he would have
thus left us in the dark concerning it, without any certain sign whereby we
might distinguish, whether it be from his Spirit, or from an ill-affected
Spleen, or a Fever?

But then, secondly, as for Diabolical Inspirations of Matter and Words in
Prayer, we have sundry very probable Instances, such as Major Weir, who is said
to have received his Inspirations through a Staff, Hacket, David George, and
that Monster of wickedness, John Basilides Duke of Russia, who were all of them
possessed with such a wonderful Gift of Prayer, as did not only charm and
ravish those that heard them, but seemed, in the opinion of the most wise and
impartial, to exceed the power of nature; which renders it very probable that
the matter of their Prayers was for the most part agreeable to Scripture,
otherwise it is hardly conceivable how they could have procured to themselves so
many admirers, and abused so many honest minds into a belief that they were
immediately inspired by God. And since by inspiring his Votaries with such
matter of Prayer as is agreeable to Scripture, the Devil may sometimes serve
his own ends, since he may thereby puff up giddy minds with pride, and
self-conceit, and more effectually recommend Seducers and false Teachers to the
World; it is very reasonable, to suppose that this subtle Agent who so thoroughly
understands his own game, will in some cases be forward enough to do it; and if
in any case we may reasonably suppose, that the Devil may inspire men with such
matter of Prayer as is agreeable to Scripture, then we can never certainly
distinguish by Scripture, whether it be the Spirit of God, or the Devil, that
inspires us. And can we, without blaspheming the goodness of God, imagine, that
if he had continued this Gift of immediate inspiration to us, he would have
neglected to continue such signs and testimonies of it as are necessary to
distinguish it from the inspirations of the Devil? doubtless it is much better
for us that this Gift should be totally withdrawn, and that as to the matter
and expressions of our Prayer, we should be left to the guidance of Scripture
and Reason, than that by the continuance of it without some certain sign to
know and distinguish it, we should be left under a fatal necessity, either of
rejecting Divine Inspirations, or of admitting Diabolical for Divine. And
therefore since we have no such sign continued among us, we have all the reason
in the world to conclude, that this Gift is discontinu'd, and ceased:
especially considering that we have not only no certain sign of any such
inspiration in the conceived Prayers of those which most pretend to it, but
many very certain ones of the contrary; I will instance in sour.

1. The great impertinence, and nonsense, and rudeness, to say no worse, that
are sometimes mingled with these Extempore Prayers. I will not give Instances
of this, because it is so notorious, that our Brethren themselves cannot but in
part acknowledge it: now to attribute these faults of conceived Prayers, to
immediate inspiration, would be to blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and father our own
follies upon him, and yet sure had he thought meet to have continued to the
Church this Gift of inspiration of Prayer, it would have been in order to the
securing the Worship of God from those rudenesses and indecencies to which
extemporary Prayers of men's own conceiving are liable; and if so, to be sure in
public Prayer at least, he would have constantly taken care to inspire such
matter as is fit to be offered up to God, and such expressions as are fit for
such matter; that so the Public Worship of God, which is the most serious and
solemn thing in the World, might not be rendered ridiculous by the folly and
inadvertency of men. Whereas on the contrary, we see those public Prayers
which arrogate to themselves the honor of being inspired, are generally more
liable to these indecencies, than Forms of humane composure, and that those
Prayers which consist of premeditated matter and words, are commonly much
better sense, and far more decent and pertinent, than our extemporary
effusions; which how it should come to pass I know not, supposing the
continuance of inspiration of Prayer, unless we will suppose, that Humane
Composures may exceed Divine Inspirations, and that Men may ordinarily
premeditate better Prayers, than the Spirit of God inspires. And methinks it
seems very strange, that the Spirit should continue this Gift of inspiration to
secure the Worship of God from nonsense and impertinence, and yet that after
all, it should remain more liable to th^se indecencies, than if our public
Prayers were offered up in premeditated Forms, composed out of our own or other
men's inventions.

2. Another sign that our composed Prayers are not immediately inspired is,
that they are so generally tinctured with the particular opinions of those that
offer them. You may observe that in all public Controversies of Religion, men's
Opinions are generally to be known by their Prayers, especially if they
zealously espouse either side of the Question: for then the debate runs so much
in their heads, and they look upon God and Religion so very highly concerned in
it, that they can hardly frame a Petition, Confession, or Thanksgiving, without
giving some intimation of their particular Persuasion; and many times one of
the Petitions is, That God would hinder the propagation of the contrary
Persuasion, and convince their Adversaries of the Error and Falsehood of it.
Thus for instance, when the Contest ran high between the Presbyterians and
Independents, the Arminians and Calvinists, how easy was it to distinguish
them by their Prayers, from one another? Whether this be not so, I appeal to
our Brethren themselves, and to all the World? And if so, what plainer evidence
can be given, that their Prayers were not inspired, but of their own invention,
and composure? For either we must suppose this Gift of Inspiration to be
confined to one Party, which would be to stint the Spirit with a witness, and
everlastingly to puzzle our selves where to find it, among so many contending
Parties that pretend to it; or else we must affirm a horrid Blasphemy, viz.
That the Spirit inspires Contradictions, and indites contrary Prayers to men of
opposite Parties.

3. Another plain sign that our conceived Prayers are not immediately inspired
is, That that which gives them the reputation of being so, is not so much the
matter, as the way and manner of expressing them. For as for the matter of
Prayer, I suppose our Brethren will not deny, but our Forms may equal at least,
if not exceed their conceived and extemporary Prayers, and that it is possible
for men, upon mature thoughts and deliberations, to compose and pen a Prayer,
that shall be as full and comprehensive of the common cases, and necessities of
Christians, as if he had conceived, and indicted it upon the place. And if all
the matter that is in a conceived Prayer, may be easily contained and expressed
in a Form, then all the difference between one and the other must lie in the way,
and manner of expressing it, and consequently it must be only upon this
account, that the one must pretend to inspiration more than the other. Now there
are only two differences between Forms, and conceived Prayers, as to the way,
and manner of expressing the matter in them; neither of which are so
considerable, as to give the one a fairer pretense to inspiration than the
other: The first is, that whereas the matter of a Form of Prayer is expressed
in set, and premeditated words, the same matter in conceived Prayer is
expressed in extemporary words; and is it not strange, that upon such a slight,
and inconsiderable difference, the one should be thought to be more inspired
than the other? as if the Spirit of God continued the Gift of Inspiration to no
other purpose, but to enable men to ask those Blessings in extemporary words,
which they might as well have asked in premeditated ones. The second is, that
conceived Prayers do generally more enlarge and amplify on the matter of
Prayer, than Forms, in which we being always tied to such a set of words, have
not that liberty to expatiate on our several cases, and necessities; but this
is so far from adding to the value of conceived Prayers, that it rather
lessens, and depreciates them; for if you observe these admired enlargements,
and amplifications, are generally nothing else but only the same matter
expressed again in different words, which makes our conceived Prayers run out
many times to that inordinate length, the same matter being repeated in them
over and over in varied phrases and expressions: how then can we entertain such
mean conceits of the wisdom of the holy Spirit, as to imagine he would continue
to us the Gift of immediate inspiration, merely to enable us to repeat the same
matter of Prayer to God ten or twenty times over, in different phrases and
expressions? especially considering that by so doing he would cross the orders
of our Savior, who expressly forbids us in our Prayers to use vain repetitions,
(or as Munster's Hebrew reads it, to multiply words above what is fit and
seasonable) thinking we shall be heard for our much speaking, to which he
subjoins this reason, For your Father knows what things you have need of before
you ask him, Matthew. 6. 7, 8. As if he should have said, you need not lengthen
out your Prayers with so many copious enlargements, and varied repetitions of
the same matter, as if you meant thereby more fully to instruct your Father in
your wants and desires, for before ever you ask, he knows your needs, and
therefore a few words will suffice to express your desires to him. And when our
Savior has required that our Prayers should be short, and pithy, and stripped
of all needless multiplicity of words, what reason have we to think that the
Holy Spirit, who is his Vicegerent in the Church, would continue the Gift of
Inspiration merely to amplify, and enlarge them? These enlargements of
conceived Prayer therefore, are so far from being signs of their immediate
inspiration, that supposing the Spirit to be of the same mind with our Savior,
they are generally signs of the contrary.

4. Another plain sign that our conceived Prayers are not immediately inspired
is, That that extraordinary manner, and way of expressing them, for which they
are thought to be inspired, does apparently proceed from natural causes: for,
as I showed before, the reason why our conceived Prayers are thought by us and
others to be inspired is, that we are many times enabled in them to enlarge
extempore, with so much readiness, and fluency: which may be easily resolved
into mere natural Enthusiasm, or present fervor of temper. And that from hence
this fluency and enlargement in Prayer does ordinarily proceed, seems very
evident by two undeniable signs; first, that according to our Brethrens own
confession, it comes upon them much oftener in their public, than in their
private Devotions. For this is an ordinary case in their Divinity; how comes it
to pass that good men often find themselves so enlarged in their public, and
so streighten'd in their private Prayers? And indeed, supposing the Spirit did
ordinarily inspire the matter and words of their Prayer, I see not how it could
be well resolved, unless we suppose the Spirit to be more concerned to inspire
us with fluency of matter and words, when we are to speak before men, than when
we are only to speak before God. The true resolution therefore of the case is
this, that in our private Prayers we want the sighs, and groans, and passionate
gestures of a devout Congregation, to chafe and excite our affections, and the
reverence of a numerous Auditory, to oblige us to teaz and wrack our
inventions; for want of which our spirits are not ordinarily so vehemently
agitated and heated as when we Pray in public; where being more than
ordinarily warmed, partly with our own efforts and struglings, to invent, and
partly with the warmths and pious fervours of the Congregation, we are many
times transported by this natural Enthusiasm, into raptures of passion and
enlargement; this I say is the only reason that can be assigned of it, unless
we will suppose that which is very unsupposeable of the Spirit of God, viz.
That he is more solicitous to indite our Prayers when we are in the presence of
men, than when we are only in the presence of God. Secondly, Another sign that
this admired fluency and enlargement in Prayer proceeds from mere natural
Enthusiasm is this, that generally in the beginning of the Prayer they find
themselves streighten'd and confined, both as to the matter and words of it,
till they have Prayed on for a while, and then they grow more ready and fluent;
which how it should come to pass, I know not, supposing the Prayer were
inspired, unless perhaps the Spirit comes in only in the middle, or toward the
latter end of their Prayer, but leaves them to their own invention in the
beginning, and what reason there should be for such an imagination, I confess I
am not able to guess. The true account therefore of the matter is this, that in
the beginning of the Prayer their Spirits are usually dull, and sluggish, and
do not flow and reflow so briskly to their heads and hearts as afterward, when
they have been thoroughly chaft and heated with the labor and exercise of
invention; by which being excited and awakened, they naturally raise the
drooping fancy, and render the invention more copious, fluent, and easy. So
that merely by the Laws of Matter and Motion, as plain an account may be given
of this extemporary fluency and enlargement of Prayer, as of any other natural
effect whatsoever; and therefore for our Brethren to attribute to the immediate
inspiration of the Spirit of God, that which has such apparent signs of its
derivation from natural causes, is, I conceive, very unwarrantable. By all
which, I think, it is very evident, not only that we have no sign of the
continuance of this Gift of Inspiration of Prayer remaining among us, but that
we have manifest signs of the contrary.

4. And lastly, That to suppose the continuance of this Gift of Inspiration of
Prayer, is to suppose more than our Brethren themselves will allow of, viz.
That their conceived Prayers are infallible, and of equal authority with the
Word of God. For if our Prayers are dictated to us by the Spirit of God, they
must be as infallible as he, whose infinite knowledge cannot suffer him to be
deceived, and whose infinite veracity will not admit him to deceive: and if so,
then whatsoever he dictates, or inspires, must be removed from all possibility
of error, or mistake; and consequently our Prayers must be so too, supposing he
inspires the matter and words of them. And as they must be infallible in
themselves, so they must be of equal authority with Scripture: for that which
gives the Scriptures the authority of the Word of God, is, their being inspired
by the Spirit of God, and therefore whatsoever matter or words are so inspired,
are as much the Word of God, as any matter or words in Scripture: All Scripture
is given, says the Apostle, by the Inspiration of God. And therefore
whatsoever is given by his Inspiration, must necessarily be his Word: for what
those Holy Men of God spoke, who delivered the Scripture, they spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and therefore what they delivered
was the Word of God, because their Mouths were the Oracles through which God
spoke; if therefore when we Pray, we are moved, as they were, by the immediate
inspiration of God, what we pray, must be as much the Word of God, as what they
spoke. So that either our Brethren must affirm, that their conceived Prayers
are of equal authority with Scripture, (which I am sure no sober Dissenter will
presume) or deny that they are immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost.

And thus I have shown what those extraordinary Operations are, which the
Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer. I proceed in the next place, to
enquire what the ordinary and standing Operations are, which the Scripture
attributes to him, and which he has promised to continue to the end of the
World. Of which I shall give but a very brief account, because herein we are
all agreed.

In short therefore, the ordinary Operations of the Spirit consist in exciting
in us the graces and proper affections of Prayer, such as shame and sorrow in
the confession of our sins, a sense of our need of mercy, and a hope of
obtaining it in our supplications for pardon, resignation to God's will, and
dependence on his goodness in our Prayers for temporal mercies, and
deliverances, hunger and thirst after righteousness in our Petitions for his
grace and assistance, and in a word, gratitude, and love, and admiration of God
in our Praises and Thanksgivings for Mercy. For in these divine and gracious
Affections, the life and soul of Prayer consists: as for the Words and
Expressions of it, about which our Brethren disagree with us, they are of no
other account with God, than as they signify to him the graces and affections
of our Prayers, without which he regards them no more, than he does the
whistling of the wind; and therefore since these affections are the main of our
Prayer, and words are nothing in his account in comparison with them; can any
man be so vain as to imagine, that those affections will be ever a whit the less
acceptable to him, because they are presented in a form of words, and not in
extemporary Effusions? Sure that Father would be very capricious, that should
deny Bread to his hungry Child, merely because he asked it to day in the same
words that he did yesterday; and to imagine that God will dislike or reject the
good affections of our Prayer, merely because they are every day expressed in
the same form, is to suppose him a very captious Being, and one that is more
taken with our words, than with our affections: the contrary of which he has
given sufficient proof of in this very particular, in that whereas he has
withdrawn from us (as I have proved at large) the inspiration of the words of
our Prayer, and left them to the composure of our own or other men's invention;
he still continues to inspire us with the affections of Prayer, and to excite
them to a due activity. For to this, among other purposes, it is, that he has
promised to continue his Holy Spirit to us, to enable us to address our selves
to him with devout and holy affections: thus Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba father:
that is, by kindling devout and filial affections in your souls, inabling you
to cry to God with all earnestness and assurance, as to a kind and merciful
Father: and hence also we are said to Pray in or by the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. it
being by him that those good affections are raised in us that we offer up to
God in our Prayers: and therefore we may well be said to Pray by the Spirit,
because it is by the Spirit that we are inspired with those holy affections
which are the soul of our Prayer; and accordingly the Spirit is said to make
intercession for us with sighs and groans, which are not to be uttered, Romans 8.
26. which words are far from asserting the inspiration of the matter and words
of our Prayer, though they are urged by our Brethren for that purpose: for as
for the matter of Prayer, here is not the least hint of the Spirit's inspiring
it, for as to that, the Christians, whom he speaks of, were well instructed
already by their Christian institution; but all that is affirmed, is, that the
Spirit enabled them to offer up the matter of Prayer to God in a most devout
and affectionate manner; with sighs and groans, that is, with earnest and
flagrant affections. And as for the words of Prayer, the Text is so far from
implying the inspiration of them, that it plainly tells us, that those sighs
and groans which the Spirit inspired, were such as were not to be uttered or
worded. And surely to inspire us with affections that are too big for words,
cannot imply the inspiration of words. So that the Spirit's interceeding for us
with sighs and groans that are not to be uttered, can imply no more, than his
exciting in us the proper affections of Prayer; and in this sense he is said in
the next Verse, to make intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God, viz. by inabling them to offer up the matter of Prayer to God with such
fervent and devout affections as are necessary to render it acceptable to him:
which is properly to interceed for us; for as Christ, who is our Advocate in
Heaven, does offer up our Prayers to the Father, and enforce them with his own
intercessions; so his Spirit, who is our Advocate upon Earth, begets in us
those affections which render our Prayers prevalent, and wings them with
fervor and ardency: the one pleads with God for us in our own hearts, by
kindling such desires there as render our Prayers acceptable to him; and the
other pleads with him for us in Heaven, by presenting those desires, and
soliciting their supply and acceptance. And thus you see what that standing and
ordinary Operation is which the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer.

And now, before I proceed to determine the present case, I shall only farther
inquire, what it means by that Phrase of stinting and limiting the Spirit. In
short therefore, to stint or limit the Spirit, is a modern Phrase, of which
there is not the least intimation in Scripture, or Antiquity; but it is a term
of Art coined and invented by our Brethren, and applied onlyto the present
Controversy, concerning the lawfulness of Forms of Prayer. Which, by the way,
is a plain evidence, that this argument against Forms, viz. That they stint the
Spirit, is very new, since though Forms of Prayer were used not only in the
Scripture Ages, as I shall show hereafter, but also in all successive Ages of
Christianity; yet, till very lately, we never heard on syllable of stinting or
limiting the Spirit by them.

The meaning of which Phrase is this; That by using Forms of Prayer, we hinder
the Spirit from affording us some assistance in Prayer, which otherwise we
might reasonably expect from him: for so our Brethren explain the Phrase, viz.
That by confining our selves to a Form of Words, we restrain the Spirit from
giving us that assistance, which he ordinarily vouchsafes in conceived Prayer.

And now, having fully stated the Case, the resolution of it will be short and
easy. It has been shown at large, that there are two sorts of assistances in
Prayer which the Scripture attributes to the Spirit; the first extraordinary,
and temporary; viz. the immediate inspiration of the matter, and words of
Prayer: the second ordinary, and abiding; viz. exciting the devotion, and
proper affections of Prayer: If therefore the Spirit be stinted, hindered, or
restrained, by Forms of Prayer, it must be either from inspiring the words and
matter, or from exciting the affections of Prayer; as for the latter, to which
this Phrase of stinting is never applied by our Brethren, I shall discourse of
it at large in the third Case, wherein I shall endeavor to prove, that Forms
of Prayer are so far from restraining the devotion of it, that they very much
promote and improve it. And as for the former, viz. the inspiration of the
matter and words of Prayer, that I have proved was extraordinary, and intended
only as other miraculous Gifts were, for the first propagation of the Gospel;
and therefore since as to this matter, the Spirit has stinted himself, it is
certain, that Forms of Prayer cannot stint him; for how can that be stinted
which is not? and if now there be no such thing as immediate inspiration of
Prayer, how can it be limited by a Form of Prayer? In a word, if the Spirit of
his own accord has long since withdrawn this Gift of inspiration, how can it
be now said that he is restrained from communicating it by any cause without
him?

Case II. Whether the Use of Public Forms, be not a sinful neglect of the
Ministerial Gift of Prayer?
In order to the resolution of which Case, it would be necessary to give a
brief state of it, according as it is put, and urged by our Brethren. By the
Gift of Prayer then, they mean an ability to express our minds to God in
Prayer, or to offer up our desires and affections to him in words, befitting
the matter of them: which ability, say they, is given by God to his Ministers,
as a means of public Prayer, and in order to their being the Mouths of their
Congregations to God, to represent to him the common Cases and Necessities of
their People; and therefore since God, say they, has given us this Gift, as a
means of public Devotion, and in order to our offering up the Prayers of the
People, it may be justly questioned, whether we may lawfully omit the use of
it, by using public Forms of other men's composure.

Now, before I enter into a particular consideration of this Case, I shall
briefly premise these two things:

1. That this Case concerns the Clergy only, and not the Laity: For suppose
that it be unlawful for Ministers to omit the use of their own abilities to
express the Devotions of their Congregations, what is that to the People? are
they accountable for their Ministers faults? or will God reject their sincere
Devotions, because the Person that utters them is guilty of a sinful omission?
if so, it will be of dangerous consequence to them to join in any public
Prayers at all, whether they be Forms, or Extemporary; they being every whit as
accountable for the nonsense, impertinence, and irreverence of their Ministers
in the latter, as for their omitting the use of their own abilities in the
former: if therefore this omission be a sin, it is the sin of the Minister; as
for the People, they joined with him indeed, in offering up the matter of
Prayer, which is contained in the Form he pronounces; but they join not with
him in the omission of the use of his ability; that is his own proper act, and
deed; and therefore if it be unlawful, it is he, and he only that is accountable
for it: and if the matter of Prayer in which they join with him be good, and
expressed in decent and suitable words, they join with him in nothing but what
is acceptable to God, and it is not to be imagined that God will be angry with
them, because he neglected to express their desires in words of his own
composure and invention.

2. I shall also premise, that this is not the case of the Clergy of the Church
of England, who, though they stand obliged to the constant use of a stated
Liturgy, yet are not hereby restrained from the exercise of their own abilities
in public Prayer: for after they have finished the Service appointed in the
Liturgy, they are permitted to use their own conceived Prayers in the Pulpit:
in which they have the same liberty, that the dissenting Ministers can claim or
pretend to; that is, to express in their own words all the matter of public
Prayer, with all the sobriety, affection, and seriousness they are able; and
this permission being of long continuance, and hitherto uncontrolled by our
Church Governors, amounts to an allowance; and indeed it seems expressly allowed
in our 55th Canon, which directs, that before all Sermons, Lectures, and
Homilies, the Preachers and Ministers shall move the People to join with them
in Prayer, in this form, or to this effect, as briefly as conveniently they
may. Now that to this effect, as it stands opposed to this form, is meant some
Prayer of our own, composed to this purpose, seems evident from the general and
uninterrupted practice of the Church, which in doubtful cases, is the best
explication of her meaning. Since therefore the use of our Liturgy does not
exclude the exercise of our Gift of Prayer, but leaves us free to exert it, so
far as it is fit, that is, with convenient brevity, I see not how this Case can
concern our Clergy; for if the evil of Forms consists in the Ministers omission
of his own Gift, as this Case supposes, then where the use of Forms does not
oblige us to this omission, but leaves us as free to exercise this Gift, as
those are who use no Forms at all, the supposed evil is removed from it.

Having premised these things, I shall proceed to a particular resolution of
the Case; which I shall do in these following Propositions.

1. That this Ministerial Gift of Prayer, or ability to express in our own
words, the common Devotions of our Congregations to God, is either natural, or
acquired. It Is true, if we had any reason to believe, that in their admission
to holy Orders, God did inspire his Ministers with this ability, we might
thence more plausibly infer, that 'twas his will that we should ordinarily
exercise it, and that it was not lawful to neglect or omit it, by using Forms
of other men's composure; it being unlikely that God should inspire them with an
ability, which he did not intend they should make use of: but of Gods inspiring
us in our Ordination with this Gift, or Ability, we have not only no promise in
Scripture, which is the only foundation upon which we can reasonably expect it;
but in fact, we have no experience of any such matter among us: for not only
we, but the Dissenting Ministers must own, if they will speak ingenuously, that
just before their Ordination, they were as able to express the Devotions of a
Congregation, as they were just after; which shows that they had no new ability
to Pray, inspired in their Ordination: and as yet, I could never find any
proof, either from Scripture, or Experience, that this ability to Pray in words
of our own composure, had any thing more in it, than a promptness of invention
and speech; which some men have by nature, and which others have acquired by
art and practice; and if so, this ability is no otherwise the Gift of God, than
our natural strength and vigor, or our skill in Languages and History. And
methinks it is very strange, that after all this talk of the Gift of Prayer,
which is supposed ordinarily at least to be conferred on rightly ordained
Ministers, our Brethren should not be able to produce one Promise, wherein God
has engaged himself, to confer it; no nor one Text of Scripture, which implies
such a Promise; all that he has promised his Ministers is, to concur with
their honest endeavors, so far forth as it is necessary to enable them to
discharge the Duties of their Office, and to suppose that they cannot do this,
without praying Extempore, or in their own words, is to take the Matter in
question, for granted.

2. That this natural or acquired Gift, is no where appropriated by God to
prayer, but left common to other uses, and purposes: For though in Ministers
especially, it is ordinarily called a Gift of Prayer, yet it is no where styled
so in Scripture: indeed the ability of praying in unknown languages, is once
called a Gift, as I observed before, but as for this ordinary ability, whether
natural, or acquired, of praying in our native language, it is no where spoken
of in Scripture, under the name of a Gift of Prayer, nor is there the least
mention of any such ability given by God to men, purely to enable them to pray;
and unless our brethren can produce some Text of Scripture, which yet they
never attempted, wherein God has appropriated this Gift to the purpose of
Prayer, they must give us leave to conclude, that he has left it common to all
other honest uses, and purposes that it can be applied to; and that in short,
it is nothing but a freedom of Utterance, and Elocution, which in some is
natural, and in some acquired, by which they are enabled readily to express
their minds to God, or men; and therefore to how many honest purposes this
common Gift of God is applicable, to so many it is designed, and intended; and
consequently, may as well be called the Gift of Conversation in good company,
and the Gift of pleading at the Bar, and the Gift of disputing in the Schools,
or the Gift of Oratory in the Forum, as the Gift of Prayer in Private, or
Public worship; it being all but one, and the same Gift aplied to several
uses, and purposes; accordingly we find that those who have this Gift, have it
not only while they are speaking in Prayer, but when they are speaking upon
other occasions; and that ordinarily they can express themselves to Men with
the same readiness, and fluency in conversation, as they express their minds to
God in Prayer, which is a plain argument that their Gift is not appropriat to
Prayer, but common to all the other uses, and purposes of Elocution.

3. That this Gift of utterance not being appropriated by God to Prayer, may
upon just reason, be as lawfully omitted in Prayer, as in any other use or
purpose it is designed for: I do confess had God any where appropriated it to
the end of Prayer, those who have it, were obliged to use it to that end, and
to omit it ordinarily, by confining themselves to forms of other men's inditing,
would be to neglect a means of Prayer of Gods special appointment and
institution; for had he any where intimated to us, that he gave it us purely to
enable us to pray without any respect to any other end, we could not have
omitted the use of it in Prayer without crossing his intention, and frustrating
him of the only end for which he intended it, but since he has given us no
such intimation, we may justly conclude that he intends it in common for all
those honest ends to which it is applicable, and if so it is no more unlawful to
omit using it to one end than to another, so that either it must be wholly
unlawful to omit using our own Elocution to any purpose whatsoever whereunto it
may be honestly applied, or it must be lawful to omit it in Prayer, and
consequently supposing I have this Gift of utterance, either I may not use a
form in petitioning my Prince, or a Court of Justice, or I may use a form in
addressing my self to God in Prayer, since my Gift is common to both th^se
purposes, and no more appropriated to the one than the other, in short
therefore as for those common Gifts of God which are applicable to sundry
purposes, and which he intends no more for one than for another, it is left to
our own liberty and discretion whether we will apply them to this or that
particular purpose or no, and no man is obliged to use his Gift to all those
just and lawful purposes it is capable of, and if he has two Gifts which serve
to the same purpose, there is no doubt but he may lawfully omit the one, and
use the other as he sees occasion; and so it is with this Gift of utterance,
which is naturally serviceable to sundry excellent purposes, and among others
to this of expressing our minds to God in Prayer, but it being serviceable to
this in common with others, it is left to our liberty whether we will employ it
in this, in that, or in another purpose, and we are neither obliged to employ
it in all, nor in this more than in another, but if we have another Gift that
is serviceable to the purpose of Prayer as well as this of utterance, it is
left to our own pious discretion whether we will use this or the other, so that
unless our Brethren can prove that this Gift of utterance or Elocution is by
special command of God made an appropriate means of Public Prayer, they will
never be able to prove, either that it is more unlawful to omit the use of it
in Prayer, than in any other Office of Elocution, or that if we have any other
means of Prayer, we are determined to this more than to another.

4. That to read our desires to God in other Men's Words, is as much a means of
Prayer, as to speak them in our own, for to speak in our own Words, is no
otherwise a means of Public Prayer, than as it serves to express to God the
Common cases and necessities of the Congregation, and if these may be as well
expressed by Reading them in other Men's Words, as by speaking them in our own,
the end of Public Prayer is as effectually served by the one, as by the other,
and sure no man will deny, but that by a Form of Words composed by another, he
may express the common Devotions of a Congregation, as well as by extempore or
premeditated words of his own invention; for this would be in effect to say,
that none but himself can compose a public Prayer, or at least none so well as
he; for if another Prayer may be as expressive of the Devotions of a
Congregation as his own, I can see no reason why the reading of that may not be
as proper a means of public Prayer, as the speaking of this; here then are two
means of Prayer, viz. reading other men's Forms, and speaking our own
Conceptions, and therefore unless our Brethren can prove, that God has
expressly chosen the one, and rejected the other, they must acknowledge both to
be lawful; and if we cannot lawfully omit the one, because it is a means of
Prayer, neither can we lawfully omit the other, because it is so too; and
therefore either we must be obliged to use them both, which is impossible at
the same time, or we must be left at liberty to use either, according to our
own discretion. In sum therefore, since we are not inspired with any peculiar
Gift of Prayer in our Ordination, and since our Gift of praying in our own
words is not appropriated by God to this use, but left in common to other
purposes, and since what is not appropriated by God, may be lawfully omitted,
when there are other means of Prayer, and since in fact there is another means
of Prayer besides this of praying in our own words, viz. praying in the words
of others, which God has lost as free to us as the former, it plainly follows
from the whole, that to omit the use of our own Gift, and in the stead of it to
use that other Gift of praying in the words of others, is not in it self any
way sinful or unlawful.

Case III. Whether the Use of Public Forms of Prayer does not deaden the
Devotion of Prayer?
For thus our Brethren argue, that by the command of God we are obliged not
only to pray, but to pray with the utmost devotion we are able, and accordingly
to use such means of Prayer as are most apt to heighten and intend our
devotion, and thus far we agree with them; if therefore Forms are in
themselves, and not through our fault and erroneous prejudice, less apt to
quicken and raise devotion than conceived Prayers, it will be granted of all
hands, that this is a good Argument against the use of them. This therefore is
the case wherein we differ, our Brethren say, that Forms of Public Worship,
(for it is that we are now discoursing of,) are in themselves apt to dispirit
and deaden the Devotions of those that use them; we say the contrary, viz. that
public Forms are in themselves more apt to improve and quicken the common
Devotions, than Extemporary Prayers of the Ministers own conceiving; in order
therefore to the clearing and full resolution of this Case, we will briefly
enquire into these three things:

1. What these advantages to Public Devotion are, which conceived, or
extemporary Prayers pretend to? 2. Whether these Advantages are not for the
most part fantastical and imaginary, and whether so far as they are real they
are not much more peculiar to Forms than to extempore Prayer? 3. Whether
besides these common advantages public Forms have not peculiar advantages,
which conceived Prayers cannot pretend to?
1. We will enquire what those advantages to the public Devotions are which
conceived or extemporary Prayers pretend to; in short, it is pretended in the
behalf of conceived Prayers, that they do much more fix the attention, and
raise the intention of the Peoples minds in Prayer, than public Forms; that
is, that they do more confine the rovings of men's thoughts in Prayer, and keep
their minds more attentive to it, and that they do much more warm and enliven
their affections in it; for, say our Brethren, the Devotions of the people are
very much raised or deaden'd by the performance of the Minister, according as
he is more or less devout in it; and as for the Minister, he must needs be much
more devout in a Prayer of his own conceiving, than in the use of a public
Form; because first, say they, it is impossible for him to keep his mind so
attentive in reading a Prayer, as in conceiving one in his own mind, and
speaking it from his own conceptions; the care of performing which naturally
bounds the wanderings of his thoughts, and keeps them more fixed and attentive;
and secondly, because when he utters his words immediately from his affections,
his thoughts have not that scope to wander, as when he reads them out of a
Book. And as conceived does more fix the attention of the Minister, so it does
also more raise his intention, or in other words, more warm and inflame his
affections; for first, whereas in reading a Form, his affections follow his
words, and are raised and excited by them, in conceived Prayer, his words
follow his affections, and are immediately uttered from, and indicted by them;
and secondly, how is it possible, say they, that the words of another, which he
reads out of a Form, should so well express his affections as his own; besides,
thirdly, that while he is reading his Form, his soul is so intent in directing
his eye to read, that it cannot direct its affections to God with that fervor
and intention as it might do in conceived Prayer. These are the supposed helps
which the Ministers devotion, and from his the Peoples receive from conceived
Prayers, above what Forms of Prayer can afford: and as conceived Prayer has
these peculiar advantages to raise the Ministers devotion, and by his the
Peoples, so it has another advantage by which it more immediately influences
the devotion of the People, viz. that the matter of it is still expressed in new
words, which must needs much more affect the attention of the People, than when
it is always expressed in the same words without any variation; And this, so far
as I can gather from the Writings of our Brethren, is the sum of what they
plead in behalf of conceived Prayer, as to its peculiar advantageousness to
public Devotion above stated Forms.

2. Therefore we will enquire whether these Advantages are not in a great
measure imaginary, and whether so far as they are real, they are not much more
peculiar to Forms, than to conceived Prayer. And here I will readily grant,
that by expressing a serious and devout affection, the Minister does really
advantage the Devotion of the Congregation, even as by his good example in all
other things he excites the people to a pious and virtuous imitation; in whose
eyes devotion never looks so amiable, as when it is expressed in serious and well
composed words, accompanied with a devout, a sober, and affectionate behavior:
both which are equally necessary to excite the devotion of the People: if
therefore it be really true, that the use of conceived or extempore Prayer is
in its own nature most apt to fix the attention, and excite the intention of
the Minister in Prayer, it must be confessed that herein it has the advantage of
Forms. 1. Therefore we will inquire whether these advantages it pretends to, as
to the exciting the Ministers attention in Prayer, be real, or no: The first
advantage is, that the very conceiving the matter of his Prayer, and speaking
it from his own conceptions, does naturally more bind his attention, than the
reading it out of a Form; but I beseech you, what does it more bind him to
attend to? is it to attend to the words and phrases? if so, then it is not to
attend to the acts of Prayer, or is it to attend to those acts which are the
proper business of Prayer? that is to be ashamed of sin, and to bewail it in
confession, to be sensible of the common wants, and common dependancies upon
God for supply in petition, to admire God's perfections, and gratefully
commemorate his goodness in praise and thanksgiving; for in these things the
true devotion both of Minister and People consists; and it is only by being an
example of these in his Prayer, that the Minister excites the devotion of his
people: it is by confessing sin, as if he were ashamed of, and sorry for it,
that he excites their shame and sorrow; by petitioning for mercy, as if he were
sensible of the want of it, and did heartily desire it, and depended upon God
for it, that he excites their sense of need, and their desire, and hope of
relief, and supply; by praising and thanking God, as if he heartily admired his
excellencies, and gratefully resented his goodness that he excites their
admiration and gratitude; that mode of Prayer therefore which is most apt to
fix the Ministers attention to these acts of devotion, must needs be most apt
to excite the devotions of the people: Now as for the mode of praying from his
own conceptions, I really think that it is much more apt to unfix the Ministers
attention to these acts, than that of praying by a Form; because it forces him
to attend to other things at the same time, viz. the recollection of matter,
and invention of suitable expressions, which must more or less divert him from
attending to the inward acts of devotion, according as his fancy and tongue are
more or less pregnant and voluble; it being impossible for him to attend at the
same time, to several things, as closely as he may to one: but when he prays by
a Form, his matter and words are ready before him, and so he has nothing else
to do, but to attend to his devotion; and certainly when a man has but one
thing to do in Prayer, he may attend to that more fixedly and closely, than
when he has two or three: it is true, by being released from attending to the
invention of his matter and words, his mind is more at leisure to wander, and
instead of attending as he ought more closely to the acts of devotion, by
employing those thoughts which in conceived Prayer he imploys in invention in a
closer attention to the acts of devotion, he may, if he please, permit them to
rove abroad; but if he does, the fault is in himself, and not in the Form he
prays by: the design of his Form is to release his mind from all other business
in Prayer, but only that of inward devotion, which is the life of Prayer, that
so it may be the more attentive to it: but if instead of applying his mind to
this design, he suffers it to wander abroad, he makes an ill use of a good
thing, and converts that which is in it self a help to devotion, into an
occasion of indevotion: but it is objected, that while his thoughts are employed
in inventing the matter and words of his Prayer, they are attending to the duty
of Prayer, and while they are so, they are well employed, though they should
not be so attentively fixed upon the inward devotion of Prayer, as they might be
in the use of a Form: to which in short I answer, That to invent the matter and
words of Prayer, is not to pray, but to study a Prayer; and till our Brethren
have proved, that our inventing the matter and words, is a part of our duty of
Prayer, which is the Question in debate between us, we can by no means grant,
that our attention to it is attending to the duty of Prayer; we believe that
when we pray devoutly by a Form, we discharge the whole duty of Prayer, though
we do not invent the matter and words our selves, and when we see the contrary
proved, we will not only yield that to attend to inventing, is to attend to the
duty of Prayer; but that it is unlawful to pray by a Form: but in the mean time
we can yield neither one, nor the other. Seeing then that Forms are in themselves
more apt to fix the Ministers attention to the inward acts of devotion, and
seeing that it is by attending to these acts, or at least by seeming to do so,
that he influences the attention of the people, it necessarily follows, that in
this respect Forms are more advantageous to public devotion, than conceived or
extemporary Prayer. But then,

2. It is pretended that conceived Prayer is in it self more apt to fix the
Ministers attention in Prayer than Forms, because in conceived Prayer he utters
his words immediately from his affections, by reason of which his thoughts have
not that scope to wander, as when he reads them out of a Book: to which, in
short, I answer, That if he has devout affections, he may utter his words as
immediately from his affections in a Form, as in a conceived Prayer; and
therefore this pretense is altogether insignificant; for his own invention is
as much a medium between his affections and utterance in Praying extempore, as
the Book in praying by a Form; as for instance, suppose that in confessing sin,
he be affected with shame and sorrow, he cannot express it in words, but by
using his own invention, or a Form, and whether he uses one, or the other, he
uses a medium to express it; and why those words which he reads should not be
as immediate to his affections as those which he invents, provided they do as
fully express them, I am not able to apprehend; in short therefore, if he has
devout affections, they will at least as much confine his thoughts from
wandering when he prays by Form, as when he prays Extempore, if he has not, he
cannot utter his words from his affections, either in the one or the other.

2. We will inquire whether those advantages which our Brethren ascribe to
conceived Prayer above Forms, as to the raising the Ministers intention in
Prayer, be real, or no: first they pretend that in reading a Form, his
affections follow his words, and are raised and excited by them; whereas in
praying extempore, his words follow his affections. This I confess is a very
curious distinction, but I am not able to apprehend either what foundation
there is for it, or how it is applicable to the matter; for first what
necessity is there either that his affections should follow his words in a
Form, more than in a conceived Prayer, or that his words should follow his
affections in a conceived Prayer, more than in a Form? why may not a man be
devoutly affected with the matter he prays for, before he expresses in a Form
of words, as well as before he expresses it extempore? since if he be
acquainted with the Form, he cannot but know beforehand what he is to pray for
in it; and therefore if he be truly devout, cannot but be affected with it,
before he prays for it; and so on the other hand, why may not a man as well be
unaffected with the matter he prays for in conceived Prayer, till he has
expressed it, as with the matter he prays for in a Form? or what reason can be
assigned, why the affection may not follow the words, and be excited by them in
the one, as well as in the other? may not a man pray inconsiderately, and
suffer his tongue, to run before his heart in both? and may not his affections
which were before asleep, be awakened by the sound of his words in either? In
short therefore, since in praying by a Form, a man may know as well at least,
and has as much time to consider the matter he is to pray for beforehand, as
in praying extempore; what reason is there why it should be more difficult for
him to affect his soul beforehand with it in the one, than in the other? and
if it be equally hard and easy in both, than it is equally possible for his
affections to go before, or follow his words in either. But then secondly,
suppose it were true, that in conceived Prayer the words follow the affections,
and in a Form the affections the words, how does it from hence follow, that
conceived Prayer does more intend and heighten the affections, than Forms? what
reason can there be assigned, why those acts of inward affections, which follow
our words in Prayer, should not be as intense and vigorous as those which go
before them? why may not a man exert as flagrant an act of desire, immediately
after he has expressed his Petition, as immediately before, especially if that
be true which our Brethren affirm, and which most men find by experence; that
the words of Prayer, if they are proper and expressive, do naturally quicken
and excite the affections; so that if it be the matter only that excites the
affections, they may be as vehemently excited after the words are spoken as
before; if it be the words also, the affections must be less vehemently excited
before the words, than after: in short therefore, when the Minister prays in
public, whether it be by Form, or extempore, he prays on, without making any
long pauses between one Petition and another, so that as soon as ever he has
conceived the matter, he expresses it, and whether it be immediately before or
immediately after, or while he is expressing it, that he joins his affection to
it, there can be no reason assigned, if it be the matter he joins them to, why
he should more affect it now, than then, there being nothing in the order of
before or after, to raise and excite his affection: and if so, his affections
following his words, though it were necessary to his praying by a Form, can be
no disadvantage to his Devotion, nor the contrary an advantage to it, though it
were necessary to his praying extempore: but then secondly, it is pretended
that the Minister cannot so well express his devout affections in other men's
words, as in his own, and therefore when he prays in a Form of words of other
men's composure, it is impossible his affections should be so livelily
represented, as when he prays extempore: To which in short I answer, That the
Ministers business in public Prayer is not to express the degrees and heighths
of his own affections, or to acquaint God of the particular and extraordinary
fervencies of his own soul: for in public he prays as the common mouth of the
Congregation, and therefore he ought not to express to God in the name of the
People, any matter that is peculiar to himself, or to represent his own
particular extraordinary fervours, as the common case of the Congregation, but
his words ought to be such as every honest and ordinary Christian may truly
join with, as the sense and meaning of his own soul; and for him to express to
God in the name of the People, such heights of Devotion as few or none of them
are arrived to, is as bad as to confess in their names such sins to God, as few
or none of them are guilty of. So that if the Minister has such peculiar
heighths of affection as can be fitly expressed only in his own words, he ought
not to tell God of them in a public Prayer, in which he is to express nothing
but what is the true and common sense of every honest and sincere Christian;
and this certainly may be as fitly expressed in another man's words, as in his
own, unless we will suppose that no man can so well express the common sense of
a Christian Congregation, as he that prays extempore, yea, and that he himself
cannot so fitly express it in premeditated words, as in extemporary ones;
neither of which I suppose any sober Dissenter will affirm. But then Thirdly
and lastly, it is also pretended, that in the use of Forms, the Ministers soul
is so engaged in directing his eye to read, that it cannot be so intensly
affected with what he prays for, as when he prays extempore; in answer to
which, I leave the Reader to judge, whether the recollecting of the matter of
Prayer, the disposing of it into a due method, and inventing of proper phrases
to express it, (neither of which are acts of Prayer, as I showed before) must
not much more busy and engage the Ministers soul when he is praying publicly,
than the directing of his eye to read; that is, whether one that has so
perfect a habit of reading as that he can readily exercise it without employing
one thought about it, cannot read a Prayer more easily, than invent one? for so
much easier as it is to read than to invent a Prayer, so much less his soul
has to divert it from being affected with what he prays for when he prays by a
Form, than when he prays extempore. And thus you see that those advantages
which are ascribed to conceived Prayer, as to the raising the Ministers
Devotion, are such as are either imaginary, or as ought rather to be ascribed
to Forms.

But it is pretended, that Forms of Prayer do not only deaden the Ministers
Devotion, and so by consequence the Peoples, but that they do also deaden the
Peoples by a more direct and immediate influence, because they still express
the matter of Prayer in the same words, which when the People have often heard,
will be apt to cloy their attention, whereas the very newness and variety of
words, in which conceived Prayers are expressed, does naturally awaken and
entertain their minds and keep them more fixed and intent. For answer whereunto,
let us consider upon what it is that this novelty and variety of expression
does keep our minds so fixed and intent on, is it upon the matter of Prayer?
doubtless, No; for that is generally the same, especially the matter of public
Prayer, and therefore if it were that that fixed our minds, 'twould as well do
it in the same as in new and varied expressions; and since the matter of
public Prayer is old, and for the main will be always so, why should it not as
well affect us in old words as in new, provided they expressed it with equal
propriety and fitness; but if it be merely the newness of the phrase it is
expressed in, that fixes their minds: there is nothing in it but a mere
surprise and amusement of their fancies, which instead of fixing does unfix
their minds from the internal acts of Prayer, and divert its attention from the
devotion to the oratory of it; so that this fixation of their minds on the
novelty of the phrase and method of Prayer is so far from being an advantage,
that it is a distraction to their devotion. As for Forms of Prayer, there is no
doubt but they may be composed with the same advantage of expression and
pronounced with the same affection as the Prayers of our own extempore
composure, and if they are so, they will have the same advantage of the music
of speech to excite the Devotions of the People; but as for novelty of method
and expression, that may indeed entertain their minds and divert them from
roving out to other objects, but even this entertainment is a roving and
excursion of their minds from the acts of Prayer, which, while they are amused
with the novelty of the phrase and method of the Prayer, can be no more intent
on the devotion of it, than while they are busied about secular objects and
affairs. And indeed that seeming devotion that is raised in the minds of the
People by the gingling of the Ministers words about their fancies, is generally
false and counterfeit, for as words do naturally impress the fancy, so the
fancy does naturally excite the sensitive affections; so that when the
affections are excited merely by the art and music of the words of Prayer, it
is not Devotion but Mechanism; for there is no doubt but men may be and many
times are strangely affected with the words of Prayer when they have not the
least spark of true devotion to the matter of it; for when they fancy the
matter of Prayer and are affected with it merely for the sake of the words, the
movement of their affection will cease as soon as the impression is worn out
which the words make upon their fancies, and if in the mean time they happen to
hear any other matter expressed in the same affectionate words, they will in all
probability be as much affected with it, as they are now with the matter of
Prayer, but if the mind be truly devout and does affect the matter of Prayer
for it self and not for the sake of the words, I cannot imagine how new words
should any way advantage its devotion, unless they were to express new matter.
Since therefore the matter of public Prayer neither is nor ought to be new,
unless it be upon extraordinary public emergencies, what color of reason can
there be assigned, why the devotion of the hearers should be more affected with
it in new words than in old, supposing it be expressed and pronounced with the
same propriety and affection in both. And thus I have shown that those
advantages of public Devotion which are pretended to be peculiar to conceived
Prayers, are for the most part imaginary, and that so far forth as they are
real they are more peculiar to Forms of Prayer, I proceed to the third and last
enquiry, viz.

3. Whether there are not sundry advantages of public Devotion peculiar to
Forms of Prayer, which conceived Prayers cannot pretend to? That there are, I
do affirm, and will endeavor to prove by these following Instances.

1. One great advantage that is peculiar to public Forms of Prayer, is, That
the People may address themselves to them with greater preparation; for if they
please, they may peruse the words beforehand, and consider the sense and
matter of them, and endeavor to affect their minds with it; as for instance,
when I know beforehand what words my sins will be confessed in, when I am to
join in the public Devotions, I can consider beforehand the sense and meaning
of them, and prepare such affection as are suitable to them; as suppose the
confession be that of our Church's Liturgy, wherein we begin with Almighty and
most merciful Father; I can consider the meaning of these words before I come
to Church; and from the consideration of God's almighty and most merciful
nature, excite my affections to an awful dread of his power, and an ingenuous
sense of his mercy; by which when I come to join with these words in the
public confession, I shall be duly affected with the sense of them, and my
soul will beready melted into all that filial sorrow and humiliation for my
sin, with the consideration that I have offended by it an Almighty and most
merciful Father suggests; and so if I consider, and apply beforehand all the
rest of the confession, I shall thereby tune and set my affections to the sense
and matter of each particular phrase and expression in it; which 'twill be
impossible for me to do when I am to join with an extempore Prayer; because I
cannot know beforehand what the phrases and expressions of it will be; besides
which, upon the words of public Forms, there may be written excellent
Paraphrases and Meditations, such as is that of the Companion to the Temple; by
reading of which the Devotions of the People may be very much excited and
improved; which is such an advantage as the words of extempore Prayer will not
admit of.

2. Another advantage peculiar to public Forms, is, That in joining with them
the People may pray with more understanding, than they can well be supposed to
do in conceived and extempore Prayer, wherein generally the Minister is forced
to make use of such words and expressions as come first to hand, having not
leisure enough to pick and choose his words, without making long and undecent
pauses and interruptions, so that sometimes he is fain to use a hard word,
which perhaps not half the People understand, because an easier does not come
to his mind, and sometimes to entangle his expressions with long Parentheses,
sometimes to darken his matter with far fetched Metaphors, or to express it by
halfs in broken Sentences, and sometimes to run out his Periods to an
inordinate length, by which the sense of them is very much clouded and
obscured: these and such like inconveniences all the World knows do very
commonly attend extempore Effusions: and let a man's fancy and tongue be never
so fluent and voluble, he can never be so secure of expressing himself
intelligibly to the People when he prays extempore, as he might be if he took
time enough beforehand to choose his words, and form his expressions, so that
the People may be much more secure of understanding what they pray for when
they join with a Form, than when they join with an extempore Prayer; for to be
sure in composing public Forms more care will be taken of the phrase, that the
words may fit the matter, and express it intelligibly to the People, than there
can be in extempore Prayer; which admits of no long consideration, no
alteration upon second thoughts, no after-scanning or revisal, as Forms of
Prayer do, but it must pass as it happens, whether it be intelligible or no, by
reason of which those who occupy the room of the unlearned, are many times
forced to break off praying for want of understanding what the words and
expressions of the Prayer mean; for whether the Prayer be spoken in an unknown
Tongue, or in words that are unintelligible to the People, it is all one to
them, for still their understanding is unfruitful, and so long their devotion
must be broken and interrupted.

3. Another advantage peculiar to public Forms, is, That the People may join
with them with much more faith and ussurance, than they can with extempore
Prayers; it must doubtless be of great advantage to a man's devotion in public,
to be satisfied beforehand that the matter he is to pray for is good and
acceptable to God; for by this means he will be enabled to pray on with a
stronger faith and surer hope of being heard and accepted; but this a man can
never be satisfied of aforehand, that joins in extempore Prayer, unless he has
an implicit faith in his Minister, that he will say nothing to God but what is
true, nor ask any thing of him but what is lawful; which how he can certainl
depend on, I cannot imagine, especially considering that the Minister who prays
is many times a stranger to him, both as to his person and principles, and for
all that he knows may be very erroneous, rash, and unadvised, or very ignorant
of what is matter of Prayer, and what not; And even those Ministers whom he
knows, and can best confide in, are not always so very sure of their hands, but
that some times they may mistake their passion for their zeal, and reak their
anger or faction in their Prayers, or in the heat and hurry of speaking what
comes next, let drop an error before they are aware, or express themselves so
doubtfully, or unadvisedly, that an honest and discerning mind may not be able
to join with him; so that in joining with an extempore Prayer, it is very
necessary, (as has been observed by an excellent Divine upon this Argument)
that as we go along with the Minister, we should judge of what he says before
our hearts consent to it, and if it should so happen, that by reason of the
novelty, or ambiguity, affectation, or indigestedness of his expressions, or
any such rub in our way, we cannot readily judge, but are fain to hesitate, and
deliberate upon this, or that passage; in the mean time he who prays is gone
on, and now upon a new subject, and we are left behind, and at a loss, and
perhaps miserably confounded before our Devotion can close in again, and no
sooner it may be is it well fixed, but it is led away again into the same
inconveniency and maze: all which may be easily prevented by the use of public
Forms; of the matter and expressions of which, the People may easily satisfy
themselves aforehand, and when this is done, they will have nothing else to do,
but to pray and keep their holy affections a going, they will have no new
Judgment to make of what is said, no doubtful phrase or matter to examine, and
their judgment being satisfied before they begin to pray, with the words and
matter of the Prayer, their devotion may go on with it, without pause or stop
in an even and uninterrupted current.

4. Another advantage peculiar to public Forms, is, That they have much less
in them to divert the affefections of the People from the matter of Prayer. For
as for extempore Prayer, it is very apt to disturb the devotion of the People,
whether it be well or ill performed, if he who performs it hesitates, or
blunders, or expresses himself in crude, undecent, or fantastic phrases,
instead of attending to the matter, and joining their affections with it, they
will in all probability be pitying, or contemning him, carping at what comes
next, and running descants on his weakness and impertinence; if he perform
well, and his method be orderly and artificial, his matter good, and his
expressions fluent and apt, and easy, they will in all probability be admiring
his parts, and entertaining their curiosity with the elegancy of his phrase,
the solidity and promptness of his judgment, and the art and finery of his
composure; either of which must very much divert and call off their affections
from the matter; whereas while they are joining in public Forms, to which they
have been accustomed, and in which neither the strength, nor weakness of the
Ministers parts appears, they have none of all these snares to entangle their
devotion: for being used to the words, and phrase, and method, they have no
temptation to concern their minds any farther about them, than as they convey
the matter of the Prayer to them, and having none of the abovenamed
diversions, to carry away their minds from the matter, they may doubtless, if
they please, attend to it with much more fervor and affection.

5. Another peculiar advantage to the Peoples Devotion in joining with public
Forms, is, That they are more secured as to the decency and solemnity of their
public Worship; and I suppose there is no body will question, but that the
decent and solemn performance of public Worship, is highly advantageous to the
Devotion of the People. But now whilst they join in extempore Prayers, the
decency and solemnity of the performance, does altogether depend upon the
ability and present disposedness of the Minister; so that if the Minister
happen to be a man of a mean elocution, of an unready memory, or an unfruitful
invention, it is impossible the Office should be performed with that decency
and solemnity, that is necessary to affect the minds, and excite the devotions
of the People; yea, instead of that perhaps, the wretched dullness, the
blundering, confusion, and impertinence of the performance, may turn their
devotion into scorn and laughter; for of this I have seen too many sad
experiments: but suppose the Minister be a man of pregnant parts, and ready
invention and elocution, yea and of great Piety and Devotion too, yet it is
possible he may be frequently liable to great indispositions of body, and mind,
to dullness, and inadvertency, to wandering, and distraction of thoughts, to
deficiencies of invention, and failures of memory, and encumbrances of mind,
with outward cares and accidents; and if he be, what remedy is there, but that
he must many times pray confusedly, and omit a great deal of the matter of
Prayer, and utter a great deal of it in broken or undecent expressions? and how
can he avoid being sometimes at a loss, both for words and matter, and being
forced to supply the present defects of his invention, with fulsome repetitions
of what went before? and how is it possible almost but that a great deal of
slat and empty nonsense, a great many crude and undigested conceptions, and
rash and unadvised expressions should escape from his lips before he is aware?
and this, if he has any grain of modesty in him, must, upon the least
reflection, put him into a greater confusion, and so amaze, and bewilder him,
that throughout the whole Prayer perhaps, he will hardly be able to recover
himself to any consistency of thoughts: Now is it not a hard case, that the
decency and solemnity of the public Prayers of a Congregation, should depend
upon the uncertain and variable temper and disposition of one single person; so
as that if he happen to be indisposed or disordered in his body or mind, the
Devotions of 500 or 1000 persons must partake of his disorders and
distractions; for how much soever he is indisposed, their Prayer can be no
better than what he is able to pour out extempore, and how flatly, unadvisedly
or confusedly soever he prays, they must pray after him, or not pray at all;
which vast inconvenience is wholly cured and prevented, by a well composed Form
of Prayer, for how weak soever the Ministers parts be, or how much soever he
may be at present indisposed, if he can but read distinctly and seriously, the
Devotion of the People will not be at all affected or influenced by it, for
whatsoever his parts, or present temper be, they will be sure to find an
orderly and methodical Prayer to join with; a Prayer that is comprehensive of
all their common cases and necessities; that is sober and good, mature and well
advised as to the matter; that is full and plain and decent as to the phrase
and expression of it; and in a word, that is every way suited to all the parts
and ends and offices of public Devotion; And if they please, they may satisfy
themselves beforehand, that there is nothing in the Prayer they are to join
with, but what becomes public Worship, which is the most serious and solemn
thing in the World.

6. Another peculiar advantage of public Forms, is, That in joining with them
the People may be better secured of the reality and sincerity of their own
Devotion. For in joining with extempore Prayers, there is no doubt but they
may, and many times do mistake the tickling of their fancics, for true and
sincere Devotion; for their fancies being surpised, and amused, merely by the
novelty of the expressions, will naturally influence their sensitive passions,
and chase them into such warmths as an undiscerning judgment may easily mistake
for the holy fervours of Devotions; they find themselves strangely heated in
the Prayer, and upon that immediately conclude, that they are wonderfully
devout, without ever enquiring, whether it be the matter, or the phrase and
expression that heats them; and so from those transports of passion, which are
merely the effects of new and surprising words, striking briskly on their
fancies, they many times take occasion to flatter themselves into a great
opinion of their Piety and Godliness, whereas many of these persons are
notoriously immoral in their lives, and utterly disaffected to the matter they
pray for with so much seeming earnestness and affection; which is a plain
argument, that their affection is not to the matter, but merely to the words
and expressions; and in all probability the same surprisingness of expression
would have as much affected them at a Play, as it does at a Prayer: thus for
instance, when they hear God or Christ spoken of, and their goodness and
perfections represented in a new and surprising strain of expressions, their
fancy many times is strangely smitten with it, and this makes their spirits
flow in a sweet and placid torrent to their heart; and by their frisking about
it, to sooth and tickle it into great complacency and pleasure, till at last it
opens and dilates it orifices, and the grateful flood breaks in, and drowns it
in delight and ravishment; and yet all this many times, instead of being a real
complacency of their souls in God, is only a complacency of their fancies in
the phrase by which he is described and represented, and had they heard the
Hero of Play described in the same phrase, they might probably have been moved
to the same affection to him, as they are now to God and their Savior; for the
same kind of influence that new and surprising expressions have upon men's
fancies in Prayer, they will have when applied to other matters; And if we will
believe Plutarch, it was an ordinary thing with the Greek Sophists, by their
honied words, surprising phrases, singing tones, and effeminate accents, to
excite their Auditors into a kind of Bacchical Enthusiasm; and no doubt but
those hearers, of whom he there speaks, who were wont to applaud their Orators
at the end of their Declamations with a (...), divinely, heavenly, unimitably
spoken; found themselves as much moved, as many a man does at an extempore
Prayer, who yet verily believes, that it is not merely a movement of his fancy,
but of his sincere and true devotion. This therefore is a great disadvantage of
extempore Prayer in public, that merely by amusing the fancies of the people
with the surprising novelty of its expressions, it puts them into fits of
counterfeit devotion, and makes them many times imagine that they are heartily
affected with the matter of the Prayers, when it is merely the phrase of it that
by striking on their fancies, moves their sensitive affection. But whether this
movement of affection be fancy, or devotion, a man may much more easily
distinguish when he joins with a Form, than when he joins with an extempore
Prayer; for he being acquainted aforehand with the phrases and expressions of
the Form, it is not to be supposed, that they should much surprise and amuse
his fancy, and therefore if notwithstanding that, he finds himself heartily
affected in the Prayer, he may much more securely conclude, that it is the
matter, and not merely the words that moves and affects him. And thus, with all
plainness and sincerity, I have endeavored to represent those peculiar
advantages which Forms of Prayer have above extempore ones, as to the
quickening and improving the Devotions of the People: I might have given other
Instances of it, but these I think are sufficient to determine the case in
debate, and to convince any unprejudiced man, that pious and well composed
Forms, are so far from deadening the public Devotions, that they contribute
sundry great advantages to it. And indeed if public Forms do deaden the
Peoples Devotion, it must be either as they always confine the Devotions of the
People to the same set of words, which, as I have proved at large, is a great
advantage to their Devotion; or as they do pro tempore confine them to a
certain set of words; in which sense the Ministers extempore Prayer is a Form
to the People, and does as much confine their Devotions to a certain set of
words, pro tempore, as any stated Form whatsoever.

And now, if after all this, it be objected by our Brethren, that they find by
Experience, which is the best Argument, that Forms do actually deaden their
Devotion, I would beseech them seriously to consider, whether this experience
of theirs be not founded in an unreasonable prejudice; and if it be, whether
it is fit that their unreasonable prejudice should prescribe to the whole
Church? it is certain, that there are other men as truly pious and devout as
they, who find by experience, that joining with the public Forms is a great
advantage to their Devotion; so that here is experience against experience; and
certainly where there are two contrary experiences of the same thing, they
cannot both proceed from the nature of the thing; but one, or the other must
necessarily arise from the disposition and temper of those who are conversant
about it: Now I have showed that Forms of Prayer are in themselves real
advantages to public Devotion, and that they are so, there are many thousands
of good Christians can attest by their own experience; and therefore if our
Brethren do not experience the same, the fault must lie in their own prejudice,
or temper, and there is no doubt to be made, but would they heartily endeavor
to cure their own prejudice, and to dispossess their minds of those groundless
Piques they have entertained against our Liturgy; would they but peruse it with
impartial eyes; consider the contents, and labor to affect their minds with
the sense and matter of it; they would quickly find the same experience of its
advantageousness to public Devotion, as those blessed Martyrs did who composed
it, used, and at last died for it, and valued every Leaf of it as an
inestimable treasure; and as we should consent in our experience, so we should
also in our communion, and with one heart and one mouth glorify our Father
together.

FINIS.

