THE CASE STATED between the CHURCH of ENGLAND AND THE DISSENTERS, Wherein the
first is proved to be the Only True CHURCH, and the latter plainly
demonstrated from their own Writings, and those of all the Reformed Churches,
to be downright Schismatics. Collected from the best Authors, on either side
and made Public for the Conviction of those who have revived matter of
Controversy, and are finding fault at this time of day with the London Cases,
when they dropped the Dispute while their Authors were living. By E. S. D. D.

Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed victa Catoni. -- Lucan. London, Printed and
Sold by John Nut ne^^ Stationers' Hall. MDCC.

TO THE READER.
THE Dissenters having again taken the Field, and revived a Dispute which had
been some time laid aside, I could neither think it useless or impertinent to
rise up in Defense of that Holy Religion, against which they are declared
Enemies; and vindicate the Best of Churches in its Excellency of Government,
and Purity of Doctrine. And though many Learned Persons have already obliged the
Public with unanswerable Discourses in Her Favor, and left us sufficient
Arguments of the Goodness of Her Worship and Discipline, yet since Her
Adversaries have rallied again, and taking the Advantage of the Death of some
of Her Champions, as Dr. Scot, Dr. Calamy, etc. are employed in picking Holes
in the London Cases, I could not but think it very proper to remind 'em of the
Strength of what they are attacking, and give 'em the true Knowledge of Her
Beauties, whilst they are making Enquiries after Her Faults. In order to this,
I have collected the Arguments which have been made use of on both sides, and
given the Reader the true State of a Controversy, which none but Men of
invincible Obstinacy would maintain, after such clear Convictions, that the
Church which I have the Honor to be a Member of, by making use of Her
Ceremonies, Worships God in the Beauty of Holiness, and by breathing forth Her
desires in Set Forms of Prayer, shows a Reverence which is due to Him that made
Her. I need say very little in relation to the Names of those Authors I have
had recourse to on either side. They are Gentlemen of known Authority by their
Writings, and are Eminent in the several Congregations* they belong to. But the
Reader will be satisfied after a due perusal, that the Dissenters have Eyes and
see not, have Ears and will not hear, and like the Adder are deaf to the voice
of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely; else they would fling themselves into
the Arms of a Church whose Constitution is Unity, and whose Purity so
Persuasive, as might make even her Enemies to be at Peace with Her.

THE CASE STATED, etc.
WHEN God Almighty first gave a Being to Man, and did him the Honor of
permitting him to wear his Makers Image; He appointed him no other Guide to be
directed by, than the Law of Nature or Reason, under the Government of which he
lived the first two thousand Years after his Creation. But as the Law of Reason
was not sufficient of it self, to keep Man in that unalterable Obedience which
was due to his Creator; it was but necessary to give him more positive Rules to
Walk by. Wherefore the Lord commanded Moses to write a Law for his People,
which bears the Name of the Mosaical, and sometimes of the Moral Law, and is
contained in the Old Testament. This Law was revealed to Men by the Mediation
of an Angel; but it consisting chiefly of Types and Ceremonies, and
consequently not having that plainess which was necessary for Humane
Capacities, as that of the New Testament, God did then often appear to his
people Himself, and instruct 'em more immediately in the ways he would have 'em
go by, and the paths it was His will they should shun.

And Men lived under this Law of the Old Testament, superadded to the Law of
Nature (which is the same in reasonable Creatures) till God vouchsafed to
convey the Knowledge of His pleasure to us, after a more full and excellent
Manner, by the Mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, in the
New Testament: And this Law of the New Testament is that which we are directed
by to this very day, being absolved by it from our Obedience to a great part of
the Old. Vid. Galat. 4.

And as this Law of the New Covenant was revealed to us after a more excellent
manner, than that of the Old; so the Precepts which are contained in it are
most extraordinary, having nothing in 'em which is either superfluous or
wanting toward the leading Men to Heaven on very reasonable Conditions. It is
so adapted and fitted to all Conditions of Men, that the very meanest
Capacities may easily understand every thing contained in it, which is
necessary to their Salvation. And this Evangelical Law, Christ and his Apostles
have left as a Rule for all succeeding Ages to walk by.

But notwithstanding that our Savior and his Apostles had left the World such
Plain and Positive Rules to walk by, that none that were not wilfully so could
be mistaken in them; yet such has been the unhappiness of the Christian Church,
that it never wanted some within it of such restless and peevish Spirits, as to
disturb its Peace and Quiet, by making Divisions and Schisms in it; which St.
Paul foresaw, when he told the Elders, Acts 20. 30. Also of your selves shall
Men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them. But though
there have been always some Divisions in the Church ever since the first
Planting of it; yet for the first Three or Four Hundred Years, they were much
fewer than what have been since, and those that were, were much more
discountenanced and opposed by the generality of Christians, than they were
afterward.

In the Church of Africa, a little before St. Augustine's Days, there arose the
Schism of the Donatists; who separated upon the account that the Bishoprics
were too Large, and the Power of the Bishops too Great. And because the
Ministers were not so Able and Holy Men as they should be, and because they
disliked the Liturgies and Public Prayers of the Church, and for suchlike
Reasons. And a little before in the Third Century, began the Novatian Schism at
Rome; for that Novatus thinking the Bishoprics too Large, would needs be
chosen Bishop in the same City where Cornelius was chosen before: But both
these Schisms were condemned, This by the Council of Carth. and the Council of
Constantinople, and by St. Cyprian, Ep. 52. N. 4, etc. And That of the
Donatists by all the Catholic Bishops at the Conference at Carth. See
Conference of the Third Day, Chap. 4. And by St. Augustine in his Books against
Permenian, Petilian, and the other Donatist Bishops.

But not long after, about the Fifth and Sixth Century, the Errors, and
Corruptions in the Church, began to Increase more abundantly, and appear more
barefaced and openly, than formerly they had done; for that as the Roman
Empire began to decline, there followed a general decay of Learning, and gross
Ignorance had over spread the Earth; insomuch, that many of the Priests
themselves could not read Latin; and then it was no difficult Matter to bring
in what Heresies and Schisms Men would. And this was the time that most of the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, were introduced, as Dr. Comber
observes, in his Advice to the Roman Catholics of England.

Under this Cloud of Ignorance and Darkness, did the Church lie hid for many
Hundreds of Years; till about the Year 1510. when it pleased God to open the
Eyes of some of his People, and to let them see those great Abuses with which
the World had been so long abused, and under the Burden of which, the Church
had groaned for so many Hundred Years. And though here in England, there has
been for many Years before the Reformation, a strong Disposition that way, as
may appear by the several Acts of Parliament made since the Conquest, to lessen
and take away the Pope's Power and Authority, as well in Ecclesiastical as
Civil Matters within these Kingdoms. See Coke's 5 th Rep. De jure Regis
Ecclesiastico. Yet the Pope had always so great an Interest at Court, and the
Clergy in the Nation, having got most of the Lands into their own Hands, that
this glorious Design could never be accomplished, till it pleased God to make
an open breach between King H. 8. and the Pope; upon which, he totally rejected
the Pope's Supremacy, and assumed to himself the style of Supreme Head of the
Church in these Nations, and Defender of the Faith. And thus the Pope being
quite forsaken, 'twas likely Popery would not live long, having lost its
Infallible Head. And so indeed it proved; For in King Edw. 6. days, Popery was
quite turned out of Doors, by the general consent of the whole Nation; whose
Example many of the Churches beyond Seas followed. And thus the general
Reformation was happily begun; and the Christian Church being stripped of all its
antic Disguises, began to appear again, and shine forth in its natural Form
and Brightness.

But because 'twas impossible to bring the People clearly off, from what they
and their Ancestors had been bred up in, and accustomed to for so many Ages; or
to make them capable of distinguishing on a sudden, between things hurtful in
Religion, and things Indifferent; therefore 'twas thought convenient, that no
Alterations should be made in things Indifferent, nor any Scruples raised about
them; which would at that time have hindered much the Reformation, since many
were with difficulty enough brought to things necessary: So that for this
Reason, as also to let our Enemies see, that we did not break Communion with
them for Indifferent things, many things were retained at the beginning of the
Reformation, that were afterward Reformed. In the days of Edw. VI. the Liturgy
and Public Service of the Church was Corrected and Amended: And this was done
with all the Care and Deliberation imaginable, and the King and Parliament took
the best Advice in the doing of it that could be had either at home or abroad.
Which makes me, indeed, admire to hear every illiterate Dissenter find so many
Faults in the Liturgies and Worship of the Church of England, that was so well
approved of then by all those Holy Bishops and Martyrs that were our first
Reformers, and by Calvin, Bucer, and all the Eminent Divines beyond Seas: It Is
very strange to think that such Excellent Men, and Men of such indefatigable
Pains, and great Integrity, as Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer, and Bradford, etc.
were, after all their diligent Enquiry, and fervent Prayers to God, that he
would direct them in the Performance and Management of so great a Work, could
not after all, spy so much as a mote of Unlawfulness, in those things that now
every Dissenting Preacher, though never so raw or illiterate; yea, and the very
meanest of the People can see such Beams in. It Is certain, that our terms of
Communion are the same, or rather easier now than they were then, as most of
the Dissenters will allow; and as Dr. Stillingfleet has proved at large, in his
Mischiefs of Separation.

During all the Reign of King Edward VI. there were no Divisions in this Church
about these Matters. There might have been some in those Days that might have
wished for a farther Reformation, as no Church ever yet wanted such; But there
was no such thing as Separation from the Church, and going to separate Meetings
upon that account: No, 'twas so far from that, that when actual Separation was
first beg^n in Queen Elizabeth's Days, those who practiced it, were severely
Condemned by most of those who were very desirous of a farther Reformation.

The time when Separation first began in the Church of England, was about the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign: For after Queen Mary's Death, the
Ministers and others, who were Banished and Fled in her time, began to flock
back again into England; but the Impressions which were made on some of our
Divines, during their Banishment; especially those who continued at Geneva, (a
place always inveterate against Ceremonies) did not wear off at their return
home; but after a little while, they began to insinuate into the People (who
are ever fond of Novelties) a hatred to the Livery of Antichrist, as they
called the Vestments, and Ceremonies; upon which, some of the People began to
Separate; and this was the first occasion of pressing Uniformity with Laws and
Penalties. The Queen and Parliament now began to see it Necessary for the Quiet
of the Church and Nation, and for the avoiding farther Divisions upon this
account, that all the Clergy should give some assurance of their Conformity and
Obedience to the Laws of this Land, and the Religion Established by Law, and to
the Orders and Discipline of the Church, agreeable to Law. And accordingly,
certain Articles and Subscriptions were agreed on; and such of the Clergy as
would not Subscribe thereto, were Suspended: They who were Suspended, writ to
their Oracle at Geneva, Beza, who was a Man of greatest Authority with them, to
know what they should do; Beza advises them, That if they cannot otherwise be
continued in their Offices, but by wronging their Consciences, that they should
submit, and live quietly, but by no means to exercise their Function against
the Will of their Queen and Bishops; for, says he, We tremble at the thoughts
of that See Dr. Still^^^fleet's Mischief of Separation, Page 20, 21, etc.
. But he tells them farther, That though he does not approve of the Ceremonies,
yet being (...) Evil in themselves, he does not think them (...) that moment as
that the Ministers should leave their Functions for them, or the People forsake
the Ordinances, rather than hear those who did Conform. And it seems, indeed,
that the more Serious and Learned of those Divines, who in their Banishment had
sucked in a Dislike to the Church of England way of Worship, did not think fit
to Separate from it upon that account, or to endeavor too hastily the
Reforming of it; for Dr. Burnet in his Book of Travels, tells us, That in
Switzerland he met with several Letters from some of our English Clergy to
Bullinger, who had procured a kind Reception to be given to several of them in
Switzerland, during the Persecution of Queen Mary. By which Letters it appears;
that several of the Clergy who had been beyond Seas, upon their return Home,
did endeavor to Persuade Queen Elizabeth to let the Matters of the Habits for
the Clergy, etc. fall; Particularly Sands, afterward Archbishop of York, Horn
afterward Bishop of Winchester, Jewel and Grindal: But Grindal in one of his
Letters to Bullinger, says, They were all resolved to submit to the Laws, and
to wait for a fit opportunity to reverse them: And he laments the ill Effects
of the Opposition that some had made to them; He also thanks Bullinger for the
Letter he wrote to justify the lawful Use of the Habits, etc. And in fine,
they all allowed the lawfulness, but not the fitness of them; and that they
ought to submit to the Law, till it should please God to reverse it lawfully.
See Burnet's Travels, p. 51, 52.

But though the wiser sort among them did not think fit to proceed to actual
Separation from the Church, upon the account of those indifferent things; yet
some there were of a more fierce and turbulent Spirit, who had not Patience to
wait God's leisure, but either a Reformation must be made presently according
to their wild Notions; and the Queen and Parliament must tack about immediately
to their Pleasures, or else to your Tents, O Israel; They will set up Churches
of their own, and forsake us utterly as a Superstitious and Idolatrous Church,
not fit to be communicated with.

And thus began our unhappy Divisions in the Church of England. I shall not
trouble my self to trace this Matter through the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth,
King James the First, and King Charles the First; nor to show how they daily
increased and grew wider: Nor the many Sub-Divisions, and Scandalous Breaches
that were daily made among themselves, ever since the beginning of Separation:
As between Brown and Barrow, Brown and Harrison, Barrow and Johnson, Johnson
and Ainsworth; who all left England to gather Separate Churches to themselves
in the Low Countries; But scarce had been well there, till they fell out all
among themselves; one Man and his Company being accursed, and avoided by the
other and his Followers, and the one Church receiving the Persons
excommunicated by the other; till they became ridiculous to Spectators, and at
last some of them were glad to return into England. This Matter has been so
fully related by Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Mischiefs of Separation, p. 51, 52,
etc. that 'twere needless here to repeat it.

I shall only take notice, that ever since King James the Second's Accession to
the Crown, the Church of England had laid aside all thoughts of Controversy
with the Dissenters, in hopes that they would have joined for their common
Safety with them, in stopping the Inundation of Popery, that was ready to break
in upon these Nations, and swallow them both up. But while most of our Eminent
Divines of the Church of England, as Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr.
Burnet, Dr. Comber, Dr. Sherlock, and the rest, were employed in writing
against the Incendiaries of Rome; the Dissenters, our Brethren, instead of
assisting us, were making themselves ready for War with us; as appeared soon
after. For when God Almighty had happily placed King William in the Throne, a
Convocation was immediately called, in hopes that some Terms of Accommodation
might have been Agreed upon between us; And which, in all probability, would
have taken Effect, if the Dissenting Ministers had been as forward as we; for
how much inclined our Clergy were to a Reconciliation (notwithstanding the
Aspersion laid on them by the Dissenters, of their having no such Design) does
sufficiently appear by several of their Writings; See Dr. Tillotson's Sermon
Preached at the Yorkshire Feast, Anno 1679. Page 28. And Dr. Sherlock's Sermon
before the Lord Mayor, Nov. 1688. See likewise the Petition of the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the other Bishops; for which they were committed to the
Tower: And see the Articles recommended by the Archbishop of Canterbury to all
the Bishops within his Province. And Dr. Stillingfleet's Preface to his
Mischiefs of Separation. By all which, it sufficiently appears how desirous
they were for a Reconoiliation. But instead of listening to any such thing, does
our Dissenters break forth into open Acts of Hostility, and at that very time
when we were actually Treating of Accommodation with them, do they Publish
several of their Books, one upon the back of another; in which, they endeavor
nothing less than the total Overthrow of our Church, by pretending to prove,
That the Constitution of our Church is New, and Unlawful; and that our Worship
is Idolatrous and Sinful. Had this been at a Time when their way of Worship was
not tolerated, or ours imposed on them with Penalties, they had been the more
excusable; Or, had we began to expose their Extempore way of Praying, as we
might easily have done; but at such a time as that was, to become the
Aggressors, was ungrateful as well as unseasonable. But now, since the
Dissenters have thought fit to revive the Controversy between us, I hope they
cannot take it unkindly of us, if we endeavor to Vindicate our Church, and to
remove those Aspersions that they have groundlesly cast upon her. But this has
been done so learnedly and fully by so many of our Learned Divines already,
that I will not pr^^end to do it better, or to say much more than what they
have said before me; I shall only here lay down briefly the Substance of what I
have Collected out of the best Authors on both sides, that have writ larely on
this Subject: For there may be some who would be willing to be satisfied in
this Matter, and yet can neither bestow the Time nor Pains to read all the
Books of Controversy over, which have been writ on this Subject.

First then, We will examine the Pleas which the Dissenters use for Separation,
and show the insufficiency of them; and that they do not justify Separation
according to their own Principles.

All the Pleas at this time made use of for Separation, may be reduced to these
Three Heads:

First, Such as relate to the Constitution of our Church.

Second, To the terms of Communion with it.

Third, To the Consciences of Dissenters.

As to the First, to wit, such as relate to the Constitution of our Churches;
They say, First, That our Parochial Churches are not according to Christ's
Institution, as being different from those of the Congregational way. Secondly
That our Diocesan Bishops are Unlawful. Thirdly, That our National Church has
no Foundation, and wants Discipline; all being swallowed up in the Bishops: And
the Pastors of every Parish who ought to have full Power to execute every part
of it, are deprived thereof. And Fourthly, That the People are deprived of
their right of choosing their own Pastors.

First, say they, Our Parochial Churches are not according to Christ's
Institution. For Christ, they say, instituted no other kind of Churches, than
particular Congregations, to which he gave full Power and Authority to govern
themselves, distinctly and Independent of all other Churches.

But where have they Authority for this Opinion? Where do they find that
Churches were limited to particular Congregations? not in Scripture; for there
is no tolerable Proof, that the Churches planted by the Apostles, were of this
Nature. It Is possible at first there might have been no more Christians in a
City, than might meet together in one Congregation; But where does it appear,
that when they multiplied into more Congregations, they made new and distinct
Churches under new Officers, with a separate Power of Government; of this Dr.
Stillingfleet says, he is well assu^'d there is no mark or Footstep in the New
Testament, or the whole History of the Primitive Church. If they will follow
the plain instances of Scripture, they may better limit Churches to Private
Families, than to particular Congregations; for of that we have a plain
instance in Scripture, Romans 16. 3. 5. Col. 4. 15. in the House of Priscilla and
Aquilla, but not a word of the other: And if they would keep to these plain
instances of Scripture, they might fully enjoy the Liberty of their
Consciences, and avoid the Scandal of breaking the Laws.

But the Scripture is so far from making every Congregation an Independent
Church, that it plainly shows us, the Notion of a Church was then the same with
a Diocese, or all the Christians of a City, which were under the Inspection of
one Bishop: For, if we observe the Language of the Scripture, we shall find
this Observation not once to fail; that when Churches are spoken of, they are
the Churches of a Province: As the Churches of Judaea, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. The
Churches of Asia, 1 Cor. 16. 19. Of Syria and Cilicia, Acts 15. 41. Churches of
Galatia, 1 Cor. 16. 1. Gal. 1. 2. Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8. 1. But when
all the Christians of a City are spoken of, it is still called the Church of
that City; as, the Church of Antioch, the Church at Corinth, the Church of
Ephesus, etc. So that it seems plain from the Testimony of Scripture, that
Churches were not limited to particular Congregations, unless they will say,
that all the Christians in the largest of these Cities mentioned in Scripture,
were no more than could conveniently meet in one Congregation; which shall be
shown to be otherwise hereafter.

But suppose we should grant that the Apostolic Churches were Congregational
(as it is plain they were not) what then? that might have been from the
Circumstances of Times, or small number of Christians in those Days; must it
therefore follow that they must always continue so? Why do they not wash one
another Feet, as Christ did, and commanded his Apostles to do the same And if
they must keep so precisely to the Practice of those Days, why does any of
their Ministers marry a Second Wife? For St. Paul says plainly, Let Bishops and
Deacons be the Husbands of one Wife, 1 Timothy 3. v. 2. and 12.
: So the first Civil Government was by God's own Institution over Families;
they may by the same Rule think themselves bound to overthrow Kingdoms, to
bring things back to God's first Institution. From whence it appears how
ridiculous that fancy of theirs is, That the Scripture is the only Rule of all
things pertaining to Discipline and Worship; and that we must stick so
precisely to the Letter of it, and to the practice of those Days, as that it is
not lawful to vary from it in any little indifferent Circumstance for the sake
of Public Order, or Convenience.

But as this notion of Congregational Churches does not agree with the words of
the New Testament; so neither does it with the Judgment and Practice of the
Primitive Church; For by the ancient Canons* of the Church it appears, That the
Notion of a Church, was the same with that of a Diocese, which comprehended
many Congregations, or Parishes. See Canons Nicen. 6, 15, 16. Constant. c. 6.
Chalcedon 17. 20. 26. Antioch c. 2. 5. Codex Eccles. Africae, c. 53. 55.
Council. Gangrae. c. 6. Council. Carthag. c. 10, 11.

And thus much as to the first Objection against the Constitution of our
Church, as differing from those of the Congregational way; and therefore not of
Christ's Institution.

The Second Objection against the Constitution of our Church is, That our
Diocesan Churches and Bishops are unlawful; For say they, It Is making a new
Species of Churches and Church Government, without God's appointment; For, says
Mr. Baxter, according to Christ's Institution, no Church must be bigger, than
that the same Bishop may perform the Pastoral Office to them in present
Communion: And so he will have three sorts of Bishops by Divine Right: First,
General Bishops, that in every Nation are over many Churches. Secondly,
Episcopi Gregis, or Ruling Pastors of Single Congregations, which are all true
Presbyters. Thirdly, Episcopi Praesides; which are the Presidents of the
Presbyters in particular Churches: This is Mr. Baxter's Notion of Bishops: But
others are not of his Mind, and will allow of but one kind of Bishop, and such
they make the Pastor of every Congregation.

But that both these Notions of Episcopacy are false, will appear; For that
First, 'twas an inviolable Rule in the Primitive Church, that there must be but
one Bishop in a City, though 'twere never so large; for our Savior having left
no Rule about Limits, the Apostles followed the Form of the Empire, planting in
every City a complete and entire Church, whose Bishop, as to his Power and
Jurisdiction, in Ecclesiastical Matters, resembled that of the Chief Magistrate
of the City; the Presbyters, that of the Senates; and the several Churches, the
several Corporations. So says Dr. Still. in his Mischiefs of Separation, p.
237. and quotes Origin, c. Cells. l. 3. and Dr. Maurice in his Def. of Dioces.
Episcopacy, p. 377, etc. affirms* the same, and proves it at large. And as far
as the Territories of the City extended it self, so far did the Diocese of the
Bishop extend; for the Church and the City had but one Territory.

But though this be a thing agreed upon by most Learned Men of all Persuasions,
that there was but one Bishop in a City in the Primitive Church; yet because
some may be so hardy as to deny this, I will appeal to the Practice of the
African Church; for which Mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen, and the rest of the Dissenters,
express an esteem above all other Churches. 'Twas an inviolable Rule among the
African Churches, that there must be but one Bishop in a City, though never so
large and populous. See Cod. Eccl. Africae, c. 71. And at the famous Conference
at Carthage, between the Catholic and Donatist Bishops, by the Command of
Constantine the Emperor, who was become Christian, the Rule on both sides
agreed was, but One Bishop in a City, or Diocese. See Conference of the First
Day. And if there could have been more than one Bishop in a City, the two great
Schisms of the Donatists in Africa, and the Novatian at Rome, might have been
avoided; but instead hereof, see how St. Cyprian among others, aggravates the
Schism of Novatius, for being chosen Bishop in the same City where Cornelius
was chosen before; For, says he, since there cannot be a second after the
first, whosoever is made Bishop, where one is made already, is not another
Bishop, but none at all, Cypr. Epist. 52. n. 4. And the same St. Cyprian in his
Epistle 55. n. 6. 9. declares, That to have only one Bishop in a City, was the
best means to prevent Schism. See St. Cypr. de Vnitate Eccles. n. 3, 4. And St.
Augustine in his Epistle 162. to the same purpose.

But now that it is so plainly proved that there was never allowed but one
Bishop in a City in the Primitive Church, they have no way to reconcile this to
their Hypothesis, but by endeavoring to prove that either the Cities were very
small in those days, or else the number of Christians in them were so few, as
that they might all conveniently meet in one Congregation. And this they are
not satisfied to do in the ordinary Cities, which Mr. Clarkson in his Book of
Primitive Episcopacy affirms, were no larger than our ordinary Market Towns in
England. But even in the very largest, and most populous Cities, they will not
allow that there were more Christians than could conveniently meet together in
one Church to serve God; as in Rome, Alexandria, Constantinople, Carthage, and
the rest: All which far exceeded any now in the World, both for largeness and
number of People. This seems to be very strange. Old Rome was at that time a
City so large and populous, that it excelled London, as it is at this day, as
far as London now does New Rome, and had by Computation at that time above
1000000 Inhabitants; as Dr. Maurice shows in his Defense of Diocesan
Episcopacy, p. 340. And seems indeed to be very probable, if one considers
those vast and mighty Pieces of Workmanship, that appear to have been done
there; the Ruins of which are to be seen at this day, as Dr. Burnet in his
Travels tells us, who gathers from thence, That that City must have been vastly
populous about that time. And it was in Aurelius his days 50 Miles in
Circumference, Dr. M. p. 212. And yet will Mr. Clarkson allow no more
Christians in this great City than could meet in one Congregation. So of
Alexandria, which was 15 Miles in Circumference, according to Pliny, l. 5. 9.
and the rest, all greater far than London now is. But to serve their turn they
will reduce them all to the narrow limits of a single Congregation, and by
consequence give all the rest to the Devil, by making them Unchristian,
Heretics, Schismatics, etc.

It Is strange that Christianity should make no better a Progress, considering
the largeness of the Cities, and Multitude of People in them; and considering
the Care and Industry of the Apostles and Learned Fathers of those Ages, and
their extraordinary Gifts; that in so large and populous a City as Rome,
Christianity should gain no more Proselytes in 300 Years, than could meet all
in one Church, notwithstanding St. Paul himself had Preached there for many
Years: The very Quakers in London, which is not comparable to Old Rome, have
made more Proselytes already, than the Apostles in much longer time; for were
all the Quakers in London assembled in one Congregation, I doubt that never a
Church in the Kingdom would be found large enough to contain them.

But besides, if the number of Christians were so few as these Dissenters would
make them, how was it possible for them to possess themselves of the whole
Roman Empire in less than 300 Years? They had no Interest at Court nor in the
Army; but were presecuted by the Emperors all that time, unless in two Reigns;
so that there can be no other Human Cause assigned for it, but their great
Numbers.

But farther it is plain that there were some great Cities entirely Christian
from the Apostles days, as Cesaria, and Lydda, Acts 9. 35. and others. So that
in the first 300 Years, whole Cities and Countries being become Christian, as
Eusebius affirms, Praep. Evang. l. 1. p. 12, 13. 'twas impossible for a single
Congregation to contain a quarter of the Christians of a City, much less of a
whole Diocese; For besides the large and populous City, every Bishop had a
Territory within his Diocese, which extended it self for several Miles round
the City. For every City had a large Territory, as it were a County round about
it, which was under the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate, who governed the
City, and as far as the Jurisdiction of the Magistrate reached in Civil
Matters, so far did the Jurisdiction of the Bishop reach in Ecclesiastical
Matters. See Can. Apostolic. 34. by which a Bishop is forbid to do any thing
without the consent of his Metropolitan or Archbishop, but what relates to his
own Diocese, and the Territories under it; And see Can. Antioch 9. and 10.

But that the Bishops Territories and Jurisdiction extended far beyond the
Walls or Bounds of the City is most evident; for Theodoret, who was Bishop of
Cyrus, had a Diocese 40 Miles square, and yet he reckoned his Episcopacy of
Divine Institution. See his Epist. 42. And he had within his Diocese 800 Parish
Churches, as appears by his Epist. 113. to Leo. This is an Instance so clear
against our Dissenters, that Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Clarkson, and the rest, have
no way to Answer it, but first that it came from the Vatican Library; which
Objection is fully removed by Dr. Stilling fleet in his Mischief of Separation,
p. 256. and by Dr. Maur. Def. of Dioc. Episc. p. 396. and this Epist. of Theod.
proved to be his own, by comparing it with his other Writings; and also by the
clear Testimony of Liberatus, who infallibly knew Theodoret's Style and
Writings. Neither does it follow, that because it came from the Vatican
Library, therefore it must not be Authentic: But when People are Drowning,
rather than sink they will catch hold of a Bull-rush.

The other Exception they take to this Testimony of Theodoret is, That he was
not Bishop of a single Diocese, but of a Province; and that Theodoret was an
Archbishop: but that Cyprus, of which he was then Bishop, was no Metropolis at
that time, nor Theodoret Primate of a Province, but under a Metropolitan,
appears by his 16 Ep. and by his 81, 82, 34, 94, and 161. Alexander was then
his Metropolitan.

But Theodoret was not the only Bishop that had such a large Diocese; for St.
Chrysostom had one full as large, and which contained as many Parishes; he was
Bishop of Constantinople, and all the Territories thereto belonging, and did
not think it in his Conscience too large; for if he did, so good a Man as he,
would either have divided or quitted it. And Athanasius was Bishop of
Alexandria and the Territories belong to it; for he says, Ap. p. 781, 802.
Maoretis is a Region belonging to Alexandria, and all the Churches there are
immediately subject to the Bishop of Alexandria.

But because Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cotton and the rest, have made choice of
the Church of Carthage in Africa, in St. Cyprian's time, to make their appeals
to; Dr. Stillingfleet, to avoid all Cavils, (as he tells us) has chosen that
very Church to be decided by, as to the Episcopal Government now in dispute
between us. And therefore, first he proves that there were a great number of
Presbyters, belonging to the Church of Carthage at that time; and therefore not
likely to be one single Congregation. And this he proves, out of St. Cyprian's
own Epistles in his Banishment. Particularly in his 5 th. Book, Ep. 28. he
complains, that a great number of his Clergy were absent, and the few that
remained, were hardly sufficient for their Work.

And that these Presbyters, and the whole Church were under the particular care
and government of St. Cyprian, as their Bishop, appears by his own words, Lib.
3. Ep. 10, and 12. to the People of Carthage; he complains to them of his
Presbyters, that they did not reserve to their Bishop that honor due to his
place; for that they received Penitents to Communion, without Imposition of
Hands by the Bishop, etc. And in his Epist. 28. he threatens to Excommunicate
those Presbyters that should do so for the future. And all the other Bishops
gave their approbation to St. Cyprian for so doing. And the same St. Cyprian in
his 3 Book, Ep. 65. tells them that a Bishop in the Church is in the place of
Christ; and that Disobedience to him is the occasion of Schisms and Disorders.
See more fully concerning this matter, in Dr. Stillingfleet's Mischiefs of
Separation, p. 228, 229. etc. And now since Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter and the rest,
have agreed to appeal to the Church of Carthage, we must suppose they allow no
Deviations in that Church, from the Primitive Institution, and what that was
then, any one may judge.

And St. Augustine was another Bishop in the African Church; he was Bishop of
Hippo Regia, the Diocese of which extended at least Forty Miles, as appears by
St. Augustine's own Epist. 262.

It Is true, the African Church came most near the Congregational way of any
other, the Diocese being smaller by reason of the many Sectaries there; the
Donatists, and many others: *And that is the Reason, Mr. Baxter and the rest
express so great an Esteem for it. But that their Bishoprics were much too
large, to serve either the Presbyterians or Independents turn; and, that they
never allowed more than one Bishop in the largest Cities, sufficiently appears
by what has been said. And in the African Code, there is a Canon that says
expressly; no Bishop shall leave his Cathedral Church, and go to any other
Church in his Diocese to reside there, See Codex Eccl. Africae c. 71. Which
shows that the Bishops Territories and Jurisdiction extended into distant
Places from the City, as well in the African Churches as in others.

I shall only add to this, that Calvin looked upon it as a Thing out of dispute
among Learned Men, that a Church did not only take in the Christians of a City
in the Primitive Times, but of the adjacent Country also. See Calv. Instit. l.
4. c. 4. n. 2.

But though there were never more than one Bishop in a City, in the Primitive
Church, V. Conc. Ephesians. Part 2. Act. 1.
yet some Bishops have had Two or more Cities in their Diocese. Timothy was
Bishop of Farmissus and Eudocias; Athanasius was Bishop of Diveltus and
Sozopolis. And there have been some Bishoprics that have had no City at all in
them, but only Villages, for there were some Countries that had no Cities in
them; so have we at this Day, Bishops in Ireland and Wales that have no Cities
in their Diocese: But it cannot be proved that the Jurisdiction of the Bishop,
and the extent of his Diocese was confined to any single Village. So far from
that, that by the Canon of Sardica VI. all the Bishops Assembled at Sardica
agree, That it shall by no means be lawful to Ordain any Bishops in Villages or
small Cities, that the Dignity of a Bishop may not be contemptible from the
meanness of the Place.

But, says Mr. Clarkson and the rest, The Apostles Ordained Elders in every
Church, and then Mr. Clarkson names the places, to wit, Antioch, Iconium,
Lystra, and other Villages: and these Elders or Presbyters they will have
Bishops. But first, I say, That during the Apostle's days, the names Bishop and
Presbyter were commonly used, the one for the other; (but not after, as shall
be showed hereafter) and therefore these Elders, or Presbyters here spoken of
may be as well taken for ordinary Presbyters or Priests, as for Bishops. But
allowing these Presbyters were Bishops, what advantage will it be to them? for
first, it does not appear, that the Apostles confined their Authority to those
places, but the contrary is evident; and unless they can prove this, it will
not serve their turn. But, Secondly, these Cities over which the Apostles
appointed Elders, were large Cities at that time, by much too great to come
together in one Congregation. Iconium was then a Metropolitan, and had many
other Cities under it. And the rest were all large Cities.

But before I conclude this point I must make one Observation, and that is,
That Mr. Clarkson, to prove that a Bishop of a City had no more but one
Congregation, undertakes to show how small some Cities were; but it is
remarkable he quotes for his Authority some Author who speaks of them long
before there were any Bishops; and because they might have been small places
then, will needs have them to be so in the days of the Apostles, which is very
ridiculous; for under the Roman Emperors, both the Roman and the Grecian
Cities were at their height, and did very much surpass both for their
magnificence and number of people, any that have been before or since; nor is
this to be wondered at, since our Cities do now stand upon much narrower
Foundations as to their constitution; our Cities have seldom any Liberties half
a mile beyond their Walls; and are generally but an Assembly of Tradesmen:
whereas the Roman Cities had each a Territory, as it were a County belonging to
it, which was under the jurisdiction of the City Magistrate; and the Citizens
were the Lords of the adjacent Country.

I have now showed that the Government of the Church by Diocesan Bishops, is
agreeable to the practice of the best and purest Ages of the Church, and to the
Judgment of the wisest and holiest Fathers of it. And that their Power and
Jurisdiction was as absolute, and extended as far, or farther than any Bishops
this day in England. I shall show hereafter that Episcopal Government, as now
settled in England, has been, and is at this day, commended and approved of by
all the most Eminent Divines beyond Seas.

Perhaps some may say, if the Government of the Church by Diocesan Bishops, be
so agreeable to that of the Primitive Church; and approved of by other reformed
Churches, as we pretend it is; how comes it that they all did not follow the
pattern of England, and become all Diocesan Churches? I answer, They may as
well ask us, Why all the Nations of the World that were subject to the Roman
Emperors, did not upon the decay of the Roman Empire, when they resumed their
just Rights of Government to themselves, become all Monarchies, according to
the Pattern of England. Some Nations besides England, Ireland and Scotland, did
assume Episcopal Government; as Denmark, Sweden, etc. but perhaps it was not
consistent with the present Circumstances, or Politic Constitution of all
places at the time of the Reformation, to set up Episcopal Government, as
indeed it was not. And therefore since neither Episcopal, nor any other
particular kind of Government is so essential to a Church, as that a true
Church may not be without it in case of indispensible Necessity; they put
themselves some under one Form of Government, some under another, as was most
agreeable to their present constitution; but with this Caution every where,
That all Protestants of every whole Church, be the Government what it will,
should be obliged to Conform to the Established Church in which they lived: For
though every National or whole Church had a Power to choose what kind of
Government they pleased for themselves, yet 'twas never allowed that particular
scrupulous People among themselves, had Power to do so too; This Power of
subdividing was never pretended to, nor practiced in any other Nation since the
Reformation, but in England. So that though they do all allow the Antiquity and
Usefulness of Episcopal Government; yet since it is not Essential to a true
Church no more than that of the Presbyterian or Independent, nor convenient at
this time for all places, some may refuse it; and yet it does not follow that
we in England should do so, since it is convenient for us, and more agreeable to
the Laws and Constitution of these Kingdoms, and comes by much nearer the
Practice of the Primitive Churches, than any other whatsoever.

But they say, we make Episcopal Government Essential to a true Church, for
that we will suffer none to execute the Office of a Minister here in England,
unless they be ordained by a Bishop. To this I answer, It Is plain, we do not
make Episcopal Government Essential to a true Church; For we allow all the
Reformed Churches to be true Churches, and Communicate with them, and yet some
of them have no Diocesan Bishops. It Is true, by the Laws of this Church and
Nation, none are to be admitted to execute the Office of a Minister in any
Cathedral or Parish Church or Chapel, nor to hold any Ecclesiastical Benefice
within these Kingdoms, but such as are willing to submit to the Orders and
Government of this Church, and the Laws of the Land: And therefore since both
the Laws of this Church and Nation do require that all Ministers who desire to
serve in this Church, shall declare publicly that they assent to and approve
of our Form of Worship, etc. and are willing to use the same as the Church
appoints, and that they shall receive their Ordination, and License to execute
their Office from the Bishops; It Is but reasonable that such as want these
Qualifications, should be refused the Liberty of executing their Office in
these Kingdoms. The Church of England does not say absolutely that all those
Ministers who want Episcopal Ordination are no true Ministers; but only that
none shall be accounted a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, so as to execute
their Function in the Church of England, unless they be once Ordained by a
Bishop; as appears by the Preface to the Ordination.
But the reason we refuse them is not so much because that Presbyterian
Ordination does not make them true Ministers, according to God's Law; (as
though no instance can be given of Ordination, without a Bishop in Scripture or
Antiquity; but all to the contrary) because they stubbornly refuse to submit to
our Laws and Constitutions, and contemn the lawful Authority under which God
has placed them, and commanded them that they should obey. And this is evident
from the Statute of 14 Car. 2. In which there is a particular Proviso, That all
Ministers of Foreign reformed Churches, who come into this Kingdom by the
King's Permission, are to be excepted out of, and excused from the Penalties of
that Act. And this Custom of requiring Conformity, and Subscriptions from all
who desire to be admitted to the Office of the Ministry, is agreeable to the
Practice of every settled Church that has been ever since Christ's days; as
will appear hereafter.

The 3d. Objection against the Constitution of our Church is, That our By
National Churches, are meant the whole Churches of such Nations as upon the
decay of the Roman Empire resumed their just Right of Government to themselves,
both in Church and State.
National Church, which we call The Church of England, has no Foundation, and
wants Discipline; All being incroach'd and swallowed up in the Bishops; and the
Pastors of every Parish, who ought to have full Power to execute every part of
it, are deprived thereof.

But this is false; for the Presbyters in our Church, have as great Power in
Ecclesiastical Matters, as ever they had in the Primitive Church. What Power
are they deprived of by the Bishops that they had then? By the Laws of our
Church, no Rules of Discipline, no Articles of Doctrine, no Form of Worship can
be introduced by the Bishops, or imposed upon any, without the consent of the
whole Presbytery of the Nation in Convocation, who appear either in Person or
by Proxy.

The only Authority that the Bishops of the Church of England have above the
Presbytes is, Government, Ordination, and Censures; which were all appropriated
to the Apostles, and Bishops in the Primitive Church: St. Cyprian assures us it
was so in the African Church, in his Third Book, Ep. 10. and 12. 28. 27. And so
it was in St. Augustine's* Time. See Cod. Eccl. Afr. c. 6, 7, 9, etc.

But, say they, the Power of Ordination is taken away from the Presbyters, and
lodged solely in the Bishops; and it is plain (say they) in the Apostles days
the Presbyters did Ordain; for Timothy was ordained by laying on the hands of
the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. But Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase on this Text
says, That these Presbyters here spoken of, who ordained Timothy, were
Apostles: That Timothy was ordained by St. Paul is most evident; for St. Paul
in his Second Epistle to Timothy, chapter 1. v. 6. says, I put thee in mind, that
thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the laying on of my hands.
And the Apostles might then have been likely enough called Presbyters; for that
during the Apostles time, Bishops and Presbyters were the same, and sometimes
used the one for the other; as appears plainly by comparing 1 Timothy 4. 14. with
2 Timothy 1. 6. In the former Verse, St. Paul bids Timothy Neglect not the gift
that is in him, by laying on the hands of the Presbyters; And in the latter, he
bids him, Stir up the gift of God which is in you, by the laying on of my hands.

For while the Apostles lived, they managed the Affairs of Government in the
Church themselves, and therefore there were few or no Bishops in their days;
but as they withdrew, they committed the Care and Government of Churches to
such Persons as they appointed thereto, of which we have an uncontrollable
Evidence in Timothy and Titus: So that although the Apostles left no Successors
in Eodem gradu, as to those things that were extraordinary in them, as the
Infallibility of their Doctrine, and the writing New Gospels, the Extent of
their Power, etc. yet to other parts of their Apostolic Office, they had
Successors, as in Teaching and Governing, and such like things that were not
extraordinary. Which Power of Governing, Ordaining, etc. being given to such
particular Presbyters as the Apostles thought fit for it, was properly the
Episcopal Power: And thus these who were but Presbyters in the Apostles days,
by the accession of this governing and ordaining Power, became Bishops after
their Decease or Departure. And thus will all those seeming Differences between
the words Presbyter and Bishop, spoken of in Antiquity, be reconciled. And
herewith agrees the Opinion of Archbishop Whitgift and Bishop Bilson, and Dr.
Stillingfleet in his Mischiefs of Separation, p. 270. and many others. See King
Charles I. his Debates about Episcopacy, more fully concerning this Matter.

But it is plain, that since the Apostles days, Presbyters were not Bishops, but
a distinct Order from them: And this is agreed by most Ancient and Modern
Writers. See among others, Ignatius his Epistle ad Trall. where he says, That
without Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, it cannot be called a Church. And Aerius
who declared, that there was no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter,
was represented by Epiphanius as a Prodigy, and his opinion Madness. See Epiph.
Haer. 74. n. 1. 3. So Ischyrus pretended to be a Presbyter, because Coluthus
had ordained him; but Athanasius represents it as a Monster, that one should
esteem himself a Presbyter, who was ordained by one who died himself a
Presbyter. See Dr. Maur. Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy, p. 451. And in the
Primitive Church, if a Bishop himself did Ordain any one against the Canons and
Established Discipline of the Church, they did not stick at declaring such
Ordination void, and in some Cases to re-ordain. See Can. Nicen. 9, 10. 16. 19.
and Can. Antioch. 73. 10, etc. What Sentence shall we think then they would
have pronounced against our Presbyterian Ordination, as practiced here in
England, contrary both to the Canons of the Church, and the Laws of the Land
too.

But besides all this, the Plea which our Dissenters make for Separation upon
this account, that the Presbyters are totally deprived of their Power of
Ordaining, is false; For by the Canons of the Church of England, Four
Presbyters are to assist the Bishop in giving Orders, and after Examination, to
join in laying on of hands on the Person ordained. See Can. 31. and 35.

But another Objection which they make to the Church of England, for want of
Discipline is, for that the Power of Excommunicating Notorious Offenders, is
taken away from the Parochial Minister, and lodged only in the Bishop. But sure
they who make this Objection, never read the 26th. Canon, which is one of them
acknowledged to be the Authentic Church Canons: For that Canon says expressly,
That no Minister shall admit any of his Flock to the L^^d's Supper, who is
known to be guilty (...) Scandalous Sin, until he has openl^ (...) that he has
truly repented. And (...) ^ase the Offender continue obstinate, he must give an
account to the Ordnary within 14 Days, who is then to proceed to greater
Excommunication, for the other is called a Penitential Excommunication. So then
it seems the Pastors are not totally deprived of the Power of censuring for
Scandalous offenses; nay, they have a greater and more absolute Power, than is
allowed them in many other Reformed Churches; for indeed, the exercise of
Discipline is a Work of so much Prudence and Difficulty, that the greatest
Zealots for it, have not thought fit to trust it in the Hands of every
Parochial Minister, and his particular Congregation. Calvin himself says, to do
so, is contrary to the Apostolic Practice. See Calv. Ep. 136. And Beza,
speaking of the Discipline of Geneva, in his Ep. 20. says, The Parochial
Ministers proceed no farther than Admonition, but in case of Contumacy, they
certify the Presbytery of the City, who sit at certain times to hear all
Censures relating to Discipline.

But allowing a Church wants true Discipline, does it therefore lose its Being,
or justify Separation (...) sure, if so, there were few (...) Churches to be
found in the (...), many of them having no Discip^^^^ a^ all among them for
many years, nor so much as the Lord's Supper administered in some parts of this
Kingdom for ten or a dozen years together.

But now we come to the 4th. Objection against the Constitution of our Church,
which is, That the People are deprived of their right of choosing their own
Ministers.

Pray let me ask them how this Original and inherent Right (as Mr. Baxter calls
it) of choosing their own Ministers, came to be lodged in the People? Was there
not a Church to be formed in the beginning? Did not Christ appoint Apostles,
and give them Authority for that end? Where was the Church Power then lodged?
Was it not in the Apostles? Did not they in all places as they planted
Churches, appoint Officers to teach and govern them? And were not then the
Pastors invested with a Power superior to that of the People? How came they
then to lose it, ^or how came the People to pretend an original Right thereto?
Besides, How could the People make choice of Men for their fitness and
abilities, when at that time their abilities depen^ (...) on the Apostles
laying on of (...) ^ands for then the Holy Ghost (...) them. It seems then that
this (...) and inherent Right was not in the People in the Apostles days, nor
in the first Ages of the Church, for if it had, St. Clement, St. Cyprian, St.
Chrysostom, etc. could not have been ignorant of it; St. Clement says in his
Ep. 54, 55, 56, 57. (the Apostles thought fit to reserve this Power of
appointing Officers in the Church to themselves, to prevent the Contentions
that might happen about it: And that all the People had to do, was to give
testimony of the Person chosen;) And to that end, it is true, the People were to
be present at the nomination of a new Bishop; for since, they were to be Men
blameless and of good report; 'twas but fit that the People that best knew his
Life and Conversation, should be present to testify the same. And herewith
agrees St. Cyprian Ep. 68. (whom Mr. Baxter vouches for the contrary) says he,
(The Bishop should be chosen in the presence of the People, that by their
presence their Faults may be published, or their good Actions commended,) but
says not a word of the Peoples Power of Electing him. All our Ordinations must
be done in the public view of the People, who are demanded of the Bishop,
whether any of them can or will except against the Persons to be admitted. See
the Form of Ordination in the Book of Common Prayer.
As to the Elections of Deacons, it is to be noted that 'twas properly no Church
Power which they had, but they were Stewards of the Common Stock; and therefore
'twas but reasonable the Community should be satisfied in the choice of them.
St. Chrysostom in his Book de Sacerdotio, complains much of the unfitness of
the People to judge in such matters. So does St. Augustine Ep. 110.

And indeed, were there no other Reasons against the Peoples choosing their own
Ministers, but the mischiefs that would necessarily attend it, 'twere
sufficient; for when ever the People assumed this Power of choosing, it caused
so great Disturbances in the Church, that at Antioch the Divisions of the
People about the choice of a Bishop, in the time of Constantine, had kindled
such a Flame, as had almost destroyed both Church and City. The like at Rome
upon the choice of Damascus. And if the People have the Power of choosing their
own Ministers, what should hinder but there may be a Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptist, Quaker and Papist teacher all in one Parish, and so this would set
open a door to infinite Divisions.

And therefore to avoid the great Evils, and inconveniences of popular
Elections, the Power of choosing their* own Ministers was taken away from the
People by several Councils, as 12. and 13. Can. Conc. Laodicea, Conc. Antioch.
c. 18. etc. Conc. 2 d. of Nice. c. 3.

The Reason that first gave Laymen a title to the nomination of Ministers, was
when Christian Princes and others, had given large Endowments to the Church,
'twas thought but just that they should have the nomination of the Ministers
for those Churches that they had built and endowed. And this was a Prerogative
in the Kings of England ever since the first foundation of a Christian Church
here, and long before any freedom of Elections was pretended to. See Stat. 25.
Edw. 3. and the Case of the King's Ecclesiastical Power in Lord Cook's 8 th.
Rep. and the Case of Praemunire in Sir John Davenant's Reports, Case ult. And
this title of Patronage has been confirmed to Laymen by several Councils, as 1
st. Coun. of Orange, Anno Dom. 441. 2 d. Counc. of Arles, Anno 452. 9 th.
Counc. of Toledo, etc.

And this Right of presentation is not only used in England, but in other
reformed Churches: In Denmark the Archbishops, and Bishops are appointed by the
King, so they are in Swedeland. So in other Lutheran Churches, the
Superintendants are appointed by the several Princes, and the Patrons present
before Ordination. The Synod of Dort has a Salvo for the right of Patronage.
In France, the Ministers are chosen by Ministers; at Geneva by the Council of
State; who have Power likewise to depose them. And Beza in his Ep. 83. declares
against the Peoples choosing their Ministers as a thing without any ground in
Scripture. Grotius Ep. ad Boatslaer Ep. 62. p. 21. agrees herein. How comes
then our English Dissenters to make this a ground of Separation, to wit, The
depriving the People of their Right of choosing their own Ministers, when it is
evident they never had any such Right, but when they got it by Usurpation: And
it is contrary to the general practice of the Church in all Ages, and even to
the practice of other reformed Churches at this day.

But besides the unwarrantableness of the Peoples choosing their Ministers, and
the great mischiefs that attend it, by making the People run into Divisions and
Factions; it is a thing very unreasonable in it self that such an ignorant,
proud, unpeaceable sort of People, as Mr. Baxter himself confesses in his
Sacrilegiae Dissert. p. 102. etc. the ordinary sort of Christians to be, should
be made judges of their Ministers abilities, and soundness of Doctrines; who
are most apt to revile the best and gravest Ministers, as the same Mr. Baxter
says himself in his Cure of Divis. p. 393. Sure it is more likely that the King
and Parliament and the Governors of the Church should provide able and fit
Ministers for us, than such sort of People as these; unless any will be so
ridiculous as to suppose that the Magistrates, and Clergy are all bad men, and
the ignorant common People the only incouragers of Virtue.

They may say it is as unreasonable on the other hand, that all the People of a
Parish should be obliged to take a Minister put into the Cure by some young,
raw, extravagant Heir that had the good Fortune to be born to an Estate, to
which the Advowson did belong, but perhaps is as ignorant, and unfit to judge
of the abilities of a Minister as the meanest in the Parish. To this I answer,
That though such ignorant Persons may sometimes have the right of Presentation,
yet they have not the Power of putting into the Cure any Minister they please,
for the Patron has only the right of presenting his Clerk, who must be admitted
and instituted by the Bishop, before the Cure is said to be full, and if the
Bishop with the rest of his Clergy, after examination had, etc. do think him
any way unqualified for the Cure of Souls, he may reject him, and put the
Patron to present another qualified for the Office; which if he neglect to do
within six Months from the time the Church became void, he shall lose his
presentation for that turn, and the Bishop shall present. So that the Patron,
it seems cannot put whom he will on the People for their Pastor, but is bound
to find Personam idoneam, a fit Person.

And now before we pass from this matter, let us see whether the Civil
Magistrate has Power to silence Ministers or not. Doubtless he has, otherwise
it is impossible that any Kingdom should be safe; for since the generality of
the People are so apt to be led by their Spiritual Guides, and take their
Notions of Loyalty and Obedience from them, it is strange to imagine that
Ministers shall be allowed to Preach up Sedition, Heresy, or what Doctrine they
please, and it shall not be in the Power of the Magistrate to silence them.

But say our Dissenters, we are called to the Office of the Ministry by God
Almighty, and have received our Commission to Preach the Gospel from him; and
therefore must not neglect to discharge our Duty in Obedience to any Power upon
Earth, for we must obey God rather than man.

But first, I hope they will grant that when God Almighty gave them this
Commission, he did not limit it to any certain place, but 'twas general to
Preach the Word to all Nations, so that in obedience to God's Command,
doubtless they ought to go and Preach in those Countries where their Preaching
is most wanted, and will do God most service. There are many Countries in the
World that know nothing of Christianity, and many that do, have not able
Ministers enough to serve their turn; sure these Men that think themselves
bound in Conscience to Preach, would much better* discharge their Consciences
by going into those Countries, and Preaching to those poor People that are in
so great want of it. Christ sent his Disciples to Preach to the lost Sheep of
the House of Israel. The Apostles who doubtless had as universal a Commission
to Preach, they never went to abide in those Cities or Places where sound
Teachers were settled before, but they chose to go into those parts where
Christianity was least known, and their Preaching would do most good. Why will
not our Nonconformist Ministers follow their example? Several of our foreign
Plantations want able Ministers among them, they want Universities and famous
Schools to breed them in, and therefore must needs be but poorly supplied. If
they would leave this Nation, and go and Preach there, 'twould convince the
World that they designed nothing but God's Glory and the discharge of their own
Consciences in desiring to Preach; but since they do not, it is evident whatever
their pretenses may be, that it is self-interest and their own convenience, that
makes them desire the liberty of Preaching in these Nations.

What have they to say to this? Indeed the best of them give but a very
unsatisfactory Answer hereto. Mr. Baxter in his Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet,
says, The Reason why they do not go to Preach among the Indians is, because
they cannot speak their Language, and because many of them have Wives and
Families which they cannot leave: But for his own part, he says, if he were but
young enough, he would not trouble this censorious persecuting part of the
World any longer: Mr. Baxter has not been always old, he was young enough when
first he began to write against the Church of England, Why did he not go when
first he was prohibited to Preach here, if he had, perhaps our Divisions about
Matters of Religion, had been much narrower than now they are, and a
reconciliation much more easy between us. As for their not speaking the
Language, there are many of the New Plantations in America, etc. that
understand English and Latin, and want able diligent Pastors among them. And as
to all their other Reasons for not going, the leaving their Families, etc. they
may carry them with them; but surely no Reasons of this kind, can come in
competition with the great Advantage of propagating the Gospel of Christ, and
the Peace and Quiet of three Kingdoms.

But again; They say God has commanded them to preach the Gospel, and they must
obey God rather than Man. So God has also commanded them to obey their
Governors and Magistrates, and to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church
and Nation in which they live. Now since they must of necessity break one of
these Commands by staying at home and preaching in separate Meetings; and may
perform both by going to preach beyond Seas, certainly the best and safest way
must be to do the latter.

And if God Almighty has given them commission to preach, as they say, I am
sure he has given them commission no where to disturb the Peace and Settlement
of a Christian Church and State, especially a true Church. He bid them go and
preach the Word, and teach all Nations, but we all know that the greatest Part
of the World was then unconverted, and had no Christian Teachers and Ministers
orderly settled among them; so that those whom Christ then sent could have come
no where amiss, every one of them was to make as many Converts as he could,
there being no limits put how far their particular Charge should extend, and no
farther; but soon after, even in the Apostles days, when particular distinct
Churches were gathered, and committed to the Care of particular Persons, I
suppose, none of our Dissenters will say, That any Ministers, by virtue of
their general Commission, to teach all Nations, might have come into another
Pastor's Congregation or Parish and preach in a separate Meeting without
License, and draw as many People from their lawful Pastor, to whose Care they
were particularly committed, as they could. No, they who did so were often
condemned by St. Paul, as appears in many of his Epistles. And this is the very
Case of the Church of England, with relation to our present Dissenters;
Allowing their Commission to preach be as full as they pretend to, yet it gives
them no Authority to invade other men's Rights, or to draw away the People from
their lawful Ministers; And especially since, if they please, they may exercise
their Office in other places, and do no Man wrong.

The Apostles had as full a Commission to preach as any of our Dissenters can
pretend to, and something more extraordinary; and yet we don't find that they
thought themselves obliged to preach directly in opposition to the civil
Magistrate though a Heathen. It Is true, for the first 300 years Christianity
had not generally the Laws to countenance and defend it, as now it has. So that
the Apostles and Fathers of the Church could not have the Command or Authority
of the civil Magistrate for what they did, yet they had his connivance, and
never preached directly in opposition to his positive command. St. Paul says,
Acts 14. 12. They neither found me in the Temple disputing with any man,
neither raising up the people, neither in the Synagogues, nor in the City. And
again, Acts 15. 8. Neither against the Law of the Jews, neither against the
Temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended any thing at all. So it seems
the practice of the Apostles was to preach the Gospel where they came so long
as they were tolerated or connived at by the Government. But as soon as they
were prohibited by the Magistrate, they left that City or Place and went to the
next, but thought it no ways their Duty to oppose the Will of their lawful
Prince, though a Heathen. And will not our Dissenters show the same respect to
a Christian Prince that the Apostles did to Heathen Magistrates?

But whether Christian Magistrates have power to silence some Ministers, such
as they think fit, or not, it is a thing questionless that has been practiced
by 'em in all Ages, ever since the time of Constantine the Great, which is near
1400 years. Constantine by his Edict suppressed all separate Meetings, and
among the rest the Novatians, and silenced their Preachers, though their
Ordination was as good as any among our Nonconformists. See Eusebius Vita
Constable. lib. 3. cap. 63, 64, 65, 66. And St. Augustine did very much commend the
Emperor for so doing. See Aug. Ep. 48. and see also his 4th* Book against
Cresconius a Donatist, chapter 51.

All the Reformed Churches in the World, do, at this day, silence such
Ministers as refuse to submit to the Orders and Government of their Church, and
believe they have Power so to do. At Geneva their Council of State has the sole
Power of Electing and Deposing Ministers. Nay, farther, by the Constitution of
Geneva, they have Power not only to silence, but to excommunicate such
Ministers as shall contemn the Authority of the Church, or by their obstinacy
disturb the Order of it. In the French Church, if any refuse to subscribe to
the Orders of their Church, he is to be declared a Schismatic* And Calvin
himself, Ep. Olevian. page 311, and 122. says, Let him that will not submit to
the Orders of a Society, be cast out.

But what need we go so far from home for Instances of this kind? Let us see
what the Opinion of our own Dissenters heretofore was in this matter. First
then in the great Dispute between the Brownists and the Non-conformists about
the Ministers preaching, etc. against the Will of the Prince, the
Non-conformists all agreed, That the Apostles had Power immediately from God to
set up his Kingdom, but their Power was extraordinary, and under Heathen
Magistrates. But our Ministers have no such extraordinary Power; And our
Magistrates being Christian are much more to be respected. See Gifford, a
Nonconformist Minister his Answer to Barrow: And see the Confutation of the
Brownists, by several Non-conformists, who joined together for that purpose;
published by one Rathband by their command, p. 51. And see Mr. Bradshaw his
Answer to Johnson, to the same purpose; where he says, That the Magistrate had
no Power to silence the Apostles, for that 'twas manifest by the silencing of
them, was intended the utter extirpation of Christianity: But the case is
altered among us, for the intent of a Christian Magistrate is not to silence
all Christian Ministers but some particular men only; so that the Question is
not whether Minister or no? but whether this or that Minister of Christ? And
doubtless every Christian Prince has Power to choose what Men he thinks fittest
for public Offices in Church or State, so long as they be equally qualified
according to God's Law.

But to go on, The Opinion and Practice of the Dissenters in the late unhappy
Times, are not yet forgotten, they were all then of an opinion that Christ's
Ministers may be silenced and accordingly put it in practice every Party as it
served their turn: See their Solemn League and Covenant, all who would not
enter into it, and solemnly swear to do their utmost endeavor to abolish
Episcopacy and set up Presbytery, were immediately not only silenced but
sequestered; though their Ministry was as much of Divine Right as any of theirs
now. Conscience then was no Plea for not taking this solemn Oath. They would
not suffer one of the old Clergy to teach a School. Nay, they would not allow
their own Independent Brethren to preach, though they had all taken
Presbyterian Orders, as they themselves. See the Letter from the Presbyterian
Ministers of London, to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, Ann. 1645. Jan.
1. And the grand Debate, etc. And in New England where the Independents have
the Power they are all of the same Mind, none is to preach publicly, by their
Laws, where any two organick Churches, Council of State, or general Court,
shall declare their dissatisfaction thereat. See their Body of Statutes which
they have lately printed. Nay, they are not satisfied to silence such Ministers
as will not conform, but they banish them too, as they did Mr. Willams and
others.

And is it not very strange then that the silencing of such Ministers by the
King and Governors of the Church, who positively refuse to submit to the
Orders of the Church, or to give their Governors such a Test of their
Obedience and Conformity to the Laws of the Church and State, as they in their
Discretion have thought fit to require of them; that this should be a thing so
unlawful and wicked now, that has been practiced in the purest Ages of the
Church, and by the Dissenters themselves when they were in Power, and by all
the Churches in the World at this day.

And indeed if the Tests which the Laws require of their Obedience and Loyalty
be too severe and rigid, they may blame themselves for it; for Governors
cannot be too cautious in securing the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom against
a Faction that has once already overthrown this Monarchy, and Church. And give
us all the Reason in the World to believe, That they are ready to do the same
again (especially the latter) as soon as ever it is in their Power. The bitter
Spirit they show in Scotland already, and their Unchristian like behavior to
all those that differ from them in Opinion, shows us plainly what we may expect
here when ever they are able.

And thus much for the Pleas which the Dissenters use for Separation, which
relate to the Constitution of our Church. The second sort are against the terms
of Communion with it. They say our terms of Communion are unlawful, for that
the Church of England injoins some things in God's Worship which are not
expressly commanded in Scripture, and so makes the Scriptures insufficient. And
these things are our Ceremonies, and prescribed Forms of Prayer, etc.

First, as to our Ceremonies. The Church of England uses no Ceremonies, but
such as were used in the purest Ages of the Church, as Dr. Stillingfleet has
proved in his Mischiefs of Separation: And such as are now used by the greatest
part of the Reformed Churches beyond Seas. The Lutheran Churches have the same,
and more Ceremonies than we have: And yet these Churches have been thought fit
to be united to the best Reformed Churches by the best and wisest Protestants,
as appears by a Synod of the Reformed Churches at Chareton in France, Anno 1631.

And indeed, there is no Christian Church in the World, but what do make Laws,
and Canons in Matters of Circumstance, and compel both Ministers and People to
obey the same. They do not believe that every variation in Circumstance, in
God's Worship is setting up new parts of Worship as our Dissenters seem to do
when they charge us with setting up new parts of Worship, and making the
Scriptures insufficient. Adoration, we all agree, is a substantial and proper
act of Divine Worship, but whether this Adoration is performed by prostration,
or by bowing, or by kneeling, is a Circumstance in it self indifferent; And
therefore they who differ in these Circumstances, do not differ in the act of
Worship, but in the manner. See the Harmony of Confessions, where you will find
what the Opinions of other Reformed Churches are concerning the Lawfulness and
Usefulness of Ceremonies: The latter Helvetian Confession says, That there are
different Rites and Ceremonies found in the Churches; let no Man judge hereby
that the Churches dissent. And the Confession of Bohemia has, Wherefore those
Rites and those good Ceremonies ought only to be kept, which among the People
of Christ do Edify; therefore whether they be extent, or brought in by the
Bishops, or by the Councils Ecclesiastical, or by other Authors whatsoever, the
simpler sort are not to trouble themselves about that, but must use them to
that which is good. And a little after, Although our Men do not equally observe
all Ceremonies with other Churches, which is not a thing necessary to be done,
yet are they not so minded as to move any Dissentions for the cause of
Ceremonies, although they be not judged to be altogether necessary, so that
they be not found contrary to God's Word. And the Augustine Confession has;
Some Men then may ask, whether we would have this life of Man to be without
Order, without Ceremonies? In no wise: But we teach, That the true Pastors in
their Churches may Ordain Public Rites or Ceremonies. And Beza in his 24th.
Epist. agrees herein, as has been said before. And Calvin in his Book of the
True way of Reformation, Chapter 16. says, He would not contend about Ceremonies,
not only those which are for decency, but those which are Symbolical. Let all
thing s be done decently and in order, says the Scripture. And St. Paul tell
us, 1 Cor. 14. 33. God is not the author of confusion but of peace, as in all
the Churches of the Saints.

But to come home to our Dissenters, Mr. Baxter in his Poor Man's Family Book,
p. 337. speaking of our public Worship in our Parish Churches, says, In all
the lawful Orders, Gestures, and Manners of behavior in God's Worship, affect
not to differ from the rest, but conform your self to the use of the Church,
for in the Church singularity is a Discord, etc. See Vines on the Sacrament to
the same purpose, p. 39. and many more Instances of this kind might be given,
but what has been said is sufficient to show that such Ceremonies as serve for
Order, or Edification, and are not directly contrary to God's Law, are to be
used according to the Opinion of all the Reformed Churches, and most Eminent
Men both at home and abroad.

Now, How shall we know what Ceremonies are lawful, and what not? It is to be
noted, That the nature of Ceremonies is to be taken from the Doctrine which
goes along with it, and may be lawful and not lawful, as that is. If a Ceremony
be made a substantial part of God's Worship, and unalterable; or be supposed so
necessary, as that the doing of it would be a thing meritorious or pleasing to
God, and the not doing of it sinful, though there were no human Law which
required the doing of it; Then it becomes sinful, because it makes the
Scriptures insufficient. And this it was that made the Jewish Ceremony of
washing before Meat sinful: And so it is in many of the Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome. But when Ceremonies are enjoined for the sake of Order and
Uniformity in God's Worship, according to the general Rules of the Scripture,
and to prevent the great Mischiefs which we should inevitably fall into, if
every Pastor and People were suffered to follow their several different
judgments in the manner of God's Worship, then they are lawful and good.

But, say they, If these Ceremonies do not bind the Consciences of Men, Why
does the Discipline and Censures of the Church, force Men to use them? I
answer, The Church does not oblige Men to the observance of these Ceremonies,
as things that bind the Conscience, or which are necessary to be done or not
done in themselves; but the Reason why Men are forced to observe them, and
punished if they refuse, is because they are appointed by the Church, and
disobedience to the Laws of Church or State, made not contrary to the Law of
God, is sinful, Romans 13. 5. and 2. And for this they are punished, and also for
disturbing the public Peace. And thus we justify our bowing at the name of
Jesus at seasonable times, and all our Ceremonies; since the Church has
appointed them, we ought to obey, unless we can prove them to be sinful, which
no Man can do, so long as the Worship is directed to a true Object, to wit, the
Person of Christ. As for the Ceremony of Bowing toward the Altar, Note the
Canon that appointed it, did not oblige any to the observance of it, but left
them to their liberty.

As to the posture appointed by the Church of England, for receiving the Lord's
Supper, to wit, Kneeling, It Is a Circumstance which may be varied according to
the Discretion of the Church. In the Primitive Church it was always taken in
the posture of Adoration, which posture varied according to the Customs of
Countries. Now Kneeling being the posture of Adoration in these Kingdoms, the
Church of England has therefore appointed, that it be taken kneeling. And
indeed, it is but very reasonable that so Sacred an Ordinance, and so great a
Benefit, should be received in the most thankful and humble posture that may
be, and that surely is on our Knees; which is also the fittest posture for
those high strains of Devotion, with which so Sacred a Work ought to be
attended at the very instant of taking it.

The only Objection that I know is made against this posture of Kneeling at the
Sacrament, is because it is Idolatrous and contrary to Christ's own Practice.
It Is strange that they will make us and the greatest part of the Reformed
Churches all Idolaters whether we will or no: Does not our Book of Common
Prayer at the end of the Communion Service tell them as plain as words can
express it, That we pay no Adoration to any thing in the Sacrament, but Christ
himself which is in Heaven, and yet will they make us Idolaters for all this?
Has any of them ever writ so strong against Idolizing the Elements of Bread and
Wine in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as our Divines of the Church of
England have done? And yet will they persuade us we are Idolaters? They may as
well believe, that we Worship the Stones in the Church-Walls, when we kneel
down to Pray in them: And truly, I fear many of them do so; which makes them
use that posture so seldom in their public Meetings: For you shall seldom see
in any of their Meetings, scarce one of the whole Congregation on their Knees,
not even at repeating the Lord's Prayer, if it happen to be said, which is not
often. Their usual postures of Praying in their public Congregations, are
either standing, or lolling on their Elbows: And at the Reading of the Holy
Scriptures; nay, even of the Psalms themselves, though they are the very highest
strains of Devotion, you shall see them all sitting on their Breeches, and many
of them with their Hats on.

But pray, How comes the posture of sitting to be the only fit posture for
receiving the Lord's Supper? Was that the posture Christ used? No, if we will
believe most learned Men, they will tell us, Christ gave it leaning; which
perhaps, he might have done on purpose, to let us see, that he did not require
any one set posture, for leaning is a mean as it were, between kneeling and
standing, and seems to incline equally to both. Why do they not take it leaning
as Christ did, and after Supper, and in an upper Room? Why do they not observe
all these Circumstances? If one may be dispensed with without sin, Why not
another? If they will not be so civil as to Conform to the Church of England,
Why will they not follow the Example of other Reformed Churches? the Churches
of France and most of the Reformed Churches, take it either standing or
kneeling, as being postures of Adoration: But because they do, our English
Dissenters will take it in no other posture, but that which is most irreverent,
and farthest from Adoration in the World; to wit, sitting on their Breeches.
It Is a Feast (say they) and therefore sitting being a posture of ease, is most
suitable to it: We own it is a Feast, but not a common, but Spiritual Feast; and
therefore we ought to take it not in the posture we use at our common Tables,
but in a more decent and reverent Posture.

To conclude this Point, I shall give you the words of one of the most Eminent
of the Nonconformist Preachers in this Matter. Vines, in his Book on the
Sacrament, p. 39. says, It Is no corruption to vary in occasional Circumstances
in administering the Lord's Supper, such as time and place, and posture, etc.
Mr. Baxter has several times declared the same, and so has most of the
Nonconformist Ministers. And herewith agrees Hooker in his Eccles. Polity,
lib. 5. p. 366.

As to the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, It Is used only as a Solemn Rite or
Ceremony of admission into the Church of England, as it is usual in admissions
into Societies to use some particular Ceremonies: Therefore as Baptism, besides
its Sacramental Efficacy, is a Rite of admission into Christ's Catholic
Church, so the Sign of the Cross, is into our Church of England. We do not use
it as it is used in the Church of Rome; for they use it as a dedicative Sign to
God, we only as a Token, or declarative Sign to Men; they use it before
Baptism, and make it part of it; we after, and make it no part of Baptism, but
allow the Baptism to be good without it; and it to be omitted in Private
Baptism, if it be scrupled.

If it be said, that since these Ceremonies are allowed to be things
indifferent in themselves by the Church of England, and are scrupled by the
Dissenters, why will the Church of England impose them? I answer, First, it is
not fit nor convenient that such things as are thought necessary by the
Governors of a Church, to preserve the Order and Unity of it, should be cast
aside, to humor some over scrupulous and restless Minds, and who, it is like,
would not be satisfied, were that granted. Secondly, It is more safe for the
Church of England to follow the Example of the greatest part of the Reformed
Churches, which do allow and practice them, than such a handful of People as
the Dissenters of England, etc. And Thirdly, There were as insignificant
Ceremonies enjoined by the Apostles themselves, as any of ours are now,
notwithstanding some Men's scruples concerning them; as the Love Feasts, and
Holy Kiss, etc. till abolished by general consent. And the Assembly of their
own Divines at Westminster, tell us, The Apostles (say they) notwithstanding
the difference of Men's Judgments, did prescribe Rules of Uniformity. See
Papers for Accommodation, p. 111.

The next great Objection which the Dissenters make to the terms of our
Communion is, For that we tie up our Ministers to prescribed Forms of Prayer,
which is a stinting of the Spirit, and hinders them from exercising their
Gifts, and is contrary to Scripture, and the practice of the Primitive Church.

The Arguments which they commonly use against written Forms of Prayer are,
First, They say that nothing but the Canonical Scripture, and the lively Voice
of God's Graces (which they call Preaching and Extempore Prayer) are to be
brought into the Public Worship of God; and nothing that is Humane, because
subject to Infirmities and Errors. But if so, then must we exclude not only all
written Prayers, but the whole Bible too, unless in the Original Tongue; for
all Translations of it are Humane, and subject to Errors. And also the Prayers
and Preaching of the Pastors must be excluded, for the Errors in the Sermons;
and Prayers of the Pastors, cannot be said to be the lively Voices of God's own
Graces. And the Psalms in Meter must be also excluded.

Another Argument is, That we must not make use of any outward helps in the
action of Prayer; for the Spirit they say helps our Infirmities, and
therefore written Forms, and all other outward helps are sinful. But let me ask
them, whether the Voice of another that Prays, or Fasting, or the lifting up
of the Hands and Eyes, 1 Timothy 2. 8. or Kneeling, be Prayer it self, or only
outward helps to Prayer to make it more fervent? Sure they are outward helps
only; and yet they are used in the very action of Prayer.

Again, they say Reading a Prayer cannot be Praying; for Prayer is the pouring
forth Supplications to God, the other a receiving in of such things as we Read.
But when one hears a Prayer pronounced by another, his hearing does receive it
into his Soul; but yet at the same instant he does power it forth as a Prayer
to God. Why then may not this be done as well when it is read as when it is
pronounced by another?

But then they tell us, That all Forms of Prayer are a stinting of the Spirit.
If so, Why will they hear the Extempore Prayer of another Man? is not this as
much a Form of Prayer to all the Hearers, as any written Form can be? Doubtless
it is. How comes it then, that the Spirit of the Hearers is not as much stinted
when they join in this Form, as if they had joined in a written Form?

But since our Dissenters have the confidence to affirm, That Forms of Prayer
are sinful; and were never used among Christians till lately, in the time of
Popery and Superstition, and are supported only by the Ignorance and Lazyness
of our Clergy, I will show, That Forms of Prayer and Praises have been used by
God's People in the time of the Old Testament, and have been practiced and
recommended by Christ himself in the New: And that both Forms of Prayer and
Liturgies, were Composed by the Fathers, and appointed to be used in the Church
ever since Christ's days: And that even the most Eminent of our own
Non-Conformists have heretofore declared their liking thereto: And that all the
Reformed Churches do use and approve of prescribed Forms in their public
Worship at this Day: And lastly, I will show, That our English Common Prayer
Book has been particularly Commended and Approved by the most Learned and
Eminent Men of the Reformed Churches beyond Seas. And when this is done, if any
will be so hardy, as to affirm, That Forms of Prayer are so Sinful, as to cause
a necessity of Separation, he is incorrigible, and not to be Convinced by
Reasons.

First then, Forms of Prayer, etc. were used by God's People in the time of the
Old Testament; for the Lord prescribed a Form of Blessing to Aaron, saying, On
this wise ye shall bless the Children of Israel, saying, etc. Numb. vi. 23. And
again, Deuteronomy. xxvi. he prescribed a Form of Prayer, which he commanded the
People to use. And the xxij. Psalm is a Prayer, which the People were commanded
to sing or say, every Morning; so are several of the other Psalms Forms of
Prayers, as lxxxvi, xc, cij, etc. See Origin Cint. Cells. l. 4. p. 178. And here
observe, That the Dissenters will allow these Psalms to be Prayers, and that
they ought to be Sung to God; yet they will not allow that a Man should Pray
Singing. For, say they, When they are Sung, they are not Prayer. See now what
an absurdity they will run into, rather than forsake their own Opinion: For
here they affirm, That a Man may say the Words of Prayer to God devoutly, and
yet not pray.

Secondly, Christ himself used a Form of Prayer (though doubtless he had a
power of praying Extempore, much beyond what our Dissenters, or any that ever
was on Earth, can pretend to) when he was in the Garden, a little before his
Suffering, he prayed twice or thrice in the same Words, Matthew. xxvi. 44. Mark
xiv. 39. and that too at a time when he was in so great Extremity and Sorrow,
That he sweated drops of Blood; and at such a time one usually prays after the
most prevailing and fervent manner.

And to assure us that our Savior thought Forms of Prayer very necessary to
help our Infirmities, we have not only his Example, but his Precept for it too.
For our Savior taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer, Matthew. vi. 9. and bid
them use it. And the occasion of our Savior's giving his Disciples this Form
of Prayer was to obviate the inconveniences which he saw did usually attend
Extempore Prayers; to wit, the using Vain Repetitions, etc. which he tells them
are not pleasing to God; and therefore he first bids them beware of that, and
then immediately after he gives them a short and perfect Form of Prayer, as the
best way to prevent that evil. Whether our Dissenters have not as much reason
to use Forms of Prayer for that very reason as Christ's Disciples had, let the
World judge that hears their tedious ex tempore Prayers filled with as many
vain Repetitions, and bald, and sometimes senseless Expressions as any of theirs.

But say the Dissenters, When our Savior taught his Disciples to pray, he did
not design that they should use any certain Form of Prayer. For he bad them,
Luke 11. 2. When ye pray, say thus; and (thus) being an adverb of Similitude,
does show that our Savior did not intend they should use the same words, but
some other such like. To this I answer, In the 3d. chap. of Exodus v. 14, 15.
The Lord said unto Moses, thus shall thou say to the Children of Israel, EHEIE
has sent me unto you. And again, the God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has sent me unto you. Here* Moses (by
this Rule) must not say these words, not EHEIE has sent me unto you; not the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has sent me unto you,
but the like. And by the same reason the Scripture is not the very Word of God,
but the Words of the Prophets; for all along, when the Prophet says, Thus says
the Lord, they do not tell the very Words of God, but the like.

From what has been said, it is evident that we have Scripture on our side, both
Old and New Testament, for using prescribed Forms of Prayer. We will in the
next place enquire what Authority we have for it in the first and purest Ages
of the Church. First then, That Forms of Prayer were used in the Church in the
first Century, I gather from Ignatius who was Bishop of Antioch, Anno Dom. 99.
in his Epist. to those at Magnesia, he bids 'em, Do nothing without the Bishop
and Presbyters, nor to make trial of things agreeable to their own private
Fancy, p. 34. And Socrates in his History, l. 6. c. 8. says, That Ignatius
first brought the usage of singing alternately (as we use in our Choirs) into
the Church of Antioch. Photius affirms the same of him. And Theodoret says,
Hist. lib. 2. c. 24. That this Custom of singing alternately, began at Antioch,
and was soon received all the World over.

In the second Century, Tertull. de Orat. c. 1. and c. 9. tells us, They used
Forms of Prayer then in the African Church. He calls the Lord's Prayer, *the
lawful and ordinary Prayer, and that the Christians daily repeated that very
Form. And he shows they sang Hymns, etc. then in the Church alternately as we
do now, Tertull. ad Vxor. l. 2. p. 172.

And Calvin in his Instit. l. 4. c. 1. affirms the same, That the Christians
did use to repeat the Lord's Prayer daily, and that they did it by Christ's
Command. How will our Dissenters reconcile this to their seldom or never using
of it, even on the Lord's Day; every young Preacher, yea, and every perhaps
drunken Cobbler, preferring their own rash and indeliberate Prayers before it.

In the third Century, St. Cyprian who lived then, affirms the same, that the
Lord's Prayer was used daily, for says he, The Father will know the words of
his own Son, see Cypr. de Orat. Dom. p. 309. And the same Cyprian in his Ep. 8.
ad Cler. and Pleb. p. 24. says, Christ commanded us to pray for all men in a
common Prayer wherein all agreed. It appears also that the Priest and People
prayed by way of Responses; as when the Priest said, Lift up your hearts, the
People answered, We lift them up unto the Lord. See Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 22.
See more for this interchangable way of praying between Priest and People, B.
Bills. of Christian Subjection, part 4. p. 435.

In the same Century, Origin says, They who served God through Jesus in the
Christian way, use frequently night and day the injoined Prayers: See Orig. in
Cells. l. 6. p. 302.

And St. Basil in his Book de Spirit. Sanct. c. 29. p. 221. tells us, That
Gregory Thaumaturgus, who was his Predecessor in the Bishopric of Neocaesarea
and cotemporary with St. Cyprian, composed a Liturgy, and appointed Ceremonies
for that Church. And that too in an age when miraculous Gifts lasted.

In the beginning of the fourth Century, Ann. Dom. 312. the first Christian
Emperor Constantine (as Eusebius tells us in his Life of Constantine, lib. 4.
c. 17. p. 395.) ordered his Palace after the manner of a Church, and would take
the Books himself into his hands, either for explaining the Holy Scripture, or
repeating the prescribed Prayers in his Royal Family.

In the same Century, Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria; shows us, that the
Priests and People prayed by way of Responses in that Church; for in his Epist.
to Solitar. p. 239. he says, The People mourned and groaned to God in the
Church, all of them crying to the Lord, and saying, Spare thy People, good
Lord, spare them, etc. By which it seems the Church did not think it enough
then for the People to say, Amen, but appointed them distinct and intelligent
answers.

In the same Century, the Council of Laodicea, Can. 15. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 459.
appointed Canonical Singers, who sang out of Books, and none but they were
allowed to begin the Hymns. And the same Council, Can. 18. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 461.
Ordained that the very same Liturgy of Prayers, should be used always both at
three in the Afternoon and in the Evening. And now because this Council is so
plain evidence against the Dissenters, that they have no way to answer it; they
fly again to their last refuge, which is to deny the Authority of this Council;
for, they say, this Council of Laodicea was but a Provincial Synod, or Council:
But though we grant 'twas no more but a Provincial Synod, yet I hope a Provincial
Council of Orthodox Bishops were Good Authority. But besides, this very Canon
concerning Liturgies, was taken into the Code of the universal Church, and
confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon, which was a general Council.

And that they used Forms of Prayer, and Responses, and Alternate way of
Singing in the African Church, appears by St. Cyprian before: And by Optatus
Melevianus, l. 2. p. 47. for there he blames the Donatists, for shutting the
mouth of all the People, and forcing them to be silent. See also St. Augustine
de Eccles. Dog. c. 30. Tom. 3. p. 46. Many more Instances and Authorities may
be given to the same purpose as St. Basil, Ep. 63. p. 843. and Ep. 68. p. 856.
(where he says, That a Prayer wherein there are not conjoined voices, is not
half so strong as otherwise it would be) Conc. Carthag, Can. 106. Bev. Tom. 1.
p. 640. But I will referr the Reader to Dr. Comber of Liturgies, and Dr.
Falkner his Defense of Liturgles.

Our Dissenters object against our alternate way of praying, as in our Litany,
where the Priest says half the Sentence, and the People the rest, for that
neither Priest nor People speak a complete Sentence, and therefore our Prayer
is imperfect, and we do but mock God. But by what has been said it appears that
this praying by way of Responses, was used in the purest Ages of the Church,
and by the Holiest Men. But pray, Why may not the words make as perfect a
Prayer when they are pronounced by two Mouths, as when only by one? Prayer is
not the pronouncing of words, but the joining the desire and consent thereto,
and this they may do as well when they are pronounced by several Mouths as by
one. They may as well say, That when a Tune is played by a Consort of Music,
and the Trebles rest and let the Tenors and Bases go on, as sometimes they do,
that the Tune is not a complete and perfect Tune, for if you take either part
singly, it is not; but altogether it is too great Advantage.

The Advantage of this way of Praying by Responses is, That we can give our
hearty Consent to each Petition, after a more lively manner than by barely
saying, Amen. And also by our frequent answering of whole Sentences, our
Fancies are the more stirred up and enlivened by shaking off that dullness and
drowsiness, that otherwise would be apt to seize upon our Spirits, in barely
listening to one long continued Prayer.

And in the Primitive Church, they had certain Prayers for certain Times and
Occasions, as Easter-Eve, etc. See Leo in Vit. Chrysostom. Tom. 8. p. 288. etc.

Thus much for the practice of the Primitive Church. Now let us come a little
nearer our own time, and see what the Opinion of other Reformed Churches is
concerning prescribed Forms of Prayers and Liturgies; and this we do the
rather, because the Dissenters are perpetually calling upon us to reform our
selves to the example of other Reformed Churches. Though I think under favor, we
of* England have no more reason to follow the pattern of other Nations as to
the Reforming and Governing of our Church, than we have to do so in Matters of
State, since we have as absolute and independent Power of Reforming our selves
as any of them; and God be thanked, as able and godly* Ministers both in Church
and State to direct us therein. They may as well quarrel with us, because we do
not depose our King, and reduce our Government from that of a limited and mixed
Monarchy, to a Commonwealth, like that of Geneva.

But since they insist so must upon this, I will make it appear that the Church
of England comes nearer to the judgment and practice of all the Reformed
Churches, in using prescribed Forms of Prayer, than the Dissenters do in
rejecting them.

I will begin with the Lutheran Churches, which I showed before, are
acknowledged to be true Churches, and which far exceed in number the Churches
that follow Calvin's method. Luther himself composed a Form of Common Prayer
for the Church of Wittemburg, taken out of the Mass Book: See Luther's Epist.
Tom. 2. p. 384. And all the Churches of his Communion at this day do use a
Liturgy containing Collects, Epistles, Gospels for every Sunday, Prayers and
Litanies, together with all other parts of Ecclesiastical Ministration, as our
Common Prayer Book does; and which agrees with ours almost verbatim, especially
in the Litany. And these are imposed on the Churches, as particularly the
Churches of Denmark, and the Churches in Upper Hungary, which are all Lutheran.
And the Lutheran Churches do chant their public Prayers as we do in our
Cathedrals. And they observe Holy Days. See all this proved at large from their
own writers by Dr. Comber his Defense of Liturgies 2 d. Part, p. 305, etc.

Next for the Churches of Poland, and Lithuania in 2 Synods held there, Ann.
Dom. 1633. and 1634. one certain Liturgy is enjoined, to be used in all those
Dominions. Certain prescribed Liturgies are also used in Transylvania, Hungary,
Bohemia, etc. See at large Dr. Comb. ubi Supra, and Monsieur Durell his View of
the Government, and public Worship of God in the Reformed Churches beyond
Seas. Printed, London, 1662.

Now for the Churches Reformed by Calvin and others; as Geneva, France,
Helvetia, Holland, etc. Calvin composed a Form of Divine Service, which is used
in the Church of Geneva, and those of France at this day, and their Ministers
are bound to use them. And see Calvin's Letter to the Protector of England,
during the Minority of King Ed. 6. the Protector at that time, when the
Common Prayer Book was to be settled by Act of Parliament, thought fit first to
Advice with so Eminent a Man, as Calvin was, about it. He writes to Calvin to
know his Opinion therein; Calvin returns him this answer, For so much as
concerns the Prayers and Ecclesiastical Rites, I much approve that they be
determined; so that it may not be lawful for the Ministers to vary from it,
that it may be a help to the weakness of some; That it may be a Testimony of
the Churches consent; And that it may put a stop to the levity of such as are
for new things. See Calv. Ep. p. 165. Ep. 87. to the Protector. And see his
Letter to Cox, a Church of England Divine upon his Arrival at Franckford, among
his Epistles, 164, 165.

See Beza his Approbation of Forms of Prayer, Tom. 2. p. 229.

In the French Church, Mornay Lord Du-Plessis, in his Book of the Mass, allows
of the Use and Antiquity of prescribed Forms: See at large Dr. Comber of
Liturgies 2d. Part, p. 313. And see there the famous Monsieur Daille agreeing
herewith.

In the Church of Helvetia, Bullinger tells us, they used prescribed Forms,
keep Fasts and Holy Days, etc. Bulling. Decod. 2. Sermon. 1. p. 38.

The Churches of Holland use Forms of Prayer for Baptism, the Lord's Supper,
and all occasional Offices, and also Liturgies, etc. which are all put into a
Book of Common Prayer. And even in Scotland they have had a Common Prayer Book,
for there are some of them now extant, which were Printed, Ann. 1594. supposed
to be writ by Mr. Knox for the use of the Kirk of Scotland. See the latter end
of Dr. Comber his Defense of Liturgies, 2d. Part.

And the Leyden Professors say, That Forms of Prayer are not only lawful, but
very advantageous; because every Christian cannot fitly conceive new Prayers:
and the attention of Auditors, are not a little helped in great assemblies by
usual Forms. See Dr. Falkner, his Libertas Ecclesiastica. p. 121.

Thus much for Forms of Prayer in general: But some perhaps may object against
our Common Prayer in particular. To clear that, I think, 'twere sufficient to
tell them, that it has been approved of by all the learned and godly Divines of
the Church of England ever since the Reformation, and confirmed by several
Parliaments: And it cannot reasonably be supposed that God Almighty should
conceal his will from the greatest number of the most learned, pious and
judicious People of a Nation, notwithstanding their frequent Prayers to God,
that he would direct them, and their great Care and Study which they take to
come to the knowledge of the truth; and reveal it only to a few, and those of
the rawer injudicious sort, who have had least time, and study, and means to
come to greater Knowledge, such as our Dissenters generally are. This alone
were sufficient to recommend our particular Common Prayer: But since our
Dissenters will not allow so many several Parliaments, and so many Successions
of Learned Divines to be competent judges in this matter, we are willing to
stand to the judgment of our Neighbor Churches of the Reformed Religion
concerning our Common Prayer, and the other Matters in controversy between us.

In King Edward 6th. his days, Archbishop Cranmer did request the famous Bucer
to peruse the whole Book of Common Prayer, in order to his censuring what he
thought was to be amended. Bucer accordingly did so; and declares his judgment
of it thus: In the prescript Form for the Communion, and the daily Prayers, I
see nothing written in this Book, which is not taken out of the Word of God, if
not in express words, as the Psalms and Lessons, yet in sense, as the Collects:
And also the order of these Lessons and Prayers, and the time when they are to
be used, are very agreeable to the Word of God, and the Practice of the ancient
Church. See Bucer's Censure upon the Book of Common Prayer, c. 1. p. 457. And
note this was before the Common Prayer was amended as now it is. Some things
it is true, Bucer did wish to be amended, which has been since done, and most of
them according to his Advice there.

Next, the Archbishop of Spalato in his Book against Suarez, p. 340. says, That
the English Liturgy contains nothing in it, which is not Holy, which is not
Pious, and truly Christian as well as Catholic.

Causabon in his Epistle to King James the first, affirms the same; And says
farther, That none at this day comes nearer the Form of the Ancient Church,
following a middle way between those who have offended both in excess and
defect.

The next Authority for us is the learned Grotius, who it is certain had no
Obligation to the Church of England, but rather the contrary. He says, I am
sure the English Liturgy, the Rite of laying on of Hands on Children in memory
of Baptism, the Authority of Bishops, of Synods consiting of none but the
Clergy, etc. do sufficiently agree to the Orders of the Ancient Church; from
which we cannot deny but we have departed both in France and Holland. See
Grotius ad Boatslaer, Ep. 62. p. 21.

The next is the famous Lud. Capellus, who was a famous French Divine of the
Reformed Church, and Divinity Professor in a famous Protestant University. This
Man lived to hear of our Independent Sect in England, and writ most Learnedly
against 'em. Says he, When miraculous Gifts ceased, there was a necessity for
Liturgies, which were used in the First IV. Ages uncorrupted; but afterward
Corruptions were introduced by the following Popes. But upon the Reformation
the Liturgy was purged from all its Corruptions, and has been happily used in
the several Reformed Churches, and with good success; until very lately (says
he) there arose a sort of morose, scrupulous, (not to say downright
superstitious) Men, who for many trifling Reasons, of no moment, not only
dislike the Liturgy hitherto used in that Church, but would have both it, and
the whole Order of Bishops to be utterly abolished; in place whereof they would
substitute that, which they call their Directory, etc. and so goes on. And then
he proves at large, That Forms of Prayer, are not only necessary for the
unlearned, but the learned also; and shows the insufficiency of their
Directory. And how ridiculous it is to suppose, That we have that extraordinary
Gift of Prayer, that they had in the Apostles days, and some little time after.
'Twere too long to put it all down here, I will referr you to Dr. Comber's
Defense of Liturgies, II. Part, page 325. and will go on to show the Opinion of
some of the most Eminent of our own Dissenters concerning our Common Prayer.

Mr. Baxter in his Poor Man's Family Book, page 336. says, Do not peevishly
pick quarrels with the Prayers of the Church, nor come to them with humoursome
prejudice, etc. And in his Preface to the same Book, he says, he mightily
approves of Forms of Prayer. See Dr. Owen to the same purpose, his Evangelical
Love, page 54.

And Mr. Baxter in his Dispute of Liturgies, Prop. 10. says farther, That the
constant disuse of Forms is apt to breed a giddiness in Religion, and may make
Men Hypocrites, who delude themselves with conceits, that they delight in God,
when it is but in those Novelties and variety of Expressions that they are
delighted. See also Gifford, a Nonconformist, his Answer to Greenwood; he writ
a whole Treatise, proving the lawfulness of read Prayer.

And now I have showed, that Praying by Forms has been used by the Saints in
the Old Testament, enjoined by Christ in the New, practiced by all the Holy
Fathers and Devout Christians who lived ever since the first settling of the
Church; and is now allowed and practiced in all the regular Protestant
Churches, and approved by some of the most Eminent of our own Dissenters. Let
any Man now in his right Reason judge, whether praying by Forms be so wicked,
and abominable a thing as most of our Dissenters make it. One of the
Nonconformist Ministers, in a Book which he Published not many Years since,
speaking of Forms of Prayer, calls it, That pitiful contemptible thing, called
Uniformity in Words, and Syllables, and Phrases; which was never desired of
God, nor ever entered into his or his Son's heart. Let the World judge now,
whether using Forms of Prayer, etc. be this pitiful, contemptible thing they
are pleased to make it, or the Books that contain them deserve no better usage
from Christians, than to be burnt in the Streets by the Common Hangman. In the
days of Julian there was never any thing done more wicked, than to burn the
Holy Bible: But even to that height are those who call themselves Christians
arrived already, in our Neighboring Kingdom: if these things be suffered, what
must we think will follow.

But the main Text of Scripture, which our Dissenters rely on, for to defend
their Extempore Prayers is, Romans viij. 26. where St. Paul says, The Spirit
helps your Infirmities; and therefore they conclude, they ought to use no
outward helps. But I have showed before, That outward helps are to be used, as
Kneeling, lifting up the Hands and Eyes, etc. So that it is plain they mistake
this Text of Scripture. And it is evident they do so, for that all the Fathers,
and the most Eminent Men of the Church, as Calvin, Luther, etc. whenever they
recommended the use of Liturgies, they gave this Reason for it among others, To
prevent the inconveniences which some Men's folly would betray them to in their
using rash and unpremeditated Prayers: Now if the Spirit helps our
Infirmities in the sense that our Dissenters will have it: How come all these
learned Men; yea, and Mr. Baxter himself, etc. to recommend Forms as necessary
for the helping of our Infirmities, and so make the Holy Spirit insufficient?
Shall we believe that all these learned Men did not understand the meaning of
that Text so well as some of our Dissenters do? It Is very likely that St.
Augustine and St. Chrysostom (who lived nearer the Apostles days by above
Twelve Hundred Years, than any of our Non-conformists) might have understood
the Apostles meaning, better than any of them: Now let us hear what their sense
was of these words of St. Paul, We know not what to pray for, as we ought, but
the Spirit helps our Infirmities. St. Aug. ad Prob. Ep. 121. p. 129. will not
grant that any Christians wanted the Spirit to help them with words and
expressions: For he says, It is not credible that the Apostle or they to whom
he wrote were ignorant of the Lord's Prayer. And therefore they must
necessarily have known what to have pyra'd for; therefore these words, (The
Spirit helps our Infirmities) he tells us must be expounded, of the Spirit's
giving us patience not to pray absolutely to be delivered out of our
afflictions, but in God's due time. And St. Chrysostom in his Hom. 14. in 8.
Romans p. 120. says, That there was a miraculous gift of Prayer in the Apostles
days; to which St. Paul alluded in those words (The Spirit helps our
Infirmities.) But he tells us there, that 'twas ceased long since, that is,
before his days, though he lived in the fourth Century; so that whatever the
Apostles meaning was then, it can no ways be taken in the sense our Dissenters
would have it, nor does it condemn prescribed Forms, now that that miraculous
gift of Prayer is ceased.

But were there no other Argument against the use of extempore Prayers in
public Assemblies, than the inconveniency of them, 'twere sufficient to reject
them: It Is impossible that Order or Unity can be preserved in any Church, where
every Congregation has liberty to Worship God in a different way from all the
rest; one Minister praying for one thing, and another perhaps for the quite
contrary at the same time, according to their different judgments and
interests, as was usual in the late times, when that extempore way was used.
Besides, in great Congregations, it is impossible that all the People should
keep their attention so well fixed on an extempore Prayer to which they are
utter strangers, as on a Prayer to which they have been accustomed: For how can
they join with the Minister in every Petition as they ought to do, till they
have reflected a little upon what it was he said, for when the Minister is left
to his own Fancy in his Prayer, it is very like he may either through mistake or
wilfully come out with some Petition that all his hearers cannot join with him
in: So that it is necessary for every one of the Congregation to watch every
expression, and reflect a little on it, before he consent to it. In the mean
time, the eloquent Pastor to show his extraordinary Gift of Prayer, runs away
with the business, as if his Tongue was indeed the Pen of a ready writer. Thus
the poor People must either be left behind, or join with him at random.

Another inconveniency which attends extempore Prayer, is, That it is impossible
for a Man who trusts to his own Memory, to retain all his wants, and the wants
and necessities of the People so in his Mind, but that something or other, will
very often be forgotten, which may be avoided by using of a well composed Form.

But again, Can we reasonably imagine that God Almighty can be pleased with
vain repetitions, and with bald, and unproper, and (too often) nonsensical
expressions such as usually attend their extempore Prayers? Doubtless he
cannot; for where he has given Judgment, and Wit, and Eloquence, he expects it
should be used in his Service, as well as in our worldly business. Our Savior
bids us, When we pray, not to use vain repetitions, nor think to be heard for
our much speaking, Matthew. 6. 7. And Solomon, Eccles. 5. 1, 2. says, Keep thy
feet when thou go to the house of the Lord; and be not nash with thy mouth
and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in
Heaven and thou on Earth, therefore let thy words be few. How agreeable now
this Doctrine is to the practice of the Dissenters, in their rash approaching
to God with a long inconsiderate Prayer, let any Man judge. When they made
their Addresses to the late King James; they drew it up with all the caution
and premeditation imaginable, and every Sentence was carefully considered on by
several of the best Heads among them, but they address the great King of
Heaven, with the rash and inconsiderate expressions of one Person, and he
perhaps, a weak onetoo.

But some of them say, Why should not Ministers be tied to a Form of Preaching,
as well as of Praying? Why sure, there is a great deal of difference between
Preaching and Praying: Preaching is directed to a Congregation, which is made
up of several People, who have different Capacities and Apprehensions, and
therefore require different Phrases and Arguments to move them. Some are drawn
with one Argument, some with another, some apprehend a Man's meaning by one
Expression, some by another, according as they are suited to their several
Capacities; so that it is impossible to frame a Form in Preaching, to answer all
these ends. But Prayers are directed to one God, who is always the same, and
not to be pleased with variety of Phrases.

I shall conclude this Point with this observation, That those who are most
inveterate against Praying by Forms, do daily use the same individual Form
themselves, word for word, throughout the whole year, as any one that frequent
their public or private Meetings, may observe.

The Third sort of Pleas which the Dissenters use for Separation, are such as
relate to their Consciences: For, say they, What though the Terms of Communion
with the Church of England be lawful, since we cannot satisfy our Consciences,
that they are so? We must not act against our Consciences, for that were sin in
us. For St. Paul says, Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans
14.

But I answer first, this Scripture is meant of indifferent things, and no
other as appears by the coherence of the words with the whole Chapter: For the
Apostle is there speaking of Meats, Times, Days, etc. and blames the Romans for
condemning, and quarrelling with one another about them.

But Secondly, It Is plain that Note when we refuse any thing enjoined by
Authority, we must be certain that the thing enjoined is unlawful; for a
doubting Conscience will not excuse our disobedience. A doubting Conscience, is
when the Conscience is in such a perfect aequilibrium or suspense, as that
there appears no more reason on the one side of the question, than on the
other; in such case the command of Authority turns the Scales, and makes it
necessary for us to obey, since for ought we know, the thing may be as well
lawful as not.
Scruples of Conscience will not excuse from sin, in some Cases. For it is agreed
by all, that Conscience will not excuse from sin, unless all proper helps and
means are used to inform our Judgments, and to come to the right knowledge of
the thing scrupled; This Mr. Baxter owns in his Dispute of Church Government,
p. 483. where he says, That if a Man through ignorance or prejudice, takes
unlawful things to be lawful, or lawful things to be unlawful, this will not
excuse him in his disobedience. Suppose then for Instance, that the Magistrate
imposes a thing which he lawfully may impose; as that all Men should begin the
public Worship at an hour, and end at an hour. The Quakers, they say, This is
stinting of the Spirit, and therefore sinful, and that they cannot in
Conscience Communicate with us, till it be removed, I will ask a Presbyterian
or Independent, whether this be a sinful Separation or not, they will own it
is, notwithstanding their pretended Scruple of Conscience: For the sin must
needs lie some where, either on those who impose the thing, or on those who
separate; not on those who imposed it, because they allow the thing enjoined to
be lawful, therefore it must be on those who separate, because they do not
inform themselves truly of the lawfulness of the thing scrupled. And indeed, if
a bare Scruple of Conscience will justify Separation, the Anabaptists and all
other Sects, may as well justify their Separation from the Presbyterians and
Independents, as they can do theirs from the Church of England. And by the same
Rule, we may subdivide, till there be as many Religions as Men.

I grant that the Obligations of Conscience are the greatest that can be, and
to act against the clear Dictates of a Man's Conscience, is a very great sin;
but this must be meant of a Conscience when all due care and diligence has been
used to rectify and inform it. And then what is this to the case of our
Dissenters? Do they separate from the Church out of pure Conscience? yes, say
they, doubtless we do: But have they used all proper means to inform their
judgments, and come to the knowledge of the truth? Surely they will not say
they have. Are not the greatest part of the Dissenters a poor illiterate sort
of People, who know nothing of the Controversy between us, nor ever trouble
their heads about it; but will go to the Meetings, because their Fathers and
Mothers did so before them, and will rail at the Church, though ask them what is
amiss in it seriously, and they cannot tell you. And as for those few of the
better sort among them, who perhaps, have had greater advantages of Education,
is it not remarkable that they Read and Converse altogether on one side, and
associate themselves into Clubs and Cabals of such who are of the same Opinion
with themselves, but avoid all occasions of creating the least intimacy with
any who differ from them in Opinion? And if any shall but offer to inform them,
though in never so peaceable and friendly a manner, does it not prove the
occasion of an eternal Quarrel? or at least put a stop to any farther intimacy
between them? Is not this truly the case among them? I appeal to their own
Consciences, whether this be truth which I say. How can these Men pretend then
that they have used all proper means to satisfy their Consciences? They who
really scruple things out of tenderness of Conscience, would be sincerely
willing to be better informed, and would look upon them as their best Friends
who endeavor to inform them, but instead of this, they fly out into rage and
violent Passions against those who offer to remove their Scruples, and for
their kindness, return most reproachful, bitter Language, both on the Persons,
though never so Eminent, and the thing though never so Sacred; which is visible in
all their Books of Controversy. And even in common Discourse, How difficult is
it to obtain from the Zeal of many of our Dissenters so much truce as to hear
what one can say to them, with patience and civility? They tell us in plain
terms we may spare our breath, and not pretend to teach them, they understand
their Duty better than we do; They are satisfied in their own minds that they
are in the right, and will not be wheedled out of their Opinion, by all that we
can say. This is truth, Mr. Baxter himself has owned as much in his Answer to
Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 81. where he affirms in his own name, and the name of his
People, That he who thinks that his own or others reasonings will ever change
all the truly honest Christians in the Land, knows so little of Matters, or of
Men, or of Conscience, as that he is not fit to be a Bishop or a Priest. What
will they say now to this, will their Scruples of Conscience excuse their
Separation and Disobedience, when it is evident they will not use the proper
means to satisfy their Consciences?* Nay farther, When they declare it is
needless to go about to remove their Scruples, for they are resolved beforehand
they will not be convinced? Let no Man say so for shame, it is against common
Reason, and the Opinion of all learned Men, and even of Mr. Baxter himself.

But we will suppose for once, that every particular Dissenter has done his
utmost endeavor to satisfy his Conscience, and that after all they cannot
conquer their Scruples; What then? Must they therefore proceed to Separation?
No, this was never allowed by Christ nor his Apostles, nor by any Christian
Church since their time, not even by our Dissenters themselves heretofore. Our
Savior himself did not separate from the Jewish Church, though there were many
things amiss in it, nor advise others to do so, says Vines, a Nonconformist,
in his Book on the Sacrament, page 39. In the Apostles days we find there were
some who scrupled some things that were enjoined, but notwithstanding the
difference of Men's Judgments, and their pretended Scruples of Conscience, the
Apostles did prescribe Rules of Uniformity, and allowed none to Separate from
the Church, and frequent Meetings of their own setting up, because they could
not conquer their Scruples. And this very Argument did the Assembly of Divines
at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1648. use against their Dissenting Brethren, the
Independents, who pleaded for Separation upon the account of Conscience, as the
Dissenters do now. See Papers for Accommodation, page 111. And when the
Independents told them they could not satisfy their Consciences so as to
Conform to their Church Government; and therefore begged, That they may be
allowed separate Congregations, the Assembly positively refused it, and urged
them to Conform to their way of Worship, etc. and charged them with Schism if
they did not: For, say they, To desire separate Congregations, as to those
parts of Worship where they own they can join with us, is very unreasonable;
for tenderness of Conscience may justify non-Communion in the thing scrupled,
but it cannot justify a Separation* See the Papers for Accommodation, page 20,
21, 22, 51, etc. For if it should, say they, it then would make way for
infinite Divisions, and sub-Divisions, and give countenance to perpetual Schism
in the Church, ib. p. 68, 73, etc. And then the Assembly justify themselves in
so doing, by the practice of the Saints in the Apostles days: For they tell
them, they desire no more of them hereby, than what they were confident was
practiced by the Saints at Philippi; namely, To hold practical Communion in
things wherein they Doctrinally agreed, ib. p. 115. So that if the judgment of
their own Brethren in a full Assembly, may be taken upon the most weighty
Debate and serious Deliberation; their setting up separate Meetings, and
forsaking the Church upon the account of some Scruples which they pretend they
cannot conquer, is Sinful and Schismatical.

And when the Assembly of Divines was pressed farther by their Dissenting
Brethren, they desired them to answer in this one thing, Whether some must be
denied the liberty of their Conscience in matters of practice or none? If none,
then (say they) we must Renounce our Covenant, and let in Prelacy again, and
all other ways: If a denial of Liberty to some may be just, then Uniformity may
be settled notwithstanding Men's different Judgments or pretense of Conscience,
Papers for Accommodation, page 116.

Agreeable hereto is the practice of the Independents themselves, where they
have the power; as in New England, no Separation is there allowed upon the
account of Scruples of Conscience, as appears by their Book of Statutes which
they have lately Printed; and by their telling Mr. Williams, a famous Minister
among them, that if nothing will serve him but Separation, because he could not
conquer his Scruples, The World was wide enough; and so away they banished them
in the midst of Winter.

From what has been said it appears, That though there were some things amiss
in the Church of England, which our Dissenters could not satisfy their
Consciences about, yet this would not justify Separation from the Church,
though perhaps it might (after due pains taken to inform themselves aright
concerning them) justify their non-Communion in the things scrupled. Now I
will show that there is really no cause to forsake the Church of England upon
the account of Conscience; And that all those who do forsake the Church, and
frequent separate Meetings, are condemned for Schismatics by the most Eminent
Divines of all the Reformed Churches beyond Seas, and by Mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen,
Mr. Gifford, Corbet, and many other of the Non-Conformists themselves
heretofore.

For, First, they all agree, That no Man is obliged in Conscience to separate
from any Church that is sound in Doctrine, and has the Sacraments rightly and
duly administered. The Scripture allows Separation only in these three cases;
First, In case of Idolatrous Worship. Secondly, In case of False Doctrine
imposed instead of True. And, Thirdly, In case things indifferent be made
necessary to Salvation. But where these Three are wanting, nothing will
justify Separation. See Canon Nicen. 6, 15, 16. Constant. c. 6. Chalced. 17,
20, 26. Antioch. c. 2, 5. Cod. Eccles. Afr. c. 53, 55. Conc. Gangrae. c. 6.
Conc. Carth. c. 10, 11. Cod. Can. Eccles. Vniv. Can. 65. All these Canons and
many more do condemn Separation from a Church that is sound in Doctrine, and
has the Sacraments rightly and duly Administered. So does Calvin in his Inst.
lib. 4. c. 1. numb. 9. where he says, That great allowances ought to be made to
such Churches, by the Example of the Apostolical Churches. And, ibid. Sect. 10.
he says, That the Lord esteemed him a runnagade, and forsaker of Religion,
whosoever he be, that separated frowardly from any Christian Society, which
imbraceth but the true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments. And, ibid. Sect.
12. he says, That though something that is faulty may creep in, either in the
Administration of the Word or of the Sacraments, yet we ought not to separate
us from the Communion of that Church; For, says he, there are principles of
Religion, without which we cannot be saved; and there are other points in which
Men may differ, and yet the Unity of the Faith be kept. And, ibid. Sect. 13. he
says, It is not for every private Man to separate from the Communion of a
Church, though faulty in some things, etc. Beza in his Epist. 24. p. 148. agrees
herein, so does Monsieur Daille, and several other of the Foreign Divines: See
Dr. Still. Misch. of Separ. 23. and 97. so does the Assembly of Divines, as I
have just now shown, and Papers for Accommodation, p. 52. they declare farther,
That they look upon Separation from a true Church, though somethings may be amiss
in it, not as a sin of mere humane Infirmity, but as a wilful and dangerous
sin. And Mr. Baxter in his Poor Man's Family Book, p. 347. tells us, Many
Churches were blamed in Scripture, but none are required to Separate from them.
See the Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet 's Sermon by several Non-conformists, where
they all acknowledge our Worship in the nature of it, to be intrinsecally good,
and a total Separation from it sinful, ibid. p. 31. So then it seems so long as
a Church retains the Marks and Signs of a true Church, though there be many
things amiss in such a Church, Separation from it is sinful.

But what if open sinners be admitted to the Communion before they have made
public Confession of their Faults, as is too frequent in the Church of
England, must I be obliged to communicate with such? May I not Separate in such
case? The Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 11, 12, 13. bids us, If any that is called a
brother be a Fornicator, an Idolater, or Covetous, etc. with such see that ye
eat not. I answer, That this very reason did the Donatists in St. Augustine 's
days give (among others) for their Separation, and quoted the same Texts of
Scripture, but they were condemned for Schismatics as I showed before. And St.
Augustine and all the Catholic Bishops did then agree that these Texts were
meant only of Separation in heart, not in body. And therefore they say, When
such a multitude offends as that the casting of them out, would be in danger to
cause a Schism, there they ought to be tolerated, least while ye go about to
pull up the taxes, ye pull up the wheat also, therefore let them both grow
together (say they) till the harvest. But when only a few are guilty of
scandalous sins, there they say, Let not the severity of Discipline cease; but
it must not be so severe as to root up, but to amend. See Aug. lib. 3. against
Permenian a Donatist Bishop, chapter 3. lib. 2. c. 18.

And herewith agrees Calv. lib. 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 13. where he says, That
though sinners be admitted to Communion, we ought to keep our selves from their
fellowship, but not to Separate from the Church. Mr. Baxter says the same in
his Poor Man's Family Book, p. 347. and Vines, on the Sacrament, p. 39.

But suppose the Parson of the Parish be weak, or a Man of a loose
Conversation, and I can hear a better Preacher elsewhere, and a Man of a more
exemplary Holy Life, and Conversation, May not I go to that Church or Meeting
where I find most Edification? No, For this still makes way for Schisms and
Divisions in the Church, and therefore was never allowed in any regular Church,
provided the Parson of the Parish be tolerable. The Followers of Estathius
Sebastenus, who separated upon this account in Paphlagonia, were condemned of
Schism by the Council at Gangrae.; and see Calvin's Instit. lib. 4. c. 1. sect.
13. to the same purpose.

And indeed, it is not reasonable that so ignorant and proud, unpeaceable sort
of People, as Mr. Baxter himself in his Sacraleg. Disert. p. 102. etc.
confesses the ordinary sort of zealous Professors of Religion to be, should be
at liberty to rend and tear a Church to pieces, out of a conceit of a purer way
of Worship, as if they knew what was better for their Edification, than the
Wisdom of the whole Nation in Parliament, and the Governors of the Church do.
The pretense of greater Edification was never allowed by the Dissenters
themselves heretofore, as a sufficient cause for Separation, as appears by the
Papers for Accommodation, and the Grand Debate, both Printed when the Assembly
of Divines sat at Westminster. Nor did Mr. Baxter ever allow of this to be a
sufficient cause for Separation, as appears by his Cure of Divisions, p. 393.
where he sets forth the pernicious Consequences of complying with the
ungovernable and factious Humors of the ordinary sort of People who are ever
apt to revile the best and gravest Ministers, and follow the more conceited,
and such as are of most fierce and bitter Spirits. And in his Poor Man's Family
Book, p. 280. he says, For want of understanding the right Terms of Church
Communion, how woeful are our Divisions, you must have Union and Communion in
Faith, and Love with all Christians; Let your usual Meeting be with the purest
Churches, if you lawfully may, and still respect the public good: But
sometimes occasionally Communicate with defective faulty Churches, so be it,
they are true Churches, and put you not upon sin: Think not that your presence
makes all the faults of Ministry, Worship, or People to be yours (for then I
would join with no Church in the World.) Division is wounding, and tends to
Death, abhor it as you love the Churches welfare or your own, etc. And again,
ib. p. 330. If your Minister (says he) be intolerable through Ignorance, Heresy
or Malignity, forsake him utterly; but if he be tolerable, though weak and
cold; and if you cannot remove your dwelling, then public Order, and your
Soul*s Edification must be joined as well as you can: In London, or other
Cities, you may go ordinarily to another Parish Church; but in the Country, and
where 'twould be a great offense, you may one part of the day hear in one
Parish, and another in the next, if there be a Man much fitter, but
notwithstanding, you must communicate with the Church you dwell in. And a
little after, he says, I advise you if there be Parish Churches orderly settled
under the Magistrates Countenance, whose teachers are sound, though an abler
Minister should gather a separate Congregation in the same place, out of that
and other neighboring Parishes, and should have stricter Communicants and
Discipline, be not too forward to join your self to that separated Church, till
you can prove that the hurt that will follow by discord, offense, division,
encouraging of Schisms and Pride, etc. is not likely to be greater than your
benefit can compensate; but if this separate Church be a factious Church, set
up contentiously against the Concordant Churches, though on pretense of greater
purity, and if their Meetings be employed in contemning and reviling other
Churches whose People are not of their mind, and in puffing up themselves with
Pride, as if they were the only true Churches of Christ, avoid such separate
Churches, as the enemies of Love and Peace. And again, in the same Book, p.
336. he bids us, Not peevishly pick quarrels with the Prayers of the Church,
nor come to them with humorsome prejudice: think not that you must stay away,
or go out of the Church for every passage that is disorderly, unmeet, yea or
unsound or untrue; for the words of Prayer are the work of Men, and while all
Men are fallible, imperfect and sinful, their Prayers and Preaching will be
like themselves, and he that is the highest pretender and the peevishest
quarreller has his own failings, etc.

So that if our Dissenters will allow their own Mr. Baxter to be a competent
judge, or any of the other learned Divines beforesaid, they must own, that
neither the weakness of the Ministry, nor better Edification, is a sufficient
cause for Separation.

But there is another thing, say they, which makes it necessary for us to
separate from the Church of England, and that is the Oaths and Subscriptions
which they require from us. What says Mr. Baxter to this? Why, Mr. Baxter in
his Poor Man's Family Book, p.* 331. says, If a Church in other respects sound
require of you any false Subscriptions, Promises, or Oaths, or any unlawful
thing, you must not do it, but hold Communion in other lawful things. It seems
then he does not allow of Separation upon this account neither.

The Scruples which Men make to the Oaths and Declarations, are grounded upon
mistakes, for that they But for the farther satisfying of such well meaning
Persons as are scrupulous, 'twere much to be wished that these Oaths,
Subscriptions, etc. and the other things required by the Act of Uniformity were
altered, and explained by Act of Parliament according to the Bill drawn up by
the Dean of St. Paul's, which the Dissenters (especially the Presbyterians) are
willing to agree to, and have made the very same Proposals themselves in their
Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon, at the latter end. Vide.
take the words in a strained and unnatural Sense. Whereas if they would
remember what the famous Bishop Sanderson tells us, De Juran. Praelect. 6.
sect. 12. p. 177. And what all learned Men do agree in, to wit, That in every
Oath, all those Conditions or Exceptions ought to be understood, which by right
or common use, are implied in it, viz. as far as I can; and it is lawful for me;
things remaining in the same, state, etc. With these Conditions, there is
nothing in these Oaths or Subscriptions, that can reasonably be scrupled; and
without them, it is impossible to frame an Oath that a Man can safely venture to
swear to.

Besides, though these Subscriptions were sufficient cause for Separation, how
can the Lay People justify their Separation upon this account? No such Oaths
or Subscriptions are required of them, they are only required from the
Ministers. Why then do the People forsake the Church? Is it in reverence to the
Ministers, least they should have none to Preach to? This is what they never
could answer with any color of Reason; and therefore many of the
Nonconformist Ministers do frequently in discourse fairly and honestly own,
that the Terms of Lay-Communion with the Church of England are easy enough, but
the only thing they stick at is the terms of Ministerial Communion. The only
Answer that ever I heard made to this, is in a Book called, An Answer to Dr.
Stillingfleet 's Sermon, by some Non-Conformists, page 6. They tell us, That
they must not justify themselves in their Preaching, and leave the People in
Schism; (I must needs say, this was kindly done of them, for 'twere very
unfriendly in them to draw the poor silly People into Schism, and when they
have done, to slip their own Necks out of the collar, and leave the People in
the lurch;) and therefore they quickly find an Answer to stop their Mouths,
whom they knew would never examine it: Say they, we are Ministers of Christ,
and have a Commission to Preach, and therefore the People may lawfully forsake
the Church to hear us, for we must not Preach to the Stone Walls. But pray will
this Reason justify the People in leaving their Parish Church, and their own
lawful Minister, to run after a stranger, for fear he should want a
Congregation to Preach to? If the King should give a Gentleman a Commission to
raise a Regiment, does this oblige Men that have formerly Listed themselves
under other Officers, to leave their Service, and follow him? No, sure. There
are in the Two Universities many Hundred young Men that are qualified for the
Ministry, perhaps as well as most of the Nonconformist Ministers, and are not
yet called to the Office, nor provided with Churches; suppose all these now
were admitted into Orders, and scattered all over the Kingdom, are the People
obliged to run away from their lawful Minister, orderly set over them; and
divide the Parishes each perhaps into Three or Four, to furnish all these new
made Ministers with Congregations to Preach to? An excellent contrivance this,
of our Reverend Nonconformist Ministers, to entail the Church Revenue upon
them and their Successors for ever, without being beholding to King, Bishop, or
Patron; and without any possibility of ever being cut off or forfeited; all the
Lawyers in England could not have devised so good a security for them, as they
have subtlely done here for themselves. They may Preach what Doctrine they
please, for the Government or against it; they have a Commission to Preach, and
the People are therefore bound, they say, to hear them. For Preaching and
Hearing, they say, are Relatives, and the one does necessarily suppose the
other. It Is true indeed, actual Preaching supposes Hearing, so do actual
Governors necessarily suppose a People to be Governed: But a Commission to
Govern, does not necessarily suppose a People actually to be Governed; for
there may be Governors appointed and made, though there be then no People for
them to Govern; as was resolved by all the Judges of England, in the Case of
Sutton's Hospital, Co. Rep. 10. fol. 32. a. So their Commission to Preach does
not necessarily draw with it People to be preached to, but only warrants their
Preaching where it is really wanted, and when they can have People to Preach to
without injuring others, or disturbing the Peace of a settled true Christian
Church. But to say no more in a matter so clear, I have already showed, that
there lies no Obligation upon any Nonconformist Minister to Preach in England,
and consequently there can be no necessity for the People to hear them.

The Oaths and Subscriptions are required only of the Clergy, and is no more
than what other Reformed Churches require of all theirs. By the Constitution of
the French Church, every Minister that will not subscribe to the Orders among
them, is to be declared a Schismatic. And by the Constitution of Geneva, any
Minister that contemns the Authority of their Church, or by his obstinacy
disturbs the Order of it, shall be first summoned before the Magistrate, and if
that will not do, he shall be Excommunicated; but no Separation allowed. And
Calvin says, Ep. Olevian. page 311, and 122* Let him that will not submit to
the Orders of a Society be cast out. Our Dissenters themselves did oblige all
to Swear Solemnly to their Covenant, under pain of Sequestration.

But, say the Dissenters, What if the Church of England Excommunicates us; may
we not then lawfully Separate and set up Meetings of our own? I Answer, it is
true, the Laws of the Church do say, that in some cases Men are Excommunicated
ipso facto, yet this does not oblige any* to separate from Communion, till
Sentence be duly and judicially pronounced in a Church. For by the Civil Law,
notwithstanding Excommunication ipso facto, a Declaratory Sentence of the Judge
is necessary before a Man shall be denied the benefit of Communion. And the
saying a Man is Excommunicated, ipso facto, signifies no more, than that the
Judge may give Sentence without any new judicial Process. But though our
Dissenters were actually Excommunicated for their Disobedience, this would not
excuse them from Schism; as Dr. Stillingfleet has proved at large, Misch. of
Separ. p. 370.

Thus I have showed, that none of those Pleas which are commonly used by the
Dissenters for their Separation from us, are sufficient to justify Separation
from a True Church. Now if I can prove, That the Church of England is a True
Reformed Church, they must either Renounce their Principles of Separation, or
their Reason.

The only Argument I shall here make use of to prove, that the Church of
England is a True Reformed Church, is, That it is so acknowledged by all the
Reformed Churches in the World; who do all own her as a Sister; and also, by
the most Eminent of our own Dissenters themselves.

All the Reformed Churches beyond Seas do own the Church of England as a True
Reformed Church, and yet they know what her Faults be in her Assemblies, in her
Worship, in her Ministry and Government. And this appears by the Harmony of
Confessions of the Churches, Collected and set forth by the Churches of France
and of the Low Countries: They do receive and approve of the Confession of the
Church of England, and call it one of the True Reformed Churches. Calvin has
acknowledged the same, in his writings against the Brownists; and condemns them
for Schismatics, for separating from it: See his Instit. lib. 4. c. 1. And the
famous Causabon in his Epistle to King James I. declares plainly, That none at
this day comes nearer the form of the Ancient Church, than the Church of
England does. Grotius ad Boatslaer, Ep. 62. acknowledges the same: To which I
shall add the Opinion of Two of the most Eminent Reformed Divines at this day
beyond Seas.

The one is Monsieur L' Moyn, Professor of Divinity at Leyden, in his Letter to
the Bishop of London, Anno Dom. 1680. who wrote to him to know his Judgment
concerning our present Divisions in England: L' Moyn writes him a long Letter,
which you may see at large at the latter end of Dr. Stillingfleet 's Mischief
of Separation: I shall only repeat some of it: Where was it ever seen (says he,
after he had been highly condemning our Dissenters for Separation) that the
Salvation of Men was concerned for Articles of Discipline, and things which
regard but the outside, and Order of the Church. Truly these are never
accounted in the number of essential Truths: And as there is nothing but these
that can save, so there is nothing but these that can exclude from Salvation.
For the Episcopal Government, what is there in it that is dangerous, and may
reasonably alarm Men's Consciences? And if this be capable of depriving Men of
Eternal Glory, and shutting the Gates of Heaven, who was there that entered
there for the space of 1500. Years, since that, for all that time, all the
Churches of the World had no other kind of Government? If it were contrary to
the Truth, is it credible that God had so highly approved it and permitted his
Church to be tyrannized over by it for so many Hundred Years, etc. Therefore
since all the Reformed Churches do look upon the Church of England, not only as
a Sister, but as an elder Sister, how comes it to pass, that some Englishmen
themselves have so ill an Opinion of her at present, as to separate rashly from
her? For to speak the Truth, I do not see their separate Meetings are of any
great use, or that one may be more Comforted there, than in the Episcopal
Churches. When I was at London, almost Five Years ago, I went to several of
their Meetings, to see what way they took for the Instruction of their Hearers;
but, I profess, I was not at all Edified by it. I heard one of the most famous
Non-Conformists, he Preached in a place where there were about Fourscore Women,
and a few Men: He had chosen a Text about the Building up the Ruins of
Jerusalem; and for Explication of it, he cited Pliny and Vitruvius, I believe
an Hundred times: And did not forget to mention a Proverb in Italian, Duro con
duro non fa muro, All this seemed to me nothing to the purpose, and very
improper for his Auditory. To Cantonize themselves, and make a Schism, to have
the liberty to vent such Vanities seems very ill Conduct: And the People seem
very weak to quit their mutual Assemblies for things that so little deserve
their esteem and preference: I do not think that any one is obliged to suffer
such Irregularity, etc.

The other Authority I promised to cite, is Monsieur Claud, to whom the Bishop
of London wrote about the same time, desiring his Opinion as aforesaid.
Monsieur Claud returns him this answer, All Reformed Churches do acknowledge
the Church of England, as a true Church; and I shall not be afraid to give that
name to the holding of Assemblies apart, and separating from the public
Assemblies, and withdrawing themselves from under the Government of the Church:
It Is real Schism. We do not enter into a comparison of your order with that
under which we live, all are subject to inconveniences, ours have hers, as
well as yours: It is enough for us to know, that the same Divine Providence,
which by an indispensible necessity, and by conjuncture of Affairs, did at the
beginning of the Reformation, put our Churches under that of the Presbytery,
has put yours under that of the Episcopacy; and as we are assured, that you do
not despise our simplicity, so neither ought we to oppose our selves against
your Pre-eminence. See both these Letters, and a third from Monsieur L' Angle,
to the same purpose, at large in the latter end of Dr. Stillingfleet 's Misch.
of Separ.

Thus much for the foreign Divines. Now we will come nearer home, and see what
our Dissenters themselves have thought of the Church of England, from which
they separate.

First then, Several of the Dissenters, to avoid the imputation of Brownism, do
sincerely profess, before God and all the World, That they hold the Church of
England, to be a true Church of Christ, with which they did, and would hold
Communion, notwithstanding any defilement or unwarranted Power of Church
Government exercised therein. See the Apologetical Narrative, p. 5, 6. Again,
They own that our Parochial Churches are true Churches, and that they can find
no fault with the Doctrine of our Church, and that it is lawful and If
occasional Communion be lawful, constant is a Duty. See Papers for Accomm. p.
47, 51, 56.
sometimes a Duty to communicate with us. Baxter 's Defense of his Cure, p. 38.
and 64. Corbet of Schism. p. 41. Peace Offering in the name of the Congreg.
party* Anno Dom. 1667. p. 10. True way of Conc. part 3. c. 1. sect. 40. and Mr.
Baxter in his last Answer to Bagshaw, p. 30, 31. has these words, You little
know what pernicious design the Devil has upon you, in persuading you to desire
and endeavor to pull down the interest of Christ and Religion, which is upheld
in the Parish Churches of this Land, and to think that it is best to bring them
as low in reality and reputation as you can, and contract the Religious
Interest all into private Meetings. And see also Mr. Baxter 's Plea for Peace,
p. 240. to the same purpose.

And lastly, Dr. Owen in his Book of Evangelical Love, p. 54. acknowledges,
That they look upon the Church of England, measuring it by the Doctrine
received since the Reformation, to be as sound and healthful a part of the
Catholic Church, as any in the World.

I have now proved that Separation from a true Church is sinful, and
schismatical; I have proved the Church of England to be a true Church; and all
this I have proved from their own Writings. How will they now justify their
Separation, or clear themselves from the imputation of Schism? What will they
say to this? Is Schism not a sin? Or is their Separation from us not Schism? If
they say it is not Schism: Why, then our Nonconformist Ministers know better
what is Schism, than all the Learned Divines of the Church of England, and the
most Eminent Men of all the Reformed Churches beyond Seas do. For I have showed
from their own words, That they do acknowledge the Church of England to be as
true and sound a part of the Reformed Church, as any in the whole World, and
condemn all those that separate from her as guilty of Schism. Doubtless these
Men are as competent judges of Matters of Religion as any of our Dissenting
Ministers. And I am sure we have not the least reason to believe they would
flatter us, for they are strangers who have no dependence upon us; and Men of
more Piety and Honesty, than to indulge us in any thing that is sinful. But it
may be they will say, that all these Learned Divines beyond Seas, who have
acknowledged the Church of England to be a true Church, are ignorant of the
Errors and Corruptions in her: But let me tell them, They might have a little
more civility, than to suppose that so many godly upright Men, would rashly
give their judgment of Matters of so great moment as those are which relate to
Religion, before they were truly acquainted with the nature and circumstances
of the thing: And besides, They ought not to judge of other Men by themselves:
Because the most of their own Divines are utter stangers to the practice and
Constitution of other Churches, as appears sufficiently by their Principles of
Separation, must they believe others to be so too? No thoroughly accomplished
Divine can be supposed to be ignorant of the true state and condition of any
Reformed National Church, much less of so great and considerable an one as the
Church of England. But to put this out of dispute, it appears before that
several of the most Eminent Men beforementioned, were in England for some
years, and frequented both the Churches and Meetings, on purpose to acquaint
themselves with both, in order to giving their judgment of them.

Since therefore the Doctrine of the Church of England is sound, and the
Worship true, and Government and Constitution of it as agreeable to that of the
best and purest Ages of the Church, as any now in the World; let us in the name
of God, lay aside all those fears and jealousies that have possessed the minds
of too many of us, concerning it, and let us remember that not only the Peace
and Prosperity of this Church and Nation, and of every particular Member of it,
depends upon our Union, but of the Protestant Religion all over the World. Though
there may be some things amiss in the Church of England, it is not the business
of private Men to Reform the Church, or dispute the fitness or unfitness of
every little imposition. Their Duty is to Conform, at least in the outward
action, and submit the fitness of such things, to the Wisdom of those to whom
God Almighty has entrusted the Government of the Church and Nation, they may
reasonably be thought more competent judges of what is convenient and fit to be
done, or not to be done, than private Men can be. And if any thing be amiss in
the Government of the Church, or the manner of God's Worship, they are to
answer for it, not the People. God will call them to an account for imposing
upon his People things not agreeable to his Will: But will never condemn us for
doing our Duty in submitting to such Governors as he has placed over us. It Is
true, there are some things in Religion which are essential to it, without
which, Men cannot be saved. Now in case our Governors command us to act
contrary to these, we ought not to obey, for we must obey God rather than Men:
But it is agreed on all sides, That the Church of England enjoins no such
things, and that they who live godly, sober lives according to the Doctrine of
this Church, are in a safe and ready way to Heaven.

But it is a difficult Matter for Men to forsake what they have been all their
lives accustomed to; they cannot believe that Separation is so great a sin as
we seem to make it: And that so many honest good People, and godly Ministers
did live and die in sin. If they are resolved; they will not believe Separation
from a true Church to be sinful, who can help that? The great number that have
lived and died in that Opinion, does not make the thing less sinful. The
Donatists in the African Church, were more numerous that our English Dissenters
are, and had it is likely, as many sober and learned Divines among 'em. For at
the Conference at Carthage, they had 400 Bishops, yet these were condemned for
Schismatics by St. Austin and all the Catholic Bishops. And the things that
these Donatists separated from the Church for, were for the most part the very
same, that our present Dissenters make the cause of their separation from the
Church of England. They thought the Bishoprics too large, and the Power of the
Bishops too great. They refused to join in Communion with the Catholics,
because sinners were admitted there. They forsook the Ministers, because they
were not so agreeable to their humor as they would have them. Optatus
Malevianus, lib. 2. p. 47.
They would not suffer any to speak in the Churches but the Ministers, and stopped
the mouths of all the People. They held that the Civil Magistrate had no Power
to Reform the Church. They made a show of greater Zeal for the Purity of
Religion, than other People; and by their stiff, rigorous severity which they
showed, and the vehement out-crys which they made, that Discipline was not duly
executed; Many of the People, not well grounded in the truth, were terrified,
and turned unto them, believing them to be the most zealous holy Men, and the
only true Church in the World. Finally they condemned all other Churches as not
true Churches. See all this in Gifford (a Nonconformist Minister) his Book
against the Brownists 2. part. These are the very pretenses that our present
Dissenters make for their separating from this Church. Our Bishoprics are too
large; our Churches not according to Christ's Institution; our Ministers
unable, and ungodly; our way of Worship false; our Magistrates assume an
unwarranted Power in Church Matters. Yea, and in their over pretending to
Purity and Godliness, they are exact Donatists, and by that very means do draw
the more ignorant and zealous sort of People to them, as the Brownists did. No
People pretend so much to Purity and Religion, as they do: In all places where
they have their public Meetings, they are sure to begin before the Parish
Churches, and end after, be they as long as they will: But yet go in to one of
their Meetings, and you shall see as little signs of Devotion and as many of
the People asleep, as in any Parish Church in the Kingdom for the number. So in
their common Discourse, many of them will scarce allow themselves so much
liberty as to make them good company, for fear they should happen to tell a
lie; but yet in their Dealings, they will over*reach a Customer in a Bargain,
and use as many equivocations to deceive him as any other People shall. But
least you think I do them wrong, let us hear what the learned Mr. Baxter says
of them, (you will not believe that he would wrong them.) In his Poor Man's Family
Book. p. 221. speaking of such who run into Parties by Divisions, says he,
Those injudicious sort of Christians having an over high esteem of their own
Under standings and Godliness, and desiring to be made conspicuous for their
Godliness, in the World, separate from ordinary Christians as below them, and
unworthy of their Communion; these Sects have ever been the Nests of Errors.
And again, ib. p. 331. he bids us beware of joining our selves to Separate
Meetings, who pretend to stricter Discipline, and greater Purity, who set
themselves up Factiously and Contentiously against the Concordant Churches, on
pretense of greater Purity, whose Meetings are employed in Reviling others, and
Condemning other Churches, and puffing themselves up with Pride, as if they
were the only Churches of Christ.

But our Dissenters will say, This is a scandalous abuse to say, that they
condemn all other Reformed Churches in the World. But I doubt they agree with
the Donatists even in this. For I suppose they will condemn all those that
account them Schismatics. And this do all the Reformed Churches; for they all
hold, that Separation from a true Church is Schism, and own the Church of
England for a true Church, and consequently make them Schismatics, and so have
expressly declared them as appears before. Again, I suppose they will condemn
all Churches that communicate with an Idolatrous Antichristian Church, knowing
her faults; some of them declare the Church of England to be such a Church, and
then they must condemn all the Reformed Churches which communicate with her.

Well, say the Dissenters, You of the Church of England have a great deal to
say for your selves, and if all be true that you have told us, our Separation
from you is sinful and unreasonable: But what reason have we to believe you; we
have a great many able and godly Ministers of our own, who tell us the quite
contrary; it is certain they cannot both be in the right, why may we not then
believe your Ministers may be deceived as well as ours?

I answer, It Is not so likely that all the Divines of the Church of England
that have been since the Reformation, should be deceived in a thing of this
nature, as that those of the Non-conformists should; First, Because they are
much more numerous, and it is not so likely that a great many good Men should be
deceived, as a few; It Is a Rule in Logic, Quod plures and sapentiores
testantur credibile est esse verum. And Secondly, Because they have much better
means to come to the knowledge of the Truth, than those of the Non-conformists
can pretend to; as will plainly appear by considering the Method taken on both
sides for the breeding up of Divines. Those who are designed for the Study of
Divinity in the Church of England, are kept at the best Schools that can
conveniently be had, till they understand Latin and Greek very well, then they
are admitted into one of the Universities, where they are put under the Care of
a particular Tutor, who is always one of the Fellows of the College, and
consequently, a Man well approved of by the whole College for his Learning and
Sobriety; for by the Statutes of every College, none but such are qualified for
Fellowships. This Tutor has seldom above 20. Students under his Care at a time,
and many of them not half that number; every Student comes twice a day to his
Tutor's Chamber, to be instructed by him. And besides this, the College
appoints other Tutors, or public Lecturers, who are to teach and instruct them
in the public Halls, some for Philosophy, some for Disputations, and other
Exercises. These public Tutors are changed every year, which is a great
Advantage to the Students, by acquainting them with the several Methods and
Opinions of such variety of Learned Men. Thus they spend the first four Years,
and then after very strict Examination by all the Fellows of the College, to
which they belong, in the public Hall for six days together; if they be found
qualified, they commence Batchelors of Arts, if not, they are laid aside till
the next Year. After they have taken their Batchelors Degree, they begin to
apply themselves more particularly to the Study of Divinity, but are still
obliged to public Lectures for Hebrew, Greek, and other parts of Learning
necessary for that Study; and to public Disputations. And thus they spend
three Years more, and then after a strict and public Examination as before, if
they be found qualified, they commence Masters of Arts, or Doctors of
Philosophy. And here observe, That no Man can hope to take his Degrees in any
of the Universities, unless he be thoroughly qualified for it: No such thing as
Favor in the case, because the Examinations are public before all the Fellows
and the President of the College: And besides that, every Man that is to take
any Degree in any of the Colleges, is obliged by the Laws of the College, to
ask the Consent of every Man, particularly, who has ever taken the Degree of
Master of Arts in that College, if they be at that time any where in or about
the Town, and any one of these if he can show Reason for it, as that he is a
Man of a scandalous Life and Conversation, or of not sufficient Learning or
such like, may stop him of his Degree. After they have taken their Master of
Arts Degree, then is the time they usually enter into Holy Orders. Some few
there are, who are admitted into Deacons Orders, after they have commenced
Batchelors of Arts, but these are few, and are looked upon but as young raw
Fellows; so that generally those who are admitted to the Office of the Ministry
in the Church of England, are Men who have spent at least seven Years in the
Study of University Learning, in one of the two most Famous Universities in the
World, with all the Helps and Advantages that are necessary for the perfecting
of them in their Studies: For besides those aforesaid, they have the constant
Conversation of so many Learned, Ingenious Men; the use of Great and Noble
Libraries, Famous all over the World, (besides the particular Libraries
belonging to each College: In which are to be found many Pieces of Antiquity
and Ancient Manuscripts, etc. not to be met with any where else, and which give
great Light into Antiquity. And in each University they have Divinity
Professors, who are chosen out of the most Eminent Divines they have, whose
business it is to hear Divinity Lectures read, and Points of Divinity disputed
on in the public Divinity-Schools, to which all those who design for that
Study, are after some few Years obliged to attend. Neither do these Learned Men
trust only to their own Knowledge, but they have carefully settled a
Correspondence with all the most Eminent Men beyond Seas.

These and many more are the Advantages of Education which the Divines of the
Church of England have above those of the Non-conformists, who are generally
bred after this manner: A Nonconformist Minister perhaps, or some such Person
who lives obscurely in some remote part of the Country, gets 30 or 40 Boys
together, and there he teaches them common School-Learning, till they come to
be toward 20 years of age, and then instead of entering them into the
University, he enters 'em in another Chamber, perhaps 5 or 6 at a time, and
there he teaches them University Learning, as they call it; for 2 or 3 years it
may be without the help of any Libraries, but the good Man's Closet, or any
Conversation more than with one another, and with the Master, if he* will
honor them so far, and his assistant if he chance to have one. And so after 2
or 3 years Study at this rate, they are qualified for the Office of a Minister
among them, and are thought fit to be entrusted with the Care of Souls, and
Government of a Church. I own there are some few among them, who have had
better Education than this is; but these are the general Methods taken for
breeding up of Divines on both sides, which is so well known, that none will
have the Confidence to deny it. And now let any Man of reason judge, whether in
Matters that depend so much upon Antiquity, and the Practice and Judgment of
the Primitive Church; as the Controversies between us and the Dissenters do;
whether I say are more likely to be mistaken, all the Divines of the Church of
England, or those of the Dissenters? It is not so likely, says Mr. Baxter in
his Poor Man's Family Book, p. 222. that God should reveal his Mind to a few
good Men, and those of the rawer, injudicious sort, and such as are most
infected with proud overvaluing their own Wisdom and Godliness, and such as
have had least Time and Study, and means to come to great Understanding, and
such who show themselves the proudest Censurers of others, and least tender of
the Church's Peace, and such as are apt to break all to pieces among
themselves; I say, It Is not so likely that* these are in the right, as the main
Body of agreeing, humble, godly, peaceable, studious Ministers, who have had
longer time, and better means to know the Truth: And the Body of Christians,
even the Church, has more promises from Christ, than particular dividing
Persons have. See all this, and more to the same purpose in this Book
aforesaid, writ by Mr. Baxter himself.

So that had we no other Authority on our side, than that of the Church of
England, 'twere much safer to rely upon their judgments in this Matter, than on
the judgment of the Non-conformists; but it appears before that we have the
Opinion of all the Reformed Churches in the World on our side; and if that
will not turn the Scales, God Almighty must work a Miracle for their Conversion,
as he did for St. Paul's.

It Is so evident that the Ministers of the Church of England have much the
Advantage of those among the Dissenters, as to Learning and Knowledge, that
they have no way left to obviate this, but by down right disclaiming at the
University Learning, and calling them Sophistical Divines, who are bred up in
vain and curious Arts.

His Book of the life and manners of Christians, note all the Brownists say the
same. So did the Donatists in St. Augustine's time, condemn human Learning, but
St. Augustine condemns their folly herein, in his 1st. Book against Cresconius,
chapter 14.
See Brown in his Preface to his Book. And Mr. Baxter in his Defense of his
Cure, p. 124. tells us of a Church in New England, that separated from a Church
on the account of their Preachers having human Learning.

But perhaps some of our Dissenters will own that our Divines of the Church of
England are generally more learned than those among them; (one of the most
competent judges among them, Mr. Baxter, has owned it fairly in his Answer to a
certain Letter, p. 18. where he says, he has seldom heard any but very good and
well studied Sermons in our Churches, and on the other side, complains
publicly of the weakness and injudiciousness, and self-conceitedness of too
many of the Nonconformist Preachers, in his Sacral. Desert. p. 86.) yet they
will tell us, they deceive the People, and keep them all in ignorance for their
own Interests, least they should lose their Church Preferments. This is a very
severe Censure, to say, that so many Thousand godly Ministers as have been of
the Church of England since the Reformation, and who have many of them died
Martyrs for the sake of it, should be such Villains as to deceive the People,
and damn their own Souls, for the sake of their Church Preferments.

But how can self-interest oblige the Clergy to defend the Church of England as
now established, if they thought it not agreeable to the Word of God? It must
be either Pride or Covetousness that must move them to it. If it were Pride,
doubtless the Presbyterian or Independent way would answer that end much
better; for whereas now the Parsons, Vicars and Curates of all the Parishes in
England are subject to their respective Bishops, etc. and can do nothing as to
matters of Discipline or Government, etc. not even in their own Parishes,
without the consent of the Diocesan Bishop: Were the Constitution of the Church
changed to that of the Presbyterian or Independent way, every Pastor would
become an absolute Bishop, and accountable to none for what he did. If it were
Covetousness that moved them to it, I suppose that were all the Parsons of
every Parish in England made the Pastor of that Church or Parish according to
the Presbyterian or Independent Notion of a Pastor, and all the Diocesan and
Metropolitan Bishoprics, and their Deans and Chapters dissolved, and their
Revenue super-added to the present in-come of every Parish Minister or Pastor,
their Church Livings would be no less, but more valuable than now they are. Why
do they not then set about this change of Church Government as fast as they
can, if they think in their Consciences 'twere more agreeable to God's will so
to do? it is plain, 'twould better answer their Covetousness and Ambition, to
pull down Episcopacy, than to live in this poor subjection that now they do.
Here they will tell us, the reason is plain, because the Bishops, who are the
Governors of the Church will not let them; they know the sweet of a fat
Bishopric too well to part with it, I warrant them. But the Thousandth part of
the Clergy of England are not Bishops, nor perhaps never think to be so. Every
one of these have a Vote in the Convocation, and doubtless may carry it against
so small a number of Bishops as 27. were they not persuaded in their
Consciences, that the Church of England as now established, is as agreeable to
the Will of God, as any other whatsoever.

Therefore since the Divines of the Church of England are more Numerous, and
generally more Learned, and can have no design upon the account of
Self-interest, to deceive the People, it is safer sure in a doubtful case, to
take their words, and trust to their judgments, than to those among the
Dissenters, whose Interest it is to deceive the People, and make the breach
between us as wide as they can, many of them being Men of no Fortune, and such
as have no other way to get a Living, and Men who must needs be losers by an
Union between us, be the Conformity of which side it will, whether they Conform
to us, or we to them, for be the Government of the Church of England, either
Episcopal or Presbyterian, or Independent; it is but reasonable that the
Ministers who are lawfully put into the Cures, should continue therein still,
as Pastors of their own Churches; so that the greatest part of the
Nonconformist Preachers must be laid aside; for 'twere not reasonable that
others who are as deserving as they, and lawfully settled in their Cures,
should be turned out to make room for them, nor that Parishes should be divided
all over the Kingdom, to furnish them with Churches. It Is likely that some of
the Nonconformist Ministers who are better qualified than ordinary, might be
provided for, should it please God, that there were an Union between us: But
many of them I doubt, could not; so that it is evident their Interest obliges
the most of them to deceive the People, and keep open the breach as wide as
they can. And that they really do so, is plain, by their making the Differences
between us seem greater than really they are, and than they themselves have
owned them to be in their Writings, as I have all along showed: And also by
their pretending to quote Authority for what they say, and either not
mentioning the Chapter or Page where the Words are to be found, or else
altering the very Words and Sense of the Author to serve their turn: If any one
think I do them wrong, let them look into Dr. Maurice his Defense of Diocesan
Episc. p. 237. 335. 353. 377. 396. 442. 444. how Mr. Clarkson to prove
Episcopacy in the Primitive Church to be agreeable to the congregational or
Independent way, has misrepresented the very Words and Sense of his Authors.
You may find more Instances of this kind in the Preface to Dr. Comber's Defense
of Liturgies, 1st. part. And see how falsely Mr. Baxter has translated
Theodoret's Epistle to serve his Hypothesis. Dr. Stillingfleet his Mischiefs of
Separation, p. 261. And how he has misrepresented the Doctor's own words, ib.
131. 132 and 126. Many more Instances of this kind may be given, were it
necessary, but what has been said is sufficient to show that in Matters of
Religion, where the case seems doubtful, and all the Divines of the Church of
England agree on one side, and the Non-conformists only on the other; it is much
safer to take the Opinion of those of the Church of England, than of the
others, because they are more numerous, and generally more learned, and seem to
have less reason to deceive us.

To all that has been said, I shall only add this, That I have taken all the
pains that possibly I could, to inform my self truly of the Matters in
Controversy between the Church of England, and the Dissenters; and did really
believe the things Scrupled to be of much greater moment than I now find them
to be. And though I for my own part, am satisfied in my Conscience, that there is
nothing at all enjoined by the Church of England, but what is agreeable to
God's Word, and the Opinion of the wisest Men of the Church in all Ages, and
what the most tender Consciences may satisfy themselves in, if they would but
make use of the proper means; yet I could heartily wish that many things were
laid aside, if that would purchase an Union between us. If things which are
allowed to be in themselves indifferent, as Postures, and Ceremonies, and such
like, were neither imposed nor abolished, but left to the Discretion of every
Christian to use or not to use as he thinks best, and as the Ceremony of Bowing
toward the Altar is, and some other alterations made, such as you may see in
the Proposals offered to the Parliament for the Uniting of Protestant
Dissenters by Dr. S. Dean of St. Paul's* there could then be no reasonable
Pretense left for Separation. But if nothing else must purchase our Peace, but
the overthrowing the whole Constitution of this Church, it is too dear a
purchase, till we have found another to exchange for, more agreeable to God's
Word, and more consistent with the Peace and Tranquillity of this Nation; but
that we have not found yet, I am sure, as is sufficiently evident, by a plain
experimental Proof, which these Nations lately had; it is very well known, that
in the late unhappy times, when the Church of England Liturgy, etc. was taken
away, the Presbyterians, Independants, and other Parties, prayed one against
the other, and against establishing that way of Government, which others of
them prayed for; diverse Persons made their own Passions, singular Opinions, and
Errors great part of their Prayers; others rejected all Confessions of sins, as
no part of their Devotions; in many places of England, the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper was laid aside for 12 or 15 Years together, so was Infant
Baptism; some would Pray for the King one way, some another, others not at all.
And in that time that the Church of England way of Worship was laid aside,
there were more Errors, Sects, Heresies, and Blasphemies broached and vented,
than ever before or since: This is acknowledged by the Dissenters themselves,
see a Book called Gangrena, part 1 st. p. 175. writ about the Year, 1646. where
many of them do acknowledge, That we (say they) in these four last Years (for
so long had Presbytery been uppermost) have overpassed the Deeds of the
Prelates, in whose time never so great nor so many Errors were heard of, much
less such Blasphemies, and Confusions, we have worse things among us, more
corrupt Doctrines, and Practices, than in 80. Years before, etc. So that if
nothing must purchase Peace between us, but the parting with our Religion, and
overthrowing our whole Constitution, to set up another, which Experience has
taught us, is neither so consistent with God's Glory, nor the Peace of these
Nations, they must excuse us. Besides, let me tell them, Their late Carriage in
Scotland, has given us great reason to fear that the Religion they so much
boast of, and with so much Zeal, endeavor to set up in this Nation, in the
place of that which by God's good Providence is now Established, is not the
true Religion of Christ; for that never taught any to Affront and Revile his
lawful Ministers, and to burn the Holy Scriptures, as they have done now more
than once. I pray God open their Eyes, and soften their Hearts, and give them
Grace to Repent.

FINIS.

