A PROCLAMATION, For securing the PEACE OF THE HIGH-LANDS. Edinburgh, the tenth
day of October, 1678.

C R
HONI SOT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
MAJESTY. 1678.

A PROCLAMATION, For securing the Peace of the Highlands.
Edinburgh, the 10, day of October, 1678.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, and to all and
sundry whom these presents do or may concern, Greeting: Forasmuch as the
quieting of the Highlands and Isles, and the dutiful and peaceable carriage and
deportment of the Inhabitants within the same, is of great concernment, not
only as to the peace and interest of the Shires and Bounds where they live,
being a large and considerable part of Our Kingdom; but also of the
neighboring and adjacent Countries and Shires, which ly open and are subject
to the incursions, depredations, and the barbarous cruelty and oppression of
Thieves, Sorners and broken men, when the Highlands are in disorder. And upon
the consideration foresaid, We and Our Royal Ancestors have been most careful
to preserve and secure the quiet and peace of the said Highlands and Isles; and
in order thereto, from time to time, with advice of the Estates of Parliament,
and of their Privy Council, have made and emitted diverse good Laws, Statutes,
Acts of Parliament and Council, Proclamations, and Orders, and in special, by
the ninety two Act of King James the sixth, in his eleventh Parliament, Our
Roal Grandfather of blessed memory, entitled, Anent the quieting of disordered
Subjects, Inhabitants of the Borders, Highlands and Isles; It is statute, that
a certain time shall be set apart by the Lords of Privy Council, to receive,
hear and answer all complaints concerning the disordered and troublesome
Subjects inhabitants of the Highlands, and attempts committed by them upon Our
good and peaceable Subjects of the In-countrey; and that a particular Register
be kept of all things that shall happen to be done and directed, in matters
concerning the quietness and good rules of the Highlands, in manner contained
at length in the said Act. And by the ninety three Act of the foresaid
Parliament, it is statute, that all Landlords and Bailiffs in the Highlands,
where broken men have dwelt or do dwell, should be charged to find sufficient
caution and soverty landed men in the In-countrey, under the pain of rebellion
in manner after-mentioned; That is to say, If any of their Men-tennents,
Servants or Indwellers upon their Lands, Steedings, Rooms and Possessions, or
within their Baileries, shall commit any masterful reef, theft, or resset of
theft, depredations, open and avowed fire-raisings upon deedly feeds, That the
Landlords and Bailiffs upon whose Lands and in whose Jurisdiction they dwell,
shall bring and present the persons complained upon to justice, to abide trial
and underly the Law for the same, and that the said Landlords and Bailiffs
shall satisfy the parties skaithed and grieved, in manner therein mentioned.
And likewise, that the Landlords and Bailiffs concur, fortify and assist
others in removing all persons disobedient to Our Laws, or fugitives therefrom,
out of their Lands and Possessions; And in case any refuse to concur to the
effect foresaid, that it shall be lawful to pursue the person refusing and his
Cautioner, for redress of the skaith sustained by the party hurt, and the
Landlords and Bailiffs to have their relief of the person refusing: And in case
any person, Landlord or Bailiff receive or resset any person fugitive, after
the committing of the crime, upon their Lands, and stays and arrests them not
when they pass through their bounds with any other men's Goods reft or stolen,
that they shall be holden to bring and present the person offending to Justice,
and to satisfy and redress the parties skaithed, in manner therein contained.
And that the chief of the Clan, in the bounds where broken men dwells, and
through which they repair in their passing to steal and reeve or returning
therefrom, shall be bound to make the like stay and arrestment as the Landlords
or Bailiffs, and shall be subject to the like redress and action criminal or
civil, in case of their failzie or negligence, as the said Act of Parliament,
containing diverse other Heads and Articles to the same purpose, at length
bears. Likeas, in the foresaid Parliament, Anno, one thousand five hundred and
eighty seven years, diverse other Laws and Acts of Parliament are made and
enacted to the same purpose, as appears by the hundred Act, entitled, The
manner how Goods taken away may be repeated; and the hundred and two Act of the
said Parliament, entitled, Dittay should be taken up anent black-mail; and by
the hundred and third Act, Landlords and others should present Trespassers to
Justice; and by the hundred and ninth Act of the said Parliament, whereby it is
statute, that such interposed persons, as take upon them to sell the Goods of
Thieves and disobedient Persons and Clannes, that dare not come to public
Mercats in Low-lands themselves, where-through, the execution of the Acts made
against Sorners, Clannes and Thieves is greatly impeded, shall be punished in
manner therein contained. Likeas, by the two hundred and twenty seventh Act of
King James the sixth, Parliament fourteenth, Anno, one thousand five hundred
and ninety four, entitled, For punishment of reef, theft, oppression and
sorning, it is statute, that there may be a perfect distinction by names and
surnames betwixt these that are, and desire to be esteemed honest and true men,
and these who are, and are not ashamed to be esteemed Thieves, Sorners and
Ressetters of them in their wicked and odious crimes and deeds: That therefore
there be a Roll and Catalogue made of all persons, and the surnames therein
mentioned suspected of slaughter, theft, reef, resset of theft, or thieves, or
sorners, in manner therein mentioned: And that all Landlords and Bailiffs be
charged to find Soverty, to make their Men-tennents and Servants answerable to
Justice, and to redress parties skaithed; and that the Chieftains of Clannes
and principal of the Branches and Householders thereof, be charged for the
relief of the Landlords, in manner therein contained. And that no Landlord set
his Land, nor suffer the same to be possessed by any person, that being of a Clan
finds not soverty to relieve his Landlord; and if the Landlord shall not take
the said soverty, that he shall be answerable to the party grieved criminally
or civilly, as if he had done the deed himself: And that none of the said
Clannes or other broken men, their Wives, Bairns, Heirs, Executors or
Assignayes, shall have action criminal or civil, against whatsoever persons for
ejection, spuilzie, slaughter or fire-raising, or other alleged violent deeds
committed against them by any of Our Lieges, except they instruct with their
Summons, that the persons alleged hurt, spuilzied, flain or ejected, was Our
free Liege man the time of that deed, and had found soverty to be answerable to
Justice for relief of his Landlord, and to redress parties skaithed, and that
every Their and Sorner shall be esteemed the man and Servant of him of whom he
has his Land in tillage or pasturage, or whom he accompanies at conventions,
gatherings or at violent deeds, or upon whose ground the Thief, Reever or
Sorner is resser, and tarrieth twelve hours together with the knowledge of the
Landlord, being of power to apprehend him, or who has received Bond of
Man-rent, or who has given Bond of maintenance to Thieves and Sorners, or
receive their caulps and herzelds, or who has had the said Thieves and
Reevers under their assurance; as the said Act of Parliament, containing diverse
other clauses, at length bears. Likeas, by the sixth Act of the second Session
of Our first Parliament, entitled, Act for suppressing of Thefts, Robberies
and Depredations, It is statute, that whenever any oppression, Hereships,
Thefts or Depredations shall be committed within any part of this Kingdom, the
Owner of the Goods away taken shall immediately give intimation thereof, after
the taking away of the same, by himself or some in his name, to the Sheriff of
the Shire or his Deputes, or any of Our Justices of Peace or Constables within
the Paroch out of which the Goods are taken, who upon intimation foresaid, are
immediately ordained, under the pain of being liable for the restitution of the
Goods away taken or the value thereof, to command all fensible persons to
concur in the pursuit of the said Goods and away takers thereof, under the
pain foresaid if they disobey. And if the said Thieves and Robbers shall
happen to pass through, or rest in any other Paroch where the Justices of
Peace, Constables and Heretors are able to stop and oppose the carrying away of
the said Goods; In that case, Our said Justices of Peace, Constables or
Heretors are ordained to make opposition, and seize upon the Goods and Drivers
thereof, and to restore the said Goods, and to deliver and secure the away
takers of same, that they may underly the Law. And if the committers of the
said Crimes be so numerous and powerful, that they cannot be stopped by the
Inhabitants of the said Paroch; then and in that case, the whole fensible
persons are obliged by the said Act, under the pain foresaid, to rise in Arms
and pursue them, and require all the fensible persons in any other Paroch they
shall happen to pass through, to join with them, under the pain and to the
effec foresaid: And if the pursuer of the Goods, after all his utmost
endeavors, be not able to recover the same and apprehend the away takers; the
Heretors, Wodsetters and Fewars of the Paroch where the Goods shall be found to
be disposed of or sparpelled, are to be liable for the value of the said
Goods, according to their several Interests. And farther, by the foresaid Act
it is statute, that the In-bringer of every Robber and Thief, after he is
outlawed and denunced Fugitive, shall have two hundred pounds Scots for every
Robber and Thief so in-brought, as the said Act, proporting diverse other
Clauses, at length bears. And whereas, the Lords of Our Privy Council, in
pursuance of the foresaids Laws and Acts of Parliament, have found it necessar
that not only the Landlords and Chieftains of Claunes, shall give Bond and
Caution for the security of the Peace, and quiet of the Highlands; But also,
that the Heads of the several Branches of Families of these Clannes, shall give
the like Bond and Caution themselves, and for all they are liable and obliegded
to answer for by the Laws and Acts of Parliament; as also, for all these of
their name descended of their Families. And albeit Our said Laws and Acts of
Parliament be many, and most ample and effectual to the intent foresaid, for
quieting and securing of the peace of the Highlands and Isles, and yet standing
in full force; yet, the Inhabitants and broken men within the said bounds,
being inured and accustomed to liberty and licentiousness upon occasion of the
late troubles, and by reason that during the same, theforesaids Laws have not
been observed and put in execution; do still presume to sorn, steal and
oppress, and to commit other insolences and disorders, to the contempt of Our
Authority, and to the great hurt, prejudice and discouragement of Our good
people and Subjects. Therefore, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, have thought fit to declare Our Royal intention and resolution, that
the foresaids Acts of Parliament abovementioned, and all other Laws and Acts of
Parliament and Acts of Council, made for quieting the Highlands and Isles, and
for preventing, repressing and punishing disorders within the same, shall be
carefully observed and put in execution against all persons of whatsomever
quality, who shall be found to have contraveened, or shall hereafter contraveen
the said Acts, or any Head or Article thereof; assuring all Our good Subjects,
who shall find themselves wronged or grieved by any person or persons
Inhabitants within the Highlands and Isles; and that upon application to the
Lords of Our Privy Council, they shall have Justice done to them with all
expedition, and reparation and redress, conform to Our Laws and Acts of
Parliament; and that the Lords of Our Privy Council will interpose their
Authority, that the Sentences and Decreets that shall be given and pronounced
in favors of the said persons, either by the said Lords of Our Privy
Council, or by Our Justice General, or by any other competent Judicatory, for
any wrong, crime or oppression that shall be committed against them by any of
the Inhabitants within the bounds foresaids, shall receive vigorous and-speedy
execution. And in pursuance of Our Royal resolution, We, with advice foresaid,
have ordained, that all Landlords and Bailiffs in the Highlands shall be
charged to find sufficient caution and soverty landed men in the In-countrey,
to the contentment of the Lords of Our Privy Council, that they for themselves,
and all these for whom they are liable and obliged to answer by Our said Laws
and Acts of Parliament, shall keep Our peace; and that they shall not invade,
trouble nor oppress any of Our Subjects in their Persons, Lands, Possessions,
Goods nor Geer but by order of Law and Justice; and that they shall be
answerable to Justice, and satisfy parties skaithed conform to the Laws and
Acts of Parliament, and under the pains contained therein, and also, under such
pecunial pains to be paid for Our use, as shall be appointed by the Lords of
Our Privy Council, to be insert in the Letters to be directed against them: And
We have ordained Letters to be directed against the said Landlords and
Bailiffs, charging them to find the said caution, under the pain of rebellion;
And for relief of the Landlords and Bailiffs who have found or shall find the
soverty foresaid, Letters are ordained to be directed, charging such persons in
special as the said Landlords and Bailiffs shall give in in Bill, which are
Vassals, Men-tennents or Servants to them, to find caution acted in the Books
of Our Privy Council, that they shall free and relieve the said Landlords and
Bailiffs of the said caution and soverty found for them, under the said pain of
rebellion. And further, We, with advice foresaid, have ordained, that the
Landlords, Bailiffs, and Chieftains of Clannes contained in a Roll, (which is
insert in the end of this Our Proclamation) shall compear before the Lords of
Our Privy Council upon the last Thursday of February next upon this present
exigent for the year ensuing, and upon the second Thursday of July yearly
thereafter; and failzieing any of them by decease; their Successors in their
Lands, Bailieries and Jurisdictions within the Highlands, and these who shall
be Chieftains of the said Clannes for the time, shall be obliged to appear
before the Lords of Our Privy Council yearly, the said second Thursday of July;
To the effect, that these who are liable to give soverty may find the same, if
it be not already found, and that they may give new caution if need be; and
that the said Landlords, Bailiffs and Chieftains of Clannes may receive such
orders and instructions as the said Lords of Our Privy Council shall think fit
to give, for keeping and preserving the peace of the Highlands: With
certification, that these who shall not appear the said last Thursday of
February, and thereafter the said second Thursday of July yearly, before the
Lords of Our Privy Council, for their absence and contumacy, shall be unlawed
and ordained to pay, toties quoties, such sums as the said Lords of Our Privy
Council shall appoint; and ordains Letters of Horning, Poinding and others to
be directed for the payment of the same; and this Proclamation being once
lawfully published in manner after-mentioned, shall be sufficient to obliege
the said Landlords, Bailiffs and Chieftains of Clannes to appear yearly before
the said Lords of Our Privy Council, without any other charge or citation. And
further, We have ordained that the said Landlords and Bailiffs, at their first
appearance before Our Privy Council, at the day aforesaid and yearly
thereafter, shall bring with them, and give in exact Lists and Rolls of all the
men living in their bounds above the age of sixteen years; and if they shall
fail to give up any above the age foresaid, they shall be esteemed, censured
and punished as favorers and ressetters of Thieves and broken men. And because
it may be pretended, that the said Landlords, Bailiffs or Chieftains of
Clannes, are or may be under Captions for debts, or some other civil cause, so
that they cannot appear before the Council; Therefore, We, with advice
foresaid, are pleased to grant protection to all Landlords, Bailiffs and
Chieftains of Clannes, who shall repair to Our Privy Council the said last
Thursday of February next, and second Thursday of July the year ensuing, or in
any other year thereafter, in obedience to Our said Order and Proclamation, or
who shall be charged to find the caution foresaid, by virtue of Letters direct
against them to that purpose: So that if they dwell within the Shires of
Stirling, Dumbartoun, Perth or Argyl, they shall have Our protection for
fourteen days before, and fourteen days after the said last Thursday of
February next, and second Thursday of July yearly, and any other particular day
to which they are cited to appear for finding the soverty foresaid; and for
twenty days before, and twenty days after, if they dwell in any other of the
Northern Shires; during which time it shall not be lawful to any Messenger or
other Officer or Magistrate, to take or apprehend any of the said persons for
debt or any other civil cause, by virtue of Letters of Caption, or any other
precept or warrant: Certifying all Our Subjects, and in special the Landlords,
Bailiffs and Chieftains of Clannes and the Inhabitants within the Highlands;
that We and the Lords of Our Privy Council will proceed vigorously, and put in
execution Our resolution foresaid, and the Laws and Acts of Parliament and
Council concerning the Highlands and quieting thereof, and for preventing,
repressing and punishing thefts, depredations, murders and other crimes,
oppression and disorders within the same, and repairing and redressing the
skaith and prejudice done to Our peaceable and good Subjects. And that all
Landlords, Bailiffs and Chieftains of Clannes contained in the said Roll, who
shall not appear before Our Privy Council the said last Thursday of February,
and second Thursday of July next to come, and yearly thereafter, shall be
esteemed disaffected to Our Authority, and to the peace and quiet of the
Country, and shall be highly fined and unlawed for their absence and
contumacy, and otherwise punished as the said Lords of Our Privy Council
shall think fit, and their fynes shall be uplifted for Our use: And that all
other Landlords, Bailiffs and others within the Highlands, who shall at any
time be charged upon Letters to be directed by Our Privy Council to find the
said soverty for themselves, and their Men-tennents and Servants for whom they
are answerable, and shall disobey and not find the same, shall be denunced to
Our Horn, and shall be taken and incarcerate, and their escheats whole Goods
and Geer shall be intromitted with and uplifted for Our use: And whenever any
Theft, Depredations, Oppressions, or other crimes or disorders shall be done or
committed by any Thieves, broken men or other Inhabitants within the said
Highlands, the pains contained in Our said Laws and Acts of Parliament, and in
the Letters directed against the Landlords, Bailiffs and others for finding
caution for themselves, and these for whom they are answerable that they shall
keep the peace, together with the reparation and redress due to the parties
grieved, shall be severely uplifted and exacted from the Landlords and
Bailiffs, who are obliged to answer for these who shall commit the said crimes
and disorders, and the delinquents and committers thereof, their Accomplices,
Aiders, Ressetters, and these who shall supply or intercommune with them, shall
be called and pursued criminally; and being convicted, shall be examplarly
punished according to Law; and if they be absent, they shall be outlawed and
declared Fugitives and denunced, and shall be esteemed and prosecuted as
Rebels and public enemies to GOD, Our Authority, and Our true and faithful
Subjects, and pursued with fire and sword where ever they may be apprehended,
without any crime, pain or hazard to be incurred by the doers thereof; And that
We, and the said Lords of Our Council, will take all other ways that shall be
thought necessary or expedient to the end foresaid, until the said Highlands be
fully quieted, and all Thieves, wicked, disorderly and broken men be utterly
rooted out and extirped. And farther, We with advice of the Lords of Our Council
have thought fit, and do hereby require and command the persons aftermentioned,
Heads of the several branches of Clannes, who by reason of their mean condition
are not able to come in to Edinburgh and find caution, to come to Inverlochy
betwixt and the twenty day of November next, and there to give in bands of
caution for themselves, their Men-tennents, Servants and Indwellers upon their
lands, and all of their name descended off their family, to the Earl of
Caithness, Sir James Campbel of Lawyers, James Menzies of Culdaures, or any two
of them, Who are hereby commissionate for receiving of the said bands conform
to the list hereunto subjoyned; with certification to the said persons, or any
of them who shall not compear before Our said Commissioners betwixt and the
day foresaid, or compearing shall refuse to give in the said band, they shall be
called before Our Council, pursued and punished as fugitives and outlaws, and
disturbers of the public peace. And the said Commissioners are hereby allowed
to give them protection in manner and for the space foresaid. And ordains these
presents to be Printed, and published at the Market Crosses of the head Burghs
of the several Shires of this Kingdom; As aso, to be read at the whole Paroch
Churches upon a Sabbath after Divine Service, that none pretend ignorance.
Given under Our signet at Edinburgh, the tenth day of October, 1678. and of Our
reign the thirtieth year.

A list of the names of the Landlords and Chieftains of Clannes that are to
compear before the Council upon the last Thursday of February next, and upon
the second Thursday of July yearly thereafter.

The Lord of Luss, the Lord of Buchannan, the Lord of Mackfarland, the Earl
of Perth, the Marquess of Athol, Robert Camphel of Glenlyon, Alexander
Robertsone of Strowan, Sir Alexander Menzies of Weyme, John Campbel of Fordell,
(...) Campbel of Glenfalloch, the Earl of Argyle for himself, and his whole
Fewars and Vassals, The Lord of Mclean, (...) Mclean of Lochbowy, the Captain
of Clanronnald, the Lord Mcdonald, the Marquess of Huntley for himself, and his
whole Fewars and Vassals, the Lord of Mcintosch for his whole Fewars and
Vassals, the Lord of Grant, the Lord Rae, the Earl of Seaforth, the Earl of
Sutherland, Sir James Mckdonald of Slait, the Lord of Mckleod, the Earl of
Murray, the Earl of Mar, the Lord Lovat, the Earl of Airth, the Earl of Aboyne,
the Earl of Airlie, the Earl of Caithness, the Lord of Lochyell, the Lord of
Edyell, the Lord of Alter, the Lord of Ballingoun, the Lord of Fowls, the
Lord of Pluseardie, the Lord of Tarbet, the Lord of Cromarty, the Lord of
Mckgregour, the Lord of Mckmartine, the Lord of Lawers, the Lord of
Gairntully, and the Lord of Drum.

A list of the Names of the Heads and Branches of Families, that are to come to
Innerlochy, and give Bond to the Commissioners of Council, betwixt and the
twenty day of November next.

Archihald Mcknab of Aucharne, Patrick Mckgrigor in Brachlich, Findlay Mcknab
of Inshewen, Donald Glass-Mckgregor now in the Brae of Balqu^idder, Dowgal
Mcgregor in Kyletten, Duncan Roy-Drumond, alias Mckgregor in Dindorn, Gregor
Mckgregor in Rora, Ewin Cameron of Calort, Angus Campbel in Innerlochie, Donald
Cameron of Teirlundy, John Cameron of Tomacharich, (...) Cameron of
Letterfindley, Angus Cameron in Kenlochlyon, Angus Cameron of Ratolichmoir,
Donald Cameron of Ratolichbeg, Angus Cameron in Balacherne, John Cameron of
Inshrie, Donald Cameron of Blairmafulich, Dowgal Mcklauchlane in Cornonan, Ewin
Cameron of Lindallie, (...) Cameron of Eracht, John Cameron of Stron, Donald
Cameron Tutor of Lochyel, John and Ewin Camerons his sons, Ewin Mckaphie alias
Viccondachie, Vic Ewin Glendesher, John Cameron alias Mckewin in Murlagen in
Locherkek, Alexander Caeron, in Innerwallie, John Cameron, alias Mckonneil,
Vic-ean-dui in Drumnasyle, John Cameron of Glenevis, Soreley Cameron in
Finnart, Archibald Mcdonald of Keapoch, (...) Mckdonald of Thersit, (...)
Mckdonald of Bohantin, and his eldest son, (...) Mckdonald of Killihonat, (...)
Mckdonald of Tullich, (...) Mcdonald in Innereimoir, Angus Kennedy in Rynathen,
(...) Mcdonald of Moy, (...) Mcdonald of Teirnadish, (...) Mcdonald of Annat,
(...) Mcdonald of Insch, (...) Mcdonald of Auchnacoichen, (...) Mcdonald in
Polvig in Glenco, (...) Mcdonald of Auchtriatin, (...) Mcdonald in Breckled,
and his son, (...) Mcdonald in Killisneycon, (...) Mcdonald in Larich, (...)
Mcdonald his brothers son, Alexander Ferquharsone of Wardhouse, (...)
Ferquharson of Monaltrie, John Ferquharsone of Innerey, Duncan Mcpherson of
Cluny, John Mcpherson in Shira, Duncan Stewart of Appin, Dowgal Stewart of
Inscherich, Robert Stewart of Ardvorlich, Duncan Stewart of Bellachallen,
Alexander Stewart of Annat, James Stewart in Glenbokie, William Mackintosh of
Borlum, Alexander Mackintosh of Connage, Donald Mackintosh of Kellachy, the
Lord of Mackfarlane, Macolme Mackfarlan of Glentiren, John Buchannan of Lenie,
Thomas Frazer of Ardachy, Thomas Frazer of Little-glendo, John Frazer Fiar
thereof, Hugh Frazer of Kilbokie, James Frazer of Drumbaloch, Donald Frazer of
Drumond, Donald Frazer of Little-garth, Hugh Frazer of Strowie, Donald Frazer
of Erchit, Malcolme Frazer of Culduthel, John Frazer of Knockchyllalen, William
Frazer of Foyer, Donald Mackilwrey, Tutor of Drumnaglass, Paul Mackbane of
Kinhail, William Forbes of Skellater, Thomas Grant of Balmakain, John Mckintosh
of Forther, James Grant of Rothiemurchus, Robert Grant of Badivochil, John
Grant of Coneachen, John Grant of Glenmoriestoun, John Grant of Crimonie,
Robert Grant of Dalvey, John Grant of Glenlochy, Hugh Ross of Kilraach, James
Grant of Auchernicke, Patrick Grant of Tullichgorum, (...) Grant of Garinbeg,
James Mcknab in Kirktoun of Straphillen, James Ferquharson of Camdel, John
Grant of Carren, and Allan Grant of Tulloch.

Al. Gibson, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most
Sacred MAJESTY, 1678.


