C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain. France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as in the whole course of our Government, We have manifested Our
Pious and Princely Care, and Zeal to maintain and promote the Sacred Interests
of the Established Religion, together with the Order and Unity of the Church;
And considering the danger arising to the Church, to Religion, and to Our
Government, by the undutiful Practices of some of Our Subjects, in intertaining
disaffected, and irregular Persons in the Offices of Chaplains, Pedagogues, and
Schoolmasters, who are apt to corrupt and poison the Families wherein they
Serve, and the Children whom they Teach and Instruct, with the Principles of
Schism, Sedition and Rebellion, Instilling into the Minds of Our People (under
the specious color of Piety) sinful prejudices against the settled Religion,
and begetting in them a Disloyal aversilion from Our Authority and Government:
Notwithstanding that by the 4th. Act of the second Session of Our first
Parliament, It is Statuted, that none be allowed to Teach any Schools, or to
be Pedagogues to Children, or Chaplains in any Family, without a License from
the respestive Ordinaries: And that by the 6th. Act. Of Our third and current
Parliament, All such Pedagogues, Schoolmasters and Chaplains, are appointed to
swear and Sign the Test, under the certification therein contained: As also, by
Our Royal Proclamation, of the date at Edinburgh, the first of March 1676. We
did Require and Command, That none thereafter should intertain any
School:master, Pedagogue or Chaplain, or Person for performing Family Worship,
who have not a License for that effect, under the hand of the Bishop of the
Respective Diocese under the penalties therein expressed. And now being
informed, that some to elude the Laws, and Proclamotions foresaids, do
intertain disaffected and irregular Persons, for Teaching their Children, and
overseeing of their Learning, Manners and Education, or Exercising
Family Worship in their Houses, under other Names and Designations, as of
Physicians, Factors, Chamberlains, Attendants, or Ordinary Servants, whose
influence in corrupting the youth, and debauchiug of Families from their Duty
to GOD, and to Us, is most apparent, and of very pernicious consequence: We do
therefore, with advise of Our Privy Council, strictly Prohibit and Discharge
all Our Subjects, of what Quality soever, to intertain any Person or Persons,
to be Chaplains in their Families, or to be Governors, Teachers or Instructers
of their Children, or Pupils, or Minors, under their Tutory or Curatory, or to
be Schoolmasters within their Lands or Jurisdictions: or who shall perform the
Duties and Offices of Teaching, and instructing their Children, or Pupils, or
Minors, under their Tutory or Curatory, by Overseeing them in their Learning.
Manners and Education: or who shall Exercise Religious-worship in their
Families, or shall perform the Duties belonging to the Places or Offices of
Pedagogues or Chaplains, under the Name and Designations foresaid, or under
whatsoever other Color, Name, Title, or Designation, except such only as shall
Swear and Subscribe the Test foresaid, before this respective Ordinaries: and
who shall be allowed by Licenses, under the hands of their respective Bishops,
for performing and Exercising of these Offices, certifying all those who shall
contemn, or contraveen this Our Royal Will and Proclamotion: That every
Nobleman so offending, shall be fined in three thousand Merks, Every Gentle^an
in Twelve hundredth Merks: And each Burgess or other Subjects in six hundredth
Merks, toties quaties, as they shall ^e found Guilty conform to the
Certification contained in Our said Proclamation dated the said first of March
1676. And shall ^^so be esteemed Persons disaffected to the Established
Religion, and to Our Royal Government; and the Magistrates of all Burghs, ^f
Royalty and Regality, are discharged to permit any Schoolmasters to Teach
Scholars in their Burghs, except they be qualified as aforesaid, under the
penalty of being pursued and punished before the Council, as their contempt and
neglect shall deserve. and to the effect, Our Royal Will and Pleasure in the
Premises may be publicly known; Our Will is, and We Charge you traitly and
Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority,
by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, and that none pretend
Ignorance. the which to do We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full
Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you, duly Execute, and indorsed
again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet, at Hallyrudhouse, the fourth day of June, One thousand
six hundred eighty and three: And of Our Reign, the thirtieth fifth year. Per
actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno. DOM. 1683. Reptinted by George Croom, in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle, 1683.


