PROCLAMATION For the more easy Stating and Inbringing of the Pole Money; and
for bringing in Lists of what is paid of the Hearth-money.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, by the ^^^th Act of the fourth Session of this Our current
Parliament, imposing the Pole Money, the Lords of Our Privy Council are
empowered to appoint ^uch methods and Courses as they should judge fit, for
stating and inbringing of the Pole Money aforesaid; And to decide and determine
finally all questions and difficulties undetermined by the said Act, that may
arise anent ^^e Pole Money therein-specified: Therefore We, with Advice of the
Lords of (...) Privy Council, for the more speedy and easy Stating and
Inbringing the fore^^id Pole Money, in the particular cases aftermentioned,
peremptorly Re^^ire and Command all Masters of Families and House-holders, to
give up ^^ll and true Lists under their Hand, of their whole Servants Prentices
and ^esidenters within their Families, together with a particular and exact
Ac^ompt of their years Fee, due and payable to them at the Term of Martinmass
next to come, and that they deliver in the Lists so subscribed by them ^o the
Clerk of the Commissioners of Supply, who is hereby ordained to ^^^smit the
same to the Office of the Pole Money at Edinburgh, betwixt (...) the Day
contained in the Act of Parliament, as they will be answerable. ^^d We, with
Advice foresaid, Require and Command the said Masters ^^d House-holders, and
others who shall be liable and due in any Fees to ^^eir Servants at the said
Term of Martinmass next, to retain in their own ^^nds the twentieth part of the
said Years Fee due to their Domestic Ser^^nts, who are to remove out of their
Service at Martinmass next, where the ^^id Fee is payable in Money, to be made
forthcoming for the said Ser^^^ts Pole Money. And further, We, with Advice
foresaid, Require and Command the Commissioners of Supply, and Magistrates of
Burghs within their several Jurisdictions, at their first meeting, appointed
by the foresaid Act of Parliament, to make up a List of all the vacant Churches
within their ^ounds, and to Design and Condescend upon an Heretor living within
the ^^id Parish, liable in payment of more then twelve pounds Scots of yearly
S^ipend to the said Kirk, to be the person who shall pay the twelve pound of
Pole Money, wherein the said vacant Kirk is liable, and a Receipt thereof from
the Farmers of the Pole Money, shall be a sufficient exoneration to him of the
Sti^end of the said Kirk wherein he is liable protanto; And We with Advice
fores^id, Require and Command the Commissioners of Our Supply, and Magistrates
within Burghs to go Diligently about the making up the Lists, and stating the
Pole Money within their several Jurisdictions, conform to the Act of
Parliament, hereby Impowering and Authorizing them to condescend upon and
design an Heretor above an hundred pounds of valued Rent, at least in each
Parish where no Commissioner lives, who being so designed and certified thereof
by the Tacksmen of the Pole Money, their Sub-tacksmen or Collectors, We, with
Advice foresaid Require and Command to proceed and make up the Lists, and state
the Pole Money within the said Parish, and report the said Lists to the Clerk
of the Commissioners of Supply, who is to transmit the same, with the Lists
made up by the Commissioners of Supply themselves, to the Office of the
Pole Money, kept at Edinburgh, betwixt and the Day appointed by the foresaid
Act of Parliament: And the several Commissioners themselves to make up the
Lists of the several Parishes within which they Dwell, and Transmit the same
in manner foresaid. And We, with Advice foresaid, allow poynding of the persons
liable to Pole Money, conform to their several proportions within the Burgh of
Edinburgh, and other Royal. Burghs within this our Ancient Kingdom, according
to the Customs used within the several Burghs, in exacting and uplifting what
falls under their Sient Rolls: And for the better Ingathering of the said
Pole Money, and for preventing Tumults and Disorders, or any opposition that
may be made in putting the Law in Execution for the said Pole Money; We with
Advice foresaid Require and Command the Officers of our Forces to furnish small
Parties to the Tacksmen of the said Pole Money, their Subtacksmen, or
Collectors according as they shall be desired by them, in the Shires where the
said Forces ly^, to give Assistance and Concurrance to them in the Execution
appointed by Law for Ingathering the Pole Money, but no ways to be employed in
Quartering upon any Person for the same. And seeing the Prosecution of the
foresaid Act of Parliament, and this present Proclamation may be a fit occasion
to take up Lists of what is Paid or Resting of the Hearth-money Imposed by Act
of Parliament, One thousand six hundredth and ninety years. Therefore We with
Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Commissioners of Supply within the
several Parishes where they Dwell, and the Heretors designed for making up the
Lists of the Pole Money within the Parishes where they Dwell, to make up true
and full Lists of all Sums of Money paid by any of Our Liedges for the
Hearth-money, wherein they were liable at the Term of Candlemass, One thousand
six hundredth and ninty one years, by virtue of the Act of Parliament made
there. anent, and presently to Transmit the same to the Clerks of the
Commissioners of Supply, who are hereby Required to Transmit them to the Clerk
of our Thesaury and Exchequer, betwixt and the first Day of October next to
come. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Ediburgh,)
and to the Mercat-crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the whole Shires of
this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make public Intimation of
the Premises, that none may pretend Ignorance,

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the second Day of August, And of Our Reign
the Sixth Year 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Consilii. GILB: ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Consilii.


