THE Christian Life.

PART II.

Wherein the FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF Christian Duty Are assigned, explained,
and proved.

VOLUME I.

BY JOHN SCOTT Rector of St. Peter's Poor, London.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Horn at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange,
and Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of
London, And one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
I Here present to your Lordship the first Volume of a second Part of that
Treatise of Christian Life, which I published some years since, and which under
the Protection of your Venerable Name has found good acceptance with the
World; and to make an ingenuous confession to your Lordship, my design in this
second Dedication is not purely to render you the due Respects of a Presbyter
to his Diocesan; nor to tender those just Acknowledgments I ow to your Lordship
for the happiness I have enjoyed, with the rest of your Clergy, under the
auspicious Influence of your serene and watchful Government; no nor yet to
express the grateful sense I have, and shall always retain, of the personal
Obligations you have laid upon me; no, my Lord, though these were all of them
sufficient Inducements, yet I confess that together with these I had a certain
Politic end in my eye. For I thank God I can truly say my main Design in
composing this Treatise was to benefit the World; but reflecting upon the
manifold defects it abounds with after all the pains I had bestowed upon it, I
found that, to palliate its internal blemishes, it was but needful to grace it
with some external Ornament, and could think of none so proper for my purpose
as this of affixing your Lordships Name to it; a Name that carries with it
power enough to recommend any thing to the World that is but pious, and honest,
and well-designed, and all that, I am sure, this is, how defective soever it be
in other respects; which together with the experience I have had of the great
candor and benignity of your Lordships temper, gives me encouragement to hope
that you will not only accept but approve it; and then I am sure your Lordships
approbation will give it credit and authority enough with the World to enable
it to effect those good and honest ends for which it was sincerely intended by

Your Lordships Most humble, Most obliged and Faithful Servant John Scott.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHEN I wrote the Treatise of Christian Life, of which this and another Volume,
now in the Press, is a second Part, I had no design of engaging any further in
that Argument; but now I find by experience that Writing is like Building,
wherein the undertaker, to supply some defect, or serve some convenience which
at first he foresaw not, is usually forced to exceed his first Model and
proposal, and many times to double the charge and expense of it. For after that
Treatise began to be a little known in the World, I was advised from several
hands that there was one thing wanting in it, which is the common defect of
most practical Treatises, and that was, an Explication and Proof of those main
Principles of Religion in which the Obligation of our Christian Duty is
founded, which they thought might be sufficiently done within a very narrow
compass, though herein I find that either they were very much mistaken, or that
I have very much exceeded the necessary limits of my Argument, which I am not
yet convinced of, but that I must submit to the judgment of the World. I
confess the prospect of doing it in that narrow compass they talked of was a
great inducement with me to undertake it, and perhaps had I foreseen at first
what a large field of discourse it would oblige me to traverse, I should never
have entered on it, but when once I was in, I could not handsomely retreat.

AND indeed considering with what prodigious rudeness and insolence the very
foundations of Religion are struck at in this dissolute Age, he who would now
treat of them to any purpose will find himself obliged not only to give a
distinct and clear explication of them, but also to assert the truth of them
with convincing evidence, and to answer and expose those Atheistical Cavils
that are levelled against them; which later would have been much less necessary
in an Age of a more serious and Religious Genius. And upon this account I have
been forced upon a much larger and more laborious proof of the several
Principles of Religion than I first intended. Not that I have any great hope of
reclaiming those who are professed Atheists to the acknowledgment of the truth;
for when men are seduced by lust, as I verily believe most Atheists are, there
is little reason to expect they will be reduced by reason. But that which I
chiefly aimed at is to confirm and establish those that are wavering, and to
Antidote all against this spreading contagion of Irreligion and Atheism, which
in a fatal Chain draws after it not only the ruin of men's Souls hereafter, but
also the utter subversion of all Humane Society here; And it is this has
constrained me to enlarge this Second Part into two Volumes, which at first
view I promised my self to finish in one.

IN this first Volume I have treated only of those Principles which are common
to natural Religion and Christianity together; as an Introduction to which I
have in the first Chapter explained and demonstrated the natural distinction of
Humane Actions into good and evil, by some eternal Reasons for or against them;
and having shown at large that God has made this distinction sufficiently
clear and evident to all men to enable them to conduct themselves to their own
happiness, and that those actions of men which fall under this natural
distinction are the principal subject matter of the commands and prohibitions
of Religion, I proceed in the second Chapter briefly to explain the nature of
Religion in General, and of natural and Christian Religion in particular; from
the nature of both which I have deduced those fundamental Principles from
whence the Obligations of Religion are derived; the five first of which being
common to natural Religion with Christianity I have handled in this first
Volume in so many distinct Chapters.

AND then as for the last, viz. the acknowledgment of Jesus Christ our
Mediator, which contains under it all those Religious Principles that are
peculiar to Christianity, though I have endeavored to treat of it with all the
brevity that is consistent with a clear and satisfactory account of the whole
Argument, yet it is run out into a second Volume, which is now in the Press,
and, I hope, within a few Weeks will be ready to follow this. And perhaps when
the Reader considers the copiousness of the Argument it handles, he will rather
blame me for being too brief than too tedious; for in treating of those
Doctrines which have been handled at large in other English Treatises of the
Christian Faith, and especially in that incomparable one of our most learned
Bishop of Chester on the Creed (a Book which next to the Bible I thankfully
acknowledge my self more beholden to for my instruction in the Doctrines of
Religion than to any one I ever read) I have contracted my self into as narrow
a compass as the barely necessary explication of them would permit me; but
where that renowned Pen has insisted more Cursorily (as for instance on the
particular Offices of our blessed Mediator) I have most enlarged my self,
though even there I have for brevity sake pretermitted some things I intended
less immediate and necessary appertaining to the Argument.

UPON the whole I can truly say, that to the best of my understanding, I have
herein delivered nothing but what is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Primitive
Church, which as the most faithful Comment on the holy Writings of our Savior
and his Apostles I have all along carefully consulted in doubtful and difficult
cases; and this is the reason why it has stuck so long in hand, the pains I
have taken in consulting the ancient Monuments of Christianity about it being,
as I may truly say, at least double to that of composing it; and in following
the Primitive Doctrine, I have followed the Doctrine of the Church of England,
which in its Faith, Government, and Discipline, I believe in my conscience, is
the most Primitive Church in the World.

As for the Method I have chosen, which is to deduce all the Doctrines of
Christianity from one general Head, viz. the Doctrine of the Mediator, it is
the most convenient I could think of for my purpose, which was to represent at
once to the Readers view all the parts of our holy Religion in their natural
connection with and dependence on one another, that so he might be the better
able to judge of the beautiful contexture and admirable contrivance of the
whole, and that by seeing how regularly all the parts of it proceed out of one
common Principle, and conspire in one common end, he may be the better
satisfied that Christianity is so far from being a heap of incoherencies, as
some have injuriously represented it, that considering it merely as an
Hypothesis, abstracted from all that external evidence that accompanies it, the
very Art and contrivance of it, the proportion, symetry, and correspondence of
its parts, their subserviency to each other, and the concurrence and tendency
of them all together to the common ends of Religion, are such as do apparently
exceed all humane Invention, and argue it to be the product of a divine mind.
For as he who would form a true Idea of the beauty of a Picture, must not
contemplate the parts of it separately, but survey them all together, and
consider them in their proportions and correspondencies with each other, so he
who would frame a right Notion of Religion must not look upon it as it lies
scattered and divided into single parts and propositions, but consider them in
contexture, and as they are connected all together into one body or hypothesis.
For it is in their apt Junctures, their mutual dependencies and admirable
coherencies with one another that the beauty and harmony of the whole consists.
And therefore to do right to Christianity, and enable the Reader to contemplate
it with the greatest advantage, I have endeavored to represent to him the
whole in a view, and to give him a prospect of all the parts of it together, in
an harmonious union and connection with each other. For I verily believe that
the mean opinion which some witty men have entertained of Christianity,
proceeds in a great measure from their broken and imperfect apprehensions of
it; they understand it piecemeal, and take it asunder into single propositions,
which they consider separately and apart by themselves, without ever putting
them together into one regular System, and presenting them to their thoughts in
that orderly connection wherein the holy Oracles have delivered them to us. For
I can scarce imagine how any man of sense should contemplate Christianity all
together, and thoroughly consider the harmonious coherence of all its parts, and
the wonderful contrivance of the whole, without being captivated with the
beauty and elegancy of it.

AND now I have nothing further to add concerning this Treatise but only to
entreat the Reader not to be too severe in the perusal of it. For though as for
the Doctrine of it, I see no reason at all to Apologize for it, because I am
fully persuaded of the truth of it, yet being forced, as I was, to compose it
by snatches, and in the more quiet intervals of a busy and uneasy life, I
very much suspect the exactness both of the Style and Method of it; and
therefore all the favor I desire is this, that where I have improperly or
obscurely expressed my self I may be construed in the most favorable sense,
and that wherever I may seem to be confused or immethodical it may be
attributed to those frequent interruptions which the disorders of my body have
given to my thoughts. And these are requests so very just and reasonable, that
I am confident none will be so peevish as to deny me, but they who read Books
only to carp and find fault, and without any design to Edify their own
understandings. But I hope the Reader will consider that the Argument here
treated of is of too great moment to him to be so wretchedly trifled with, and
that therefore he will not be either so disingenuous to me, or uncharitable to
himself, as to peruse with such a spiteful design that which I sincerely
intended for his good, and which he, I am sure, if he pleases, may be the
better for for ever.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
HUmane Actions of three sorts, page 1. Necessary and sinful Actions are either
such as are good or evil in themselves, which are those we call Moral Actions,
or such as are commanded and forbid by positive Law, p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The
Nature of Moral Good explained, Sect. 1. p. 8, 9, 10, 11. That there is such a
thing as Moral Good in humane Actions, proved in five Propositions, p. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. The various ways by
which God has discovered to us what is Morally Good in six particulars, Sect.
2. p. 28, to p. 53. Actions Morally Good are the principal parts of Religion,
Sect. 3. p. 53, 54, 55. This demonstrated by six Arguments from Scripture, p.
55, to p. 71. Four Reasons why God principally requires what is Morally Good,
p. 71, to p. 91.

CHAP. II.
OF the nature of Religion in General, and of natural Religion what it is, p.
92, 93, 94, 95, 96. And of Revealed Religion, p. 97, 98, 99, 100. A definition
of natural and revealed Religion, considered as they are now in conjunction, p.
101, 102. From the nature of Religion thus defined the Principles of all
Religious Obligations are deduced, p. 202. Which are reduced to five Heads, p.
102, 103.

CHAP. III.
OF the necessity of believing the existence of God in order to our being truly
Religious, p. 104, 105. Atheism resolved into the corruption of men's Wills and
Imaginations, Sect. 1. p. 106, 107, 108, 109. The particular causes of it
reduced to nine Heads, and of the folly and unreasonableness of them, p. 109,
to p. 157. Of the great folly and madness of Atheism in its self, p. 157, 158.
This shown at large in six particulars, p. 158, to p. 196.

CHAP. IV.
THat to the founding the Obligations of Religion it is necessary we should
acknowledge the divine Providence, p. 196, 197, 198, 199. What are the
particular Acts of Providence which we are to acknowledge, shown in five
Particulars, p. 200, to 244. The Divine Providence proved, first a Priori by
Arguments drawn from the nature of God which are reduced to four Heads, p. 245,
to 256. secondly, a Posteriori by Arguments drawn from sensible effects of God
in the World, of which six instances are given, p. 256, to p. 310. The most
considerable Objections against a Divine Providence reduced to five Heads, and
particularly answered, p. 310, to p. 354.

CHAP. V.
THe necessity of acknowledging divine Rewards and Punishments to oblige us to
be truly Religious, p. 355, 356, 357, 358. How far it is necessary we should
believe them, shown in four particulars, p. 358, to 369. Of the Universal
acknowledgment of future Rewards and Punishments, p. 370, 371, 372, 373. The
reality of these future Rewards and Punishments proved by six Arguments, p.
373, to 399. By what means our belief of future Rewards and Punishments is to
be acquired and confirmed, shown in four particulars, p. 399, to 410. Of the
force and power of this belief to oblige us to be truly Religious, p. 410, to
417.

CHAP. VI.
THe necessity of Right Notions of God to oblige us to be truly Religious, p.
417, 418. In what respects they are necessary to oblige us to be truly
Religious, shown in four particulars, p. 419, to p. 444. Of the way of forming
right Notions of God in general, p. 445, to 449. Si^ general Rules laid down
for the framing right Notions of God, p. 449, to 484. Of the common causes of
men's misapprehensions of God, in si^ particular instances, p. 485, to 513.

OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. PART II.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Being, and Nature of Moral Goodness.
ALL Humane Actions are either Necessary, or Sinful, or Indifferent. The
Necessary are such as are commanded, the Sinful such as are forbidden by God,
the Indifferent such as are neither commanded nor forbidden, but left entirely
free to our Choice and Discretion. Again, the necessary and the sinful actions
are either such as are necessary and sinful in themselves, and are commanded
and forbidden upon the account of some Good and Evil that is inseparable to
their Natures; or such as are indifferent in their own Natures, as to any good
or evil inherent in them, but are made necessary or sinful by some positive
Command or Prohibition superinduced upon them. Of the first sort are those
which we call Moral Actions; as being the subject matter of the Moral Law,
which commands, and forbids nothing but what is essentially and immutably good
and evil: and whilst there was no other Law but this, every Action which did
not oblige by some eternal Reason, or which is the same, by some inseparable
good or evil, was left free and indifferent. But in process of time God
superadded to this Moral Law a great many Positive ones, whereby he obliged men
to do, and forbear sundry of those indifferent things, which were left to their
liberty by the Law of Nature. For such we call the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Mosaic Law; all which were indifferent before they were imposed, and as soon
as ever the Imposition was taken off from them, did immediately return to their
Primitive Indifferency; so that by the abolition of their Ceremonial Law, the
Jews were restored to all the Liberties of the Moral; excepting only the matter
of the two Sacraments, and of maintaining a visible Communion with the Church,
which are determined by positive Laws of Christianity. And of this later sort
of necessary and sinful Actions, are, not only all those indifferent ones which
God himself has commanded and forbidden immediately, but also all those which
he commands and forbids by his Viceroys and Representatives, in this World.
For whatsoever he has not commanded or forbidden by his own immediate Dictate
and Authority, he has Authorized his Vicegerents to command or forbid, as they
shall judge it most expedient for the Public. So that when they command what
God has not forbidden, or forbid what he has not commanded, their will is
God's, who commands us by their Mouths and stamps their Injunctions with his
own Authority.

And of this distinction between actions that are morally and positively
Necessary, the Scripture frequently takes notice, and particularly, Mich.
vi.6.7, 8. Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord and bow my self before the
high God? shall I come before him with Burnt-Offerings, with Calves of a year
old, etc. No, these are not the things that will render me acceptable in his
eyes, and procure me a welcome Admission into his Presence; and yet it is
certain that these things were then required and commanded, and therefore were
positively necessary; but that they were not necessary in themselves upon the
account of any intrinsic Goodness that was in them, is evident from what
follows, He has showed thee O man what is good; as much as if he should have
said, the things above named are in their own nature indifferent, having
neither good nor evil in themselves; and are made necessary merely by positive
Command, upon which account they are insufficient to recommend you to God: but
there are other things that carry an intrinsic Beauty and Goodness in their
Nature by which they strictly oblige you to embrace and practice them, and do
thereupon recommend you by their own native Charms, to the Love and Favor of
God; and what these good things are he has sufficiently shown or discovered to
you, viz. To do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God, which
are the main and principal Duties that he requires of you. Which plainly
implies that there are some Actions which are morally, that is, in their own
Natures, eternally good, and therefore eternally necessary, and some that are
necessary only because for some present Reason God Wills and Commands them. For
no account can be given why he should be more pleased with Justice and Mercy
and Humility, than with Sacrifice, unless we suppose the former to be good, and
therefore necessary upon immutable Reasons, and upon that account to be
immutably pleasing to him; and the latter to be necessary only upon mutable
reasons which therefore were to lose their Necessity as soon as those reasons
did alter or cease. For had Sacrifices been good in their own Natures, their
goodness had been as unalterable as their Nature; whereas, on the contrary we
find, that whereas their Nature neither is nor can be altered, yet their
Goodness or Necessity is. For as before God adopted them into the Rubric of
Religion by his own positive Institution they were indifferent things; so after
this Institution was repealed by a contrary Command, they became unlawful. So
that it is now as necessary that we should not Offer them in the Worship of
God, as it was before that we should. And the same may be said of all the other
Rites of the Mosaic Law: which being in their own Nature Indifferent, could no
otherewise be converted either into Necessary or Sinful, but by God's express
Command or Prohibition. Whereas Justice and Mercy, etc. are good in themselves
abstractly considered from all Will and Command; and are not good merely
because they are Commanded, but are commanded because they are good; because
they carry with them such unalterable Reasons as do in themselves render the
practice of them eternally necessary. For tho there be very good reason why men
should not offer material Sacrifices, notwithstanding they were once enjoined;
yet it can never be reasonable for them to be unjust or cruel or proud, because
the contrary virtues carry such fixed and immutable Reasons with them as will
bind and oblige us to eternity; insomuch that tho we had a Dispensation to be
proud under the Broad-Seal of Heaven, yet 'twould still be very absurd and
unreasonable to be so. And as things that are only positively necessary or
sinful, derive all their necessity and sinfulness from God's direct or express
Command and Prohibition; so they cannot be commanded or forbidden by
Consequence. For if the Matter of them be antecedently Lawful or Indifferent,
it must necessarily remain so till it is directly commanded or forbidden; there
being no other Reason to bound and limit it, but only the Will of the Lawgiver
in whose disposal it is: and therefore till he directly signifies his Will
either for or against it, it must remain as it is, i. e. Free and Indifferent.
But you will say* Suppose God has commanded such an indifferent thing for such
a Reason, does it not thence follow that he thereby commands every other
indifferent thing that has the same reason for it? I answer, No; for if the
Reason why he commands it be necessary and eternal, it is not a thing
indifferent, but morally necessary, and so is every thing else that has the
same Reason for it; and consequently the reason of the Law, tho it be applied
but to one thing, extends to every thing of the same Nature; because in all
moral Cases the Reason of the Law is the Law. But if the thing commanded be in
it self indifferent, the Reason why it is commanded cannot be necessary; and
therefore tho there be the same Reason why another thing of the same Nature
should be commanded, yet it does not necessarily oblige unless it be commanded
actually; because in such Cases it is not the Reason but the Authority of the
Law that obliges: and therefore where there is only the Reason and not the Law,
it lays no obligation on the Conscience.

From the whole therefore it is evident what is the difference between things
that are positively and morally Necessary and Sinful; which I thought very
necessary to explain at large for the giving a fuller light to the ensuing
Discourse; in which I shall endeavor to show,

First, THAT there is such an intrinsic Goodness in some Humane Actions as
renders them for ever necessary and obliging to us.

Secondly, THAT God has sufficiently discovered to us what those Humane
Actions are which carry with them this perpetual obligation.

Thirdly, THAT these Actions which carry with them this perpetual obligation
are the main and principal parts of Religion.

SECT. I. That there is such an Intrinsic Good in some Humane Actions as
render them for ever Necessary and obliging to us.
GOOD is twofold, Absolute, or Respective, or the Good of the End and the Good
of the Means. The good of the End is that which is the Perfection and Happiness
of any Being; the good of the Means is that which tends and conduces thereunto.
As for Instance, the absolute Good of a Brute Animal consists in the Perfection
and Satisfaction of its Sense, or in having perfect Feeling and Sensation of
such things as are most grateful to its Appetite and Senses. Its respective
Good is the Means by which its Senses are perfected or rendered lively and
vigorous, and by which it is provided for with such things as are grateful and
pleasing to them. For there being in every animate nature a Principle whereby
it is necessarily inclined to promote its own Preservation and Well-being, that
which has in it a fitness to promote this End is called Good, as on the
contrary that which is apt to hinder it Evil. Now Man being not only a
sensitive but a rational Creature, has a twofold Good belonging to his Nature,
the first Sensitive which is the same with that of brute Animals, consisting in
the Perfection and Satisfaction of his bodily Senses and Appetites, and in
those means which conduce thereunto; and this for distinction sake is called
his Natural Good: the second Rational, which consists in the Perfection and
Satisfaction of his Rational Faculties, and in those means which tend
thereunto; and this is styled his Moral Good, though in reality it is as much
Natural as the former. For Man being naturally as well Rational as Sensitive,
that which promotes his Rational Perfection and Happiness, is no less naturally
good for him than that which promotes his Sensitive: Nay his Rational Nature
being the much more noble and excellent part of him, that which naturally
promotes the Perfection and Happiness of it, is in it self a much greater good
to his Nature and ought to be preferred by him before any of those Natural
goods, which conduce only to the happiness of his sensitive Nature; and he who
indulges his sensitive Part in any Pleasure which his Rational disallows, does
thereby create a torment to himself, and raise a Devil in his own mind. For tho
Reason and Religion does allow that the Sensitive nature should be gratified in
all its natural Appetites and Desires, yet neither allow that it should be
pampered and indulged in any such Excsses as are prejudicial either to it self
or to that Rational Nature whereunto it is joined; and he who indulges his
Sense in any such Excesses, renders himself obnoxious to his own. Reason, and
to gratify the Brute in him displeases the Man, and sets his two Natures at
variance. So that there is nothing can be naturally good for us, that is any
way inconsistent with what is morally so, i. e. with what conduces to the
Perfection and Happiness of our rational Nature; and tho this Natural and Moral
Good are no way inconsistent with one another, yet it is the Moral that is the
Supreme Good of a Man, because it is the good of his most excellent Nature.
Having thus premised what I mean by Good in general, and particularly by Moral
Good, I proceed to show that in some Humane actions there is such an intrinsic
moral Good as renders 'em for ever obliging to us. And this I shall endeavor
in these following Propositions.

First, THAT the Happiness of Humane Nature is founded in its Perfection.

Secondly, THAT the Perfection of Humane Nature consists in acting suitably to
the most perfect Reason.

Thirdly, THAT the most perfect Reason is that wherein all reasonable Beings do
consent and agree.

Fourthly, THAT there are certain Rules of Moral Good, wherein all Reasonable
Beings are agreed.

Fifthly, THAT to act suitably to those Rules has been always found by
universal experience conducible to the Happiness of Humane Nature, and the
contrary mischievous thereunto.

I. THAT the Happiness of Humane Nature is founded in its Perfection. For the
Perfection of Beings consists in their being completely disposed and adapted
for the End whereunto they are designed. Now the End of all Beings that have
Life and Sense, is that sort of Happiness that is suitable to their Natures; for
it is thither that they all of them naturally tend, and therein that their
Faculties do all concenter. When therefore their Faculties or Powers of Action
are completely disposed to enjoy the proper Happiness of their Natures, then
are they perfect in their Kind. Thus for instance, the End of Brutes which have
only Bodily Sense, is Sensitive and corporeal Happiness; and thererefore then
is the Brute Creature perfect in its kind, when it has not only all the Parts
and Senses that are necessary to procure and enjoy its Happiness, but has them
also perfectly sitted, tempered, and qualified to pursue and relish it. And
supposing that all the pleasure or happiness of a Beast consisted in the Taste
and Smell of its Pasture, it could never be completely happy so long as the
Organs of its Smell or Taste were imperfect. So that the perfection of every
Sensible Nature consists in being perfely disposed to enjoy its Natural
Happiness. And accordingly herein consists the Perfection of Humane Nature, in
being perfectly fitted and disposed to enjoy and relish Humane Happiness. For
this being its proper End, it is impossible it should ever be perfect in its
Kind till it is completely contempered and adapted thereunto. So that our
Happiness must necessarily be founded in our Perfection, which is nothing else
but the perfect Disposition of our Natures to relish and enjoy those Goods
wherein the Happiness of our Nature consists; and till our Nature is perfectly
disposed to enjoy them, all the good things of Heaven and Earth will be
insufficient to render us perfectly happy.

II. THAT the Perfection of Humane Nature consists in acting sutably to the
most Perfect Reason. For Reason being the top and Crown of Humane Nature, has
a natural Right to Command and Dispose of its Motions; to be the Eye of its
Will, and the Guide of its Affections, and the Law of all its Powers of Action.
And indeed, for what other use serves the Reason of a Man, but to prescribe
Rules to his unreasonable Affections, to light and direct them to their proper
Objects, and as they are moving toward them to moderate their Excesses and to
quicken their Defects and to lead them on to true Happiness in an even Course
through all the wild Mazes of popular Mistakes? And unless it be thus employed,
the man is Reasonable in vain, and his light like a Candle enclosed in a
Dark-Lanthorn burns out in wast and spends it self in an useless and
unprofitable blaze. And whilst to please our Appetites and Passions we run
counter to the advice of our Reason, we forsake the rule of our Natures and act
like Beasts and not like Men; in which course of Action if we persist, we must
necessarily degenerate from our selves, and sink by degrees into the most
sordid Brutality. For when once our Appetites have gotten the Command of our
Reason, and not only dethroned but inslaved it, the very Order of our Nature is
transposed and we are become our own Reverse and Antipodes. If therefore we
would arrive at our own Perfection it must be by following our Reason, and
submitting all our Affections and Appetites to its Government. For what else
can be the Perfection of a Rational Nature, but to be perfectly Rational; and
what is it to be perfectly Rational, but to have our Minds thoroughly instructed
with the Principles of Right Reason, and our Will and Affections entirely
regulated by them? For herein consists the Supreme Perfection not only of Men,
but of Angels, yea and of God Himself, the Crown and Glory of whose Nature it
is, that he always knows, and chooses and acts what is fittest and best and most
reasonable. And when once our Understanding is so far enlightened as that it
always dictates right Reason to us; and our Will and Affections are so far
subdued as that they always freely and cheerfully comply with it, we have
arrived to the very top of our Nature, and are Commenced perfect Men in Christ
Jesus.

III. THAT the most perfect Reason is that wherein all Reasonable Beings do
consent and agree. For if there be any such matter as True and False,
Reasonable, and Unreasonable in the Nature of things, and if there be any such
thing as Understanding among Beings, whereby they are capable of distinguishing
between the one and the other; either that must be True and Reasonable which
all Understandings do consent and agree in, or all the Understandings that are
in the World must be under a fatal Cheat and Delusion. Which later being
supposed inevitably destroys all Knowledge and Certainty, and lays a foundation
for the wildest Skepticism. For supposing all Understandings to be deceived and
imposed on, it is impossible for us to be certain of any thing, and for all we
know, a Part may be bigger than the Whole, two and two may make twenty, and
both parts of a Contradiction may be true. Nay we can never be certain whether
we are not Dreaming when we think we are Awake, and whether we are not Awake
when we think we are Dreaming. Either therefore we must renounce all Certainty
whatsoever, and fluctuate in eternal Skepticism, or allow that to be True and
Reasonable which all Understandings do unanimously vote so.

IV. THAT there are certain Rules of Moral Goodness concerning the immutable
Reason whereof all Understandings are agreed. For such are all those which
prescribe the Dueness of Worship and Veneration to God, of Obedience and
Loyalty to our Parents and Superiors, of Temperance and Fortitude to our
selves, and of Justice and Charity to one another; to the Goodness and
Reasonableness of which Rules, all Understandings do as unanimously consent, as
to the truth of any Proposition in the Mathematics. Now of all the orders of
Reasonable Beings, that which we most converse with and with whose Consent and
Agreement in any matters we are best acquainted, is that of Men; and therefore
if among Men we can discover such an Universal Agreement concerning the
Goodness of these Rules as will warrant us to conclude all other Rational
Beings to be consenting with them, this will be a sufficient Demonstration of
the Truth of the Proposition. These two things therefore I shall endeavor to
make out, 1. That the Reason of Men is Universally consenting in this matter,
viz. That there is an immutable Goodness in these Rules of Morality. 2. That
this Universal Consent of Men's Reason in this matter is a sufficient
Demonstration that all other reasonable Beings are consenting with them.

First, THEREFORE there is nothing more evident than that Men are Universally
agreed in this matter, that to Worship God, to Honor their Parents and
Superiors, to be temperate in their Passions and Appetites, and just and
charitable toward one another, are things in their own nature immutably good;
that this is not an Opinion peculiar to such an Age, or to such a Nation, or to
such a Sect of Religion, but the Universal Judgment of all Mankind of
whatsoever Age, Nation, or Religion. For it is upon this judgment that all that
Conscience is founded which approves of or condemns men's actions; which
Conscience is nothing else but a Sense or Feeling of Moral Good and Evil; and
is every whit as natural to Men's minds, as the Sense of pleasant or painful
touches to their Bodies. Since therefore general Effects must spring from
general Causes, it necessarily follows that the Pain and Pleasure which Men's
minds generally feel upon the Commission of bad and good Actions, must be
resolved into some general Cause; and what else can that be, but the general
Consent of their Reason concerning the immutable Evil of the one and Good of
the other? I know it is pretended by some of our Modern Navigators that there
are a sort of People in the World who have not the least sense of Good and
Evil, and do own neither God nor Religion nor Morality. But considering the
short Converse and imperfect Intercourse which these our new Discoverers have
had with those Barbarous Countries, it is fairly supposeable that the
Inhabitants may have Notions both Religious and Moral, of which Strangers who
understand not their Language and Customs, and Manners, can make little or no
Discovery. But suppose that what they report were true; yet by their own
confession these wretched Barbarians are in all other things so extremely
Brutish, that they discover no other token of their Humanity but their Shape.
For they live altogether regardless of themselves; of the Conveniences of their
Lives, and of the Dignity of their Natures; without making any Reflections on
their own minds, or any Observations from their own experience. Since therefore
all Knowledge is acquired by Attention, it is not at all impossible for
Creatures so utterly supine and negligent to be ignorant of the most common
Notions. But for any man to question the truth of this general Rule, because
there are a few Exceptions from it, is every whit as absurd as if he should
question whether Men are generally two-legg'd Animals, because there have been
some Monsters with three. And what if among men there are some Monsters in
respect of their Minds, as well as others in respect of their Bodies? This is
no more a prejudice to the standing Laws of Humane Nature, than Prodigies are
to the Regularity of the constant course of Universal Nature. Specimen naturae
cujuslibet, says Tully, a natura optima sumendum est, i. e. The true sample of
every Nature is to be taken from the best Natures of the kind. Since therefore
the men of all Nations and Ages and Religions who have in any measure attended
to the Nature of things, and made but any tolerable use of their Reasons, are,
and always have been universally agreed that there is an immutable Good in
Virtue, and Evil in Vice; it is no Argument at all that this is not the general
Sense of Mankind, supposing it true which is very questionable, that there are
some few such inhumane Barbarians in the World as make no distinction at all
between 'em. But then

Secondly, THIS Universal Consent of Men's Reason in this matter, is a
sufficient Demonstration that all other Reasonable Beings are consenting with
them. For it shows that God himself is of this mind; and if He be, we may be
sure that all other Reasonable Beings are. For if we believe that God made us,
we must believe that he made us for some End; and if he made us for any End, he
must esteem those Actions good which promote it, and those evil which obstruct
and hinder it. And what other End can an infinitely happy and blessed Being
have in making other Beings; but only to do 'em good and according to their
several Capacities to make them partakers of his own Happiness? And if this be
the end for which God made us, to be sure those Actions must be good in his
esteem that are beneficial, and those evil that are hurtful and mischievous to
our Nature. And therefore since he has implanted in us not only a natural
Desire of Happiness; but also a rational Faculty to discern what Actions make
for our Happiness and what not, we may be sure that whatsoever this Faculty
does Universally determine to be good or evil for us, is good or evil in the
Judgment of God. It Is true when the Reason that is in one man judges contrary
to the Reason that is in another, there must be a Disagreement on one side or
the other from the Reason and Judgment of God; but when all men's Reason is
agreed that this is good and that evil, it is plain that this is is the
Judgment of the Rational Faculty which naturally makes such a Distinction of
things. For there is no man that uses his Reason can possibly think that Truth
and Falsehood, Justice and Injustice, Mercy and Cruelty are equally good in
themselves; his Rational Faculty being so framed as that at the first glance
and reflection, it naturally distinguishes 'em into Good and Evil. When
therefore God has created us with such a Faculty as naturally makes such a
Judgment of Good and Evil, that Judgment must be Gods as well as the Faculty
which made it. That therefore which is the unanimous Judgment of all Men, must
be the Natural Language of the Rational Faculty; and that which is the natural
Language of the Rational Faculty must be the Language of the God of Nature. For
he who created me with such a Faculty as naturally judges this Good and that
Evil, must either have the same Judgment himself, or create in me a
Contradiction to his own Judgment; and that Judgment which he has created in
me, he must be supposed to create in all other Beings that are capable of
Judging; otherwise he would be the author of Contradictory Judgments. For,
should one Rational Faculty naturally judge this, and another the contrary,
they must necessarily be so framed as to contradict each other, and
consequently he who framed both must be the Author of the Contradiction. So
that this universal Consent of Men concerning the Good and Evil of Humane
Actions is a plain Evidence that God and all other Rational Beings are
consenting with 'em.

V. AND Lastly, that Men's acting conformably to these Rules of Moral Goodness,
in which they are thus universally consenting, has by long and constant
Experience been found most conducive to Men's Welfare and Happiness. For the
Proof whereof I shall need urge no other Argument than this, that the great
Design of all Humane Laws and Constitutions has been to secure and enforce
these Rules of Morality; which is a plain Argument that Men have always found
by Experience that they are naturally good and productive of their Happiness
and Welfare. For how can it be thought that after men have had so many
thousand years Trial of Piety and Justice and Mercy and Temperance, they should
still be so solicitous to fence and guard 'em with Laws, had they not found 'em
highly advantageous, and their Contraries as mischievous to Mankind. For do but
suppose that the Contraries to all Virtue were for Experiment-sake imposed for
some time upon Mankind, and it were made as Penal by the Laws of Nations to be
Pious, and Just, Merciful, and Temperate as it is now to be the contrary; is it
imaginable that that which we now call Vice should in process of time acquire
the same Universal Reputation that Virtue has always had among men? Or at
least, is it probable that after some thousand years Trial and Experience of
such a Law, Men should still be as much concerned to guard and enforce it, as
they are and always have been to secure the Laws of Piety and Virtue? No, it is
most certain they would not. For the very injoyning of Impiety, Injustice, and
Cruelty would be in effect to enjoin men to render themselves most wretched and
miserable; to surrender up all the Supports of their Hope, the Peace of their
Consciences and the Tranquillity of their Minds; to live in everlasting Broils
and Discords, and turn Robbers and Cutthroats to one another, and utterly
deprive themselves of all the Comforts and Securities of Humane Society. So
that there is no doubt but after a few Years Experience of the mischievous
Consequents of such a Law, the whole World would groan under it as an
insupportable Tyranny, and even the most Vicious would soon grow quite weary of
it, and heartily wish that it were for ever Repealed, and the good old Laws of
Piety and Virtue restored and enforced upon Mankind. And if so, it is plain
that Virtue and Vice are distinguished by their Natures into good and evil; and
that the Obligations we lie under to practice the one, and abstain from the
other, are not founded in any Arbitrary Constitution, but in the essential
Goodness and Malignity that inseparably adheres to them.

AND if we consult the Experience of particular Men, we shall always find, that
whereas Impiety and Injustice, Fraud, and Malice do naturally torment men's
Minds with Anguish and Confusion, haunt their Breasts with fearful Thoughts and
dire Expectations, harrass their Souls with perpetual Malecontentedness, and
intricate their whole Lives with everlasting Shifts and Intrigues; Piety and
Justice, Truth and Benevolence do as naturally sooth and ravish their Minds,
fill 'em with blessed Hopes and* cheerful Reflections; compose their Passions,
strengthen and invigorate their Hearts, and render the whole Course of their
Lives plain and direct, even and easy. And hereby Virtue does sensibly
recommend it self to our Natures in all its Capacities, as being suited to the
Satisfaction of all its reasonable Desires, and so by consequence designed to
make up the compleatest and most entire Enjoyment. All which is as plain and
obvious to the Reason of Mankind as any Matter of Fact that is before us. So
that it is not only the Reason, but also the Experience of Mankind that
universally agrees and consents in this great Truth, that there is such a Good
in Virtuous and such an Evil in Vicious Actions, as does eternally and
inseparably cleave to their Natures.

AND therefore since our Nature is to continue the same for ever; the same
Virtues and Vices which are now the Perfection and Depravation, and
consequently the Happiness and Misery of it, will be so for ever. From whence
it necessarily follows, that our eternal Happiness and Misery is founded in the
Course of our own Actions. So that as in the Course of a virtuous Life we are
growing up into a State of fixed and everlasting Virtue, wherein we shall be
everlastingly Perfect and Happy; so on the contrary, in a course of vicious
Actions we are sinking into a state of everlasting Viciousness, wherein we
shall be everlastingly wretched and miserable. For since Virtue is good for and
Vice evil to us in its own Nature, it necessarily follows that according as we
remain Virtuous or Vicious for ever, our Condition must be good or evil for
ever. And this being so, of what unspeakable Consequence are the Actions of
Men, that thus draw after 'em a Chain of Joys or Woes as long as Eternity? And
how careful ought we to be, to what course of Life we determine our selves,
considering that our eternal Fate depends upon what we are now doing; that
every Moral Action we perform is a step Heaven or Hell wards; that in every bad
or good Choice we make, we are planting our Tophet or our Paradise; and that in
the Consequents of our present Actions we shall rue or rejoice to eternal Ages?
O would to God men would at last be so wise as to consider these things before
it be too late, and not live at Random, as they do, without any Regard to the
certain and unavoidable Fate of their own Actions! For doubtless would they but
thoroughly weigh the Nature and Event of things, and look before they leap into
Action, they would see infinitely more Charm and Terror in that Good and Evil
which inseparably adheres to virtuous and vicious Actions, than in all the
Temptations in the World. Wherefore in the name of God let us look about us,
and for once resolve to act like Beings that must for ever feel the bad or good
effects of our own Doings. Which if we do, we shall not only live well and
happily here, but to all Eternity experience the blessed Consequents of it.

SECT. II. That God has sufficiently discovered to us what those Humane
Actions are, which are Morally Good, and upon that account perpetually obliging.
THE Truth of which will evidently appear by considering the Particulars, what
it is that God has done in order to the making this great Discovery to us; the
most considerable of which are reducible to these six Heads,

First, HE has implanted in us a natural Desire of Happiness.

Secondly, HE has given us Reason to discern what Actions they are that make
for our Happiness, and what not.

Thirdly, HE has so contrived our Natures as that we are thrust on by our own
Instincts and Passions, to those Actions which make for our Happiness.

Fourthly, HE has taken care to excite and oblige us to those Actions by
annexing natural Rewards to them and entailing natural Punishments on their
Contraries.

Fifthly, To strengthen and enforce this Obligation, he has frequently
superadded to these natural Rewards and Punishments supernatural Blessings and
Judgments.

Sixthly, THAT to enforce all this he has made sundry supernatural Revelations
wherein he has plainly told us what those things are that carry with 'em this
intrinsic Good and Necessity,

I. GOD has taken care to discover to us what is Morally Good by implanting in
us a natural Desire of Happiness; which is so inseparable to Humane nature,
that it is impossible for us to forbear desiring what is good for us, or at
least what appears so. For tho through our own Ignorance and Inconsideration we
many times mistake Evil for Good, and Misery for Happiness, yet such is the
Frame of our Nature, that we cannot desire Evil as Evil, or Misery as Misery;
but whenever we embrace a real Evil, it is either under the Notion of a less
Evil, or of a real and substantial Good. Now by this unquenchable Thirst and
Desire of Happiness which God has implanted in our Natures, we are continually
importuned and excited to search out and enquire by what Ways and Means we may
arrive to be happy. So that as Hunger and Thirst and the sense of bodily Pain
and Pleasure forces men upon the invention of Trades and civil Occupations to
supply their Necessities and Conveniences: So this vehement Hunger and Thirst
after Happiness, which God has created in our Bosoms, does almost necessitate
and constrain us to pry into the Nature of our Actions; that so we may discover
what Trade and Course of life it is that tends most directly to our own
Felicity. And by thus importuning us by our own self*love to enquire into the
Nature of our Actions and into their natural tendencies to our Weal or Woe, he
has not only expressed his good will toward us by taking Security of our
selves for our own Welfare, and obliging us to be happy by the most tender and
vigorous Passion in our Natures, but has also taken an effectual Course to
discover to us the Good and Evil of our own Actions; Considering,

II. THAT he has given us Reason to discern what Actions they are that make
for our Happiness and what not. It Is true, had he only implanted in our Breasts
a blind Desire of Happiness, without any Eye of Reason in our Heads to guide
and direct our Actions toward it, we must have wandered in the dark for ever,
till we had pined away our wretched Beings with a hungry and unsatisfied
Desire. But by giving us a quick-sighted Faculty of Reason to guide and conduct
this our blind Desire, he has taken sufficient care not only to excite our
Enquiry after the Way to Happiness, but also to enable us to find it. For the
natural tendencies of our Actions to our Happiness or Misery are so very
obvious and visible, that we can scarce open our Eyes and look abroad without
observing them. For how can any man who makes any observations upon things, be
so stupid as not to discern the vast Difference there is between Truth and
Falsehood, Justice and Injustice, as to their natural tendency to the Good and
Hurt, Happiness and Misery of Mankind? It Is true, if men will neglect using
their Reason, they may be ignorant of the plainest Propositions; but if they
be, it is their inexcusable Folly. But if men will be so true to their own
Interest, as calmly to reflect upon their Actions, their Sense cannot more
readily distinguish between Honey and Gall, than their Reason will beween
Virtue and Vice; the fundamental Reasons of which are so legible in all the
Appearances of Nature, so necessary to the Being and Preservation of Mankind,
and their equity is so apparent, and their Convenience so obvious, that a man
can hardly reflect upon any thing either within or without him, without being
convinced of their Force and Obligation. So that for a man that has the use of
his Reason not to observe the Difference of his Actions, as to their intrinsic
Good and Evil, and necessary Tendency to his Happiness and Misery, would be as
gross and unexcusable a Stupidity, as if he should pass through the World
without ever taking notice that two and two make four. God therefore by giving
us a Reasonable Faculty to discern the nature of things, upon which the
Differences of Good and Evil are so plainly and legibly imprinted, has hereby
taken sufficient Care to show us the difference of our own Actions. For, to
inspire us with a Faculty of Reasoning, by which we can form true Notions of
things from single Experiments and infer one truth from another, and
immediately to inspire this Faculty with Divine Truth, are only two different
Modes of Divine Revelation; and God did as really reveal himself to us when he
gave us Reason to understand his Will, as when he sent to us his Messengers
from Heaven to make known his mind and Will to us. For God has so framed our
Understandings, as that whenever we impartially reason about things, we are
forced to distinguish between Good and Evil, and cannot persuade our selves
without doing infinite Violence to our own Faculties, that to Blaspheme God or
to Reverence him, to lie or speak Truth, to honor our Parents or to scorn and
despise them are things of an indifferent Nature; but as soon as ever we open
the Eye of our Reason we discern such an essential Difference between them, as
forces us to condemn the one and approve the other. And accordingly as for the
great strokes of Iniquity, we find they have as much the Universal Judgment of
our Reason against them as any false Conclusion in the Mathematics; whilst the
Goodness of their contrary Virtues is as universally acknowledged by us as the
Truth of any first Principle in Philosophy. Since therefore God has so framed
our Understanding as that it cannot calmly reflect upon our Actions without
distinguishing between the good and bad, he has hereby sufficiently revealed
to us what that good is that immutably binds and obliges us.

III. GOD has so contrived our Natures as that we are thrust on by our own
Instincts and Passions to those Actions which are morally Good and do make for
our Happiness. For we are framed and constituted with such Passions and
Affections as do naturally point and direct us unto virtuous Actions; and tho
by the Constitution of our Natures, our Passions are subjected to our Reason,
and all our Virtue consists in being reasonably affected, yet in the very
Nature of our Passions there is a certain Tendency and Direction to Virtue,
antecedent to all our Reasoning and Discourse. Which Theages the Pythagorean
styles a (...), a certain natural Impetus or Enthusiasme by which without any
previous Discourse or Deliberation we are forcibly carried on toward virtuous
Actions. For some Affections there are in our Nature, which do in the general
plainly signify to us that there is such a thing as Moral Good and Evil in
Humane Actions; and others that do as plainly point out what those Actions are
wherein this moral good and evil is subjected. Of the first sort are the
Affections of Love and Hatred, Complacency and Horror, Glory and Shame,
Repentance and Self-satisfaction; which plainly declare that there are
answerable Objects in the Nature of Things and Actions; that there is a Good to
be beloved and an Evil to be hated; a Deformity to be abhorred and a Beauty to
be delighted in; an Excellency to be gloried in and a Filthiness to be ashamed
of; a Well-doing to be satisfied (...) an Ill doing to be repented of. For
(...) the^e were no such real Distinctions in the Nature of Things and Actions,
all these Affections in us would be utterly vain and impertinent. And as these
Affections of our Nature do signify in the general that there is a moral Good
and Evil in our Actions, so there are others which do particularly point out
what Actions are morally Good and what Evil. Thus for Instance, the Passions of
Veneration and Disdain do plainly direct us to Honor God and our Superiors,
and to be constant in good Courses out of a generous Scorn of all Temptations
to the contrary. Thus Commiseration and Envy direct us to Charity and Justice,
to lament and assist those who are undeservedly unfortunate, and to be
displeased with the Advancement of base and undeserving People; and
consequently to be just and equal in our Distributions, and to proportion them
to men's Merit and Desert. For by this Passion of Envy Nature teaches us that
there is such a thing as just and unjust, equal and unequal, and that the
former is to be embraced and the latter to be shunned. And to name no more,
thus Sorrow and Joy does by a silent Language dissuade us from injuring and
persuade us to benefit one another. For so by the mournful Voice, the dejected
Eyes and Countenance, the Sighs and Groans and Tears of the sorrowful and
oppressed, (all which are the powerful Rhetoric of Nature) we are importuned not
only to forbear heaping any further Injuries upon them, but also to commiserate
their Griefs, and by our timely Aids to succor and relieve them. As on the
contrary the florid and cheerful Looks, the pleasant and grateful Air which we
behold in those that rejoice, are so many Charms and Attractives by which
Nature allures us to mutual Vrbanity and Sweetness of Behavior, and a
continual Study to please and gratify one another. By these and many other
Instances I might give, it is evident that tho by our own ill Government we too
often deprave our Affections and corrupt them into Vices, yet their natural
Drift and tendency lies toward Virtue. Thus by their own natural Light which
they carry before us, they direct our steps to the Way we are to walk in, and
point out all those Tracts of eternal Goodness that lead to our Happiness. For
since these Affections are in us antecedently to all our Deliberations and
Choices, it is evident they were placed there by the Author of our Natures; and
therefore since it is He who has inclined them to all that they naturally
incline to, He does in Effect direct and guide us by their Inclinations. So
that their natural Tendencies and Directions are the Voice of God in our
Natures, which murmurs and whispers to us that natural Law which our Reason
indeed does more plainly and articulately promulge. And from this natural
Tendency of our Affections to Good proceeds that pleasant and painful Sense of
good and bad Actions which we experience in our selves before ever we can
discourse. For thus before we are capable of reasoning our selves into any
Pleasure or Displeasure, our Nature is rejoiced in a kind or just Action either
in our selves or others, and we are sensibly pleased when we have pleasured
those that oblige us, and as sensibly grieved when we are conscious of having
grieved and offended them. We love to see those fare well who we imagine have
deserved well; and when any unjust Violence is offered them, our Nature shrinks
at and abhors it. We pity and compassionate the miserable when we know not why;
and are ready to offer at their Relief when we can give no Reason for it; which
shows that these things proceed not either from our Education or deliberate
Choice, but from the Nature of our Affections which have a Sympathy with
Virtue, and an Antipathy to Vice implanted in their very Constitution. And
hence it is that in the Beginnings of Sin our Nature is commonly so shy of an
evil Action; that it approaches it with such a modest Coyness, and goes
blushing to it like a bashful Virgin to an Adulterers Bed; that it passes into
it with such Regret and Reluctance, and looks back upon it with such Shame and
Confusion; which in our tender years, when as yet we are not arrived to the
Exercise of our Understandings, cannot be supposed to proceed from Reason and
Conscience, and therefore must be from the natural Sense of our Affections,
which by these and such like Indications do signify that they are violated and
offended. Now this natural Sense of Good and Evil which springs from the Frame
and Nature of our Affections, was doubtless intended by God to be the (...)
guide of Humane Nature; that so when as yet it is not capable of following
Reason and Conscience, it might be directed to what is Good and be preserved
from wicked Habits and Prejudices by its own Sense and Feeling, till such time
as it is capable of the Conduct of Reason; that so when this leading Faculty
undertakes the Charge of it, it may find it (...) to its (...) and be able to
manage it with more Ease and Facility. And thus by the natural Drift and
Tendency of our Affections God has plainly revealed to us what is good and
what not.

IV. GOD has also entailed upon our Actions natural Rewards and Punishments,
and thereby plainly declared which are good and which evil. For it is easily
demonstrable by an Induction of Particulars, that every Virtue has some
natural Efficacy in it to advance both our public Good and our private
Interest. That Temperance and Charity, Righteousness and Fidelity, Gratitude
and Humility are not only convenient, but absolutely necessary to our Joy and
Comfort, our Peace and Quietness, our Safety and Contentment; to the Health of
our Body and the Satisfaction of our Mind, and the Security and Happiness of
our Society with one another. Whereas on the contrary, Vice naturally teems
with mischievous Effects, and is ever productive of Horror in the Conscience,
Anguish in the mind, Discord in the Affections, Diseases in the Body, and
Confusions and Disturbances in Humane Society. Since therefore the Divine
Wisdom and Contrivance has thus inseparably coupled good Effects to good
Actions and evil ones to evil, it has hereby very plainly and sensibly
declared to us what it would have us do and what not. For seeing it has so
constituted things as that in the Course of Nature such Proportions of
Happiness do necessarily result to us from such Actions, and such Proportions
of Misery from their Contraries, what can be more evident than that its Design
was hereby to encourage us to the one and affright us from the other? So that
by these natural Rewards and Punishments which in the Course of things God has
chained to our Actions, he has as expressly prescribed us what to do and what
not, as he could have done if he had spoken to us in an audible voice from the
Battlements of Heaven. For since the whole Train of Natural Effects is to be
resolved into the Providence of God, and since his Providence has so ordered
and contrived things as that in the ordinary Course of them good Effects do
spring out of good Actions and evil out of evil ones, what else could he intend
by it but to allure us to the one, and terrify us from the other? For it is by
Rewards and Punishments that all Lawgivers declare their Will and Pleasure
concerning those Actions which they command and sorbid; and therefore since God
in his Providential Government of the World has thought good to link natural
Rewards to such Actions, and natural Punishments to such, these are to be looked
upon as the great Sanctions of the Law of Nature, whereby he commands what
pleases and prohibits what displeases him. For when God had no otherwise
revealed himself to the World than only by the establsht Course and Nature of
things, that was the great Bible by which alone Mankind was instructed in their
Duty; and there being no revealed Threats or Promises annexed to good and bad
Actions, Gods Will and Pleasure concerning them was visible only in the good
and bad Consequents which they drew after them; which are so plain and obvious
to the Observation of Mankind, that 'twould be the most inexcusable
Inadvertency not to take Notice of them. So that the moral Good and Evil of all
Actions, finally resolves into the natural Good and Evil that is appendant to
them; and therefore are our Actions morally good because they are naturally
beneficial to us, and therefore morally evil because they are naturally
prejudicial and hurtful; and those which in their own nature are neither good
nor evil, are indifferent in themselves, and left altogether undetermined by
the Law of Nature, which commands and forbids nothing but under the Sanction of
those natural Rewards and Punishments which in the Course of things are made
necessary to Humane Actions.

V. TO these natural Rewards and Punishments which God has entailed upon good
and bad Actions, he has thought good many times to superadd supernatural
Blessings and Judgments. For tho he had before sufficiently expressed his Will
concerning Humane Actions in the great Bible of Nature, and by their natural
Effects had plainly enough distinguished the good from the bad; yet considering
what heedless and inobservant Creatures we are, and how apt to overlook the
ordinary Consequents of our Actions, he has not altogether abandoned us to the
easy Instructions of Nature, but out of his superabundant Care to show us what
is Good and lead us to our Duty and Happiness, he has from time to time
seconded the natural Rewards and Punishments of our Actions with supernatural
Favors and Judgments; that so by these he might awake our drowsy Attention,
and revive in us the languishing sense of our Duty. Of which we have infinite
Instances in the several Ages of the World; there being scarce any History
either Sacred or Prosane that abounds not with them. Several of which both
Blessings and Judgments do as plainly evince themselves to be intended by God
for Rewards and Punishments, as if they had been attended with a Voice from
Heaven proclaiming the Reasons for which they were sent. For how many famous
Instances have of we miraculous Deliverances of Righteous Persons, who by an
Invisible Hand have been rescued from the greatest Dangers, when in all outward
appearance their Condition was hopeless and desperate; and of wonderful
Blessings that have happened to them not only without, but contrary to all
secondary Causes; of some that have been so eminently rewarded in kind, as that
the Goods which they received were most visible Significations of the Goods
which they did; of others who have received the Blessings which they have
asked, whilst they were praying for them, and obtained them with such
distinguishing Circumstances as plainly signified them to be the Answers and
Returns of their devout Addresses to Heaven? And so on the contrary, how many
notable Examples are there of such miraculous Judgments inflicted upon
unrighteous Persons, as have either exceeded the Power of secondary Causes or
been caused by them contrary to their natural tendencies; of men that have been
punished in the very Act of their Sin, and sometimes in the very Part by which
they have offended; that have had the evil of their Sin retaliated upon them in
a correspondent Evil of Suffering, and been struck with those very Judgments
which they have imprecated on themselves in the Justification of a known
Falsehood? All which supernatural Judgments and Blessings of God are only his
Comments on the Text of Nature, by which he farther explains to us the Meaning
of those natural Rewards and Punishments which Virtue and Vice draw after them,
and shows us what clear Indications they are of his Almighty Pleasure and
Displeasure. For when he rewards men supernaturally it is for those Actions
that carry a natural Reward with them, and when he punishes them supernaturally
it is for such Actions as do carry a natural Punishment with them; so that his
supernatural Rewards and Punishments do speak the same Sense and Language with
his natural, only they speak plainer and louder to rouse and awake those stupid
Souls that are deaf to and regardless of the soft and still voice of natural
Rewards and Punishments. Thus when the old World by not attending to the
natural Consequents of their own Actions had almost extinguished their Sense of
Good and Evil, God by a supernatural Deluge in which he drowned the wicked and
preserved the righteous, consigned to all future Generations a standing
Monument of his Hatred of Sin and Love of Righteousness; that so by the
Remembrance of it he might keep Men's heedless Minds more attentive to the
natural Rewards and Punishments of their Actions. And when the Remembrance of
this was almost worn out, and with it men's natural Sense of good and evil, God
by raining down Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorra, and rescuing the
Righteous Lot from that dire Conflagration, alarmed the World with a new
Declaration of the wide Distinction he makes between Virtue and Vice. And
lastly, when the Virtue of these great Examples was almost spent, God raised up
the People of Israel, and by the miraculous Blessings he bestowed on them when
they did well, and the stupendous Judgments he inflicted when they did
wickedly, exposed them to all the Nations round about for a standing
Demonstration of the vast Difference he makes between Good and Evil. For so the
Psalmist tells us, Psalm 98. verse 2. compared with Psalm 102. verse 15. The
Lord has made known his Salvation, his Righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the Heathen; that the Heathen might fear the Name of the Lord, and
all the Kings of the Earth his Glory. Thus by frequent Examples of supernatural
Rewards and Punishments God has been always instructing the degenerate World
in the essential Differences between Good and Evil.

VI. AND lastly, To enforce all this God has made sundry supernatural
Revelations, wherein he has plainly instructed us what Actions are good and
what evil. That he has made sundry Revelations to the World is evident in
Fact, because there are sundry Revelations extant, which by those many
miraculous Effects of the Divine Power that attended the Ministration of them,
have been sufficiently demonstrated to be of a divine Original. And such are
those contained in the five Books of Moses, and the Prophets, which have been
all most amply confirmed, both by the Miracles which were wrought by their
inspired Authors, and the exact Accomplishment of the several Predictions
contained in them. And such is also the last and best Revelation contained in
the New Testament; which both by the Types and Predictions of the Law and
Prophets, and the infinite Miracles wrought by Jesus and his Followers,
together with its own inherent Wisdom and Goodness, has been so effectually
proved a divine Revelation, that nothing but Ignorance or inveterate Prejudice
can cause any man to disbelieve or suspect it.

NOW if you consult these several Revelations, you will find that the main
Drift and Design of them is to detect and expose what is morally evil, and
explain and recommend to us what is morally good. For thus the several
Revelations made to Abraham and his Children, were only so many Repetitions of
that Covenant of Righteousness which God had struck with them, to encourage
them to persevere in Well-doing. Thus the Law of Moses consisted partly of
Ceremonial Rites, which were either intended for Divine Hieroglyphics to
instruct that dull and stupid People in the Principles of inward Purity and
Goodness, or else for Types and Figures of the holy Mysteries of the Gospel:
and partly of Precepts of Morality, together with some few of Policy, suited to
the Genius of that People; and partly of such Promises and Threats as were
judged most apt to oblige them to the Practice of Piety. And as for the
Prophets, the substance of their Revelations was either Reprehensions of Sin
together with severe Denunciations against it; or Invitations to Virtue and
Piety together with gracious Promises to encourage them to practice it; or
Predictions of the Messiah and of that everlasting Righteousness which was to
be introduced by him. And then as for the Gospel, all the Duty of it consists
either in Instances, or Means and Instruments of Moral Goodness; and all the
Doctrins of it are nothing but powerful Arguments to oblige us to the Practice
of those Duties. Thus the great Intendment of all Gods Revelations is to
explain and enforce the Duties of Morality; to discover the Nature, and lead us
on to the Practice of them by the most powerful Obligations. And in this most
perfect Map of the Road to Happiness, all the Tracts of Piety and Virtue are so
plainly described and delineated to us, that no man can possibly miss his Way,
that sincerely inquires after it. For tho in matters of Opinion men may be
innocently mislead and deceived, yet there is no Article either of Doctine or
Duty upon which our Happiness necessarily depends, wherein it is possible for
an honest and diligent Mind to be mistaken. And thus you see by how many
excellent Ways God has discovered to us which of our Actions are good and
which evil. So that if after all this we proceed in any sinful and immoral
Courses, we are utterly inexcusable. For if after God has thus plainly made
known his Will to us, we still persist to contradict it in our Practice, we do
thereby in effect declare that we regard not the Almighty, and that we will do
what we list, let him will what he pleases. And what an unpardonable Insolence
is it for us who depend upon his Breath, and hang upon his Providence every
moment, to treat him as if he had nothing to do with us, and were the merest
Cipher and most insignificant* Being in the World? For though it is true he has
not made so full a Discovery of his Will to some as to others, yet he has so
sufficiently discovered it to all, that none can pretend to the Excuse either
of invincible or unaffected Ignorance. For as for the Heathen, though they have
no Revelation of Gods Will without them, yet they have the Bible of Conscience
within them, and the large and legible Bible of Nature that lies continually
open before them, in which they may easily read the principal Differences
between Good and Evil, and all the great Principles of Morality. And if
notwithstanding this they will be so regardless of God as not to attend to and
comply with those natural Discoveries of his Will, what Pretense can be made
for them why they should not perish for ever in their Obstinacy? For as the
Apostle tells us, though they had not the Law, that is, the revealed Law, yet
they did, or at least might have done, by nature the things contained in the
Law; and therefore as many of them, says he, as sinned without this revealed
Law, shall perish without the Law, that is, by the Sentence of the Law of
Nature, Romans 2.12, 14. And then as for the Jews, besides those natural
Indications of Gods Will which they had in common with the Heathen, they had
sundry supernatural ones; they had sundry great and notorious Examples of Gods
rewarding good men, and punishing bad; and besides they had the Law of Moses,
the Moral part of which was but a new Edition of the Law of Nature; as for the
Ceremonial Part of it, it was though an obscure, yet an intelligible
Representation of all those sublime Motives to Piety and Virtue, which the
Gospel more plainly proposes. So that would the Jews but have heedfully
attended either to the spiritual Sense of their Law, or to the Sermons of their
Prophets which very much cleared and explained it, they could not have been
ignorant either of any material Part of their Duty, or of any considerable
Motive by which it is pressed and enforced. And if notwithstanding, they would
be so regardless of God, as to take no notice of his Judgments and Mercies; so
rude to his Authority as not to mind either his Law within or his Law without
them, upon what reasonable Pretense can they excuse themselves? But then as for
us Christians we have not only all those natural Discoveries of our Duty which
the Heathen had, and all those Supernatural ones which the Jews had, but a
great deal more. For in our Revelation the Laws and Motives of Virtue are set
before us in a much clearer Light, and are neither wrapped up in Mystical Senses,
nor overcast with typical Representations, but laid before us in the most plain
and easy Propositions. For that which was the Mystical Sense of the Jewish
Law, is the literal Sense of the Christian; in which all those Precepts and
Promises and Threats which were delivered to the Jews in dark Riddles, obscure
and typical Adumbrations, are brought forth to us from behind the Curtain, and
proposed in plain and popular Articles. So that if we still continue in our
sinful Courses, we are of all men the most inexcusable. The Heathen may plead
against the Jews, that their Law of Nature was not so clear in its Precepts,
nor yet so cogent in its Motives as the Law of Moses; the Jews may plead
against us Christians, that their Law of Moses was neither so express in its
Precepts, nor yet so intelligible in its best and most powerful Motives as our
Gospel; but as for us Christians, we have nothing to plead, but by our own
Obstinacy against the clearest Discoveries of our Duty do stand condemned to
everlasting Silence. So that when it shall appear at the dread Tribunal of God,
that we have persisted in our wickedness notwithstanding all these Advantages,
we must expect to be reproached by all the Reasonable World, to be exploded and
hissed at, not only by Saints and Angels, but by the Jews and the Gentiles, and
the Devils themselves, who will all conspire with our own Consciences to second
our woeful Doom with the Loud Acclamation of Just and Righteous art thou O Lord
in all thy Ways. Wherefore as we would not perish for ever without Pity and
Excuse, let us make have to forsake all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to
live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present World.

SECT. III. That those Actions which carry with them this perpetual Obligation
are the main and principal Parts of Religion.
THE truth of which is most evident from the abovenamed Text, Mic. 6.8. and
what does the Lord require of thee but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? Which Interrogation tho it implies not an absolute
Negation, viz. that the Lord required nothing else of them (for under the Law
he required Sacrifices and sundry other positive Duties, as under the Gospel he
requires Sacraments and Reading and Hearing his holy Word, etc. which are
positive Duties as well as those legal Institutions of Moses;) yet it plainly
implies a comparative Negation, viz. that the Lord requires nothing else so
principally and affectionately, so for the sake of the things themselves and
upon the account of their own inherent Beauty and Goodness, as he does these
Moral Duties here specified. He did indeed require the Jews to offer Sacrifice
to him and to perform those other Ceremonial Rites specified in the Law of
Moses; and for them wilfully to have neglected those Duties would have been
such an avowed Defiance to his Authority as would have rendered them justly
obnoxious to all the Judgments threatened in their Law; but yet he did much more
earnestly require them to be just and merciful and humble, and manifested
himself to be far better pleased with one Act of Moral Goodness than with a
thousand Sacrifices. And thus he requires of us Christians that we should
communicate with him and with one another in our Evangelical Sacraments, and
dutifully conform to all those sacred Institutions and Solemnities of Religion
which are contained in the Gospel; and if we wilfully neglect them we justly
incur all that everlasting Vengeance which is there denounced; but yet our
sincere compliance with the immutable Obligations of Piety and Virtue, is a
thousandfold more acceptable to God than our strictest Observation of these his
positive Institutions. So that the Question in the Text what does the Lord
require of thee plainly implies this Proposition, that tho God does exact of us
certain Duties which are not moral, i. e. have no intrinsic necessity in them,
yet it is the Moral Duties, such as Justice and Mercy and Humility which he
principally requires at our hand. Thus concerning Sacrifice, God plainly tells
us, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, i. e. I will have Mercy rather than
Sacrifice, Hos. 6.6. And the Wise man assures us that to do Justice is more
acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice, Prove. 21.3. And to the same purpose our
Savior himself pronounces, even before that Ceremonial Worship was Abolished,
that to love the Lord with all our heart, with all our understanding, with all
our Soul, and with all our strength, and to love our neighbor as our selves is
more than all burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices, Mark 12.33. But for the clearer
Demonstration of this great and necessary Truth, I shall endeavor, First, to
prove the Truth of it by some Scripture Arguments, Secondly, to assign the
Reasons of it. As for the Proof of it, the following Particulars will be
abundantly sufficient,

First, THAT the Scripture plainly declares that the great Design of all the
Doctrinals of Religion has always been to move and persuade men to the
practice of Moral Goodness.

Secondly, THAT the main Drift and Scope of all the positive Duties of Religion
has been always to improve and perfect men in Moral Goodness.

Thirdly, THAT God expresses in Scripture a great Contempt of all the positive
Duties of Religion when ever they are separated from Moral Goodness.

Fourthly, THAT where ever we find the Whole of Religion summed up in a few
Particulars, they are always such as are Instances of Moral Goodness.

Fifthly, THAT wherever such Persons as have been most dear and acceptable to
God are described in Scripture, their Character always consists of some
Instances or other of Moral Goodness.

Sixthly, THAT the Scripture plainly declares that at the great Account between
God and our Souls, the main Inquisition will be concerning our Moral Good or
Evil.

I. THE Scripture expressly declares that the great Design of the Doctrins of
Religion is to move and persuade men to Moral Goodness. For so the Apostle
speaking of the Grace of God, i. e. the Gospel, assures us that its great
Design is to teach men to deny all ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present World. Tit. 2.12. And if we
consider the Doctrines in Particular, we shall find that they all conspire in
this great Design. For so the Doctrine of eternal life is proposed by God to
persuade us to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and
to perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2. Cor. 7.1. So also the Doctrine of
our future Punishment is levelled against all unrighteousness and ungodliness
of men, Romans 1.18. And as for those Doctrines which concern the Transactions of
our Savior, they are all proposed to us as Arguments to persuade us to Piety
and Virtue. For 'twas for this cause that Christ was manifested, to destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. 'twas for this purpose that he bore our sins in
his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin should live to
Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. 'twas for this end that he rose from the dead, that
thereby he might prevail with us to walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4. and it is
for this end that he intercedes for us at the right hand of God, that thereby
he might encourage us to come to God by him, Heb. 7.2. and in a word, for this
cause he has told us he will come to Judgment, to reward every man according
to his works, that thereby he might stir us up to Sobriety and Vigilance and to
all holy conversation and Godliness, Mat. 24.42. compared with 2 Pet. 3. verse
11. Thus you see all the Doctrines of Religion are only so many Topics of
divine Persuasion, whereby God addresses himself to our Hope and Fear and every
other Affection in us that is capable of Persuasion, to excite us to comply
with the eternal Obligations of Morality; and there is no one Article in all
our Religion, that is matter of mere Speculation, or that entertains our Minds
with dry and empty Notions that have no Influence on our Wills and Affections.
For since the Design of Religion in General, is to bind and fasten our Souls to
God, we may be sure that there is no Part of it but what does in some measure
contribute hereunto. Since therefore it is moral Goodness that God chiefly
recommends to us by the Persuasions of Religion, we may be sure that what his
Arguments do chiefly persuade us to, that his Commands do chiefly oblige us to.

II. FROM Scripture it is also evident that the main Drift and Scope of all the
positive Duties of Religion is to improve and perfect men in moral Goodness. We
find the Jewish Religion exceedingly abounded with positive Precepts; for such
were all those sacred Rites and Solemnities of which the Bark and Outside of
that Religion consisted; of all which it is true what the Psalmist says of
Sacrifices in particular, thou desire not Sacrifices, thou delightest not in
burnt Offerings, Psalm. 51.16. that is, thou take no delight in them upon the
score of any internal Goodness that is in them, but desire them merely as
they are instituted means and Instruments of Moral Goodness. For so many of the
Rites of the Mosaic Law were instituted in opposition to the Magical, Unclean
and Idolatrous Rites of the Eastern Heathen. As particularly, that Prohibition
of sowing their Fields with mingled Seed, Lev. 19.19. in Opposition to that
Magical Rite which the Heathens used as a Charm for Fructification. So also
that Command of sprinkling the Blood of their Sacrifices upon the Ground like
Water and covering it with Dust, in Opposition to that Idolatrous Rite of
gathering the Blood into a Trench or Vessel, and then sitting round it in a
Circle, whilst they imagined their gods to be licking it up. And to name no
more of this kind, the Prohibition of seething a Kid in his Mothers Milk, Exodus
23.19. was in Opposition to a Custom of the Ancient Heathen, who at the
Ingathering of their Fruits were wont to take a Kid and sees it in the milk of
its Dam, and then in a Magical Procession to sprinkle all their Trees and
Fields and Gardens with it, thereby to render them more fruitful the following
Year. Besides all which you may find a World of other Instances in Maimonides
More-Nevoch. lib. 3. who tells us, that the Knowledge of the Opinions and
Customs of these Eastern Heathens was porta magna ad reddendas praeceptorum
causas, the great Rationale of the Mosaic Precepts; and that multarum legum
rations and causae mihi innotuerint ex cognitione fidei, rituum and Cultus
Zabiorum; i. e. that by being acquainted with the opinions and customs of those
Eastern Heathens he understood the grounds and reasons of many of the Laws of
Moses, More-Nevoch. lib. 3. cap. 29. So that tho these Precepts were not Moral,
yet were they set up as so many Fences by God, to keep his People from
straggling into those Heathen Immoralities.

AGAIN, there are other Rites of their Religion, which were instituted to
shadow out the Holy Mysteries of the Gospel; the great Design of which
Mysteries was to invite and persuade men to comply with the eternal Laws of
Morality. Thus their Laws of Sacrifice were instituted to represent to them the
great Transactions of their future Messiah; his Incarnation and immaculate
Life, his Death and Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession at the right hand
of God. So also their Festival Laws, and particularly their Laws of Jubilee,
were made to shadow out the Doctrines of our Redemption and eternal Life; and
their pouring out Water in their Sacrifices, and their Ritual Purgations from
uncleanness, were intended for obscure Intimations of the Effusion of the holy
Spirit, and the Doctrine of Remission of Sins; all which Doctrines carry with
them the most pregnant Invitations to Piety and Virtue.

Lastly. THERE are other Rites of that Law which were appointed to instruct
them in Moral Duties. For God finding them not only a perverse but a dull and
sottish People, as those generally are that have been born and bred in Slavery,
apprehended that the most effectual way to instruct them would be by Signs and
material Representations, even as Parents do their Children by Pictures. And
accordingly in Isaiah 28.10. he tells us that he gave them line upon line, and
precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, with a stammering
tongue; i. e. he looked upon them as Children, and so condescended to their
Weakness, and spoke to them in their own Dialect. And this way of instructing
them by outward and visible Signs, being much in use in the Eastern Countries,
and more especially in Egypt, whose manners they were infinitely fond of, was
of all others the most probable and taking. And accordingly a great part of the
Jewish Rites consisted of Hieroglyphics, or visible Signs, by which their minds
were instructed in the Precepts of Morality. Thus by Circumcision God signified
to them the necessity of mortifying their unchaste Desires; by their Legal
Washings he intimated to them their Obligation to cleanse themselves from all
Impurities of Flesh and Spirit; yea this, as St. Barnabas in his Epistle tells
us, was the Intent of all that Difference of Meats in the Jewish Law, which
pronounced Swines flesh unclean, to instruct them not to live like Hogs, that
wallow in the Mire while they are full, and whine and clamor when they are
empty; which forbid them to feed on Eagles and other Birds of Prey, to instruct
them to live by honest Industry, and not by Rapine; which prohibits Fish
without Scales, that generally live in the Mud, to teach the evil of Sensuality
and earthly-mindedness, etc. From all which it is evident that Moral Goodness
was the constant Mark at which all the positive Precepts of their Law were
levelled.

AND then as for the Christian Religion, all the positive Precepts it contains
are directed to the same End. It requires us to believe in Jesus Christ, and in
his Mediation to draw near unto God; the Design of which Faith it expressly
tells us is to Sanctify our natures, Acts 26.18. and to purify our hearts,
Acts 15.9. It enjoins us to be Baptized into the name of Jesus; and for what
purpose? but to oblige us thereby to die to sin and to walk in newness of life,
Romans 6.4. It requires us to commemorate our Savior's Passion in a Sacramental
Communion of his Body and Blood; and to what End? but only to excite us to Love
and Thankfulness to God, and Charity toward one another, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. In a
word, it requires us to live in Unity with the Church, and not to separate our
selves from her sacred Assemblies; and for what other reason? but that we might
become an holy Temple, and an habitation of God, by being compacted together
into an uniform and regular Society, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. Since therefore all the
Precepts both of the Old and New Testament which are purely positive, do bear a
Respect to Moral Goodness, and were imposed by God in subserviency thereunto,
it is evident that that is the principal Mark which he designs and aims at.

III. ANOTHER Evidence from Scripture that Moral Goodness is the principal
Matter of our Duty, is the great Contempt which God expresses of the positive
Duties of Religion when ever they are separated from moral Goodness. For thus
concerning the Positives of the Jewish Religion, we are told that the Sacrifice
of the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord. Prove. 15.8. And concerning the
Whole of their positive Religion, the Prophet thus pronounces in the Name of
God, to what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices to me says the Lord?
I am full of the burnt-Offerings of Rams, and of the fat of fed Beasts, i. e,
so full as that I loath them; and I delight not in the Blood of Bullocks, or of
Lambs, or of He-Goats. When ye come to appear before me, who has required
these things at your hands, to tread my Courts? bring no more vain Oblations,
Incense is Abomination to me; the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of
Ass^emblies I cannot away with; it is Iniquity, even the Solemn meetings. Your
new Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I
am weary to bear them. And when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine
eyes, yea, when ye make many Prayers I will not hear. And what I beseech you is
the reason that God should thus dislike his own Institutions? why he plainly
tells you, your hands are full of blood, your Cruelty and Oppression does
profane your Worship, and turn it all into Impiety, Isai. 1.11. to the 16th.
For so Isai. 66.3. he plainly tells them, he that kills an Ox, is as if he
slew a Man; he that Sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck; he that
offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood; he that burns Incense,
as if he blessed an Idol; and why so? why they have chosen their own ways, i.
e. of Impiety and Wickedness, and their Soul delights in their Abominations.
Nor does God express a less Contempt of the Positives of Christianity, when
separated from Moral Goodness. For thus St. James tells us even of our Faith or
Belief in Jesus, that without Works it is dead; that is a senseless, squalid
thing that has neither Life nor Beauty in it, James 2.17. And S. Peter
compares Baptism to the washing of a Swine when it is separated from Purity of
Life and Manners, 2 Pet. 2.22. And our receiving the Lords Supper without
Charity and Devotion is by St. Paul styled coming together to Condemnation, 1
Cor. 11.34. All which is a plain Demonstration that moral Goodness is the
principal matter that God insists on; since 'twas this that sanctified the
Sacrifices of the Jews, and crowned all their Ceremonial Observances with the
divine Acceptance, and without this all their other Services were noisome and
offensive to him; and it is this that perfumes our Faith and our Sacraments,
our Prayers and Religious Assemblies, and renders them a grateful and sweet
smelling savor in the Nostrils of God, and without this they are all a hateful
stench and Annoyance to him. Doubtless therefore the principal Matter of Duty
which God requires of us, is that which he esteems the Grace and Fragrancy of
all our other Duties.

IV. ANOTHER Evidence from Scripture that moral Goodness is the principal
matter that God requires of us, is, that where ever we find the Whole of
Religion summed up in a few Particulars, they are always such as are Parts and
Instances of moral Goodness. Thus in the above cited Mic. 6. what does the Lord
require of thee? but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God. Thus also the Prophet Isaiah giving an account to his People what they
were to do in order to their Reconciliation with God, thus directs them, wash
ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes,
cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge
the Fatherless, plead for the Widow; come now, and let us reason together says
the Lord, Isai, 1.16.17, 18. So also our blessed Savior sums up the Whole Duty
of Man into two Particulars, and what are they? why thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; this is
the first and great Commandment. And the second is like unto it, thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self; on these two Commandments hang the Law and the
Prophets, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. Thus St. James, True Religion and undefiled
before God and the Father is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the Word, James 1.27. And
elsewhere the Apostle sums up the whole Law into one leading Head of Morality,
and that is Love, for love, says he, is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10.
So this Observation generally holds true, that in all those Summaries of Duty
mentioned in the holy Scripture, only such Duties are taken Notice of as are
Parts and Instances of Morality. Which is a plain Demonstration that it is this
which God principally requires, since it is this which he most takes notice of;
and it may be reasonably supposed that in those Summaries of our Duty wherein
but a few Parts are enumerated, they are such as are the Chief and principal;
it being contrary to all Rules of Language to express the Whole of any thing,
by the meanest and most inconsiderable Parts of it.

V. ANOTHER Evidence from Scripture that Moral Goodness is the principal Matter
of Duty that God requires of us, is, that wheresoever such Persons as have been
most dear and acceptable to God are described, their Character is always made
up of Instances of Morality. Thus the Description of Job is, that he was a man
perfect and upright and one that feared God and eschewed evil, Job 1.1. And in
the 15th. Psalm the Description which David gives of the man who should abide
in the Tabernacle of the Lord, is this, that he walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart; that he backbiteth not with
his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against
his Neighbor, etc. he that does these things, says he, shall never be moved.
And the greatest Character that is given of Moses the Darling and Favorite of
God, is, that he was very meek above all the men that were upon the face of the
Earth, Numb. 12.3. Thus also the Character of Cornelius by which he was so
indeared to God, is, that he was a just and devout man, one that feared God
with all his house, who gave much Alms to the people and prayed to God always,
Acts 10.2. And in a word, the general Character of those whom God accepts, is,
in every Nation he who does righteousness is accepted of God, Acts 10.35. Thus
moral Goodness is the great Stamp and Impress that renders men current in the
Esteem of God; whereas on the contrary, the common Brand by which Hypocrites
and false Pretenders to Religion are stigmatized, is their being zealous for
the Positives, and cold and indifferent as to the Morals of Religion. For so
our Savior Characters the Pharisees; woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for ye pay tyth of Mint, Annis, and Cummin* which yet was a
positive Duty, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment,
Mercy, and Faithfulness; these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the
other undone. Ye blind Guides, ye strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel, Math.
23.23.24. plainly implying the Morals of Religion to be as much greater than
the Positives in weight and moment, as a Camel is than a Gnat in bulk. Since
therefore Moral Goodness is always mentioned as the great Character of Gods
Favorites, and the Neglect of it out of a pretended zeal to the positive
Duties of Religion is always recorded as a Mark of the most odious Hypocrites;
this is a sufficient Argument how high a Value God sets upon the Moralities of
Religion.

VI. and Lastly, ANOTHER Evidence from Scripture that moral Goodness is the
principal Part of Religion, is, that at the great Account between God and us,
his main Inquisition will be concerning such Actions as are morally good or
evil, For so Romans 2.6. we are told that God will render to every man according
to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for honor
and glory and immortality, eternal life. But to them who are contentious, and
do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, tribulation and wrath,
indignation and anguish. And accordingly Enoch as he is quoted by St. Jude
verses 14.15. declares this to be the Occasion of the Lords coming with
thousands of his Saints, viz. to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him; all which are matters of Fact against the eternal Rules of
Morality. And our Savior himself in that Popular Scheme and Description he
gives of the Proceedings of the Day of Judgment, plainly declares that one of
the principal Matters, he will then inquire into, will be our Neglect or
Observance of that great moral Duty of Charity toward the poor and needy, Mat.
25.32, 46. Which is a plain Evidence that our obeying or disobeying the eternal
Laws of Morality, is that by which we do most please or displease God; since
it is upon this that he will most insist in his final Arbitration of our eternal
Fate. For since his last Judgment is only the final Execution of his Laws, we
may be sure that whatsoever it is that he will principally insist on in his
Judgment, that is the principal matter of his Laws. And now having sufficiently
proved the Truth of the Proposition, I proceed to the Reasons of it; upon what
Accounts it is that God has made moral Goodness the main and principal Part of
our Religion. The chief Reasons of which are these four.

First, BECAUSE it is by moral Goodness that we do most honor him.

Secondly, BECAUSE it is by this that we do most imitate him.

Thirdly, BECAUSE it is by this that we advance to our own Happiness.

Fourthly, WHEN all our positive Duty is ceast, this is to be the eternal Work
and Business of our Nature.

I. GOD has made moral Goodness the principal Part of our Religion, because
it is by this that we do him the greatest Honor. It is an excellent saying of
Hierocles (...), i. e. the best honor we can do to a self*sufficient being is
to receive the good things he holds forth unto us; and therefore it is not by
giving to God that you honor him, but by rendering your selves worthy to
receive of him; for, says he, (...), i. e. whosoever gives honor to God as to
one that wants, does not consider that he thereby sets himself above God. For
by his own self-sufficiency he is infinitely removed above all Capacity of
Want, and so can never need any additional Contributions of Glory and Happiness
from his Creatures. For Glory being nothing else but the Resplendency of
Perfection, which always reflects its own Beams upon it self, where ever there
is infinite perfection (as to be sure there is in the Nature of God) there must
an infinite Glory proceed from it; and therefore being infinitely glorious in
himself, it is impossible that any thing we do should add any further Glory to
him. So that if we would truly honor and glorify him, it must not be by giving
to, but by receiving from him. Now the best thing we can receive from God, is
Himself; and Himself we do receive in our strict compliance with the eternal
Laws of Goodness. Which Laws being transcribed from the Nature of God, from his
own eternal Righteousness and Goodness, we do by obeying them, derive Gods
Nature into ours. So that while we write after the Copy of his Laws, we write
out the Perfections of his Being; and his Laws being the Seal upon which he
has engraven his Nature, we do in obeying them take Impression from him and
stamp his blessed Nature on our own. For all those virtuous Dispositions of
mind which we acquire by the Practice of Virtue, are so many genuine Signatures
of God, taken from the Seal of his Law, and Participations of his Nature. For
so Holiness which consists in a Conformity of Soul with the eternal Laws of
Goodness, is in Scripture called the Signature or impression of the Spirit of
God, whereby we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. and such as
do righteousness, are said to be born of God, 1 John 2.29. which implies their
deriving from him who is their divine Parent, a divine and Godlike Nature, even
as Children do their humane Nature from their humane Parents. So that by the
Practice of moral Goodness we receive from God the best thing he can bestow,
viz. a divine and Godlike Nature; and consequently by so doing, we render him
the highest Honor and Glory. For since we can no otherwise honor him but by
receiving from him, we doubtless do him the greatest honor when we receive
Himself, by partaking of the Perfections of his Nature, which are the greatest
Gift he can communicate to us. Herein, says our Savior, is my Father
Glorified, that ye bear much fruit, John 15.8. (...), says the aforenamed
Philosopher, i. e. he only knows how to honor God who presenrs himself a
Sacrifice to him, carves his own Soul into a divine Image, and composes his
Mind into a Temple for the Entertainment of God, and the Reception of the
divine Light and Glory. It Is then therefore that we best honor God, when by
the Practice of true Godliness we conform our Wills and Affections to him; and
derive into our selves his Nature and Perfections; and should you erect to him
a Temple more magnificent than Solomon's, and load its Altars with Hecatombs of
Sacrifices, and make it perpetually ring with Psalms and resounding Choirs of
Halelujahs, it would not be comparably so great an Honor to him, as to convert
your own Souls into living Temples, and make them the Habitations of his Glory
and Perfections. For he values no Sacrifice like that of an obedient Will,
delights in no Choir like that of pure and heavenly Affections, nor has he in
all his Creation an Ensign of Honor so truly worthy of him, as that of a
divine and God-like Soul; a Soul that reflects his Image, and shines back his
own Glory upon him. Wherefore since it is by the Practice of moral Goodness that
we receive God, and copy his Nature into our own, it is no wonder he should
make it the principal Part of our Duty. For how can it be otherwise expected
but that he should exact that chiefly of us, which most conduces to his own
glory. Since then nothing we can do can conduce to his Glory but only our
receiving Benefits from him, and since no Benefit we receive from him can so
much conduce to it as our receiving Himself, and since we can no otherwise
receive himself but by practicing that Goodness which is the Perfection of his
Nature, we must hereby doubtless render him the greatest Honor and Glory.

II. GOD has made moral Goodness the principal Part of our Duty, because it is
by this that we do most truly imitate him. For so you find in Scripture, that
wherever God is proposed to us for a Pattern of Action it is by some Act or
other of Morality that we are required to transcribe and imitate him. So 1 Pet.
1.16. be ye holy, for I am holy; and Luke 6.36. be ye merciful as your Father
is merciful; and Mat. 5.48. be you perfect as your Father in Heaven is perfect.
And indeed it is only in Moral Goodness that God can be the Pattern of our
Imitation; as for those Perfections of his which for Distinction-sake we call
natural, viz. his Omniscience, and Omnipresence, Omnipotence and Eternity, they
are all beyond the Sphere of our Imitation, and therefore were never proposed
to us as the Copies of our Action. But as for his moral Perfections, viz. his
Goodness, and Righteousness, and Purity, and Mercy, they are the Fundamental
Rules and Standards of all moral Action. For the Nature of God, as it is
infinitely good and righteous, is the eternal Fountain whence all the Laws of
Morality are derived; and all those moral Precepts by which he governs his
rational Creation, are only so many Exemplifications of the moral Perfections
of his own Nature. For the Holiness of God, which comprehends all his moral
Perfections, consists in that essential Rectitude of Nature, whereby he always
chooses and acts conformably to the Dictates of his own infallible Reason; and
it is to this Rectitude of choosing and acting that all his moral Laws do oblige
us. For moral Laws are only the Dictates of right Reason, prescribing us what
to do and what to avoid; so that in our Compliance with them, we follow the
Rule of Gods own Will and Actions, and thereby imitate the eternal Rectitude of
his Nature. For tho in those different States and Relations of God and
Creature, right Reason cannot be supposed to oblige him and us to all the same
particular Choices and Actions, yet it obliges us both to act reasonably in our
respective States and Relations; it obliges God to act reasonably and as it
becomes the State and Relation of a God and Creator; and it obliges us to act
reasonably and as it becomes the State and Relation of men and Creatures. And
as for God, He is invariably inclined to do all that right Reason obliges him
to, by the essential Rectitude of his own Nature; and herein consists all his
moral Perfection, which is nothing else but the immutable Inclination of his
Nature to do whatever is just and good and reasonable. So that while we live
according to the Dictates of Reason, or, which is the same thing, the eternal
Laws of Morality, we trace and imitate the moral Perfections of God; and in our
Place and Station, live at the same Rate and by the same Rule, that He does in
his. We do what God himself would do, if he were in our Place, and what the Son
of God did do when he was in our Nature; and there is no other Difference
between his Life and ours, but what necessarily arises out of our different
States and Relations. Since therefore Moral Goodness is an Imitation of God,
it is no wonder that he so much prefers it before all other matter of Duty. For
he must needs be supposed to love that above all things, which is the true
Copy and Image of those Perfections of his Nature, for the sake of which he
loves Himself above all. For he loves himself not merely because he is Himself,
but because he is in all respects morally Good, and his Will and Power are
perfectly compliant with the infallible Dictates of his own Reason; and hence
arises his infinite Complacency in himself, that there is nothing in him but
what his own Reason perfectly approves, no Inclination in his Will or Nature
but what is exactly agreeable to the fairest Ideas of his own Mind. And since
it is for his own Goodness-sake that he loves himself as he does, we may be
sure that there is nothing without him can be so dear to him, as that in us
which is the Image of his Goodness. Every like, we say, loves its like, and the
righteous Lord, says the Psalmist, loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. i. e.
being righteous himself, he loves Righteousness in others by an invincible
sympathy of Nature. His greatest Heaven and Delight is in his own most
righteous Nature, and next to that in righteous Souls that imitate and resemble
him. (...); God has not a more grateful Habitation upon Earth than in a pure
and virtuous Mind; (...) says Apollo that Mimick of God, by his Pythian
Oracle. i. e. I rejoice as much in pious Souls as in my own Heaven. Which is
much what the same with that gracious Declaration that God himself makes by the
Prophet Isaiah 57.15. thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth
eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also
that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Since therefore moral Duties are
all but so many Copies and Exemplifications of Gods Nature, this is a
sufficient Reason why he should prefer them before all the Positives of
Religion.

III. GOD principally requires moral Goodness, because it is by the Practice of
this that we advance to our own natural Happiness. For the natural Happiness of
reasonable Creatures, consists in being entirely governed by right Reason; i.
e. in having our Minds perfectly informed what it is that right Reason requires
of us, and our Wills and Affections reduced to an entire Conformity thereunto.
And this is the Perfection of moral Goodness, which consists in behaving our
selves toward God and our selves and all the World as right Reason advises, or
as it becomes rational Creatures placed in our Circumstances and Relations. And
when by practicing all that true Piety and Virtue which moral Goodness implies,
we are perfectly accomplished in our Behavior toward God, our selves, and all
the World, so as to render to each without any Reserve or Reluctance what is
fit and due in the Judgment of right Reason, we are arrived to the most happy
State that a reasonable Nature can aspire to. It Is true, in this Life we cannot
be perfectly happy; and that not only because we live in wretched Bodies that
are continually liable to Pain and Sickness, but also because we are imperfect
our selves, and have none to converse with but imperfect Creatures. But were we
once stripped of these natural and moral Imperfections, wheresoever we lived we
should necessarily be happy. Were I to live all alone, without this painful
Body, I should necessarily be in a great measure happy while I followed right
Reason, tho I lived in the darkest Nook of the Creation. For there I should
still contemplate God, and while I did so, my mind would be always ravished
with his Beauty and Perfections; there I should most ardently love him, and
while I did so, I should sympathise and share with him in his Happiness; there
I should still adore and praise him, and while I did so, I should feel my self
continually drawn up to him, and wrapped into a real Enjoyment of him; there I
should be imitating his Perfections* and while I did so, I should enjoy an
unspeakable Self-satisfaction, perceiving how every Moment I grew a more Divine
and Godlike Creature; there I should entirely resign up my self to his heavenly
Will and Disposal, and while I did so, I should be perpetually exulting under a
joyous Assurance of his Love and Favor; in a word, there I should firmly
depend upon his Truth and Goodness, and while I did so, I should be always
triumphing in a sure and certain Hope of a happy Being for ever. Thus were I
shut up all alone in an unbodied State, and had none but God to converse with,
by behaving my self toward him as right Reason directs me I should always,
enjoy him, and in that Enjoyment should be always Happy. And if while I thus
behaved my self toward God, I took care at the same time to demean my self
toward my self with that exact Prudence and Temperance and Fortitude and
Humility which right Reason requires, I should hereby create another Heaven
within me; a Heaven of calm Thoughts, quiet and uniform Desires, serene and
placid Affections, which would be so many everflowing Springs of Pleasure,
Tranquillity and Contentment within me. But if while I thus enjoyed God and my
self, by behaving my self as right Reason directs, I might be admitted to live
and converse among perfect Spirits, and to demean my self toward them with
that exact Charity and Justice and Peaceableness and Modesty which right Reason
requires, the Wit of man could not conceive a true Pleasure beyond what I
should now enjoy. For now I should be possessed of every thing my utmost Wishes
could propose; of a good God, a Godlike, joyful and contented Soul, a
peaceable, kind and righteous Neighborhood; and so all above, within, and
without me would be a pure and perfect Heaven. And indeed when I have thrown
off this Body, and am stripped into a naked Ghost, the only or at least the
greatest goods my Nature will be capable of enjoying, are God, my self, and
blessed Spirits; and these are no otherwise injoyable, but only by Acts of
Piety and Virtue, without which there is no good thing beyond the Grave that a
Soul can taste or relish. So that if, when I go to seek my Fortune in the World
of Spirits, God should thus bespeak me, O man, now thou art leaving all these
Enjoyments of Sense, consult with thy self what will do thee good, and thou
shall have whatsoever thou will ask to carry with thee into that spiritual
State; I am sure the utmost I should crave would be this, Lord give me a heart
inflamed with Love, and winged with Duty to thee, that thereby I may but enjoy
thee; give me a sober and a temperate mind, that thereby I may but enjoy my
self; give me a kind, a peaceable, and a righteous Temper, that thereby I may
but enjoy the sweet Society of blessed Spirits; O give me but these blessed
things, and thou have crowned all my wishes, and to Eternity I will never crave
any other Favor for my self but only this, that I may continue a pious and a
virtuous Soul for ever; for while I continue so, I am sure I shall enjoy all
spiritual Good, and be as happy as Heaven can make me. So that the main
Happiness you see of Humane Nature consists in the Perfection of moral
Goodness; and it being so, it is no wonder that the good God who above all
things desires the Happiness of his Creatures, should above all things exact of
us the Duties of Morality. He knows that our supreme Beatitude is founded in
our Piety and Virtue, and that out of our free and constant, sprightly and
vivacious Exercise of these arises all our Heaven both here and hereafter; and
knowing this, that tender Love which he bears us, that mighty Concern which he
has for our Welfare makes him thus urgent and importunate with us. For he
regards our Duty no farther than it tends to our Good, and values each Act of
our Obedience by what it contributes to our Happiness; and it is therefore that
he prefers moral Duties above positive, because they are more essential to our
eternal Welfare.

IV. and Lastly, GOD principally requires of us moral Goodness, because when
all positive Duty is ceast, this is to be the eternal Work and Exercise of our
Natures. For Moral Good is from everlasting to everlasting, its Birth was elder
than the World, and its Life and Duration runs parallel with Eternity; before
ever the Mountains were brought forth 'twas founded in the Nature of God, and
as an inseparable Beam of his all-comprehending Reason it shines from one end
of the World to the other. For as soon as ever there was a rational Creature in
being, the obligations of Morality laid hold on him, before ever any positive
Duty was imposed; and as long as ever there remains a rational Creature, the
Obligations of Morality will abide on him, when all positive Duty is expired.
For moral Obligations are not founded like positive ones upon mutable
Circumstances, but upon firm and everlasting Reasons; upon Reasons that to all
Eternity will carry with them the same force and necessity. For as long as we
are the Creatures of an infinitely perfect Creator, 'twill be as much our Duty
as it is now, to love and adore him; as long as we are reasonable Creatures,
'twill be as much our Duty as it is now, to submit our Will and Affections to
our Reason, and as long as we are related to other reasonable Creatures, 'twill
be as much our Duty as it is now, to be kind and just and peaceable in all our
Intercourses with them. So that these are such Duties as no Will can dispense
with, no Reasons abrogate* no Circumstances disanul or make void; but as long
as God is what he is, and we are what we are, they must and will oblige us. So
that what the Psalmist says of God, may be truly applied to moral Goodness,
the Heavens shall perish, but thou shall remain, they all shall wax old as does
a garment, and be folded up and Changed, but thou art the same yesterday* to
day, and for ever, and thy years shall have no end. But as long since the
positive Parts of the Jewish Religion were cancelled and repealed, the Vail of
the Temple rent in twain, the Temple it self buried in Ruins and all its Altars
thrown down and their Sacrifices abolished, whilst the moral Parts of that
Religion still stand firm as the everlasting Mountains about Jerusalem; so the
time will come whem the positive Parts of Christianity it self must cease, when
Faith must be swallowed up in Vis^on, and Sacraments be made void by
Perfection, and all the stated times and outward Solemnities of our Worship
expire into an everlasting Sabbath; but then when all this Scene of things is
quite vanished away, Piety and Virtue will still keep the Stage, and be the
everlasting Exercise of our glorified Natures. For as I showed before, all
positive Duty is instituted in subserviency to moral, and like a Scaffold to a
House is only erected for the Convenience of Building up this everlasting
Structure of Morality; and when this is once finished, must be all taken down
again as an unnecessary Encumbrance that now only hides and obscures the Beauty
of that Heavenly Building that was raised on it, and shall abide without it for
ever, to entertain our Faculties through all the future Ages of our Being, and
to be the everlasting Mansion of our Natures. Wherefore since positive Duties
must all cease and expire, and only moral Goodness is to be our Business for
ever, it is no wonder that God, who is so good a Master, takes so much Care in
ths short Apprentiship of our Life to train us up in that which is to be our
Trade for ever. He knows it is upon Piety and Virtue that we must live to
Eternity, and maintain our selves in all our Glory and Happiness; and that if
when we come into the invisible World we have not this blessed Trade to subsist
by, we are undone for ever; and therefore out of a tender Regard to our
Welfare, he makes it his principal Care to train us up in this everlasting
Business of our Natures.

WHAT then remains but that above all things we take care to apply our selves
to the Practice of moral Goodness: to contemplate and love and adore and
imitate God; to depend upon him and resign up our selves to his Disposal and
Government* to be sober and temperate in our Affections and Appetites, and just
and Charitable and modest and peaceable toward one another. These are the
great things which God requires at our hands, and without these all our
Religion is a fulsome Cheat. It Is true the positive Parts of Religion are our
Duty as well as these, and God by his Sovereign Authority exacts them at our
hands; and unless when Jesus Christ has been sufficiently proposed to us we do
sincerely believe in him, unless we strike Covenant with him by Baptism, and
frequently renew that Covenant in the Lords Supper; unless we diligently attend
on the Public Assemblies of his Worship, and use an honest Care to avoid
Schism and to persist in Unity with his true Catholic Church, there is no
Pretense of Morality will bear us out when we appear before his dread Tribunal.
But then we are to consider that the proper Use of all these positive Duties is
to improve and perfect us in moral Goodness; and unless we use them to this
Effect we shall render them altogether void and insignificant. Wherefore as we
would not lose all the Fruits of our positive Duties, let us take care to
extend them to their utmost Design, to improve our Sacrifice to Obedience, our
Sacraments to Gratitude and Love, our Hearing to Practice, our Praying to
Devotion, and our Fasting to Humility and Repentance. For if we rest in these
Duties and go no farther, thinking by such short Payments to Compound with God
for all those Debts we owe to the eternal Laws of Morality, we miserably cheat
and befool our own Souls, which notwithstanding all this Exactness about the
Positives of Religion are by their own immoral Affections still enslaved to the
Devil; to whom it is much one what our outward Form of Religion is, whether it
be Christian or Heathen or Mohammedan, provided it does not operate on our minds
or give any Check to the Current of our depraved Natures. For whether we bow to
God or to an Idol, is all one to the Devil, so long as our souls remain Profane
and indevout; whether we Communicate in the holy Sacrament of Christ's Death,
or in the impure Rights of Venus and Priapus, is indifferent to him so long as
our Hearts continue putrid and corrupt, steaming with unchaste Desires and
Affections; whether we Celebrate the Christian Festivals or the bloody
Saturnals or Barbarous Bacchanalia is no great matter to him, provided our
Minds be but cankered with Wrath and Malice and Cruelty and Revenge. These are
the Sinews of his Government, and the Bands of our Allegiance to his Throne; and
whilst they are preserved, he knows his Kingdom is safe, and so long he does
not much regard what our outward Religion is. Nay there is nothing can be a
higher Gratification to his Ambition, than to behold Himself served in Christ's
own Livery and Worshipped in a Form of Godliness; by which he has the Pleasure
of dividing Empires with God, and ravishing the better share from him; of
beholding his hated Creator mocked with the Shell and Outside of a Worshiper,
whilst himself is treated with the Kernol and Inside. For whilst we continue
wicked under an outward Form of Religion, we do in Effect Sacrifice our Beast
to God, and our selves to the Devil; who above all things loves those unnatural
Commixtures of Hearer and Slanderer, Worshiper and Deceiver, Communicant and
Drunkard, Sacrificer and Oppressor; by which we only exalt and sublimate
Impiety, which never looks so Glorious as when it is Gilded with Fasts and long
Prayers. Wherefore as you will answer it at your eternal Peril, do not Cheat
and abuse your selves with the Name and Shadow of Religion; lest when you have
superstructed your Hopes of Happiness on a rotten Foundation, it should finally
miscarry and sink underneath you into everlasting Wretchedness and Despair.

CHAP. II. Concerning Religion; What it is, and what things are Necessary for
the founding and securing its Obligations.
HAVING in the foregoing Chapter briefly discoursed concerning the Nature of
Moral Goodness, and shown that it is the principal Part of Religion, it will be
requisite in the next place to explain what Religion is, that so from thence we
may collect what things are necessary to the founding and securing its
Obligations, which will be the Subject of the ensuing Chapters.

RELIGION in the General respects God as the Object and Center of all its Acts
and Offices. For upon Supposition that there is such a Being as a God, and that
there are such Beings as reasonable Creatures, or capable Subjects of Religion,
it will necessarily follow that there must be some Religion or other to tie and
oblige these Creatures to that God. For by God we mean a Being that has all
possible Perfection in him, and is the supreme Cause and Fountain of all other
Being and Perfection; and such a Being we must needs acknowledge does not only
deserve the worthiest Acts of Religion that reasonable Creatures, who alone are
capable of understanding his Worth, can render to him, but has also an
unalienable Right to exact and require them; and that not only upon the Account
of his own essential Desert (for whatever he deserves he has a right to
demand) but also upon Account of the Right he has to reasonable Creatures, who
owe their Beings to him and all their Capacities of serving him, and so cannot
dispose of themselves without manifest Injury to him contrary to his Will and
Orders. By reasonable Creatures we mean Beings that are derived from God and
are endowed by him with a Capacity of understanding him and themselves; and
such Creatures must necessarily stand obliged to render him such Acts as are
suitable to and due Acknowledgments of the Perfections of his Nature and their
own Dependence upon him; and this Obligation is that which we call Religion.
Which word according to Lactantius lib. 4. Divin. Institut. c. 28. is derived a
religando, from binding or obliging us to God. So that true Religion in the
general is the Obligation of Reasonable Creatures to render such Acts of
Worship to God as are suitable to the Excellency of his Nature and their
Dependence upon him. Which Definition includes both the Doctrines and Dutuies
of Religion. For the Doctrines are the Reasons by which it obliges us to the
Duties; and as there is no Duty in Religion but what derives its Tie and
Obligation from some Doctrine contained in it, so there is no Doctrine in
Religion but what ties and obliges us to some Duty that is enjoined in it. When
therefore I call Religion an Obligation, I include in that term all those
Doctrines of it concerning God, his Nature, and his transactions with his
Creatures, which are the reasons by which we stand obliged to render all acts
of Worship to him. But for the better understanding of the nature of true
Religion, it is necessary we should distinguish it into natural and revealed.
By natural Religion I mean the Obligation which natural Reason lays upon us to
render to God all that Worship and Obedience which upon the consideration of
his Nature and our dependence upon him it discovers to be due to him. For God
having planted in us a rational Faculty, by the due exercise of which we are
naturally lead into the belief of his Being, the sense of his Perfections and
the acknowledgment of his Providence, he expects we should follow it as the
Guide and Directory of our lives and actions; and whatsoever this Faculty does
naturally and in its due exercise dictate to us, is as much the voice of God as
any revelation. For whatever it naturally dictates, it must dictate by his
direction who is the Author of its Nature, and who having framed it to speak
such a sense and pronounce such a judgment of things, has thereby put his word
into its mouth and does himself speak through it as through a standing Oracle
which he has erected in our breasts on purpose to convey and deliver his own
Mind and Will to us. So that whatsoever natural Reason rightly exercised
teaches us concerning God and our Duty toward him, is true Religion, and does
as effectually bind and oblige us to him as if it had been immediately revealed
by him. It teaches us that God is infinitely wise and just and powerful and
good; that he is the Fountain of our Beings, the disposer of our Affairs, and
the Arbitrator of our Fate both here and hereafter; and by these Doctrines it
obliges us to admire and adore him, to fear and love him, to trust and obey
him. And this is natural Religion, which consists of such Doctrines as natural
Reason teaches us concerning God and his Nature and Providence, and of such
Duties as it infers from those Doctrines and inforces by them; and all the
Doctrines of this Religion upon which it founds its Duties, being eternal
verities, as they must necessarily be being all deduced from the immutable
Natures of God and things, all the Duties of it must be morally, that is
eternally good and reasonable, because those Doctrines are the eternal Reasons
upon which they are founded and by which they oblige. So that whatsoever is a
Duty of natural Religion must oblige for ever, because it obliges by an eternal
Reason, and so can never be dispensed with or abrogated 'till the Natures of
things are cancelled and reversed, and eternal Truths are converted into Lies.

IN short therefore, natural Religion has only natural Reason for its rule and
measure; which from the Nature of God and things deduces all those eternal
Reasons by which it distinguishes our Actions into honest and dishonest,
decorous and filthy, good and evil, necessary and sinful. For it does not make
them good or evil by judging them so, but if it judges truly, it judges of
them as it finds them; and unless it finds them good or evil in themselves upon
some eternal Reason for or against them, its judgment is false and erroneous.
So that the objective goodness or evil that is in the actions themselves is the
measure of our Natural Reason, but our natural Reason judging truly concerning
them is the measure of our choice or refusal of them; for be our action never
so good or evil in it self, unless we have some eternal reason for or against
it, we cannot judge it so; and unless we judge it so, we cannot reasonable
choose or refuse it; but as soon as ever we have judged and pronounced it good
or evil upon an eternal reason, we stand obliged by that Judgment to do or
forbear it. So that right Reason pronouncing such actions good and such evil,
is the Law of Nature, and those eternal Reasons upon which it so pronounces
them are the Creed of Nature, both which together make natural Religion. And by
this Religion was the World Governed, at least the greatest part of it., for
some thousands of Years; till by long and sad Experience it was found too weak
to correct the errors of men's Minds, and restrain the wild extravagancies of
their Wills and Affections; and then God out of his great pity to lost and
degenerate Mankind, vouchsafed to us the glorious Light of revealed Religion,
which in the largest acceptance of it includes all natural Religion, as well
the credenda as agenda, the Doctrines as the Duties of it; both which are
contained in that Revelation of his Will which God has made to the World, to
which it has superadded sundry Doctrines and Duties of supernatural Religion.

BUT strictly speaking, revealed Religion as it is distinguished from natural,
consists of such Doctrines and Duties as are knowable and discoverable only by
Revelation; as are not to be deduced and inferred by reasoning and Discourse
from any necessary or natural Principles, but wholly depend upon the counsel
and good Will of God. And where things depend entirely upon Gods Will, and
their Being or not Being lies wholly in his free disposal, it is impossible
that our natural Reason should ever arrive at the knowledge of them without
some Revelation of his Will concerning them. For in such matters as these where
the Will of God is absolutely free, Reason without Revelation has neither
necessary nor probable Causes and Principles to argue from, and therefore can
make neither certain Conclusions nor so much as probable guesses concerning
them, but must necessarily remain altogether in the dark till such time as God
has revealed to it which way his Will is determined; and of such matters as
these consists all revealed Religion strictly so called. For tho God has made
sundry Revelations of his Will, yet the subject matter of them was for the Main
always the same, viz. the Doctrine of the Mediation of Jesus Christ, and the
Duties that are subsequent thereunto, which from that Promise which God made to
Adam upon his Fall, the seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, to the
last promulgation of the Gospel, has been the great Theme of all divine
Revelation. For what else was that Revelation which God made to Abraham, in thy
Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, but only the dawning of the
Gospel? which is nothing but glad tidings of the Mediator. What was the Law of
Moses but only the same Gospel shining through a Cloud of Types and symbolical
Representations; and what are all the succeeding Prophesies of the Old
Testament but only the same Gospel still shining clearer and clearer till at
last it broke forth in its Meridian brightness? And were this a proper place, I
think I could easily demonstrate that from Adam to Moses, from Moses to the
Prophets, from the Prophets to Jesus Christ, the main Scope and Design of all
Divine Revelation, has been the gradual Discovery of this great Mystery of the
Mediation. So that revealed Religion was for the matter of it always the same,
tho it was not always revealed with the same Perspicuity, but cleared up by
degrees from an obscure Twilight to a perfect Day. Wherefore Christianity which
in strictness is nothing but the Doctrine of the Mediation together with its
appendant Duties, ought not to be looked on as a new Religion of 1600. years
Date, for in reality it is as ancient as the Fall, and was then Preached to Adam
in that dark and Mysterious Promise; after which it was a little more clearly
repeated, tho very obscurely still, in God's Covenant with Abraham; and again,
after that it was much more amply revealed in the Types and Figures of the Law
of Moses, which yet like painted Glass in a Window did under their Pompous Show
still darken and obscure the holy Mysteries within them, which were nothing but
the Doctrines and Laws of the Christian Religion. So that Judaism was only
Christianity veiled, and Christianity is only Judaism revealed.

THUS The Religion of the Mediator, you see, was the principal Subject of all
divine Revelation; and this without Revelation natural Reason could never have
discovered, because the whole of it depended upon the free will of God. For
whether he would admit of any Mediator or no; whether he would admit his own
Son to be our Mediator or no; whether he would deposit such inestimable
Blessings for us or no in the hands of our Mediator, was entirely left to his
free Determination; and there was no necessary cause either within or without
him, no nor any probable one neither, that humane Reason could ever have
discovered, that could incline or determine him one way or the other. So that
till such time as he revealed his Will to us, we were left utterly in the dark
as to this matter, and had no manner of Principles to argue from, or so much as
to guess by. This therefore is strictly the revealed Religion as it stands in
opposition to the natural. But since together with revealed Religion God has
put forth a second Edition of natural, which was almost lost and grown out of
Print through the wretched Negligence and Stupidity of Mankind; and since he
has not only revealed them together but also incorporated them into one;
Religion as it is now framed and constituted by this happy Conjunction of
natural with revealed, may be thus defined, It is the Obligation of Rational
Creatures to render such acts of Worship to God through Jesus Christ as he
himself has instituted, and as are in their own Natures suitable to his
Excellencies and their dependence upon him. Where by acts of Worship I do not
mean such only as are immediately directed to and terminated upon God, as all
those are which are contained in the first Table of the Decalogue; but all
those acts in general which God has commanded, which being performed upon a
Religious account, that is, out of Homage and Obedience to Gods Will and
Authority, are as truly and properly acts of Worship to him as Prayer or Praise
or Adjuration.

AND now having given this short account of the nature of Religion, it will
from hence be easy to collect what Principles are necessary to the founding
and securing its Obligations; for

First, GOD being the great Object of all Religion, it must be absolutely
necessary in order to our being truly Religious that we believe that God is.

Secondly, RELIGION being an Obligation of us to God; that this Obligation may
take effect upon us, it is necessary we should believe that he concerns himself
about us, and consequently that he Governs the World by his Providence.

Thirdly, RELIGION obliging us to render all due acts of Worship to him, to
enforce this Obligation upon us, it is necessary we should believe that he will
certainly reward us if we render those acts to him, and as certainly punish us
if we do not.

Fourthly, THESE acts of Worship which Religion obliges us to, being such as
are suitable to the Excellency of Gods Nature, to enable us to fulfill this
Obligation it is necessary we should have right Apprehensions of the Nature of
God.

Fifthly, RELIGION obliging us to render all these Acts of Worship to God in
and through Jesus Christ, to our performing this it is necessary we should
believe in his Mediation.

THESE are the great Principles in which all the Obligations of Religion are
founded; and therefore in order to the through fixing those Obligations upon
men's Minds, it will be necessary before we proceed to the particular Duties
which Religion obliges us to, to discourse of these Principles distinctly.

CHAP. III. Of the necessity of believing that God is, in order to Men's being
truly Religious.
HE that comes unto God, says the Apostle, must believe that God is, Heb.
11.6. where by coming to God is meant worshipping him, that is, expressing our
Veneration of, and Affection to him, by outward and visible Signs and Actions;
and unless our outward Actions in Religion proceed from an inward Veneration
of, and Affection to him, they are not Worship but Mockery; but how is it
possible a man should inwardly venerate God, when he believes there is no such
Being in the World? For how real soever any thing may be in it self, if we
believe it is not, it is to us as if it were not; and therefore tho God does so
necessarily exist, as that he cannot but be, the very Notion of him implying an
infinite Distance from not being; yet while we believe he is not, our Thoughts
can be no more concerned about him, than about purchasing an Inheritance in
Vtopia. So that this Proposition that God is, is the prime Fundamental of all
Religion, and if this be removed, Religion must sink, and all its Sacred
Obligations fly in sunder. But this is so self-evident that it would be very
impertinent to insist upon the Proof of it. All that I shall do therefore in
pursuance of this Argument shall be to endeavor to establish the Belief of
this fundamental Truth upon which all Religion depends; and that First, by
inquiring into, and removing the Causes of men's Infidelity in this matter;
Secondly, by representing the Folly and Unreasonableness of it. For as for the
Proofs and Evidences of Gods Being, I shall reserve them till I come to
discourse of his Providence, where I think there is enough said to satisfy any
Man that is not desperately hardened against all Conviction.

SECT. I. Of the Causes of Atheism; showing the great Absurdity and
Unreasonableness of them.
CONSIDERING how loudly the Voice of Nature, the Consent of Nations, and the
beautiful Structure and Contrivance of things do proclaim the Being of God, one
would think it impossible there should be any such Monster as an Atheist among
reasonable Beings; and indeed it has been warmly disputed among the Learned
whether there be any such or no? A Question, which these later Ages have
determined in the Affirmative, by an Induction of too many woeful Instances. But
doubtless had men impartially attended to the Dictates of Reason, and not
delivered themselves up to the Infatuations of their Lusts, and the inveterate
Prejudice of a corrupt Imagination, it would have been impossible for so many
gross Absurdities as Atheism implies, to have entered into their minds; but when
once men's Wills and Affections have espoused a Proposition, they will make one
shift or other, be it never so absurd, to impose it on their Understandings;
and considering how many Causes there are leading men to Atheism who are
predisposed thereunto, I cannot think an Atheist to be so great a Wonder. For
so long as men's Understandings are led by their Wills, and their Wills are
biased with inclinations to Impiety, they can hardly forbear wishing there
were no God; and then from wishing there were none to believing there is none,
will be a very short and easy Transition. Since therefore their Atheism
proceeds not so much from the Defect of their Reason as from the fault of their
Wills, perhaps the most effectual way to cure it, is rather to detect and
remove those faulty Causes in their Wills, than to attempt upon their Reason
with the Proofs and Demonstrations of a Deity. And accordingly you see that
when God had once erected this goodly Theater of Beings, and imprinted on it so
many glorious Characters of his own Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, tho from
time to time he has wrought innumerable Miracles, to reduce men from
Superstition, Idolatry and Wickedness, yet he never wrought one to reduce them
from Atheism. And indeed to what purpose should he? it being highly improbable
that they who will not be convinced of the Being of God by this standing
Miracle, the World, in which there are so many ample Demonstrations of his
Being, should be convinced of it by any other Miracles; for other Miracles are
only the Disorders and Interruptions of Nature; and certainly the regular
Course and standing Order of Nature, is a much more glorious Evidence of Gods
Wisdom and Power, than the most miraculous Interruptions and Disorders of it.
And therefore if men will be Atheists notwithstanding God has imprinted so
many Proofs of his Being on this visible Creation, it is plain it is not their
Reason but their Wills that make them so; and if so, to what purpose is it to
urge their Reason with the Arguments of Gods Being? since if they will not
listen to those that are round about them, and are every where to be found in
this great Volume of Nature, it is highly improbable that even Miracles
themselves, which are Gods peculiar Arguments (and are therefore called the
Demonstrations of his Spirit) should ever be able to persuade them. Wherefore
to put a stop to this Pestilential Disease, which in these later Ages has been
so fatally propagated among all Degrees and Orders of men, I conceive the most
proper way is to discover and remove those faults in their Wills which have
such a malevolent Influence on their Understandings; and the principal ones may
be reduced to these nine Heads, 1. A perverse Opposition of Will to the Will
and Nature of God. 2. Superstitious Misapprehensions concerning God. 3.
Precipitant Rashness in prescribing to, and prejudging the Divine Providence.
4. Vain Affectation of Singularity in Opinion. 5. Custom of Drolling on, and
Ridiculing the most serious things. 6. Taking up our Religion, or Opinions in
Religion, without Examination. 7. Measuring the Truth or Falsehood of Religion
by the Practice of such as make high Pretenses to it. 8. Placing Religion in
the little Opinions that constitute the Sects and Parties we are engaged in. 9.
Profane and careless Neglect of Public Worship.


I. ONE great cause of Atheism is the perverse Opposition of men's Wills to the
Will and Nature of God. For the natural Notion which men have of God is, that
he is a most pure and holy Being, infinitely removed by the Perfections of his
Nature from all Inclinations that are contrary to the Dictates of right Reason.
And accordingly in all those Declarations which he has made of his Will, they
find him expressing an high Detestation of all Immorality and Wickedness, and
commanding them to abstain from it under the most dreadful Penalties, which
they know he has both Right and Power to inflict when he pleases.
Notwithstanding which, presuming on his Goodness and a future Repentance, they
suffer themselves to be tempted and seduced into wickedness; the pleasure of
which tolls them on from one Wickedness to another, till their Wills are
captivated by Custom to inveterate Habits of Sinning. So that now their Sense
of God, and of his Almighty Displeasure being no longer able to master the
stubbornness of their Wills, only serves to fret and disturb them, to raise
Terrors and Anxieties in their Consciences, and therewithal to imbitter the
Pleasure of their Sin. For so long as this Sense remains alive in their Bosoms,
they can never hope to sin quietly for it; and it being so, they have no other
Remedy but either to part with that or their Sins. For while thy retain their
Sins, the Belief of a God will grow an intolerable Vexation to them, unless by
sophisticating their Belief with false Notions of Religion they can temper it
into an amicable Compliance with their Lusts. And this is usually the Artifice
of the duller sort of People whose Understandings are more easily imposed on,
viz. to intermingle with their Belief of a God such Notions of Religion as may
render it favorable and propitious to their Lusts. And hence I doubt not
sprang most of those wicked Doctrines which from time to time have been foisted
into Christianity, from the Desire which men have to accommodate the Difference
between their Consciences and their wicked Wills, and reconcile their natural
sense of God to their Sins. But alas these Artifices are all so thin and
transparent, that it is a hard matter for men of Wit to impose them on their
Understandings; and tho they have an equal Good Will to these wicked Doctrines
with the duller sort of sinners, yet their Reason is too sharp-sighted to be
Chouc'd and deceived by them. And therefore usually they go another way to
work, and being sensible that they can never enjoy their sins in quiet, while
they are awed with the Sense and Belief of a Deity, and yet obstinately
resolved that they will enjoy them, they have no other Expedient but to muster
up all their Wit and Reason to dispute the belief of a God out of their Minds;
and being stiffly resolved to persist in their Wickedness, they are obliged by
their own Interest to wish there were no God to observe and punish them. And
then facile credunt quod volunt, they easily believe what they would have, and
the slenderest probability will sway their Understanding to vote on the side of
their Interest and Affections. So that when men are resolved to be wicked,
Atheism is their Interest and Refuge, to which they are many times forced to
fly in their own Defense, to avoid the Clamors and Persecutions of their
Consciences. Had these men lived in those Good Pagan days wherein they might
have rioted with Devotion, Sacrificed to the gods in drunken Bowls, and
Worshipped in the Arms of a Strumpet, no men would have been more Religious than
they; and could they now but Compound the matter so as that God should let them
alone to enjoy their Lusts, there is no doubt but they would be well enough
content to let him alone to enjoy his Being. But because their sense of him
frets and galls them, they first grow impatient under it, and then set their
Wits at Work to raise objections against it, and either to laugh or dispute it
out of their Minds. And accordingly Plato makes mention of a sort of Atheists
(...); who in consequence of their Opinion that all things are void of Gods,
have plunged themselves into intemperance of Pleasures and Pains being
otherwise persons of great Memories and quick Understandings, De Leg. Lib. 10.
But alas, how unreasonable is it in a matter of such vast importance for men to
believe by their Interest and Affections! it is true could men put out the Sun
with winking, or extinguish the Nature of things by an obstinate disbelief of
them, it would be very justifiable for those men to believe there is no God
whose Interest it is that there should be none. But alas, the Natures of things
are unalterable and will be what they are whatsoever our Opinion is about them.
If there be a God, there will be one, whether we think fit to believe it or no;
and tho when the Interest of our Lusts requires it, we may possibly dispute our
selves out of the Belief of his Being, yet he is not to be disputed out of his
Being. We may indeed secure our selves from the Dread of his Vengeance by
disputing our selves into a disbelief of him, but we can never secure our
selves by it from the danger of his Vengeance. And what a senseless thing is it
for a man to shut his eyes against an unavoidable danger, merely for fear of
being frightened by it; and when he might shun Gods Vengeance by dreading it,
instead thereof to shun the dread of it? What is this but to set his Reason at
work to rock his Conscience asleep, that so he may destroy himself without fear
or Disturbance.

II. ANOTHER great cause of Atheism is superstitious Misapprehensions
concerning God; which tho they are Lodged in the Mind, yet are most commonly
exhaled from the Affections, that like impure Bogs do generally breath up all
those Meteors that darken and disturb the Region above. And indeed most of our
ill apprehensions of God are transcribed and copied from our own Affections;
which be they never so irregular, our own self-love will be apt to celebrate
for Perfections. And then whatsoever we esteem a Perfection in our selves, we
naturally attribute to God, who is the Source and Standard of all Perfection;
and those Affections of our own Nature which we most injuriously attribute to
God, we love or hate in him according as we love or hate them in other men.
Thus the fond and indulgent, who are apt to dote upon others without reason,
and to hug even their Vices and Deformities, are prone to attribute their own
temper to God, and to look upon him as a Being that is infinitely indulgent to
those whom without any reason he has chosen for his Favorites. And because he
who is fond of others, loves others should be fond of him, to be sure he will
love his fond God too, and be far more devoutly affected toward this Idol of
his own temper, than to the true God himself clothed in all the native Glory
of his own Attributes. But on the contrary, those who are stern and peevish and
implacable can by no means endure their own temper in others; and therefore
it is no wonder if they hate it in God to whom they are wont injuriouslly to
attribute it. For how is it possible for them to affect a Divinity whom they
have pictured in their own Minds with such a stern and terrible Aspect, with an
Imperious Self-will that bears down all things before it by irresistible Might
without any Respect to Right or Wrong, with bloody hands and a Vengeful heart,
and a testy, peevish and unaccountable Nature that loves and hates without any
reason, and is pleased or displeased as the ^oy takes it. And having thus set
up such a grim Idol of God in their Minds as they can by no means affect, they
secretly wish there were no such Being, which is the brink of Atheism. Thus
their ghastly Apprehensions of God meeting with the surly and churlish temper
within them, instead of moulding them into Devotion to him, commonly inrage and
canker them with Malice against him; and accordingly Plutarch well observes
(...), i. e, the Atheist thinks there is no God and he who has dreadful
Apprehensions of him wishes there were none; and he who wishes there were none
is but one remove from believing there is none. Thus you see in what a direct
Line Vice leads to Superstition, and Superstition to Atheism. For Pride and
Wrath, Malice and Revenge are naturally apt to engender in men's Minds horrid
and frightful Apprehensions of God; which working on those sour and rugged
Passions that begot them are as apt to exasperate and inrage them against him;
and then their Reason immediately takes part with their Passion, and to
gratify its wish that there were no God, sets it self industriously to argue
him out of his Being. But alas, what an unreasonable procedure is this, for men
to pin their faults upon God, and dress him in their own Deformities, and when
they have thus disguised him by putting upon him their own frightful tempers,
as the old Persecutors did the Christians by wrapping them in Lions Skins, to
set on their Wit and Reason to worry him out of his Being; what is this but to
make a God as the Heathens did their Mercuries, and then fling stones at him;
to transform him into a Monstrous Idol and then dislike him, and then dash him
in pieces? But be not deceived, God will be what he is, a most perfect,
glorious, and amiable Being, how inglorious soever he may appear to you through
the false Medium of your own Diabolical temper, which like Crimson-coloured
Glass will represent the fairest Objects to you bloody and terrible; But for
you to hate God for no other reason but because your own hateful Passions do
reflect to you such an inglorious Idea of him, and then to deny him because you
hate him, is equally impious and unreasonable.

III. ANOTHER great cause of Atheism is Rashness and Precipitancy in
prescribing to and pre-judging the divine Providence; and this also most
commonly arises from some great Irregularity in men's Wills and Affections. For
generally the rash Judgments which men make of the divine Providence, are
grounded on those unequal Distributions it makes of the good things of this
World in prospering the Bad and afflicting the Good, upon which we are too
often ready to Charge it with being an unequal Arbitrator of men's Fates. The
occasion of which is our immoderate Estimation of the Goods and Evils of this
World. We so inhance the Goods of it in our Opinion, as to think them great
enough to be the Crowns and Rewards of Virtue; and have such horrible
Apprehensions of of the Evils of it, as to imagine them great enough to be the
Plagues and Punishments of the most obstinate and notorious Offenders. Whereas
by the whole Course of his Providence it appears that God has a different
esteem of them both; that he thinks the best things of this World to be bad
enough to be thrown away upon the most despicable persons; and therefore to
express his Scorn of these admired Vanities, he many times scatters them with a
careless hand, as not thinking it worth the while to be so exact in the
Distribution of them, as to put them in Gold Scales and weigh them out to
Mankind by Grains and Scruples. And as for the worst things of this World he
thinks them not so bad but that they may be endured without any considerable
Damage to the Sufferer; and therefore many times suffers them to befall his own
Favorites, as not thinking it of Moment enough to interpose his Providence to
shield them against their impotent Impressions. And upon this difference of
Judgment men too often ground an inveterate Quarrel against God, and because
they dote upon this World, and thing the Goods of it good enough to be the
Portion of good Men, and the Evils of it bad enough to be the Punishment of
bad, they are angry with God for not being of their Opinion, and are ready to
arraign his Providence, and to conclude that this World is governed by a blind
Chance that drops her Favors at random, as the full plumed Hawk mews her loose
Feathers and never cares who stoops to take them up. And this Ovid ingeniously
acknowledges of himself.

Dum rapiunt mala fata bonos, ignoscite fasso,
Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos; i. e.
While I behold ill Fates attend good men, I am tempted to think there are no
gods.
Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, at Cato parvo,
Pompeius nullo, quis putet esse Deos?
The wicked Licinus lies in a Marble Tomb, but Cato in a small one, and Pompey
in none, who would think there were gods?
So also there are others, who beholding themselves in the flattering Mirror of
their own self-conceit, are so taken with the Reflections of their own Merit
and Excellency, as that they cannot see how it is possible but that if there be
a God he must love and reward them; and therefore if instead of so doing, God
either deprives them of those worldly Goods which they dote on, or frustrates
them of those carnal Hopes for whose Accomplishment they have earnestly
supplicated, they presently begin to murmur against him, and thence proceed to
arraign the Justice of his Providence, and thence to deny both that and his
Being. For thus it comes to pass, says Simplicius, that such who have no
grounded Belief of a Deity, when they observe the Miseries of good Men, and the
Prosperities of bad, are without any Regard to the common Notions of a God,
ready to cry out with with him in the Tragedian (...), i. e. I dare affirm
there are no Gods, because the wicked prosper that hurt me. Thus from their
fond Affection to these worldly Goods, men frequently take occasion to quarrel
with Gods Providence, for not appropriating them to be the Rewards of Virtue;
and being once engaged in a Quarrel against his Providence, their next attempt
is to dispute him out of his Being.

But what an unreasonable way of concluding is this? I value this to be best
and that to be worst, and therefore God ought to be of my Opinion, and to
proceed accordingly in his Providence over the World; for there is nothing can
be better or worse within the Prospect of an infinite Wisdom than what I
apprehend to be best and worst for Mankind; and therefore if he will do good to
the Good, it must be in the Method that I shall prescribe him, that is to say,
he must crown them with Rose-buds* and cloth them in Purple, and feed them
with the fat of the Land; and if he punish the Wicked he must give me leave to
give aim to his Arrows, and to direct him how, and what, and when, and where to
shoot, and so long I am contented to allow him a Being in the World; but if he
will presume to cross my Opinion of things, and steer his Actions by the
unerring Compass of his own infinite Wisdom; if he will rather choose to do
good to the Good by chastening than by prospering them, and to avenge himself
upon the Wicked by fattening them with Prosperity for Slaughter, I shall look
upon it as such an Affront to my judgment as will admit of no meaner Expiation
than the stripping him out of his Providence and Being. And what can be more
ridiculous than for men to deny the Being of God, because his Providence
sometimes crosses their foolish Opinion of things, and does not Govern it self
by the crooked Rules which they are pleased to prescribe it.

IV. ANOTHER great cause of Atheism is vain Affectation of Singularity in
Opinion; a Vice that has been always incident to men of Speculation, who
valuing themselves upon the stock of their Knowledge and deep Insight into the
Nature of things, have always affected to start new Notions and advance
contrary Hypotheses to the received Opinions of Mankind, that so they may be
vogued for men of singular Knowledge, and seem to have taller Understandings
than the rest of their Brethren, And this I doubt not has been one great cause
of speculative Atheism; for there is no Principle in Nature which has been
more universally received among Men than the Belief of a Deity; which doubtless
is the main Reason why men who affect Singularity have been so prone to quarrel
at it. It does not comport with their Design of being thought wiser than the
rest of the World, to submit their Understandings to common Notions and
universal Doctrins; because should they think as other Men do, they might
probably be thought no wiser. Perhaps had the Belief of a Deity been lately
started, and only received by some singular Sect of Vertuosoes, these men might
have beeen as forward to entertain it as they are now to reject it; but because
it is an Old-fashion Doctrine, in which all Ages and Nations have concurred,
they think it would be a discredit to their Understanding to wear it, and
therefore they set their Wits at work to invent Atheistical Hypotheses to solve
the Phenomenon of Nature without a Deity. And he that does but impartially
consider the haughty Genius of those Philosophers that laid the Foundations of
Speculative Atheism, may easily perceive that the great Motive of their
Infidelity was nothing but a proud Affectation of thinking counter to Mankind.
And indeed could I but embrace the Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls, I
should be tempted to believe by the likeness of their Humors that it was one
and the same Soul that passed through Democritus into Protagoras, through
Protagoras into Epicurus and through Epicurus into Mr. Hobbs; And since they so
exactly agreed in their Pride and haughty Ostentation of Knowledge, it is justly
supposable that this was the main cause of their Agreement in Atheism; which
being a Singular Doctrine and directly contradictory to the common Notions of
Mankind, was upon that account more adapted to the humor of these arrogant
Philosophers, And accordingly Plato describes the Atheists of his Age to be a
conceited and scornful sort of People, and declares the cause of their Atheism
to be (...), a certain pernicious sort of ignorance that put on a semblance of
the greatest Wisdom; and afterward he calls Athetheism (...), that which in
the Eyes of some conceited people seemed to be the wisest of all Doctrines, de
Leg. Lib. 10. And because these Atheistical Philosophers, who were some of them
great Masters of Wit and Learning, had the good luck to be remarqued and gazed
on like so many Anticks for their Singularity, they have always found Disciples
and Followers among the people of little Sense and a great deal of Vanity, who
being ambitious of the Reputation of Wits and Philosophers, but having neither
Brains nor Industry enough to merit it, are fain to shelter their Ignorance in
Atheism, and there to face it out with laughter and boldness; and because by
laughing at God and Religion they deride the common Faith of Mankind, they
fancy themselves singularly witty, and expect that others should fancy them so
too; whereas in reality these little People are but mere Pretenders to
speculative Atheism. For before they can be more, they must comprehend the
whole System of the Atheistical Philosophy, and be able to describe all those
supposed Laws of Motion, by which Matter without the Conduct of a Superior
Wisdom and Power did originally range it self into this beautiful World, and to
show at least the possibility of all the strange Appearances in Nature, without
supposing a God; which is such a task as their feeble Understandings durst
never attempt; for the utmost they can pretend to is a few Terms of the
Atheistical Philosophy, which they have learned by rote, and do cant and
smatter with as much Skill and Understanding as Parrots do the Lessons that are
taught them. And tho the brisk young Gentlemen will sometimes boldly affirm,
and if you dare take them up will lay a Wager on it too, that Reason is nothing
but a Train of Imaginations; that Choice is nothing but the last stroke of
outward Object on the Fancy; and that there is nothing in Nature but Matter and
Motion; yet should you be so rude as to ask them what they mean by these
Phrases, you would uncase their Ignorance and utterly undo them. So that such
as these are only the Hawkers and Retailers of Atheism, that noise and cry it
about; but have neither Wit not Industry enough to understand it, but do take
it up with the same implicit Faith as the Papists do their Religion. Thus as
the Ambition of being accounted wiser than others, causes men to affect
Singularity in their Opinions, so the Affectation of Singularity in Opinion
does very often transport men into Atheism.

NOW tho I would by no means plead for Men's enslaving their Understandings to
vulgar Opinions, so as to put a stop to all Advancements of Knowledge, and
hinder the World from ever growing wiser; yet doubtless for men to quarrel at
Opinions for no other reason but because they are vulgarly received, is not
only a rude Affront to the Reason of Mankind; but also an effectual way to
involve our selves in an endless Labyrinth of mistakes. For while I affect to
be singular in my Opinion, I deprive my self of the Assistance of other men's
Understandings, and in my travel for Knowledge choose rather to go alone by my
self through untrodden by-ways, than to keep the Road and follow the Tract of
those that have gone before me. So that unless I am wiser than all the World,
which is very unlikely, it is a thousand to one but I bewilder and loose my
self; for how wise and sagacious soever I may be, it is certain that many Heads
are wiser than one; and therefore when all heads concur in the same judgment,
it is probable at least that that judgment is true; he therefore who rejects an
Opinion because all or most do embrace it, affects to think counter to the
strongest Evidence, and to believe against the greatest Probability. It Is true
in many things the generality of men have been mistaken, which is a sufficient
reason why we should not pin our Faith upon the Sleeve of Vulgar Opinions, but
impartially examine before we confidently embrace them; but yet there is a
Reverence due to the Judgment of Mankind, and the Laws of Modesty require us
not to be confident against it without very great reason; but to affect to run
counter to it, especially in such a matter of moment as the Belief or Disbelief
of a Deity, is not only the highest Arrogance but the most extravagant Madness.
For it is at least probable that there is a God, because all Mankind do believe
one, and if there be one, it is of infinite Moment that we should believe it,
and act accordingly; and therefore for men to turn Atheists out of mere
Singularity, is not only to believe there is no God, because it is probable
there is, but to play and dally with ones own Fate, and run the hazard of being
eternally miserbale out of a wanton Affectation of contradicting the Judgment
of Mankind.

V. ANOTHER great Cause of Atheism is custom of drolling on and ridiculing the
most serious things; a humor which has strangely prevailed in this pleasant
and jocular Age, wherein the wild rovings of men's Fancies into odd Similitudes*
startling Metaphors, humorous Expressions, and sportive Representations of
things are grown more acceptable in almost all Conversations, than the most
solid Reason and Discourse, and it is generally looked upon as a far more genteel
and fashionable Quality for a man to be witty than Wise. Now though I do not
deny but that Wit in it self is a very useful and valuable Indowment, and
serves to many excellent purposes; as namely to pollish and adorn the most
serious Truths, and represent them to men's Minds in the most comely and
affecting Dresses; to expose what is apparently base and ridiculous, and lash
it with the Satyrs it makes against it self; to quicken and give life to a
solid ArguMent, and render it more piercing and convictive; and in a word, to
indear our Society, and give a relish and picquancy to our Conversation, and to
recreate our Minds after we have been tired out or cloyed with severer
Occupations; though Wit, I say, be a very useful Quality as to all these good
purposes, yet unless a wise Man has the keeping it, that knows when and where
and how to apply it, it is like Wildfire that flies at rovers, runs hissing
about, and blows up every thing that comes in its way without any respect or
discrimination. And indeed the more grave and serious any thing is, the more
prone it will be to expose and ridicule it. For the life of Wit consists in the
surprisingness of its Conceits and Expressions, in making such smart or uncouth
Representations of things as are most apt to raise a pleasing Wonder and
Amazement in those that hear us. Now there is nothing more surprising in its
own nature, than to see or hear a serious thing sportfully represented, and
dressed up in an antic and ridiculous Disguise; the very exposing it in a Garb
and Figure so unexpected because so very unlike and unsuitable to it self, is
apt of its own Nature to surprise and amuse the Spectators or Hearers; which
surprise, if he be a vain person, will tickle him into Laughter, but if he be
serious, will affect him with Detestation and Horror to see a serious thing so
contemptibly treated. But the greatest part of Men being of vain and trifling
Spirits, that are whisled up and down in little levities of Fancy, there is
nothing commonly does more gratefully surprise them and provoke their Laughter,
than ridiculous Representations of serious Arguments; and hence it comes to
pass that it is grown a great Instance of wit among the generality of men to
sport and play with serious things, to burlesque the sense of them, and apply
them to ridicuculous purposes; whereas in reality this mistaken sort of Wit is
nothing but dull and impudent Buffoonery, and a very little Wit joined with a
great deal of Sauciness will enable a Man to make sport with the most serious
Arguments. For it is but clothing them in rude and porterly Expressions, or
misconstruing them to a profane or ludicrous sense, or debauching the Phrases
by which they are expressed to a silly or a wicked meaning, and it shall be
presently cried up for an excellent Jest, and the Author of it dubbed a Wit
Laureat. This therefore being so easy a way for dull people to advance
themselves to the Reputation of Wits, has of late years especially been
mightily frequented by the impotent Well-wishers to Wit and Ingenuity; and
because Religion has been always esteemed the most serious thing in the World,
therefore they fix upon that as the common Theme of their Raillery, considering
that the more serious it is, the more it will surprise men to hear it
burlesqued and drolled on. So that if they do but speak slightly and
irreverently of God, or never so clownishly ridicule a Mystery of Religion, or
cloth an obscene Thought in a Text of Scripture, their Sauciness will supply
the defect of their Wit, and men will laugh not so much at the Picquancy of
their Conceit, as at the Boldness and Presumption of it; and because their
Discourse has the luck to be laughed at, they think themselves celebrated for
the Oracles of Wit, and are thereby emboldened to proceed in this their impious
Buffoonery, till at last they have drolled themselves into a Contempt of God,
and from thence into downright Atheism. For tho a Jest be no Argument nor yet a
loud laughter a Demonstration, yet if you inspect the generality of our little
Pretenders to Atheism, you will find this is the main Foundation that their
Irreligion depends on; for their gift consists not in arguing and
demonstrating, but in such a Set of fine Phrases and terse Oaths; and all the
Stock of Learning they pretend to is a few shavings of Wit gathered out of
Plays and Romances, and these they pin upon Religion, as you have seen unhappy
Boys do Rags at men's Backs, to expose it to Scorn and Derision; and having
accustomed themselves to treat it with such rude and porterly Contempt and
Disingenuity, it grows by degrees cheap and vile in their Eyes, and at last is
rejected by them as a ridiculous Imposture; and if now when they are urged with
Evidences of Religion, they have but Wit enough to answer Reason with Drollery,
and to retort a Jest to a Demonstration, how gloriously do they imagine they
have acquitted, themselves, and with what triumphant Shrugs do they celebrate
their Victory over the little man in black.

NOW tho for men to deride what they do not understand, savours neither of
Learning nor good Manners, and is equally unbecoming a Gentleman and a Scholar;
and tho for a man to venture to be damned for deriding of God and Religion, is
such a Triumph of Wit as argues the utter Defe^^^ of his Reason, yet so long as
there are vain men enough to be tickled with this profane sort of Drollery, to
be sure there will never want Fools enough to venture on it. For when a Fop
will needs aspire to the Reputation of a Wit, he has no other way but to dress
up Religion in a Fools-Coat, and expose it for a Spectacle of Derision, and
then how dull soever the Conceit be, the stupendous Presumption of it will
suprise and amuse the Company, and men will admire him just as they do
Ropedancers for daring to perform what a wise Man would tremble to attempt; and
being thus emboldened by the Admiration and Laughter of his Company, which the
vain Creature mistakes for a Proof and Evidence of his Wit, he grows more pert
and confident, and so fools and fleers on till he has toyed and laughed
himself out of all sense of Religion.

BUT alas! what a desperate piece of Folly is this, for men thus to sport and
dally with the Almighty, whose Vengeance they can neither withstand nor endure;
to point and make Mouths at him to his Face, and set him up as the Finger-butt
of their Scorn and Derision! For certainly if there be Sins that can raise a
Cry loud enough to reach Heaven, this, as a great Author of our own has
expressed it, will be so far from whispering there, that 'twill give an Alarm
to the Vengeance of Heaven, whose Inflictions like Stones tumbling from the
tops of Towers, will by so much the more fatally crush those they light on, by
how much the longer they are falling upon them. And therefore for Men thus to
dally with their own Fate, to venture to be damned that they may be thought to
be witty, and expose themselves to endless wailing and Woe only to raise a
present fit of Laughter, is doubtless a far more desperate Attempt than 'twould
be to play at the mouths of Canons while they are spitting Fire, or to lay hold
on a Thunderbolt as it comes roaring down from the Clouds.

BUT suppose there were neither Evil nor Danger in this impious Practice, yet
for men to conclude there is no God because they have the Confidence to scorn
and despise him, is altogether as ridiculous as their despising him is impious.
For there is nothing in Nature so real or serious but may be drolled and
Rallied on; if a man will set his Wits at work he may break Jests upon Pain,
and entertain his Company with Comical Representations of the Groans and
Agonies of dying; but it would be a Jest indeed should be droll himself into a
Belief that there are no such things as Pain or Death; but alas, things are not
to be altered by laughing at them, and how merry soever we may make our selves
with the Belief and Nation of a Deity, we shall one day find in earnest that he
is not to be jested out of his Being.

VI. ANOTHER cause of Atheism is taking up Religion or Opinions in Religion
without Examination. The generality of men do embrace their Religion as a part
of their Fate, as the Temper of their Clime, or the Entail of their Ancestors;
and the reason why they are Christians is, because Christianity had the luck to
bespeak them first, and by its timely Interposure to prepossess and forestall
them. So that in all probability had Mahometism plied them first, they would
have had as much Faith for the Alchoran as they have now for the Bible. Now
when Men thus take up their Religion they know not why, their minds must needs
be left naked and defenseless to all the Temptations of Atheism. For when a Man
can render no ^eason for his Religion, his Faith has nothing but blind
Prejudice to support it; and it is with his Will that he believes and not with
his Understanding; so that he may choose whether he will believe or no, because
he has no Evidence to determine his Understanding. And how unstable and
insecure must his Faith needs be, when it has no other Foundation but a fickle
and inconstant Will; when it lies at the mercy of his Humor and Inclinations,
and it is in his power to determine his Assent to that side of the Question
which is most for his Interest? For now his Faith being determined by his Will,
and his Will by his Interest, whenever he thinks it his Interest that there
should be no God, to be sure he will be ready enough to believe that there is
none; and consequently as soon as he grows wicked enough to need Atheism for a
Refuge from his Conscience, he will betake himself thither in his own defense*
and endeavor by an obstinate Disbelief of Gods Being, to shelter himself from
the Dread of his Power. Thus when men's belief is not grounded upon Reason and
Evidence, but stands tottering on the fickle Foundation of their Wills, it is
liable to be blown down by every Blast of Temptation. And hence I doubt not in
a great measure proceeds the Irreligion of the Age we live in; for if you
surveigh the present Sticklers for Atheism, you will find they chiefly consist
of the hair-brained and uncatechised Youths of the Town* who never troubled
themselves to understand the first Principles of Religion, nor to consider the
Dependence and Connection of its Doctrines, and know nothing at all either of
the admirable Contexture of the Parts of it, or of the Reason and Evidence of
the Whole. For alas, their Study has been employed another way, viz. in
courtly Forms of Speech and Punctilioes of Action, in fashionable Garbs and
Oaths and artificial Luxuries, in conning of fine Jests and Modes of Address,
and retailing Fragments of Wit from Plays and Romances; but as for the severer
and more useful Studies they bequeath them to the dull men of Sense and Reason.

SUCH as these for the most part are the Sages that droll upon Religion and
make jests upon the Scripture; and what wonder is it that such as these turn
Infidels, who were never able to render any Reason of their Faith? For how weak
soever the Arguments of Infidelity are, it is a hard case if it cannot baffle
that Faith which has no Reason on its side to guard and defend it; especially
when they are seconded with a man's Lusts and Inclinations, as to be sure the
Arguments of Infidelity will always be. For when a man has no Reason for his
Faith, but a great many Lusts against it, the slenderest shows of Probability
will suffice to make him an Infidel. But what an horrible Neglect is it for Men
that have Reason to distinguish between Truth and Falsehood, to take no care to
enquire into the Truth and Evidence of their Religion in which their greatest
Interest is involved; but to wink hard and believe at a venture they know not
why nor what? what is this but to cast Lots for their Souls, and throw Cross or
Pile for their eternal Salvation? They resolve, they say, to adhere to the
Religion of their Ancestors, but whether that be true or false they never
inquire; so that if it be true, they may thank their Stars for it, but if it be
false, they have the worse Luck. Thus they wholly commit themselves to the
Conduct of Chance to be conducted to Heaven or Hell, as it happens; and as if
those distant Fates were indifferent to them, they concern not themselves to
inquire whether the way they are in be the Broad or the Narrow, the Right or
the Wrong, but even leave the Event to determine it. And can any thing in the
World be more wild or extravagant, than for men who are so solicitous about
their smaller concerns, who will not purchase an Acre of Land without examining
the Deeds and Evidences by which the Right to it is Conveyed, thus to take up
their Religion upon Trust, and stake their everlasting Fate upon such a
desperate venture? But then for men to take occasion to despise and reject
Religion from their own sottish Neglect to inquire into the Truth of it, is
such an height of Extravagance as no Bedlam can parallel; it would be as
reasonable for a man to put out his Eyes, and then resolve not to believe there
is a Sun in the Firmament because he does not see it, or to stop up his Ears,
and then peremptorily deny the Being of Sounds because he does not hear 'em;
for for men thus to graft Infidelity upon Ignorance, is only to heap one
Extravagance on another; if they understand not the Evidence of Religion the
more Shame it is for them, but methinks it might very well become them to be
modest and teachable till they do; and in the mean while to take care to inform
themselves better; but thus immediately to leap out of Ignorance into Atheism,
is first to play the Fool, and then run stark mad upon it.

VII. ANOTHER cause of Atheism is men's measuring the Truth or Falsehood of
Religion by the Practice of such as make the loudest Pretense to it. When a man
is unwilling to undergo the trouble of satisfying his own Reason of the Truth
of his Religion, his usual Method is to inquire what other men think of it, who
by the zealous Profession which they make may be supposed to understand it
better than himself; but because men's Thoughts are secret and invisible, and do
not always correspond with their Words and Professions; therefore to satisfy
himself what other men think of Religion, he concludes the safest way is to
judge by what they do, and not by what they profess; and so far indeed he is in
the right. For to be sure men's Actions are a much more certain Index of their
Thoughts than their Words; and therefore when he sees those who profess
Religion act as if they did not believe it, and observes how their Words do run
atilt at their Practice, and how broadly their Lives give the lie to their
Professions, he presently concludes that whatever they pretend they are
Infidels in their Hearts; and being once persuaded that those whom he thinks do
best understand Religion do not believe it, he thence immediately concludes
that they find no reason to believe it, and do only put on the Profession of it
as an Angelical Vizor, being minded to play the Devils in it with more Credit
and Security. And by this Popular way of reasoning they conclude Religion to be
nothing but a Politic Device and Engine which wise men have contrived to
beguile and manage the simple; and that whatsoever is pretended for it, it is a
mere jugling-box which Knaves play tricks with to delude and cozen Fools. And
of this way of men's reasoning themselves into Atheism the Age we live in is
full of woeful Instances; for now adays to scorn and despise Religion is no
longer the Prerogative of Wits and Vertuosoes, but the Infection is spread and
propagated into Shops and Stalls, and the Rabble are become Professors of
Atheism. Now whence should this proceed? alas, it is not to be supposed that
such persons as these should ever be able to Philosophise themselves into
Infidelity, and turn Atheists either upon Aristotle's or Epicurus's Hypotheses;
no, no, their Argument lies nearer home, and more open to their Capacities;
they have seen a world of vile tricks played in our Religious Carnivals and
Masquerades; some making their Religion a Sanctuary for their Treasons and
Rebellions; others gilding over their Faction and Sedition with a specious
Pretense of zeal for Gods glory: some prosecuting their own Revenge and
Ambition under the Ensigns of pure Worship, and true Protestant Religion;
others commuting for their Excesses of Riot with a clamorous zeal for Decency
and Order, and others picking Pockets with one hand while they have been
lifting up the other to Heaven in Devotion; the sight of which has tempted the
rude and unthinking Vulgar to look upon Religion as a mere Castle in the Air,
that has no Foundation* but in the Invention of Knaves* and in the Faith of
Fools.

NOW tho there is no doubt to be made but that these vile Hypocrites who have
laid this Stumbling Block in men's way, shall one day dearly answer for the ruin
of those whom it has occasioned to fall, and for thus exposing the Credit and
Reputation of Religion to the misprisions of those that do not understand it;
yet it is a most inexcusable piece of folly for men thus to infer Atheistical
Conclusions from the ill Example of Hypocritical Professors. For in the first
place, to conclude a Man an Infidel because his Actions run counter to the
Faith he pretends to, is very rash and fallacious. For do we not see Men very
often act against their Consciences, and fly in the face of their own
Convictions? why may we not then as fairly suppose those wicked Actions we
argue from to be the effects of an obstinate Will as of an Infidel Judgment;
but suppose it were true that those men were all Infidels that do thus act
against their Faith, does it therefore follow that you must turn Infidels too?
if it be so unsafe and so unworthy of a man to carry his Brains in other Men's
Heads, what a shame is it to carry them in other Men's Heels, and to suffer his
Faith to be lead by the Tract of their Examples through all the wild Mazes of
Irreligion and Atheism?

BUT you will say, by these Men's Examples you plainly see what a Mystery of
Iniquity there is in religious Pretenses; and what then? must Religion be a
Cheat because bad Men play tricks with it, and make it a Cloak for their
Knavery? if so, then the best things in the World are liable to Suspicion;
because there is nothing so good but what is capable of being prostituted to
very ill purposes. I confess when we see so many Cheats acted under the Masque
of Religion, we have just reason to call it to a more severe Examination, and
to inquire more narrowly into the Proofs and Evidences upon which it is
founded; but presently to reject Religion because Knaves and Hypocrites make
bold to disguise themselves in it, is every whit as absurd and ridiculous as if
a man should deny that there is any such Virtue as Chastity in the World,
because there are common Prostitutes that pretend to it.

VIII. ANOTHER cause of Atheism is Divisions and Schisms formed out of little
Opinions in Religion. For it is natural to men to place a great part of their
Religion in those Opinions, for whose sake they divide and separate from each
other; so that if hereafter they happen to be dissatisfied with those Opinions
of which they are excessively fond at the present, they will be under a great
Temptation to suspect Religion it self, as if that were as ill grounded as
those little Opinions which they laid so great a stress on, and so after they
have run through several Sets of Opinions, and in fine have discovered them to
be all Delusions, they are ready to conclude Religion it self to be nothing but
a System of Lies and Impostures. For as weak Heads when they perceive the
Battlements shake are apt to suspect the Foundations, so weak Understandings
will be prone to suspect even the Fundamentals of of Religion, when once they
perceive those darling Notions totter which they have confidently presumed to
superstruct thereupon.

AND upon this account I make no doubt but that the Irreligion of this Age is
very much to be attributed to the Sects and Divisions of it. For how many woeful
Examples have we of Persons who had once a great Zeal for and Satisfaction in
Religion, that upon their causeless Separation from the Churches Communion,
have run from Sect to Sect, and from one extravagant Opinion to another, till
at last being convinced of the Cheats and Impostures of them all, they have
totally discarded Religion it self, and made their last Resort into Atheism.
And as separating into Parties upon little Differences in Religion exposes the
Separatists themselves to great Temptations to Atheism, so it does those also
who are Indifferent on both sides, and stand engaged on neither part of the
Separation. For whilst these men behold the State of Religion thus miserably
broken and divided, and the Professors of it crumbled into so many Sects and
Parties, and each Party spitting Fire and Damnation at its Adversary; so that
if all say true, or indeed any two of them in five hundred Sects which there
are in the World, (and for all I know there may be five thousand) it is five
hundred to one but that every one is damned, because every one damns all but it
self, and it self is damned by four hundred and ninty nine; so that it is a
mighty Chance if in so great a Volly of Anathemaes which every one has
levelled at it, any one escape: When, I say, unengaged persons that are not
able to distinguish between the disputable Opinions that constitute these
Sects, and the Necessaries and Essentials of Religion, shall reflect upon this
tumult and confusion of Faiths, they will be apt to conclude without farther
Inquiry, that Religion it self is nothing but an infinite Maze of disputable
Opinions, wherein Men wander about in the dark and justle and rancounter one
another without any certain Clew on either side to guide and direct their
Inquiries; under which Misapprehension they will either damn all Religion for a
Cheat, or hover about in eternal uncertainty, not knowing where in so great a
Confusion of Religions to fix and settle their Faith. And hereunto I doubt not
is to be attributed a great part of the Irreligion of this Age. For while some
Men by running themselves out of Breath in pursuit of those Ignes fatui or New
Lights, that have broken and divided our Communion, have at length quite tired
out their Zeal and religious Pretenses, and so are at length lain down in the
Mire of Irreligion and open Profaneness; others by looking on and beholding the
wild Divisions which these new Lights have made, have been tempted to run away
from Religion it self, as if that were only a Labyrinth of uncertain Opinions
contrived on purpose to distract and bewilder men's Brains.

NOW tho the Authors of these Divisions, whosoever they are, are doubtless
highly accountable to God for all that Irreligion which attends them, yet for
Men from hence to draw Atheistical Conclusions is much more imputable to the
perverseness of their Wills than to the Weakness of their Understandings.

FOR in the first place, What if you have discovered some Opinions ln Religion
to be false and erroneous, of the Truth of which you were once very confident;
does it therefore follow that there is nothing certain in Religion? If so, you
may as well conclude that there is nothing certain in the Mathematics neither,
since some men have been as confident of the Truth of false Axioms in Geometry
as ever you could be of false Propositions in Religion. That you were once
over-confident in a disputable Matter was your own Fault and Folly, but must it
therefore follow that Religion is a Cheat because you have been rash and
inconsiderate? and what tho you once laid the great stress of your Religion
upon an Opinion which you now discern is erroneous, must Religion needs suffer
for your Mistake, and be branded for an Imposture because you took that for
Religion which was not? For there are a thousand Propositions about Religion,
which have been Zealously disputed for and against, which have torn men into
Sects, and been the Religion of the separate Communions they have formed and
denominated, that yet are very remote Superstructures on the true Foundations
of Religion, and may be true or false, believed or disbelieved without any
damage to Religion. And therefore before you suspect the Truth of Religion it
self upon your discovering the Falsehood of any particular Opinion, you ought in
all Reason to consider whether that Opinion be so essential to Religion as that
it cannot subsist without it; for if it be not, it is the most unreasonable
thing in the World, to infer a suspicion of the Truth of Religion from the
Falsehood of Propositions that have little or no Dependence on it, and to reject
the Gold and the precious Stones for the sake of the Wood, and Hay, and Stubble
that have been superstructed upon them. And then

2. What can be more absurd than for Men to reject Religion because Men's
Opinions about it have been so divided? For if you survey the several Divisions
of Christians, you will find they generally concur in all the necessary and
essential Doctrines of Religion, and that the Opinions wherein they divide, are
for the most part such unnecessary Speculations, as that it is almost
indifferent to Religion whether they be true or false; And with what Reason can
we suspect the Truth of necessary Doctrines wherein all are agreed, because
there are Disagreements in unnecessary ones? Because there are some
Propositions in the Mathematics, about which the Opinions of the
Mathematicians are divided, shall we therefore suspect the Truth of all those
wherein they are agreed? For if their Disagreement be an Argument of the
Falsehood of the former, why should not their Agreement be as good an Argument
of the Truth of the later? But how much soever Men's Opinions about Religion may
be divided, all that can be thence inferred is, that some Men are mistaken; and
while some Men judge of Religion by their Passions and Interests, and others by
the Prejudices of their Education, it is impossible it should be otherwise. But
for men in the midst of such apparent causes of Difference, to resolve to be of
no Religion till all are agreed in one, is just as wise, and as rational as if
they should determine not to go to Dinner till all the Clocks in Town strike
Eleven together.

IX. And Lastly, ANOTHER great cause of Atheism is the profane and careless
Neglect of Gods Public Worship. For Men of Secular lives whose Minds are
always engaged in this eternal hurry of worldly Affairs, are too prone to
forget God, and all their Concerns in Religion and another World; and even
their conversing so much with these sensitive things which are always before
them, and are continually crouding in upon their Thoughts, does naturally
indispose them to exercise their Faculties about divine and spiritual Objects,
and render their Minds (...) unfit and unable to ascend to the Contemplation of
God. And therefore God has appointed the stated Times of Public Worship, on
purpose to withdraw Men from their secular Pursuits, that so they be at leisure
to retire into themselves, to recollect their scattered Thoughts, and awake
their Minds to a sense of Piety and Religion; which can by no way so
effectually be performed as by the Solemnities of Public Worship, wherein our
remembrance of God is not only refreshed, and our Piety to him excited and
directed by the public Instructions, but our natural Sense of Religion is also
actuated and intended by the mutual Concurrence and Example of each others
Devotion. Thus after our Religion has been slackned by our worldly Cares and
Delights, it is duly wound up again by the Returns of our Public Worship, and
so the sense of God is still kept alive in our Minds. When Men therefore turn
their Backs upon the Public Worship, and devote the holy Seasons of it to
their secular Business or Pleasures, it is not to be wondered at that their
sense of a divine Power, which they seldom or never think of, should by degrees
decay and wear off, and that that being extinguished they should sink into
Irreligion and Atheism. For when once Men have worn out their Sense of a Deity,
and as the Consequence of that are broke loose from all the Ties and
Obligations of Conscience, they can have no other Principle but Atheism to
warrant their Actions; and when once they have abandoned all Sense and
Remembrance of God, so that he is not in all their Thoughts, they are in a fair
forwardness to Infidelity. For tho as yet they do not actually disbelieve his
Existence, so neither do they actually believe it; for how should they actually
believe that which they have no Sense or Thought of; so that in this insensible
State their Faith is concerned neither one way nor to other, nor are they at
all solicitous whether there be a God or no. Thus from their profane Neglect of
Gods Worship Men naturally slide into an habitual Senslessness and Incogitancy
of him, and from thence to not believing; and from thence to disbelieving him
is an easy and almost necessary Transition.

OF the Truth of which the Age we live in will furnish us with too many
sorrowful Instances. For as this Nation which has been always remarqued for a
grave, serious and religious Genius, was never so generally tainted with
Atheism as now; so neither was it ever chargeable with such a general Neglect
of the Public Worship of God, which for several Ages after the Reformation,
was duly frequented, and devoutly celebrated, till by the Prevalence of our
restless Sects and Factions, the Discipline of the Church was gradually
weakened, and at last totally destroyed; in the happy Days before which the
Families of each Parish went hand in hand together to the House of God, and
with one Heart and Voice celebrated his Praise and Worship; and to absent ones
self ordinarily from the Public Assemblies, was hardly consistent with the
Reputation of being a Christian. By which means their natural Sense and Dread
of the divine Powers, being continually awakened and revived, they were not
only secured by it from all Atheistical Impressions, but also animated and
excited to a pious and sober Conversation. But the spirit of Schism prevailing
against the Power and Discipline of the Church, till it had uttterly disabled
it from restraining the Wantonness of that crooked and perverse Generation;
some incorporated themselves into separate Communions, and others under
Pretense of so doing withdrew from the Public Assemblies to the common Resorts
of Idleness, Drunkenness and Debauchery; and whilst the Masters took the
Liberty of Conscience to go to Conventicles, the Servants pretending to be of a
different Persuasion assumed the Liberty of Will to go to Taverns and
Alehouses; insomuch that it grew a common Observation, that there have been
more young People debauched on the Lords Day than all the Week after, whilst
under pretense of joining with a different Communion, they have taken occasion
to withdraw themselves from the Inspection of their Parents and Masters. And
till once our Schisms and Divisions are cured, it will be impossible to prevent
this ill Practice, unless we will be so unjust as to deny that Liberty of
Conscience to our Servants which with so much Clamor and Confidence we demand
of our Governors. And thus by degrees Profaneness has insinuated it self under
the Covert of Schism, and Liberty of Conscience became a common Sanctuary for
the licentious Neglect and Contempt of Gods Worship, till at last it grew so
common and fashionable, that it almost ceast to be scandalous. Yea, so far at
length has this impious Humor prevailed, that to go to Church and be devout
is among too many Men grown a Note of Disgrace, and the Character of a
Priest-ridden fool; and a Man is hardly looked upon as fit for genteel
Conversation, that knows any other use of a Holy Day, but only to be at leisure
to lie abed, or to Game or Drink and Debauch; by which Neglect and Contempt of
the Worship of God, that natural Sense of him, which should have been quickened
and cherished by it, has been gradually worn out of Men's Minds; the
Consequence of which is, all that Atheism and Infidelity that overspreads this
present Age. For when once Men have renounced the Worship of God, and in
Consequence are abandoned of their natural Sense of his Majesty, they are upon
the brink of Atheism, into which their own vile Lusts, whose Interest it is
that there should be no God, will easily precipitate them. But alas, how
ridiculous as well as impious is it for Men to take occasion from their own
Neglect of Gods Worship, to renounce the Belief of his Being; what is this but
to tail one folly to another, and to second Extravagance with Madness? It would
make one amazed to think that ever reasonable Beings should be so besotted, as
to live in a World over which an Almighty Being presides, who sees all their
Actions, and in whose Hands all events are which concen them, and even the
everlasting Fate of their Souls; and yet take no more notice of him, pay no
more Respect or Veneration to him, than if he were the merest trifle or most
insignificant Cipher in the whole Creation. But sure when Men have been guilty
of such a black and horrid Impiety* one would think their wisest Course for the
time to come should be to repent of it, and to endeavor to compensate for
their past Profaneness by the strictness and Sincerity of their future
Devotion; but for Men to proceed from neglecting Gods Worship to denying his
Being, is to do worse because they have done ill, and thereby to inflame the
Provocation, as if they were resolved to render their Condition desperate,
because they have been so foolhardy as to render it dangerous.

AND thus I have given a short Account of the common Causes of Atheism, which
you see are all derived from Men's Wills and not from their Reason. For this I
do most firmly believe, that the Arguments of Gods Existence are so plain and
convincing, that no Man ever was or can be an Atheist without some inexcusable
fault in his Will.

SECT. II. Of the inexcusable Folly and Unreasonableness of Atheism.
THE next thing I proposed was to endeavor to confirm and establish this great
Principle of Religion, viz. the Belief of a God, by representing the great
folly and unreasonableness of Atheism. In discoursing which I shall meddle no
more than needs must with the Proofs and Arguments of a Deity, because as I
have showed before, it is not for want of Arguments that Men turn Atheists, but
for want of Consideration and an honest Will; and that the Bias that carries
them toward Infidelity is not in their Understandings, but in their Wills and
Affections; that it is only their Partiality to their Lusts, that inclines them
to Atheism; and that the Reason why they are so ready to believe that there is
no God, is, because they wish in their Hearts that there were none. To
establish the Belief of a God therefore, I shall endeavor to represent the
folly and unreasonableness of Men's being partial on the side of Atheism,
supposing it were disputable whether there be a God or no; and this will
evidently appear in the following Particulars.

1. The Atheist concludes against the Dignity of Humane Nature, and renders it
not only mean but ridiculous. 2. He concludes against the very Being and
Well-being of Humane Society. 3. He concludes against that which is the main
Support and Comfort of Humane Life. 4. He concludes for that side of the
Question which is infinitely the most unsafe and hazardous. 5. He concludes for
the unsafest side of the Question upon the highest uncertainties. 6. He plainly
contradicts himself in his Conclusion.
I. THE Atheist concludes against the Dignity of Humane Nature, and thereby
renders it not only mean but ridiculous. For the chief Worth and Dignity of
Humane Nature consists in its Relation to God, without whom its noblest and
most excellent Faculties are in a great measure useless and insignificant; for
if there be no God, the objects of our Five Senses are the sole Entertainment
of our Understanding and Will, and we have no other use of these mighty
Faculties, (which if there were any such thing as an infinite Truth and
Goodness are naturally capable of enjoying them) but only to consult and choose
the Gratifications of our Sense, and the Pleasures of this perishing Body. For
excepting God there is no such thing in Nature as a spiritual enjoyment, no
Good to be found, but what is prepared to entertain the boundless Liquorishness
of our carnal Appetites; and had we none but such as these to consult for, our
Reason which is the Crown and Glory of our Natures, would have nothing else to
do but to Cater for our Flesh, and we should have an Understanding and Will to
no other purpose, but to enable us to play the Brutes with more Skill and
Sagacity. And indeed setting God aside we are so far from having the advantage
of Brutes by being rational, that we are rather so much the more wretched and
despicable than they. For as for the Happiness of this Life which wholly
consists of sensual Good, the Senses and Appetites we have in Common with the
Beasts that perish are sufficient for the enjoyment of it; and with these we
might relish it as well without our Reason as with it; we might Eat and Drink
and Sleep, and enjoy all the Pleasures of a Brute with as much Gust and Savor
as we do now with our Reason. For if we were Brutes we should do as Brutes do;
we should weary our selves no longer with vain pursuits, nor vex our selves
with fruitless Expectations, nor torment our selves with the fears of a
Disappointment, but even take our Pleasures when our Appetites craved 'em, and
they freely offered themselves to our Enjoyment. And tho our Reason does
sometimes cook the Enjoyments of our Sense, and give them a higher Relish and
and Luxury, yet this advantage is very much out-weighed by the many Regrets,
and Remorses, and stinging Reflections it intermingles with our Pleasures; So
that had we only the Faculties of Brutes, I am verily persuaded we should more
sincerely enjoy the Happiness of the brutal Nature; but to be sure we should
bear our Miseries with much more Ease and Cheerfulness. For supposing there is
no God, our Reason can afford us no solid support under any Calamity; the main
Arguments of Comfort, as I shall show by and by, being derived from the
Consideration of God and his Providence; which being taken away, I doubt not
but we should bear our miseries without our Reason much better than with it.
For then we should neither be terrified at the approach of them, nor tormented
with Despair under them; then we should neither multiply them with false
Opinions, nor inrage them with bitter Reflections on the Causes of them; but
whenever they happened, bear them as Beasts do, without any other Pain or
Uneasiness than what they necessarily impressed on our Senses, which would
render them a thousand times more tolerable to us, than all our Arguments can
do, supposing we have no God nor Providence to argue from.

So that were that true which the Atheist concludes for, viz. that there is no
God, it would follow that Reason in a Man serves to no other purpose, but to
render him more wretched and despicable. If there be a God indeed, our rational
Faculties are of excellent Use; as having an Object commensurate to their
widest Capacities, and every way fit and worthy to employ and exercise them; an
infinite Truth for our Understanding to dive into, and an infinite Good for our
Wills and Affections to pursue and embrace. But if there be nothing to be
enjoyed by us but what is Carnal and Sensual, our Reason is so far from being
our Ornament and Perfection, that it is the Plague and Disgrace of our Natures.

FOR for any Nature to have more Faculties than what are necessary to its
Happiness, is monstrous; and therefore had we nothing to enjoy but the
Happiness of Brutes, 'twould be a Deformity to our Natures to have the
Faculties of Angels; because these Faculties would be in vain, there being no
adequate Object in the Nature of Things to employ and entertain them. So that
were the Doctrine of the Atheist true, it would cashier our Reason for a vain
and useless Faculty; a thing that serves our Nature to little other purpose,
but only to vex and disquiet it. And what Man that has any Regard or Reverence
for himself, would ever be fond of a Belief that thus sinks and depreciates
him, and lays the Glory of his Nature in the Dust? For if it be true that there
is no God, it is as true that Man is a most despicable Creature, that his
Reason upon which he so much values himself is a frivolous and impertinent
Faculty; a Faculty that can serve him to no higher purpose than only to be a
Cook and a Tailor to his Body, to study Sauces and Fashions for it; and that
while it serves him in this, disserves him in a thousand other Instances, in
mingling his Pleasures with Gall and Wormwood, with Fears and Impatiences,
Anxieties and Remorses, and in aggravating and putting Stings into his Griefs
and Calamities. So that when all is done, the only thing that makes it worth
the while for a Man to be reasonable, is, that there is a Being of infifinite
Perfection to be known, and loved, and imitated and adored by him; and to deny
the Existence of this blessed Being, is infinitely to undervalue our selves,
and to eclipse the Glory and Dignity of our Natures. So that by being partial
to Atheism we are partial to our own Shame and Disgrace, and industriously
consult the Reproach and Infamy of Humane Nature; for the Devil himself cannot
affix a blacker Scandal on our Reason than what is implied in this Assertion,
that there is no God.

AND as it lays the greatest Reproach upon our Nature, so it also renders us
the most Ridiculous of all Beings. For there are certain Affections interwoven
with Humane Nature, which if there be no God are shamefully ridiculous; such as
the Dread of invisible Powers, the Sense of Good and Evil, and the anxious
Expectation of a Judgment to come; all which are so deeply inlaid in our
Beings, as that with all our Arts and Reasoning we cannat totally erase them.
And even the Atheists themselves who have tried all possible ways of
extinguishing them, have found by Experience that the utmost they can do is, to
damp and stupifie them at present; but that in despite of them they will
revive and awake again when Death or Danger approaches them. Now how ridiculous
are these Affections in Humane Nature, if there be no such Being as a God? For
upon this Supposal we have Passions that have no Objects in the Nature of
things, that have nothing in the World to move and affect them, but wild
Chimeraes, flying Dragons, and Castles in the Air; and whereas all other Beings
have real Objects in Nature corresponding to their several Instincts and
Affections (for so the Hare has a natural dread of a Dog, the Sheep of a Wolf,
the Mice of a Cat, the Toad of a Spider, all the Objects of which dread have a
real Existence) Poor silly Man, supposing there is no God, naturally trembles
at an invisible Nothing, and is horribly afraid of the Shadow of an
Imagination. So that if the Atheists Opinion were true, the Ape that looks pale
at the sight of a Snail, and flies as if he feared lest that slow Creature
should overtake and devour him, would be a great deal less ridiculous than
timorous Man, whose Nature is thus hagg'd with frightful Imaginations of
invisible Powers and a Judgment to come.

AND what Man that has any Reverence for the Humane Nature within him, would
ever suffer himself to be bribed for an Opinion that does not only undervalue
but deride and Ridicule it. Should you hear your self branded with a
contemptible Character, or ranked among Apes or any such ridiculous Animals,
you would doubtless be so far from courting the Author of it, that you would
resent it as a great Affront, and think your selves obliged in honor to return
the Provocation; and yet for the sake of a few base Lusts, which are the Shame
and Scandal of your Natures, you espouse the Cause of Atheism, tho it derides
and affronts you to your Face, and stains the Glory of your Natures with the
most contemptible and ridiculous Character in the World.

II. THE Atheist concludes against the very Being and Well-being of Humane
Society. For the Soul that penetrates through all Humane Society, and compacts
and unites it in a regular Body, is Religion, or the Sense and Acknowledgment
of a Divine Power, without which all the Parts of the Corporation of Mankind,
like the Members of a dead Body, must necessarily disband and fly abroad into
Atoms. For a formed Society which is an united Multitude consists in the
Harmony and Consent of its Members mutually united by Laws and Agreements, and
disposed into a Regular Subordination to one another, neither of which can any
Humane Society long continue without the Belief and Acknowledgment of a God.

FOR without this in the first place, it is impossible that the Parts of any
Society should continue united by Laws and Agreements. For it is from the Belief
of a God, that all the Obligations of Conscience are derived; so that take that
away and these must dissolve; and when the Obligations of Conscience are
dissolved, there is nothing but Men's temporal Interests can oblige them to
conform to those Laws and mutual Agreements, by which they are united to one
another. And if it be their Interest only that obliges them to be just and
faithful to their mutual Agreements, they will be equally obliged to be unjust
and unfaithful, when ever it is their Interest to be so. So that this Principle
which only obliges them to be honest while it is for their Advantage, will as
effectually oblige them to be Knaves when ever the Case is altered; and things
being reduced to this Issue, there remains no Foundation of Trust and mutual
Confidence among Men. For what can any Man's Promise signify, if he be under no
Obligation but Interest? To be sure if it be for his Interest he will do what
he says without any Promise; but if it be not, what Promise can oblige him? You
will say it is his Interest to keep his Word, because otherwise he will forfeit
his Reputation for the future? But pray what Reputation can a Man have to
forfeit, that owns no other Law or Obligation but his Interest? or who will
ever presume upon that Man's Word and Engagement, whose avowed Principle it is
to be honest no longer than he can gain by it? Thus Atheism you see, resolves
all our Obligations into our worldly Interest, which is so fickle and mutable a
Principle, so dependent upon Chance and the Inconstancies of Fortune, that
there is no hold to be taken of those that are governed by it. For that which
is their Interest to Day may be their Disadvantage to Morrow, and if it should
so happen, they must steer a contrary Course, or else act contrary to their
leading Principle. So that for Men to trust each other upon this fickle
Principle, is all one as to rely upon the Constancy of a Weathercock, which
every contrary Wind turns to a contrary Position. And things being once reduced
to this Issue, that Men can place no Trust or Confidence in one another, their
Society will soon become their greatest Plague and Vexation. For every Man will
be forced to stand upon his Guard against every Man, and keep himself reserved
and retired within himself; till at last out of mutual Distrust and Jealousy
of one another, they are forced to withdraw their Society, and to live apart in
separate Dens for fear of being intrapt and devoured by each other.

AND as Atheism cuts in sunder those Ligaments of mutual Trust and Agreement,
by which the Parts of Humane Society are united; so it also dissolves that
Regular Subordination that is between them. Plutarch observes in his Treatise
against Colot, (...), i. e. It seems to me more possible for a City to stand
without Ground, than for a Commonwealth to subsist and continue without the
Belief of a God; which is (...) only firm Foundation whereup^^ (...) and
Society depends. For if there be no God, what should oblige any to own any
Superior, or pay any Submission? And if his Interest be his only Obligation to
his Superiors, when ever he can mend his Fortune by Rebelling against them,
that very same Interest which at present restrains him from it, will with equal
force invite him to it; nor will it signify any thing that we are obliged to
the contrary by Oaths of Fidelity and Allegiance; for if it be our Interest to
be faithful to the Government, our own Prudence and Discretion will oblige us
to it without such Oaths as well as with them; but if it be not our Interest,
and this be the only Principle that obliges us, no Oath or Engagement can hold
us. So that in this State of things all the Security that Governors can have of
their Subjects, is, that they will not Rebel when they are not able; but as
soon as they think it safe, to be sure they will think it lawful; which being
once admitted will undermine the very Foundations of Government, and utterly
dissolve that regular Subordination by which Humane Society is supported.
Whereas admitting that the Laws of our Prince are bound upon us by the
Authority of a Sovereign Lord, who can render us eternally happy or miserable,
we are obliged to obey him by all that we can hope or fear, and have all the
Engagements to Loyalty that the Reflections on a happy or miserable Eternity
can lay upon us. What a prodigious piece of Folly is it therefore for Men to
embrace Atheism as their Interest, which does thus directly tend to deprive us
of all the Comforts of Society, by involving us in eternal Confusions and
Disorders? For if once we take away mutual Trust and Government from the World,
both which have a necessary Dependence on the Belief of a God, we break all the
Harmony of Humane Society, and convert it into a Commonwealth of Canibals. And
what Man in his Wits would ever be found of an Opinion that proclaims open War
with Mankind, and is pregnant with Consequents so fatal and destructive to the
World? Can we think it more advantageous to us that Atheism should be true,
than that Humane Society should be upheld and perpetuated? or are the Pleasures
we reap from the Lusts which incline us to Atheism, comparably so valuable as
the Benefits which acrue to us from being formed and united into regular
Corporations? If not, how apparently do we engage against our own Interest,
when we espouse the Cause of Irreligion?

III. THE Atheist concludes against that which is the main Support and Comfort
of Humane Life. For while we are in this World, our best and securest Condition
is exposed to a world of sad and uncomfortable Accidents, which we have neither
the Wisdom to foresee, nor the Power to prevent; So far are we from being
self-sufficient as to our worldly Happiness, that there are a thousand Causes
upon which we depend for it, that are not in our Power to dispose of; and in
such a State of uncertainty wherein we are continally bandyed to and fro, and
made the Game of inconstant Fortune, what Quiet or Security can we enjoy within
our selves without believing that there is a God at the Helm, that steddily
overrules all events that concern us, and steers and directs them by the
invariable Compass of his own infinite Wisdom and Goodness. For considering how
poor and indigent our Nature is, how we are fain to seek abroad and to go a
begging from Door to Door for our Happiness; how we depend upon Chance, and are
secure of nothing we possess, or desire, or hope for; how prone we are to be
alarmed with the Prospect of a sad Futurity, and to magnify distant Evils in
our own Aprehensions; how apt we are to aggravate our Miseries by our
Impatience and Despair, and to pall our Enjoyments by expecting more from them
than their Natures will afford; considering these things, I say, which way can
we turn our selves without a God? or where can we repose our restless Thoughts
but in his Providence? Verily, could I be tempted to believe that there is no
God, I should look upon Humane Nature in its present Circumstances as the most
forlorn and abandoned part of the Creation, and wish that I had had the Luck to
be of any other Species than that of a Rational Animal. For in the State I am I
find my self liable to a thousand Dangers against which I have no Sanctuary,
and under which I have no Support, if there be no God to govern the World; and
having such a dismal Prospect of things before me, and a busy Mind within me
that will be continually working on and aggravating the Evils of it, what can I
do with my self, or how can I enjoy my self without a God to rely on? Upon the
supposal that he is, and that he governs the World I can easily relieve my self
under the most dismal Apprehensions; I can fairly conclude and safely depend on
it, that if I take care by my submission to Gods Will to make him my Friend, he
will either prevent the Evils I apprehend, or support me under them, or convert
them to my good, either of which is sufficient to set my Heart at ease, and
instate me in a quiet Enjoyment of my self. But now by giving up the Belief of
a God, I throw away all these Considerations, and leave my self utterly
destitute and supportless. For what solid ground of Support can I have when I
have no manner of Security either that the Evils I dread shall be prevented, or
that I shall have a Proportionable Strength to bear them, or that I shall ever
reap any good or advantage from them; without which Considerations every Evil
that threatens or befalls me is pure unmingled Misery, against which there is no
Fence or Cordial in Reason or Philosophy. For suppose I should argue with the
ancient Moralists, that every ill Accident that befalls me is fatal, as being
the Effect of some necessary Cause that is without my Power or Disposal, and
therefore it is unreasonable for me to grieve at it; this will be so far from
any way mollifying the Anguish of my Mind, that 'twill rather inrage and
inflame it. For that my Calamity is fatal, so that it is not in my Power to
avoid or remove it, is rather an Aggravation than a Diminution of it. Or
suppose I should reason as the same Moralists otherwhiles do, Why should I
grieve at the Evils that befall me, when alas! my Grief will be so far from
lessening them that 'twill rather increase and multiply them, contribute new
Venom to their Stings, and render them more pungent and dolorous; What a faint
Cordial would it be to my oppressed Mind, to consider that my Grief will but
augment my Load? It is some Ease to a dejected Soul to vent its Griefs in Moans
and Lamentations, which while she seeks to smother in a sullen silence like
imprisoned Wind will breed a Colic in her Bowels; and is it not a sad thing
that I must deny my self the only Solace of a miserable Man, for fear of
augmenting my Misery? Again, suppose I should reason thus with the same
Authors, that Afflictions are indifferent things, and in themselves neither
good nor evil, but indifferently improvable into Mischiefs or Benefits; this I
confess were a good Argument supposing that the Affliction came from a good
God, who can extract Good out of all our Evils, and render the rankest Poison
Medicinal; but otherwise you will find it is but a cold Comfort to call your
Misery by another Name; For if there be no God to temper our Evils, and to
ordain and direct them to wise and good Ends, we shall find in the issue they
will prove themselves Evils to us by what soft Name soever we may call them.
Again, and to name no more, Suppose I should reason thus, as these Masters of
Morality do, that to bear Afflictions with an unconcerned Mind is brave, and
manly, and generous; that it is an Argument of a great and Heroic Mind, that
has raised it self above the reach of Misfortunes; I readily confess so it is,
supposing a Man has good reason thus to bear his Afflictions, which is the
Question in debate; for then it is the Triumph of Reason over Passion, and an
illustrious Instance of a well fortified Mind; but if we have no reason for it,
all these glorious Words, Generous, Brave, etc. are nothing but empty Flash and
mere Rodomontado. For for a Man to be unconcerned with Evils without reason, is
so far from being generous and brave, that it is an Argument of his brutal
Stupidity and Fool-hardiness. But yet supposing that there is no God, these are
the main Arguments we have to support our selves under any Calamity. But alas,
such real Griefs of ours are not to be redressed with pretty Sayings and grave
Sentences, which tho they may look takingly at a Distance, will when we come to
apply and experience them force us to pronounce as Job did of his Friends,
miserable Comforters are ye all, and Physicians of no value. So that were we
left destitute of God and a Providence, and of all those blessed Supports we
derive from thence, we were of all Creatures the most miserable. For in this
state of things we are compassed about with Miseries and Misfortunes, and which
without God is our greatest Misfortune, we have a thing called Reason within
our Breast, which is very ingenious in giving Stings to our Miseries, and
vexing us with cutting Reflections on them, but is not able to qualify one
Grief, or minister one dram of solid Comfort to us.

BUT when we lift up our Eyes to God, there are such vast and innumerable
Comforts flowing down to us from the Consideration of his Nature and
Providence, as are sufficient not only to allay our Sorrows, but to convert
them into Joys and Triumphs. For in him we behold not only an infinite Wisdom
that always knows what is best for us, but also an infinite Goodness that
always wills what it knows to be so, and an infinite Power that always does
what it wills; and whilst we see and consider this, there is nothing in the
World can happen amiss to us; Welcome Pain, welcome Pleasure, welcome Loss,
welcome Gain, welcome Disgrace, welcome Honor; for if we have but God our
Friend, we may securely depend upon it, that whatever befalls us is best for us.

WHO but a Madman therefore would ever espouse the Cause of Atheism, or make
it his Interest to exclude God out of the World? Indeed were he an envious,
malicious, or tyrannical Being, that repined at the Happiness of his Creatures,
and watched all Opportunities to plague or destroy them, 'twere but reasonable
we should endeavor to quit our Minds of the Belief of him; but to imagine it
our Interest to believe there is no such Being in the World as a Good God, that
out of the immense Benignity of his Nature espouses our Interest, and takes
care of our Happiness; that understands our Wants, and compassionates our
Sufferings, and is able and willing to support and relieve us; that requires
nothing of us but what is for our good, and will infinitely reward us for doing
that which is best for our selves; that connives at our Follies, and pities our
Infirmities, and upon our unfeigned Repentance is ready to be reconciled to us,
even when we wilfully and presumptuously provoke him; to Imagine it, I say, our
Interest to shake off the Belief of such a blessed Being as this, is the utmost
height of Folly and Madness. For 'twere doubtless a thousand times more
tolerable for Men that the Sun should be pulled down from the Firmament, and
all the Lights of Heaven extinguished, than that the Belief of a God should be
banished from the World, the absence of which would overspread Mankind with
such a dismal Night of Horror and Despair and Blackness of Darkness, as would
render all wise and considering Men aweary of their Beings, and cause them to
wish a thousand times over, as for the utmost Good they could devise for
themselves, O that there were such a Being as a God at the Helm of the World,
that so the Affairs of it might be steered by an infinite Power, that is always
directed by an infinite Wisdom, and always biased and inclined by an infinite
Goodness! What then can be more brutish or irrational, than for the sake of a
few base Lusts that are the Scandal of our Nature, the Bane of our Society, the
Vexation of our Lives, and the Disturbance of all our Happiness, to banish the
Belief of a God from our Minds which is the Foundation of our Hope, and the
only support we can rationally depend on.

IV. THE Atheist concludes for that side of the Question which is infinitely
the most unsafe and hazardous. He who believes there is a God and acts
accordingly, runs a very small and inconsiderable Venture if in the issue of
things he should chance to be mistaken; he only ventures the dissatisfying a
few extravagant Lusts, the crossing some irregular Inclinations of his Nature,
which if he had gratified would have vexed and tormented him, and entangled his
Life with a thousand ill Circumstances; he only ventures some Prayers and some
Tears, some Watchings and Sruglings and Contentions with himself, and perhaps
some Reproaches and Persecutions for Righteousness sake, in Exchange for which
he has commonly a healthful and a prosperous, an even, safe and contented
Life, a quiet and a Triumphant Conscience, and a joyous Expectation of a
blissful Eternity to come, which do outweigh all the Incommodities he ventures,
all the Pains he undergoes, and all the Pleasures of which he debars himself;
and if in the Conclusion when he resigns up his Breath, it appears that there
is neither God nor Heaven nor Hell, his Condition will be altogether as good as
the Atheists, with whom he will sleep quietly in the same Dust under the same
everlasting Insensibility.

BUT on the contrary, the Atheist by believing that there is no God and acting
accordingly, runs the most desperate Hazard in the World. For besides that he
throws away the main Support and Comfort of his Life, and lays himself open to
all Contingencies, and resigns up the Satisfaction of a good Conscience
together with the Hopes of a blessed Futurity, and all the innumerable Joys it
abounds with; besides all which, I say, he ventures to be eternally wretched
and miserable in the World to come, and exposes himself naked and defenseless
to the unquenchable Wrath of an everliving God; in Exchange for all which he
has no other present Compensation, but the Pleasures of a riotous and
tumultuary Life, which do always die away in the Enjoyment, and are generally
dashed and sophisticated with a thousand very sad and uncomfortable
Circumstances. And then if when he concludes this present Scene of Life, he
should find himself mistaken in his Atheistical Confidence, and be unexpectedly
summoned to the Tribunal of that God, whose Being and Authority he has so
peremptorily denied and affronted, and from thence be transmitted into a dismal
Eternity, there to languish out an everlasting Existence in remediless Woes and
unpitied Lamentations; how would it astonish and confound him to find his
confident Infidelity baffled by such a woeful Experiment, when instead of being
asleep in a state of Silence and Insensibility, which was the thing he depended
on, he shall find himself wasted to a strange Shore, and there landed among
Devils and miserable Spirits, in a state of endless, easless and remediless
Calamity! How blank and forlorn will the Fool look to find himself thus fatally
mistaken? and yet for all he knows this may be the Result and Issue of things.
So that it is a very small Hazard you see that good Men run, compared with that
of the Atheist; for should they be mistaken, their Condition will be as good as
his at the winding up of the Bottom; but if they should not, it will be
infinitely better.

IT is storied of a certain Hermit, who being retired from the World, led a
very severe and mortified Life, that being one day met by two Cardinals, who
were riding by with a very Pompous Equipage, was thus acosted by them, Father,
why should you thus mortify and macerate your self by retiring from the
Glories and Pleasures of this Life? Suppose now that after all your Religious
Severities, there should be neither a God nor a future World to reward you,
would it not be egregious Folly in you thus to throw away present Enjoyments
for future Nothings? To which the good Man presently returned this Answer; But
Sirs, suppose there should be a God and a future World to punish you, would it
not be egregious Folly in you, to run such a desperate Venture as you do of
being everlastingly miserable, for the sake of a few momentary Honors and
Advancements? Upon which, as the Story says, the Cardinals being convinced,
went away very pensive. And herein doubtless the honest Hermit was very much
in the right. For were it a Moot-point whether there be a God or no, one would
think in a matter of such unspeakable Moment, and where the Hazard on each side
is so infinitely unequal, there is no Man in his Wits but would choose the
safest side, and make that his Rule and Principle to live by. In this therefore
the Atheist is justly chargeable with the most desperate Folly, that whereas at
least he might be safe, if not eternally Happy, by believing that there is a
God and acting accordingly, he rather chooses to venture being eternally
Miserable, by believing there is none and acting as if there were none. In
short, this is the plain state of the Case, if I believe that God is and act
consonantly, I shall be safe if he be not, and eternally happy if he be;
whereas if I believe that he is not, I am sure to be miserable for ever if he
be, and am only safe from being miserable for ever if he be not; and this being
the Case, I leave any Man to judge which of the two is in Prudence more
eligible, the peradventure of being happy for ever or of being miserable for
ever, supposing both to be equally probable. But

V. The Atheist concludes for the unsafest side of the Question upon the
greatest Uncertainties in the World. One would think before a Man assented to a
Conclusion, the Consequence of which, if he should be mistaken, will be for
ever fatal to him, he should be so wise at least as to look before he leap, and
satisfy himself of the Grounds he concludes on, and not to give up his Assent
upon every doubtful and uncertain Appearance. Now that part of the Question
which the Atheist Assents to, is of such mighty Consequence as that should it
prove false he is lost for ever; and therefore one would think it concerned him
to be very sure of his hand, and take care that his Assent be founded upon very
strong and undeniable Evidence, instead of which he assents at a venture, and
grounds his Belief upon the most sandy Foundations. For

1. He concludes for a pure Negative.

2. He concludes for it upon a bare Possibility.

3. He concludes for it against the best Evidence that the Contrary will admit.

I. HE concludes for a pure Negative. All Men are agreed that it is a very hard
thing to prove a Negative; but to prove a pure Negative is impossible, unless
the Existence of the thing which it denies implies an express Contradiction.
It Is true, where a thing visibly exists so that we can perceive as well how it
does not exist as how it does, we may with as good Evidence deny as affirm; but
as for pure Negatives which deny the very Existence of such things as may
possibly exist, it is impossible to be certain of them without an infinite
Understanding. For before we can be sure that what is not in our Understanding
is not in Nature, we must be sure that whatsoever is in Nature, is in our
Understanding, otherwise a thousand things may be tho we do not understand
them. As for Instance, Unless I were sure that I had the perfect Map or
Geography of such a Country in my Head, it is impossible I should be sure that
there is no such Town, or City, or Region belonging thereunto; and so unless I
were sure that the Cosmography or Universal Map of Nature were perfectly
delineated on my Understanding, I cannot positively affirm that such or such a
Being does not actually exist. So that as a great Divine of our own has well
observed upon this very Argument, after all that can be said against a thing
this will still be true, that many things possibly are which we know not of,
and that many things more may be than are. For unless our Understanding were
extended to the whole Compass of Nature, there may be, for all we know, ten
thousand things in Nature which are not in our Understanding. So that
concerning pure Negatives we can never be certain, unless the things which they
deny be absolutely impossible, and imply, in the very Notion of their
Existence, a plain Contradiction; which cannot be said of the Existence of God.
For by God we mean nothing but a Being endowed with all possible Perfections;
and to say that it is impossible that there should be any such Being as is
endowed with all the Perfections that it is possible for a Being to be endowed
with, is to assert Possibilities impossible, which is a Contradiction in Terms.
Since therefore this Negative that there is no God, denies that which is
possible in its Nature, and which implies not the least Shadow of
Contradiction, it is impossible, supposing it were true, for any finite
Understanding to be certain of it. What Man in his Wits then would ever presume
to deny the Being of God, and to Stake his everlasting Fate on it, when he
knows beforehand that he cannot be sure that his Denial is true, and that if it
prove false he is lost for ever! Alas! what is this but to throw Dice for our
Souls, and to venture our Salvation on a wild Uncertainty?

II. THE Atheist concludes for a pure Negative upon a bare Possibility. One
would think in a Matter of such infinite Moment, Men should at least be so wise
as not to conclude without strong Probabilities, where they can find no
Certainty to rely on; but so desperately foolhardy is the Atheist as to
suspend his Faith, and with that his Salvation, upon the bare Possibility that
there may be no God. For when he is urged with those Arguments of Gods Being,
that are drawn from the beautiful Contrivance of the World, he has no other
way to evade them, but by endeavoring to demonstrate how by the necessary Laws
of Matter and Motion, things might possibly be shuffled together as they are
without the Agency and Direction of a God; and yet even in this Attempt so many
inextricable Difficulties present themselves as have puzzled and confounded the
acutest Wits that were ever engaged in it; and while with all their Art and
Contrivance they have been framing their Hypothesis of the Existence of this
World without a God, they have been forced not only to beg some Principles, but
also to assert others that upon Examination have been found repugnant to the
Nature of things; and when all is done, if both were true, yet are they
altogether insufficient to solve a thousand Phainomena in Nature. So that the
utmost that the most learned and inquisitive Atheist could ever pretend to, was
to advance Atheism to a Grand perhaps, and by endeavoring to demonstrate how
things might possibly be as they are without a God, to prove that it is possible
there is none; and yet when all is done, their most ingenious Endeavors are
only a Demonstration that the most acute and witty Men may be mistaken. For
what a hopeless kind of Task is it to show how that may be the Effect of a
blind Chance or Necessity, which has all the Characters of a wise Design and
Contrivance fairly imprinted on it? How is it possible for an undesigning
Chance to fit Means to Ends, or Ends to Natures, or so to proportion Parts to
one another as to make a comely Symmetry in the whole, and this in ten thousand
Instances and not fail in one? How often, as the above named Author from Tully
discourses, might a Man after he has shaken together a Set of Letters in a
Bag, fling them out upon the Ground, before they would fall into an exact Poem,
or make a good Discourse in Prose? And may not a little Book be as easily made
by Chance as the great Volume of the World, in which there is such an
inexhaustible Treasure of rich Sense and Contrivance? Or how long might a Man
be in sprinkling Colors upon a Canvas with a careless Hand, before they would
happen to fall into the exact Picture of a Man? And is a Man easier made by
Chance than his Picture? Why may we not as well conceive the most regular
Building in the World to be framed by a casual Concourse of Stone and Iron and
Timber, as that these blind and rambling Parts of Matter should chance to place
themselves so orderly in the World, and to observe such an exact Harmony and
Decorum as if they kept Time with the Musical Laws of some almighty Mind, that
composed their Measures and regulated their Motions up and down in the Universe?

BUT granting the Atheist what he so eagerly tho unsuccessfully contends for,
that it is possible all this might happen by mere Chance, and consequently that
there may be no God in the World, would any Man in his Wits found his Faith
upon a mere Possibility, when 'twill be as much as his Soul is worth if he
should happen to be mistaken? It is possible that should he throw himself from
the Top of a high Steeple, the Air between may be so condensed as to bear him
up and preserve him from being dashed in pieces by his Fall; but would you not
think the Man slark mad that should venture his Neck upon that Possibility? And
yet it is a far more desperate Venture that the Atheist makes, by thus
hazarding his Soul to everlasting Destruction, upon a bare possibility that
there may be no God to destroy him.

III. THE Atheist concludes against the best evidence that the Contrary will
admit. For that there is a God we have as full Evidence as the Matter could
bear if there were one, and to require more is absurd and unreasonable. For let
us at present suppose, but for Argument-sake, that there were such an infinite
Spirit in the World; a Spirit that were as wise, and as good, and as powerful
as he whom we call God is supposed to be; supposing, I say, there were such a
Spirit actually existing, we could not have greater Evidence of it than we have
already that he actually exists. For we could not see him with our Eyes,
because we suppose him to be a Spirit, we could not demonstrate his Existence a
priori or from any Cause, because being the first Cause he must be un caused or
Self-Originated. It remains therefore that the only Demonstration we could give
of his Being, is that which we call a posteriori or from such sensible Effects
as can only be ascribed to the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of such a Being;
and of such Effects as these we have infinite Instances before us. For in sum,
we have all this visible World about us, whose changeable Nature demonstrates
it to be the Effect of some superior Cause, and whose unspeakable Vastness,
Beauty, and Contrivance argues it to be the Effect of some most wise, and good
and powerful Cause. For as to the first, whatsoever is changeable cannot
self-exist, but must necessarily proceed from some superior Cause; because
whatsoever Self-exists is necessarily, and whatsoever is necessarily is always
the same; that which is without any Cause cannot but be, and that which is thus
or thus without any Cause, cannot but be so or so for ever; and consequently if
the World were of it self without any Cause, it would not only be necessarily,
but also be such as it is necessarily and unchangeably; but contrariwise we
plainly perceive that it runs a perpetual Course of Change and Alteration, that
its Parts are continually altering their Figure, and shifting their Places with
one another, whereas if this Part were of it self necessarily, as it must be if
the Whole be so, it would necessarily be where it is and what it is eternally.

AND since the Mutability of this World argues it to be the Effect of some
superior Cause, I would fain know whether considering the Vastness, and Beauty,
and Contrivance of it, it be not most reasonable to attribute it to such an
all-good, all-wise, and Almighty Cause as we suppose God to be. For what less
than an infinite Power can bear a due Proportion to such a vast and immense
World? Should you enter into a vast and magnificent Palace, and find no
Creature in it, but a company of Mice or Weasels, could you possibly believe
that these impotent Vermin built it? And yet the building of the most Royal
Palace does not so much exceed the Power of these weak Animals, as the building
of this World does the Power of any Cause but a God. But then if we consider
the infinite Number of Beings in the World that are capable of Happiness, and
the vast Provisions that are made to entertain them according to their several
Capacities, we cannot but thence conclude that the Power which made them was
acted by an infinite Goodness. Lastly, if we consider the rare and admirable
Contrivance of the several Parts of the World; how perfect each one is in its
Kind, how exactly fitted to each other, and what a lovely Symmetry and
Proportion they all make in the whole, how can we otherwise imagine but that
that Power and Goodness which caused it was directed by an infinite Wisdom? So
that the World is such an Effect as openly proclaims its Cause to be a God; and
if this Evidence of Gods Existence will not convince Men, they are impregnably
fortified against all Conviction; and if God should carry them into those
infinite Spaces that are beyond the Limits of this World, and there command a
New One into Being, while they stood looking on, and saw it springing out of
nothing, they might with as good reason conclude that World to be nothing but a
fortuitous Concourse of insensible Parts of Matter, as they now do that this is
so. So that in fine, he that denies God after all these Demonstrations which he
has given of himself, is out of the reach of Argument, and if he pursue his
own Principles, can never be convinced by any possible Reasons. And what a
desperate Folly is it for Men to embrace a Belief, which should they be
mistaken draws after it everlasting Ruin, when they have all the Reasons to the
contrary that the Matter is capable of? What is this but to shut their Eyes,
and cast themselves blindfold on their own Destruction, and to resolve to wink
hard and believe against all possible Reasons, that so they may ruin themselves
without any Interruption?

VI. and Lastly, THE Atheist plainly contradicts himself in his own Conclusion.
For by denying that God is, he necessarily denies the Possibility of his Being.
For if he be not, it is impossible he should ever be; because Eternity of Being
is included in the Notion of him. For when we speak of God, we mean by him a
Being that is before all Causes, and the Cause of all Causes, and that
therefore owes not his Being to any prior Cause, but does necessarily,
independently, and eternally exist. So that if he be not now, he cannot be at
all, because he must begin to be, which is contradictory to the very essential
Notion and Idea of him. For if he should ever begin to be, he cannot be
Eternal, and if he be not Eternal he cannot be God. So that to say God is not,
is by necessary Consequence to say he cannot be at all; and yet by a God we
mean at the same time a Being that is endowed with all the possible Perfections
that a Being is capable of. Wherefore as by saying that God is not, we do by
Consequence assert that it is impossible he should ever be, so by asserting
that it is impossible he should ever be, we do in effect assert this gross
Contradiction; that it is impossible such a Being should ever be as includes
all the Perfections that are possible to a Being. Thus in the same Breath we
pronounce that God can and cannot be, that it is possible he is, and yet
impossible he should ever be. For by saying that he is a Being endowed with all
the possible Perfections of Being, we expressly affirm that it is possible he
may be; but by saying that there is no such Being actually existing, we do as
expressly assert that it is impossible he should ever be. He therefore who
asserts that God is not, does by necessary Consequence assert this express
Contradiction, that it is impossible there should ever be a Being as perfect as
it is possible. And when if there be a God, Men's eternal Fate depends but upon
believing that he is and acting accordingly, what a monstrous Folly is it for
Men to contradict themselves to deny him; what is this but to stake their Souls
upon it, that the very first Principle of reasoning is false, and put their
Fate upon this desperate Issue, that unless both Parts of a Contradiction prove
true, they must inevitably perish for ever?

And now having shown you from what malignant Causes Atheism springs, and how
desperately foolish and unreasonable it is in it self, let us all endeavor by
the serious Consideration of what has been said, to fortify our Minds against
it. And since this Proposition that God is, is the prime Foundation of all
Religion, it concerns us all to use our utmost Diligence to establish our Minds
in the firm and steadfast Belief of it; and this we cannot fail to do, if we
heartily endeavor it. For the Arguments of Gods Being do shine all round about
us with such a clear and convincing Light, that we need do no more than just
open our Eyes to it, and dispel those mischievous Causes from our Wills, that
hide and obscure it from our Understandings. And when once we have thoroughly
settled the Belief of Gods Being in our Minds, it will mightily influence all
our Powers of Action; it will invite our Hope, and alarm our Fear, and Address
to every Passion in us that is capable of Persuasion, and be an everliving
Spring of Religion within us; for God is an Object so infinitely Great in
himself, and of such infinite Moment and Concernment to us, that it is next to
impossible we should firmly believe that he is, without being vigorously
impressed with religious Affections upon the Consideration of his Being.

CHAP. IV. Of the Necessity of acknowledging the divine Providence to oblige us
to be truly Religious.
THE main Influence which the Belief of a God has upon the Minds of Men,
proceeds immediately from the Belief of his Providence, without which we are no
way concerned or Interested in him. For a God without a Providence is a
solitary kind of Being that lives alone from the World, altogether retired
within himself, and never looks abroad or any ways intermeddles with any thing
without; and what have we to do with a Being that has nothing to do with us or
our Affairs, but lives apart from us in some unaccessible Retirement, where
neither we can go to him nor he come to us? So that it is by his Providence
that all Correspondence and Intercourse between God and his Creatures is
maintained; which being taken away, he is as nothing to us, and we are as
nothing to him. For what does it signify to us that there is a certain
excellent Being, called God, sitting on the Top of the Heavens with his Arms
folded in his Bosom, and who does nothing there but enjoy himself in a quiet
Contemplation of his own Perfections, without regarding any thing without him,
or doing either good or hurt to the World? Such a God is nothing but a great
Cipher in the World, that only makes a glorious Flourish, but is as
insignificant as no God at all. For to what purpose should we pray to a God
that is not at leisure to hear us, or hope in a God that is not concerned to
help us? What should move us to love a God that bestows no Good, or to fear a
God that inflicts no Evil, or to obey a God that has no Regard of our Actions?
Why should we thank him if we receive nothing from him? For what should we
praise him if he be no ways beneficial to the World? And wherein should we
imitate him if he sits still and does nothing, and exercises neither Wisdom,
nor Goodness, nor Justice, nor Mercy toward any thing without him? All which
Perfections of the Deity without a Providence are utterly void and useless. For
his Providence is the great Sphere of Activity wherein he exercises and
displays his Perfections, wherein his Power executes the Contrivances of his
Wisdom, and his Wisdom contrives the Methods of his Goodness; so that without
his Providence all his Perfections will signify nothing. For what does that
Wisdom signify that contrives nothing? Or that Power which does nothing? Or
that Goodness that is good for nothing? Or that Justice which distributes
nothing? And yet just such Ciphers are all the Perfections of God suppose there
is no Providence wherein to employ and exercise them. And if once we vacate and
extinguish these Perfections of God which are the Graces which render him so
Sublime and Adorable, what Reason can move us to adore and Worship him? For why
should we concern our selves with a God who concerns himself with no Body, and
that either has neither Power, nor Wisdom, nor Goodness, or which to us is the
same, makes no use of them? So that the denial of Gods Providence, you see,
directly cuts in sunder all the Ties of Religion, by rendering him an
insignificant Being to the World.

IN the Prosecution of this Argument I shall show, First, What of the divine
Providence it is that is necessary to be believed in order to our being truly
Religious. Secondly, What Evidence there is to create in us this Belief.
Thirdly, The Insufficiency and Unreasonableness of the common Pretenses to
Infidelity in this matter.

SECT. I. What it is we are to believe of the divine Providence.
IN General, it is not sufficient that we believe this or that Part or Branch
of it, but we must acknowledge the Whole; every Part whereof the Whole consists
being pregnant with very powerful Obligations to Religion. Now the Whole of
Providence consists in Gods continual Conservation, Possession, Inspection, and
Disposal of all things, and Government of the rational World. So that the Whole
of it includes these five Parts or Branches, 1. Gods continual Conservation of
all things. 2. His continual Possession of all things. 3. His continual
Inspection of all things. 4. His continual Ordering and Disposal of all things.
5. His continual Government of the rational World. All which, as I shall show,
are highly necessary to be believed in order to our being truly Religious.


I. To oblige us to be truly religious, it is necessary we should believe that
God continually upholds and conserves all things. That he alone is the great
Atlas on whose almighty Shoulders the whole Frame of things depends. For tho
the works of Humane Art do often stand many Ages after the Workmans Hand is
withdrawn from them, yet the reason is because there is Something between them
and Nothing, viz, the pre-existing Matter of which they are formed; whereas the
Works of God being all produced out of Nothing, have nothing between them, but
that creative Power which produced them. And therefore as Man's Works would
necessarily perish were that pre-existing Matter taken away, which stands
between them and Nothing, so Gods Works would necessarily resolve into nothing,
should that creative Power be withdrawn which stands between them and nothing.
In short pre-existing Matter is the Basis of our Works, and creative Power of
Gods; and therefore as our Works must cease to be were their pre-existing
Matter withdrawn, so Gods Works must cease to be were his creative Power
withdrawn. So that it is the same almighty Power which raised the World out of
Nothing that keeps it from sinking into nothing; and that it is this Moment is
as much the Effect of divine Power, as that it was that Moment when it was
first created. For the World was no more able to give it self the second Moment
of Being than it was the first, nor the third than the second, and so on
through all the past and future Moments of its Being. For one Moment of Being
is as much as another, and therefore to give a second requires the same Power
as to give a first; and if so, then each succeeding Moment of the Worlds
Duration and Continuance, must be derived from the Cause of the first Moment of
its Being. So that the Creation and Conservation of the World, is only the same
Act continuing and flowing on (like a Line from a Mathematical Point) from the
first Instant of its Being to the last Period of its Duration. And so the
Scripture represents it; thus Nehemiah 9.6. Thou, even thou art Lord alone,
thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens with all their Hosts, the Earth
and all things that are therein, and thou preservest them all; and Acts 17.25,
28. he gives to all life and breath and all things, in him we live, and move,
and have our being; and Heb. 1.3. he is said to uphold all things by the word
of his Power.

WHICH is a Truth of that vast Importance to Religion, that it is hardly
conceivable how it can subsist without it. For while we look on our selves as
Beings that are independent from God, that do live, and breath, and subsist of
our selves, without any new Supplies of Being from him, why should we serve and
worship him? What reason have we to trust in a Being from whom we expect no
Support? Or to render Homage to a Being on whom we have no Dependence? So that
by disbelieving this Part of the divine Providence, we do in effect cut off all
Intercourse between God and our selves, and lay an Imbargo on Religion. For if
we depend not on him, what have we to do with him? And if we owe not our Lives
and Beings to his Power, what right has he to exact our Obedience? But while
we look upon our selves as Beings that hang upon him, and derive every Breath
and Moment of our Beings from him, so that should he withdraw from us that
almighty Arm that susteins us, and leave us to subsist of our selves, we must
presently drop into nothing, how can we forbear without infinite Stupidity and
Ingratitude to devote our selves and all our Powers and Faculties to his
Service? For what a stupid Wretch should I be should I not study to please him
upon whom I know my Life and Being depends, and who merely by withdrawing his
Hand from underneath me can let me sink into nothing when he pleases; and what
an ungrateful Wretch should I be should I refuse to honor, worship and obey
him, from whom I draw every Breath I breath and derive new life and Being every
Moment?

II. IT is also necessary we should believe that God possesses all things; that
he has not given away this World from himself, and cast it out of his own
Disposal as a common Scramble among Men; but that he has reserved to himself
an absolute, unalienable and independent Propriety in all that we enjoy and
possess. For all things owe their Being to him as he is the Creator and
Vpholder of them; and therefore whatsoever is must necessarily be his, because
it is by his Power and Providence. And if we who act by the Power of God and
can do nothing without him, may claim a Right to the Effects of our Invention
and Industry, how much more may God who contrived and produced all things by
his own independent Wisdom and Power? For our Wisdom and Power being Gods, he
has a Sovereign Right to all the Effects of them; but his Wisdom and Power are
absolutely his own without Dependence on any superior Cause; and therefore
whatsoever are the Effects of them must necessarily be his by a most absolute
and independent Propriety. And accordingly he is styled the possessor of Heaven
and Earth, Genesis 14.19. and Moses tells his People, behold the Heaven and the
Heaven of Heavens is the Lords, the Earth also and all that is therein, Deuteronomy.
10.14. and the Earth says the Psalmist is the Lords and the fullness thereof,
the World and they that dwell therein; for he has founded it upon the Sea and
prepared it upon the Floods, Psalm. 24.1. and 50.12. and the Heavens says he
again are thine, the Earth also is thine; as for the World and the fullness
thereof thou have founded them, Psalm. 89.11.

GOD therefore being the Supreme Proprietor of the World, there is nothing can
be justly ours but by his Will and Grant; and nothing can be ours by his Will,
but what is honestly and justly ours. So that for us to seize upon any Part of
the World by Fraud, or Violence, or Oppression, is to trespass upon God and
invade his Property, and to tear his World from him against his Will. Thus
whatsoever we possess by Wrong, we possess as Robbers and Invaders of God, and
whatsoever we enjoy by Right, we enjoy as Tenants to the great Landlord of the
World; and without owning and acknowledging this we cannot be truly Religious.
For if the World be not his, why should we pray to him for what we want of it,
or praise him for what we enjoy? Why should we patiently submit to his Disposal
when he deprives us of what we have? Or thankfully acknowledge his Goodness when
he supplies us with what we need? Why should we employ our Possessions in his
Service, or think our selves obliged to return him any Part of them in pious or
charitable Works? In a word, why should we be contented with a small share, and
abide by that unequal Division of things that is made in the World, and not
endeavor to increase our own poor Heap by pilfering from other Men's that are
ten times bigger than ours? Whence are these Obligations but from this
Supposal, that God is the supreme Proprietor and Possessor of all things; which
being denied there remains no solid Foundation of Reason for any of these great
and necessary Duties of Religion.

III. To oblige us to be truly religious it is also necessary we should believe
that God is present with and inspects all things; that his divine Substance is
diffused through and circumfused about all things, so as to penetrate them
within as an universal Soul, and contain them without as an universal Place.
For so the Jewish Doctors are wont to call God Hamakom, that is to say, the
Place or Continent of all things; because all things are encompassed by him,
and do live and move within his infinite Bosom. For so in Scripture the divine
Substance is described, as spreading it self through and a round the World,
even to the utmost possibility of Extension. Whither says the Psalmist, shall
I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up
into Heaven thou art there, if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there; if
I take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea,
even there shall thy Hand lead me and thy right Hand shall hold me, Psalm.
139.7, 8, 9, 10. And Behold, says Solomon, the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain thee, 1 Kings 8.27. yea do not I fill Heaven and Earth? says the Lord
himself, Jer. 23.24.

NOW tho Gods Omnipresence be strictly an Attribute of his Essence, and not a
part of his Providence, yet it is such an Attribute as includes his universal
Providence, and without supposing of which an universal Providence can hardly
be conceived. For if he co-exists and be present with all things, he must be
supposed to operate upon them; because where ever he is, his infinite Wisdom
and Power and Goodness are; which in their own Nature are such active
Perfections as cannot be present where such a world of things are to be done,
and sit still and do nothing. For how can we conceive that infinite Wisdom
should be present where a world of things are to be ordered, and yet order
nothing? That infinite Power should be present where a world of things are to
be done, and yet do nothing? Or that infinite Goodness should be present where
a world of good is to be done, and do no good at all? Such an idle, restive
Presence as this, is utterly inconsistent with such active Perfections. So that
the Omnipresence of an infinite Power and Wisdom, and Goodness necessarily
supposes an universal Providence, and without such an Omnipresence an universal
Providence can hardly be conceived. For how can God be present by any Power, or
Virtue or Efficacy of his Nature, in any Place from whence the real Substance
of his Divinity is excluded? How can he operate by his own immediate Efficiency
where he is not? Or extend his divine Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness over all
things, except his divine Substance in which these Attributes are, be
co-extended with them. Every Agent must be where it acts, because it acts from
its Being, and it is as possible for that which is not to operate, as for that
which is to operate where it is not; and hence Socrates being asked how it was
possible for one God to order all the Affairs of the World? returns this
Answer, (...), i. e. God is so great and vast a Being, as that he hears and
sees all things together, and is present every where, and takes care of all
things at the same time. Thus Gods Omnipresence, you see, does so include his
universal Providence that with it it is necessary and without it inconceivable.

AND then from his Presence with all things, necessarily follows his Inspection
of all things; because where ever he is, his infinite Knowledge is, which is
inseparable from his Being; and were ever his infinite Knowledge is, it must
necessarily have a through Prospect of all things round about him, so that
nothing can be concealed from its Inspection. For so the Scripture assures us
that the Eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, 2 Chronicles.
16.9. and that the Eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and
good, Prove. 15.3. and in a word, that all things are open and naked to the Eyes
of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13.

BOTH which are Truths of vast Importance to Religion. For while Men look upon
God as a Being that dwells at a great Distance from them, they will be ready
enough to conclude Procul a Jove procul a Fulmine, that being far off from him,
they are out of his reach, and beyond the Danger of his Thunderbolts; and that
he is too far removed from them either to succor them when they want his Aid,
or to punish them when they deserve his Displeasure; which must needs
extinguish both their Hope and Fear, which are the Master-Springs of their
Religion. And tho we should believe him to be present with us, yet unless we
also believe that he has a full Inspection into all our Actions and Affairs,
we shall have no Regard to him. For if he sees not into our Affairs, how can he
succor and relieve us? And if he cannot relieve us, to what end should we hope
in him, depend upon him, or pray to him? And unless he has a perfect Insight
into all our Actions, how should he reward or punish us; and if he cannot
reward us what should encourage, if he cannot punish us, what should terrify
us to our Duty to him? But if we look upon him as a Being that is always with
us, and where ever we are surrounds us wirh his boundless Presence* that
includes and penetrates every part of our Substance, sees into our inmost
Thoughts and Purposes, and ransacks every Corner of our Souls with his
allseeing Eye, and has a through and perfect Prospect of all our Affairs and
Concerns, we cannot without infinite Force to our Reason forbear fearing and
reverencing, serving and adoring him.

IV. To fasten the Obligations of Religion upon us it is also necessary that we
believe that God continually orders and disposes of all things; that he is the
Spring of all the Motions of this great Machine of the World, that sets every
Wheel and Cause agoing, and by his all-commanding Influence maintains, directs
and overrules their Motions; and that there is nothing happens in the World,
whether by Nature, or Chance, or Design, but by his Ordination and Disposal;
that even those natural Causes which are necessarily determined to such
particular Courses and Effects, are influenced and conducted by him, and that
whenever they stray from their Courses, suspend or precipitate their Motions,
or move counter to their natural Tendencies, it is by his Order and Direction;
that it is he who drives and guides the heavenly Bodies, impresses the Degrees
and chalks out the Paths of their Motions, and by his own Almighty Hand turns
round those stupendous Wheels in a perpetual Revolution. For so the Scripture
tells us that he makes his Sun to shine upon the good and bad, Mat. 5.45. that
it is at his Beck and Command that those vast Bodies of Light exhale the
Vapors of the Earth and Sea, and dissolve them down again in Hail, and Rain
and Snow. For so we are told that it is he who covers the Heavens with Clouds,
and prepares the Rain for the Earth; that sends forth his Commandment unto the
Earth, and gives Snow like Wool, and scatters the hoar Frost like Ashes, and
casts forth his Ice like Morsels, and sends forth his Word and melts
them, and causes the Wind to blow and the Waters flow, Psalm 147.8, 15, 16, 17,
18. that the Fire, and Hail, and Snow, and Vapors, and stormy Winds do fulfill
his Word, Psalm 148.8. And in a word, that it is by his Order and Influence that
the Earth sends up its Sap into the Seeds and Roots of Herbs, and Corn and
Plants, and causes them to spring and grow, and that all Animals do propagate
their Kind, and still replenish the Storehouses of Nature; for so we are told
that he clothes the Grass of the Field, and arrays the Lillies in all their
glory, Mat. 2.28, 29, 30. and that he causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle,
and Herb for the use of Man, that he may bring forth Food out of the Earth,
Psalm. 104.14.

AND then as for fortuitous and casual Events, which depend upon Accidental and
irregular Causes, as a Man's being hit with an Arrow let fly at random, or
brained with a Stone falling from the Top of an House, we must believe that
they are all ordered, directed, and overruled by God; so as that to him there
is nothing casual or contingent; and tho there are many things happen of which
there was no Necessity in their immediate Causes, yet do they as necessarily
depend upon the Will and Power of the first Cause of all, as the Rising and
Setting of the Sun, and Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. So that how fortuitous
soever these things may be in respect of the Design and natural Tendency of
second Causes, yet none of them ever happen besides the Purpose and Intention
of God, who foresees and designs them before they come to pass, and directs and
levels them to his own most wise and holy Ends and Purposes. For so the Arrow
which the Soldier let fly at Random was levelled by God at Ahabs Breast, so
that his Death was Chance in respect of the Soldier who shot the Arrow, but
Design in God who directed it; and accordingly, Prove. 16.33. we are told that
the Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
And so in the Case of Chance-Medley when a Man accidentally kills another
without any Design or Intention, tho it be mere Accident in him, it is Council
and Design in God, who, as the Scripture expresses it, delivers the Man he
slays into his Hand, Exodus 21.13.

And then Lastly, As for those Events which happen by the Design of free and
rational Agents, it is necessary we should believe that they are all overruled
by God too; that whatever befalls us in this World whether it be by the good or
ill Design of Men or Angels, is for good, and just, and holy Ends, either
permitted or determined by the sovereign Disposer of all Events; so that
without his wise Permission or Determination, neither Angels, nor Men, nor
Devils can do us either good or hurt; that every good thing we receive from
them, only passes to us through their Hands from God, and that they are only
the Channels and Conveyances of the overflowing Streams of his infinite Bounty;
and that when ever we suffer any ill from them, they are but the Rods in Gods
Hand wherewith he chastens and corrects us; that he has the overruling
Disposal of all the Ills which they inflict upon us, and can render their
Stings a Sovereign Balm, and their ranckest Poison Medicinal to us; so that
their Malice being in Gods Disposal, can effect nothing but what he will have
it; and if it does us hurt it is his Executioner, but if he pleases it shall do
us good, and like Leaches applied by a skillful Physician, shall draw away our
Disease while it is sucking our Blood. For so God made the Malice of Joseph's
Brethren the means of his Advancement in Egypt; and by the Covetousness of
Judas and Cruelty of the Jews advanced the holy Jesus to his own right Hand,
and executed his Purpose to redeem Mankind. Thus God overrules the Actions of
Men, and when he pleases directs them quite contrary to their Intentions; for
the way of Man, says the Prophet, is not in himself, it is not in Man that
walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10.23. It is the Man that walks and acts, but
it is God alone that leads his Way, and directs his Actions to what End he
pleases.

ALL which it is necessary we should believe in order to our being truly
religious. For while we look upon God as a Foreiner to the World, that has
altogether retired himself from the Affairs of it, and abandoned it to the
Disposal of blind Chance or Necessity, he must stand for a Cipher in our
Esteem, and signify no more to us than the Emperor of the World in the Moon,
who for all we know may be a glorious and puissant Prince, but is so far
removed from us and our Affairs, that he can do us neither good nor hurt. And
if God intermeddle not with those Goods and Evils which happen here below, what
does he signify to us who live apart from him in another World, from which he
is wholly retired and withdrawn? But if we firmly believe that there is nothing
befalls us, whether it be in the Course of Nature or by Chance, or Design, but
by his Order and Direction, we must lay aside our Reason and Humanity, if for
every Good we want or do receive, we do not apply our selves to him with
humble, and submissive, thankful and ingenuous Minds; and if under every Evil
that we feel or fear, we do not resign up our Wills and lift up our Eyes to
him, as to the sole Arbitrator of our Fate. For where should we pay our Thanks,
or whence should we expect our Supplies and Deliverances, but to him who is the
Fountain of all Good, and from him who is the supreme Moderator of all Events?
Who is there in Heaven or Earth whom we are so much concerned to please, and so
much obliged to acknowledge and submit to, so much engaged to trust to and rely
on, as him who has all our Fortunes in his Hands, and the absolute Disposal of
every thing in which we are or may or can be any way interested or concerned?
So that the Belief of Gods overruling Providence has every Link of our Duty
fastened to it in a strong and rational Concatenation, and if it be loosened
from this Principle, the whole Chain must necessarily fall in sunder.

V. and Lastly, To oblige us to be truly religious it is also necessary we
should believe that God is the Supreme Governor of the rational World; which is
a distinct Branch of Providence from the former. For all things whatsoever are
subject to Gods Order and Disposal, but in strictness of Speech it is only
rational Beings that are subject to his Government. For Government supposes
Laws, and Laws Rewards and Punishments, of which rational Beings alone are
capable, they alone having the power to deliberate, and upon Deliberation to
choose what is good and refuse what is Evil, without which no Being can deserve
either to be rewarded or punished. So that the Government of God in strictness
of Speech, respects only the rational World consisting of Angels and Men.

As for the Government of Angels it is impossible we should understand any more
of it than what God has revealed; because tho they converse with us and our
Affairs, yet we do not converse with them; our Spiritual Nature by which we are
near allied to them being shut up in Matter, which like a Wall of Partition
divides us from them, and hinders us from looking over into their World, and
from seeing their Nature and Operations, and surveying their Polity and
Government. Indeed so far as we understand their Natures, we may easily
understand the Laws by which God Governs them; because we know Gods Laws are
always adapted to the Natures of things; and consequently since we know that
they are rational Creatures, we may conclude from thence, that whatsoever is
fit and decorous for rational Creatures, as such, they stand obliged to by the
Law of their Natures. But since there are particular Powers and Properties in
their Natures which we understand not, it is impossible we should understand all
the particular Laws by which they are Governed. Only thus much in general we
know, that the whole Order of Angelical Beings were from the first Moment of
their Creation subjected to Laws fitted to their Nature; by which natural Laws
they stood obliged to obey their Creator in all his positive Commands and
Institutions; and that these Laws whatsoever they were both natural and
positive were established in Rewards and Punishments, by which if they
continued obedient they were to continue for ever in their most blissful Ranks
and Stations; but if they rebelled were immediately to be banished thence into
everlasting Wretchedness and Misery; that a certain Order of these Angelical
Beings, excited either by their Pride, or Envy, or sensual Affection, did under
their Head or Chieftain revolt from God by transgressing some natural or
positive Law, for which they were expelled the high Territories of Happiness,
and driven into these lower Parts of the World, where under the Prince of their
Rebellion they have ever since waged War against God and Man; that in this
state of War they are under the Restraint of Gods almighty Power, who sets
Bounds to their Power and Malice which it cannot pass, and determins it to what
Ends and Purposes he pleases; employing it sometimes to try and chasten good
Men, sometimes to execute his Wrath upon the Children of Disobedience, and
sometimes again letting it loose, merely to display his own almighty Power in
its Defeat and Overthrow; in which State they are reserved as Prisoners at
large to the Judgment of the great Day, whereby together with wicked men they
shall be sentenced and confined to everlasting Flames and Darkness; that the
good Angels in reward of their constant Obedience are continued and fixed in a
most blissful Condition, in which they enjoy the constant Smiles of God, and
the unspeakable Pleasure of being entirely resigned to his Will, who upon all
Occasions sends them to and fro the World, as the great Messengers and
Ministers of his Providence, to Minister to the Recovery of recoverable
Sinners, and to pour out the Vials of his Wrath upon the obstinate and
unreclaimable; to assist, protect and comfort good Men while they live, and
when they depart from hence to conduct their Spirits through the aerie
Territories of the wicked Angels into those blissful Mansions that are prepared
to receive them till the Resurrection; at which time their Part will be to
summon and gather both the good and bad before the Tribunal of Christ, to
receive their final Sentence to everlasting Weal or Woe.

THIS is the main of what we know concerning Gods Government of Angels; the
sincere Belief of which will be of vast Advantage to us in the whole Course of
our Religion. For since there is such a mighty Colony of evil Angels roving
about the World, watching all Opportunities to lay Snares in our Way, and to
tempt us into their Revolt and Ruin; and since their Design in tempting us now,
is only to get us into their Power, that so they may torment us hereafter, how
much does it concern us to guard and defend our selves against their evil
Motions and Suggestions, left by complying with them we give them opportunity
to train us on from one degree of Wickedness to another, till they have made us
provoke the Almighty to cut us off, and abandon us for ever to their Rage and
Fury; and since they are all of them under his Restraint, and can proceed no
farther in their mischievous Designs against us, than he lets loose his Chain
to them, how should this encourage us manfully to struggle and contend against
them; since if we do, we may depend upon it, that God in whose Power they are,
will either command them off, or at least not permit them to overpower us with
Temptation. And since by Gods Permission there are great Flocks of good Angels
always hovering about us, to guard us against those malignant ones, and to
prompt us to good, as they prompt us to evil, and with their holy Inspirations
to countermine their impure Suggestions, how much does it import us to cherish
and reverence every pious Thought and Motion, since for all we know it may be
the Whisper of some Angel of God, who by these and such like holy Injections is
now struggling with the Powers of Darkness, to rescue our Souls out of their
hands. And since these blessed and benevolent Spirits do by Gods Appointment
pitch their Tents about good Men while they live; and convoy them safely to the
Seat of the Blessed when they die, how should this encourage bad Men to be
good, and good Men to persevere in Well-doing; since they place and continue
themselves under the blessed Patronage of Angels, to be conducted safely by
them through this perilous Sea to the calm Regions of eternal Light? Thus the
Belief of Gods Government of Angels, so far as he has thought good to reveal
it to us, very much conduces to a hole Life.

BUT that which more nearly concerns us, and has a more immediate Influence on
our Practice, is his Government of Men; the Belief of which is indispensably
necessary to render us truly religious. Now concerning this Government of God
over Men, there are seven things necessary to be believed.

1. That the great End of Gods Government is the Welfare of Mankind. 2. That in
order to this End, God has given us Laws for the Regulation and Government of
our Actions. 3. That to secure our Obedience to these Laws he has derived his
Authority upon all lawful Sovereignties to Govern us according to them. 4. That
he is ready to contribute to us all necessary Assistance, to enable us to
observe these Laws. 5. That the Assistance he contributes to us is such as
supposes us free Agents, and concurs with and maintains our natural Freedom. 6.
That he takes particular Cognizance of the good and ill Use which we make of
our natural Freedom. 7. That he will certainly reward or punish us accordingly.
I. To oblige us to be truly religious it is necessary we should believe that
the great End of Gods Governing us is our Welfare and Happiness. That being
infinitely raised above all Want and Indigence, he does not assume the
Government of us to advance himself, or to gratify any boundless Ambition of
his own, which is a Vice that springs out of Poverty and Indigence, and
therefore can have neither Root nor Room in a Nature so infinitely happy as
his; but that all his Design in reigning over us is to do us good and to
consummate our Happiness; to restore and rectify our disordered Nature, and to
advance and raise it to the utmost Perfection, and Bliss and Glory it is
capable of; to protect and defend us against present Evils, and support us
under them, and convert them into Instruments of good, and to rescue us from
that worst of Evils, Sin, and from all those endless Miseries it is pregnant
with. This we ought to believe is the great Scope of all his Acts of
Government, and even of the direct Punishments he inflicts; which are always
intended either to reclaim the Offenders themselves, or to warn others by the
sad Example of their suffering not to follow the ill Example of their Sin. And
that this is the great End of his Government he himself has expressly declared.
So Psalm. 145.9. we are assured that the Lord is good to all, and that his
tender Mercies are over all his Works; and Verse 13.14. that in the Exercise of
his everlasting Kingdom, he upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all that
are bowed down; and tho in the Administration of his Government, he has
decreed to cut off all such obstinate Rebels as will not be reduced by the
Methods of his Love, yet he has declared that he is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. and that he
would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. And unless we believe him to be a benevolent Governor, that aims at
the Good of his Subjects, we shall look upon his Government as a cruel Tyranny,
erected for no other End but to squeeze and oppress us, to inthrall our
Liberty, and rob us of the Rights of our Nature, and to chain us down to an
endless and easless Toil and Wretchedness; and whilst we thus look upon it, it
is impossible we should ever submit to it with that generous Freedom and
Cheerfulness that true Religion requires. But if we firmly believe that the
great Design of it is to promote our Welfare both here and hereafter, we have
all the reason in the World to covet to be Governed by God, and to receive his
Yoke as a mighty Grace and Favor.

II. To oblige us to be truly religious it is also necessary we should believe
that God has given us Laws for the Regulation and Government of our Actions.
For without Laws to direct Men what to do and what to avoid, there can be no
such thing as Government, the proper business of which is to regulate Men's
Actions, and without a Rule there can be no Regulation; so that divine Rules or
Laws are necessarily included in the divine Rule or Government; and as God
cannot be supposed to give Laws without Governing, so neither can he be
supposed to Govern without giving Laws; so that unless we believe that God
governs us by Laws, we are utterly destitute both of all Reason why and of all
Direction wherein to obey him, and have neither Motive to enforce nor Measure
to regulate our Obedience. And as it is necessary we should believe that he
has given us Laws, so it is also necessary we should believe that those Laws
are for our good; that he neither imposed them on us pro imperio, as arbitrary
Tests and Trials of our Obedience, nor exacts them of us to serve himself and
advance his own Interest and Greatness, but that the great Design of them is to
do us good, and to direct our Actions to our own Interest; to render our Lives
placid and easy, and to perfect and glorify our Natures. For while we look
upon the Matter of Gods Law either as indifferent in it self, and imposed upon
us by him for no other End but to show his absolute Sovereinty over us, or as
beneficial only to him and imposed upon us merely to promote his Interest, it
is impossible we should ever comply with it with a free and cheerful Mind. We
may happily obey him out of Fear and Dread, because he is too mighty for us, and
not to be contended with without infinite Peril and Disadvantage; but it is
impossible we should obey those Laws with a resigned and cheerful Will, from
which we only fear ill but expect no benefit. Wherefore to oblige us to render
a free and unforced Submission to Gods Laws, it is absolutely necessary we
should believe that the great Design of them is the good of those they are
imposed on; and so the Psalmist assures us that the Statutes of the Lord are
perfect, converting the Soul and making wise the simple; right, rejoicing the
Heart; pure, enlightening the Eyes, true and righteous altogether, more to be
desired than Gold, yea than much fine Gold, sweeter also than the Honey and the
Honeycomb, and that in keeping them there is great Reward, Psalm 19.7, 8, 9,
10, 11. and that the Law of Gods Mouth was better to him, that is, for the good
it did him than thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm 119.72.

AND this if we firmly believe it will infinitely encourage our Obedience. For
when I am sure that God commands me nothing but what my own Health and Ease and
Happiness requires, and that every Law of his is both a necessary and a
Soverein Prescription against the Diseases of my Nature, and that he could not
have prescribed me less than he has without being defective in his Care of my
Recovery and Happiness, with what Prudence or Modesty can I grudg to obey him?
How can I think much to serve him, when I serve my self by it to the best
Purpose in the World? Or why should I so much as wish that he had not imposed
this or that Law on me, when I know he imposed it to no other End but to oblige
me to be happy, and that he cannot Dispense with any Duty he requires of me
without giving me leave to be miserable. When therefore Gods Authority does
thus strike in with our Interest, and walk hand in hand with it through every
Duty it imposes, by refusing to obey him we fight against our selves, and
renounce his Authority and our own Happiness together.

III. To oblige us to be truly religious it is also necessary we should believe
that to secure our Obedience to these Laws, God has derived his own Authority
upon all lawful soverein Powers, to govern us according to them. That to
promote our Happiness which is the End of his Government, and to secure our
Obedience to his Laws, which are the Means to that End, he has established a
visible Authority upon Earth to represent his own invisible Majesty, and in his
Name to exact our Obedience to his Laws, so far as it is liable to their
Cognizance; and that the Persons vested with this Authority are exalted by it
above all Control or Resistance, and in their several Dominions placed next to
and immediately under God, by whose Commission alone they act, and to whose
Tribunal alone they are accountable; so that by resisting them, we do as much
resist God, whose Deputy Governors they are, as a Neopolitan does the King of
Spain by levying Arms against his Viceroy of Naples; and by refusing to obey
their just and lawful Commands we demur to Gods Authority, who in every just
thing they impose or require, speaks to us by their Mouths, and Commands us by
their Laws. For so the Scripture tells us not only that they are ordained of
God, and that to resist them is to resist the Ordinance of God; not only that
they are the Ministers of God, and that therefore for Conscience sake, or in
Reverence to Gods Authority which they bear, they are to be obeyed, Romans 13.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. but that they judge for God and not for Men, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. and
that therefore their Judgment is Gods, Deuteronomy. 1.17.

THE Disbelief of which excludes Gods Government out of the World, and
consequently dissolves all our Obligations of Duty and Allegiance to him. For
how can he be supreme Governor of the World, if all other Governments are not
immediately under him? And how can they be immediately under him if they are
not immediately authorized by him? And by what other Right can any Person or
Persons pretend to govern in Gods Kingdom under him, but by Commission from
him? For every supreme Authority is the Head and Fountain of all other
Authorities, so far as it extends; and if it be not so, it cannot be supreme.
And therefore unless all Authority be derived from God, he can have no such
thing as a supreme Authority in the World. And this I doubt not is very well
understood by our Atheistical Politicians, who in pursuance of their Denial of
God, derive all Authority from the People; being truly aware that if the
Authority of the Governors can be derived from the People, it will necessarily
follow that both must be independent upon God, and that to derive Authority to
govern from any other Head but God, is to deny him to be the supreme Governor
of the World, which is the thing they would be at. If it be said, that God has
given Authority to the People to authorize their Governors, and so he is still
Head of all Authority tho it be derived from him immediately through the
People; I answer, That this does very little mend the matter. For if God has
given Authority to the People to authorize their Governors, he has in Effect
given the Reins out of his own Hands, and left the People to govern the World.
For I would fain know, do Governors govern by Gods Authority or the Peoples? If
by the Peoples, it is the People that govern by them and not God; if by Gods,
it is God that governs by them and not the People. In short, If they govern by
the Peoples Authority, they are, as Governors at least, independent from God,
and accountable only to the Tribunal of the People; if by Gods Authority, they
are Independent from the People and accountable only to the Tribunal of God. So
that whether he authorizes them immediately or by the People it is all one, the
Question being not so much how they are authorized, as by what Authority they
govern; if it be by Gods, to God alone they are accountable if by the People,
Gods Authority is quite excluded from having any hand in the Government of the
World. In short, If the Choice of the People makes their Governor without Gods
authorizing him, he is the Peoples Viceroy and not Gods; but if it be God that
authorizes him, he is Gods Viceroy and not the Peoples. So that their choice
even in Elective Governments can signify no more than the bare presenting of a
Person to God to be authorized his Vicegerent by him: who, if their Choice be
just and lawful, is supposed to consent to and approve it, and thereby to
authorize the Person so presented. For sovereign Authority in the Abstract is
ordained and instituted by God; but abstract Authority cannot govern unless
some Person be vested with it; and to vest him with it, he must not only be
applied to the Authority, but the Authority must also be applied to him; but
where the People have the Right of Election, they only apply the Person to the
Authority, but it is Gods Consent and Approbation that applies the Authority to
the Person, who thereupon commences Supreme under God, and has no superior
Tribunal but Gods to account to.

AND thus according to the Prophet Daniel, the most High rules in the Kingdoms
of Men; Because as Lord of all the Lords, and King of all the Kings of the
Earth, he rules and governs by their Ministry, and they rule and govern by his
Authority. So that to secure and maintain the Obligations which Gods Government
of the World devolves upon us, it is necessary we should believe that all
rightful Sovereigns are his Vicegerents, and do rule by his Commission and
Authority, and that the Sword which they bear is Gods, who has delivered it
into their Hands, to protect his faithful Subjects, and to execute his Wrath,
and avenge his Authority upon Evildoers. So that we cannot rebel against them,
nor wilfully disobey their just Commands, without giving a Defiance to God
himself, and rejecting the Yoke of his Government. Whilst therefore we behave
our selves Factiously and Seditiously toward those whom God has set over us,
we live as Outlaws in the Kingdom of God, without any respect to that visible
Authority by which he governs the World; and whilst we do so, all our Pretenses
to Religion are impudent lies and Impostures.

IV. IN order to our being truly Religious it is also necessary we should
believe that God is ready to contribute to us all that Assistance which is
necessary to enable us to observe his Laws. That whereas in this corrupt State
of our Nature, we are so indisposed to all good by our carnal Affections and
vicious Habits, as that without some foreign Aid it is morally certain we shall
never be reduced to a through Compliance with our Duty, God is always ready not
only to second but to prevent our Endeavors, to inspire good Thoughts into our
Minds, and by them to kindle devout Affections in our Wills, and by them to
excite us to a constant Course of pious and virtuous Endeavors; and that when
he has proceeded thus far with us, he does not presently abandon us to our
selves, and leave us to contend and struggle in vain with insuperable
Difficulties, but all along cooperates with us, aids and assists our Faculties,
and with his holy Inspirations cherishes our languishing Endeavors, till they
have wrought their way through all the Difficulties of Religion into a
permanent State of Piety and Virtue. So that unless we either turn a deaf Ear
to those good Thoughts he suggests to us, and refuse to listen to their
Persuasions, or quench those holy Affections which they kindle in us with
earthly Cares and Pleasures, or by wilful sinning harden our Hearts against all
the Impressions of his Grace, we shall not fail of being frequently and
powerfully excired by him to Piety and Virtue; and when he thus excites us, if
we do not wilfully slacken our Endeavors, and basely surrender back our selves
to our Lusts, in despite of all our Resolutions and his Persuasions to the
contrary, we shall be so effectually and constantly assisted by him, as that it
will be impossible for us to fail of Success. For thus the Scripture assures us
that he gives Grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. and thereby works in them to
will and to do, Phil. 2.13. and that to this End he gives his holy Spirit to
every one that asks, Luke 11.13. The Belief of which is absolutely necessary to
oblige us to submit to Religion. For tho we are naturally free to Good as well
as Evil, yet through the vicious Habits we have generally contracted either
through youthful Levity and Inconsideration, or ill Education and Example, our
Liberty to good is so straightened and confined, that whenever we attempt to
exercise it, we find a prevailing Bias on our Natures, that carries us the
contrary way, bearing before it all our good Resolutions, and tiring out our
short-breathed Endeavors, so that the good we would, we do not, and the evil
we would not, we do. And therefore unless we can depend upon God for Assistance
against the Violence and Outrage of our bad Inclinations, after we have once
strugled with them in vain, and thereby made a woeful Experiment of our own
Impotence, we shall out of mere Despair of prevailing against them, give over
attempting it and utterly abandon our selves to their Tyranny.

BUT if we firmly believe that God who knows our Weakness and our Enemies
strength, will in Proportion to both readily assist us, whenever we heartily
invoke his Aid, and in Concurrence therewith exert our own Endeavor, we have
all the Encouragement in the World to undertake our Duty maugre all the
Difficulties that attend it. For being assured that God will concur with our
Endeavors, we may depend upon it, that not only our own Endeavors are in our
Power, but Gods Assistance too, and that the Corruptions of our Nature do not
so much over-match our Endeavors as Gods Assistance over-matches those
Corruptions. So that if we heartily exert our Endeavor, we are sure we cannot
fail of Success; because we know that God will assist our Endeavor, and that
with his Assistance we cannot but be victorious. Since therefore the Grace of
God is as much under the Command of our Will as our own Principles of Action,
it is as much in our Power to do that which we cannot do without Gods Grace, as
to do that which we can. And therefore if Gods Grace be sufficient to supply
the Defect of our natural Power, and enable us to conquer the Difficulties of
our Duty, we are sure there is nothing in it can be too hard for us; because
now we can do not only all that we can do by our selves, but also all that we
can do by the Grace of God.

V. To oblige us to be truly Religious it is also necessary we should believe
that the Assistance which God affords us, is such as supposes us free Agents,
and concurs with and maintains our natural Freedom. That it does not
necessarily determine us to good, but leaves it to our own free Choice to
determine our selves which way we please; that as he acts upon necessary Agents
by a necessary Influx and Causality which they cannot resist, and determines
those things to act by his Will, which have no Will of their own to determine
them, so he acts upon free Agents by a free and unconstraining Influence, i. e.
by suggesting Arguments to their Minds, to incline and persuade them, but
leaves it to their own Liberty to consider those Arguments or not, and to
comply with those Persuasions or reject them; and that tho as he has sometimes
suspended the Powers of necessary Agents and interrupted the natural Course of
their Motion, as when he forbad the Sun to move, and the Fire to burn, so he
has at other times restrained the natural Liberty of free Agents, and
determined them by an overruling Necessity, yet both the one and the other are
extraordinary and miraculous: but that in the ordinary Course of his
Government, he does as well leave free Agents to that natural Freedom with
which he first created them, as necessary ones to those Necessities which he
first impressed upon their Natures. For his Providence is succedaneous to his
Creation, and did at first begin where that ended, and does still proceed as it
began, ordering and governing all things according to the several Frames and
Models in which he first cast and created them. Nor can he order and govern
them otherwise without unraveling his own Creation, and making things to be
otherwise than he first made them. For how can he ordinarily necessitate those
Agents whom he first made free without changing their Natures from free to
necessary, and making them a different kind of Being than he made them? So that
tho in the Course of his Government God does powerfully importune and persuade
us, yet he lays no Necessity on our Wills, but leaves us free to choose or
refuse; and as the Temptations of Sin incline us one way, so the Grace of God
inclines us another, but both leave us to our own Liberty to go which way we
please. And this the Scripture plainly asserts, where it makes mention of Men's
resisting the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. and grieving and quenching the Spirit of
God, Ephesians. 4.30. 1 These. 5.19. and refusing to hear when God calls, and to
regard when he stretches forth his Hand, and of their setting his Counsel at
naught and rejecting his Reproofs, Prove. 1.24, 25. and in a word, where it
makes mention of some Men's baffling and defeating that very Grace which would
have conquered and persuaded others, Mat. 11.21. Which plainly imply that all
that Assistance to do our Duty, that God ordinarily vouchsafes us in the Course
of his Government, is such as no way determins or necessitates us.

THE Belief of which is highly necessary to engage us in the Service of
Religion. For while Men imagine that their Duty is such as they cannot heartily
comply with, without being compelled to it by an irresistible Grace, and that
no Assistance of God can be sufficient to this End, but that which suspends
their Liberty to Evil, and fatally determins them to Good, what should move
them to exert their own Endeavor? Why should they watch and pray and strive,
and contend against a corrupt Nature? For if God will make them good
irresistibly, their Endeavor is needless; but if he will not, it is Labor in
vain. To what End should they ply the Oar to stem the Tide of a degenerate
Nature, since without an irresistible Gale from Heaven they shall never
succeed, and with it they shall whether they ply or no? So that while Men live
in Expectance of an irresistible Grace to make them good, they quit themselves
of all their Obligations to a pious and virtuous Endeavor; but so long as they
believe that Gods Grace is such as supposes and leaves them free, such as they
may defeat or prosper by the good or ill use of their Liberty, they cannot but
discern themselves infinitely obliged to cooperate with it, to listen and
consent to its blessed Motions and Persuasions, and constantly to endeavor to
comply with them in their Actions, or at least not to resist them, and harden
and fortify themselves against them, by acting counter to and flying in the
face of their own Convictions. For since the Grace of God does not determine us
to good, but leaves us to our own Freedom, we can never expect to be determined
to good without our free Concurrence; which if we refuse we shall certainly
perish in our Sin, and have not only the Blood of our own Souls to answer for,
but all that Grace too which we have baffled and defeated.

VI. To oblige us to be truly Religious it is necessary that we should believe
that God takes particular Cognizance of the good and ill Use we make of our
natural Freedom; that he does not merely gaze upon our Actions as an
indifferent and unconcerned Spectator, but beholds them with the highest
Concern and Regard, with infinite Complacency or Detestation, and treasures
them up in his all-comprehending Mind, to be produced for or against us in the
day of fearful Reckonings and Accounts; that he does not inspect our Actions
with a passant and cursory View, as things of little or no Moment, but lays
them up in everlasting Remembrance, so that every good or ill thing we do
stands upon Record in the Mind of God in order to our final Acquittal or
Condemnation. For so the Scripture tells us, not only that Gods Eyes are upon
the Ways of Man, and that he sees all his goings, Job 34.21. and that his Eyes
run to and fro throughout the Earth, and are in every Place beholding the good
and Evil, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. and Prove. 15.3. but that he sees good Actions tho done
in secret, and will reward them openly, Matthew. 6.6. and that he will bring
every work into Judgment with every secret thing whether it be good or evil,
Eccles. 12.14.

THE Belief of which is absolutely necessary to found the Obligations of
Religion. For if we suppose either that God sees not our Actions, or looks upon
them with an indifferent Eye, without taking any Notice or Cognizance of them,
there is no religious Consideration can oblige us. For upon this Supposal, our
Actions must all be indifferent to him; and if they are indifferent to him,
what reason have we to make any difference between them? It Is true, good
Actions are in themselves beneficial and evil ones prejudicial to us, and
therefore for our own Interest-sake we ought to choose the one and refuse the
other; but this abstracted from all Respects to God, is only a Prudential and
not a religious Obligation; but why should we do any good or avoid any evil
upon Gods account, if Good and Evil are alike to him? But if we firmly believe
that God not only sees whatsoever we do, but takes particular Notice of all our
good and evil Actions, and out of an high Complacency in the one and Abhorrence
of the other treasures up both in everlasting Remembrance, we cannot but
discern our selves obliged by all the Reason in the World* to choose what is
good, and eschew what is evil. For what an infinite Encouragement is it to do
good, to consider that while we are doing it Gods Eye is upon us, regarding us
with high Applause and Approbation, and entering it with all its acceptable
Circumstances into the eternal Record of his own Mind, from whence it shall be
produced in the last Day, and proclaimed before Men and Angels to our
everlasting Honor and Glory? So that when our Memory is lost upon Earth, and
all that we did is swallowed up in the deep Abyss of Oblivion, all our Pieties
and Virtues shall be famed in the Records of Heaven, and have everlasting
Memorials in the Mind of God. As on the contrary, what an infinite
Discouragement is it from sinning, to consider that the Eye of that God to whom
Vengeance belongs, is intent upon us, following us through all our Retreats and
Concealments, and Recording every ill Deed with all its foul Aggravations in
the eternal Volumes of his own Remembrance, which he will one Day most
certainly open and read out before all the World to our everlasting Shame and
Confusion? So that when the pleasure of our Sin is gone, and all that rendered
it tempting or desirable for ever vanished and forgotten, the Shame and Infamy
of it shall stand upon Record, and be transmitted down to eternal Ages.

VII. and Lastly, To oblige us to be truly religious it is also necessary we
should believe that God will reward and punish us according to our doings; that
he is neither an idle nor an impotent Spectator of our Actions, that merely
pleases and vexes himself with the Contemplation of them; but that all the
Notice he takes of them is in order to his rewarding and punishing them, which
he will one day most certainly do to our everlasting Joy or Confusion. But
because this Argument will be the Subject of the ensuing Chapter, I shall
insist no farther on it here.

SECT. II. Of the Proofs and Evidences which there are to create in us a Belief
of the divine Providence.
HAVING in the foregoing Section given an account of those Parts or Branches of
the Divine Providence, which are necessary to be believed in order to the
founding the Obligations of Religion; I shall proceed in the next place, to
show what Evidences there are to create this Belief in us; and because this is
the great Fundamental of all Religion, upon the Belief of which it all
immediately depends, I shall endeavor to demonstrate the Truth of it,

1. A priori, by Arguments drawn from God himself. 2. A posteriori, by
Arguments drawn from sensible Effects of God in the World.
I. I shall endeavor to assert the Truth of a divine Providence by Arguments
drawn from God himself. For supposing that there is a God, that is to say, an
infinitely wise, and good and powerful Cause of all things, (which I doubt not
to make appear when I come to discourse of the sensible Effects of God in the
World) it will from thence necessarily follow that he upholds, disposes and
governs all things by an overruling Providence; For

1. If there be such a God, he must necessarily be and exist of himself,
without any dependence upon any superior Cause. 2. He must necessarily be the
Cause of all other things that are and do exist. 3. He must necessarily be
present with all things. 4. Where ever he is, so active are his Perfections
that he cannot but operate wheresoever he finds Objects to work upon. From all
which I shall make appear it will necessarily follow, that he continually
exercises an overruling Providence over the World.
I. IF there be a God he must necessalily exist or be of himself without
Dependence on any superior Cause. For when we speak of God, we mean by him a
Being that is as perfect as it is possible, that has nothing before him,
nothing superior to him, nothing greater than himself; which cannot be meant of
any derived Being; because all Effects are after their Causes, and in some
respect inferior to them, as deriving their Beings, and all their Excellencies
and Perfections from them. But to say of God that he is after or any way
inferior to any Cause, is a palpable Contradiction to the very Notion of him;
it is to say that there is something before the eternal Something, superior to
the Supreme Something, more perfect than infinite Perfection. So that either
there can be no such Being as a God in the World, or he must be of himself or
from his own Essence, in which there must be such an infinite Fullness of Being,
as that from all Eternity past to all Eternity to come it is infinitely removed
from not Being, and so by a Necessity of Nature must from ever have been and
for ever be. And such a Being we must admit of whether we will admit of a God
or no; for either we must allow that this World, or at least the Matter of it
exists of it self by its own never* failing Fullness of Being, without ever
needing any Cause to produce it, (which as I shall show you by and by is
impossible) or that all things in it derive their Being from some first Cause
who having no Cause in being before him must necessarily be uncaused and
unproduced; and if God exists of himself, as he must do supposing he is, he
must be superior to all things; for that which is of it self cannot but be,
and that which cannot but be can have no Power above it, because if it has,
that Power might have either hindered or extinguished its Being, and so it
might not have been.

So that Gods Self-existence necessarily supposes him exalted above all Power
and Superiority, and consequently to be the supreme and sovereign Power over
all things; but to suppose him to be supreme and Sovereign without exercising
Rule and Domion, is ridiculous; for without the Exercise of Dominion supreme
Power is but a useless and insignificant Cypher-flourish with a glorious Name,
Rule and Dominion being the only proper Sphere for supreme Power, as such, to
move and act in. So that unless God rules and governs, he is supreme to no
Purpose, and his sovereign Power is useless and in vain; for if he exert his
sovereign Power at all, it must be in Rule and Dominion, which is its only
natural Province; but if he does not, his Sovereignty is only a Majestic Sloth
that sits sleeping in an awful Throne with its Hands in its Bosom, without ever
doing any thing that is Sovereign; and of what Use is that sovereign Power that
never exercises any act of Sovereignty? Since therefore Gods Self-Existence
necessarily supposes his sovereign Power over all things, we must either grant
that he continually exercises this Power in ruling and governing the World, or
assert that it is utterly useless and in vain, which as I shall show by and by
is as absurd as it is blasphemous.

II. If there be a God he must necessarily be the Cause of all other things
that are and do exist. For whatsoever might not have been, or may not be, must
be derived from something which cannot but be. If it might not have been how
came it to be? Not from it self to be sure, for then it must always have
necessarily been; and therefore it must finally be resolved into some other
Cause which is of it self, and so cannot but always have been and always be.
Now that this World is not of it self, but from some other Cause that is of it
self is evident; because whatsoever is of it self, must necessarily have all
the Being, and all the Perfection of Being that is possible. For that which is
of it self is necessarily of it self, and it is not only true that it cannot
but be, but also that it cannot but be of it self; for if it might not have
been of it self, it might not have been at all, because it self or its own
Essence is the only Ground or Reason of its Being; and therefore if that Reason
might have failed it might never have been at all. Now that which necessarily
is of it self, has neither actual nor possible Cause of Being; for if it has
an actual Cause, it is not of it self; if any possible one, it is not
necessarily of it self; and if it has no possible Cause of Being, it is all
that its possible to be, that is, it is so complete and perfect, that no
possible Being or Perfection of Being can be added to it.

BESIDES, that which is of it self includes Necessity of Being in its Essence,
and that which includes Necessity of Being, must always actually be what it is,
and have nothing potential in its Nature; and that which has nothing potential
must have all possible Being and Perfection. For if there be any possible
Perfection of Being which it has not, it must be in possibility of being what
it is not; and if so, it is not necessarily what it is. So that if the World be
of it self, it must include in the Nature of it a Necessity of Being; and if
so, it must always actually be, that is, be always out of all Possibility
either of not being or of being what it is not; and if it be out of all
Possibility of not Being, it must have all Possible Being; if out of all
Possibility of being what it is not, it must have all possible Perfection of
Being, that is, all possible Power and Knowledge and Wisdom and Goodness, which
do all as necessarily result from Self-Being as any essential Property from any
Essence. Since therefore this material World has none of these possible
Perfections of Being in it, it is impossible it should be of it self, and if it
be not of it self, it must have a Cause of Being that is distinct from and
before it self; and what can this Cause be but God; since that which caused the
World must be before all Causes, and that which is before all Causes must be
uncaused and of it self, and that which is of it self must have all possible
Perfection, and consequently be God.

SINCE therefore the World was made by God, it will from hence necessarily
follow that it is ruled and governed by him. For if he made the World, to be
sure he made it for some End, it being unconceivable that infinite Wisdom
should frame a World that is capable of the most noble and excellent Ends,
without designing it to any End at all; and if he designed it for any End, to
be sure he is concerned that that End whatever it be should be accomplished;
and if he be, his own Concernment will lead him to the Exercise of a
Providence, which is nothing else but a constant and steady Guidance of those
Beings which he has made, to those common and particular Ends for which he
made them. For if he made them for any End, to be sure whatever it was, he did
not let it drop out of his Mind and Thoughts as soon as he had made them, but
still carries it along in his Eye and Intention; and if he still intends that
End, there is no doubt but he still prosecutes it, which he cannot do without a
Providence; for how can he drive things on to the Ends for whice he made them,
if he be withdrawn from the World, and has wholly sequestered himself from all
the Affairs of it?

III. IF there be a God, he must necessarily be present with all things;
because being of himself without any Cause, he must be without any Bounds or
Limits of Being. For it is altogether unconceivable how any thing that is of it
self should be restrained or limited by it self. For tho we must allow
something to be of it self whether we will admit of a God or no, yet we cannot
suppose that which is of it self to be the Cause of it self, without a
Contradiction; because every Cause must be before its Effect; and therefore to
suppose that which is of it self, to be the Cause of it self, is to suppose it
to be before it self, that is, to be when it is not, or to be and not be
together, which is impossible. When therefore we say that something is of it
self, our meaning can be no other that this, that it has such an immense
Plenitude of Being in it self, as that it neither needed nor required any Cause
to produce it; and how can that which is of it self without being the Cause of
it self, be any way restrained or limited by it self? For that which limits
Beings, is only the Will or Power of their Causes, which either would not or
could not bestow any further Being or Perfection upon them; and therefore only
such things as are caused are limited, because they being produced out of
nothing, are only so far and no farther brought into Being, as their Cause was
willing or able to bring them. That therefore which exists of it self without
any Cause of Being, must exist of it self without any Limits of Being; because
it was neither limited by it self nor by any other Cause; and that which has
nothing to limit it, must necessarily be immense and boundless. God therefore
being this Self-existing Being, must necessarily be of an unlimited Essence; an
Essence which no possible Space can either circumscribe or define, but must
necessarily be diffused all through, circumfused all about, and present with
all things.

AND if he be present with all things, how is it imaginable he should sit still
among them, and exercise no Providence over them? For since he is a living
Being, he must be vitally present wheresoever he is, and that he should be
vitally and yet unactively present among a World of Beings, that he should live
in this wide University of things, and in every Part of it, and yet take no
more Notice of, have no more Influence upon it than if he were a dead and
senseless Idol, is altogether inconceivable; and we may as well imagine a Sun in
the Universe without Heat or Light, as a living God surrounding and penetrating
all things, without ever exerting his active Powers, or shedding forth his
vital Influence upon them. For where ever life is it will operate; and
therefore since God who is all Life and Activity is every where, he must
operate every where, and if he operate every where, that Operation is an
Universal Providence.

IV. and Lastly. IF there be a God, he must be endowed with all those active
Perfections of Power and Wisdom, Justice and Goodness; all which must be
present wheresoever he is. For as for Power, it is nothing else but the Spring
or Fountain of Causality; and therefore since God is the first Cause, he must
necessarily be the Spring of the Power of all Causes; and that from which all
Power is derived must it self be all-powerful; otherwise it would derive more
Power than it has, and be the Cause of that whereof it has no Causality,
which is a Contradiction. And then as for Wisdom and Goodness, they are
inseparable to perfect Power; which how forcible soever it be, cannot be
perfect except it be conducted by Wisdom and Goodness; for without these, Power
is only an irresistible Whirlwind that sweeps and hurries all things before it
without any End, or Method, or Order. And what a lame, blind and defective
Power must that be that can neither design nor contrive, neither propose to it
self beneficial Ends, nor yet choose suitable Means to effect them? and in a
word, that can neither intend well nor prosecute wisely? If therefore the Power
of God be perfect, as it cannot but be, being the Original of all Power, it
must necessarily be conjoined with perfect Wisdom and Goodness; with perfect
Goodness to level its Intentions at good and beneficial Ends; with perfect
Wisdom to order and direct its Prosecutions.

SINCE therefore perfect Power, and Wisdom and Goodness are essential to God,
they must be coextended with his Essence, which as I showed before is extended
to all things. And how can we conceive such active Perfections as these to be
present with all things without ever acting upon them? For the very End and
Perfection of all these Attributes consists in their Exercise; for so the End
of Power is Action, the End of Wisdom is ordering and contriving, and the End
of Goodness is doing good. How then can we suppose that an infinite Power whose
End is Action, should be present where a World of things are to be done, and do
nothing? that infinite Wisdom whose End is ordering and contriving, should be
present where a World of things are to be ordered, and order nothing? or that
infinite Goodness whose End is doing good, should be present where a World of
good is to be done, and do none at all? What is this but to transform the
divine Perfections into senesless Idols, that have Eyes, but see not, hands,
but act not; that have boundless, boundless, but useless and unactive Powers;
that have glorious Names, but in reality stand but for so many Ciphers in the
World? And thus I have endeavored to demonstrate a Providence by Arguments
drawn from God himself; but because there may be something in them too subtle
and Metaphysical for common Apprehensions to reach, I have but briefly insisted
on them. I proceed therefore in the second place to another sort of Arguments,
which are more easy and obvious, viz. such as are drawn from sensible Effects,
of which I shall give these six Instances.

1. The constant Direction of things to the same good Ends, which have no
Design in themselves. 2. The watchful Providence of things which have no
Foresight in themselves. 3. The mutual Agreement and Correspondency of things
which have no Understanding of themselves or of one another. 4. The
Continuation of things in the same comely Order, which have no Government of
themselves. 5. Miraculous Events. 6. Predictions of future and remote
Contingencies.
I. ONE sensible Instance of a divine Providence is the constant Direction of
things to the same good Ends which have no Design in themselves. When we see
things void of all Sense and Reason as constantly directed to good Ends, as
they could be if they had Sense and Reason, we may be sure that there is a
Reason without them that framed them for those Ends, and directs them to them;
it being unconceivable how Chance or blind Necessity that have no Design, or
Art, or Contrivance in them, should constantly operate as regularly as Reason
it self. Now if we survey this vast Universality of things, we may easily
observe, at least of the generality of them, that they are framed for and
directed to some Wise and excellent End; and though through our own
short-sightedness or want of Enquiry we do not see the Use and Tendency of them
all, yet this is no Argument at all that they are vain and superfluous. For as
we now see the Use of a world of things which past Generations understood not,
so there is no doubt but future Generations will understand the Use of a World
more than we; and therefore since the Usefulness of the Generality of things is
now so apparent and visible, we ought in all Reason to conclude, that our not
discerning the Usefulness of them all, proceeds not from their Defect but from
our own Ignorance*

LET us therefore briefly survey this beautiful Scene of things that is before
us. The Sun and Earth, for Instance, are things that are utterly void of
Understanding, and therefore can have no Design or Contrivance in them; how
then came they to place and continue themselves at such a commodious Distance
from one another? Whereas in such a vast and immense Space they might have
found ten thousand Millions of other Places and Distances to fix in? The Earth
might have found room enough to place it self either much nearer to or much
remoter from the Sun than it is; but if it had done so, it must have either
been everlastingly parched or everlastingly frozen and benighted, and either
way converted into an useless, barren and inhabitable Desert; whereas where it
now is, it stands at the most convenient Distance from the Sun, to be warmed
and cherished by his enlivening Fires, and neither to be roasted by being too
near them, nor frozen by being too far from them; but to receive from them such
a temperate heat, as is sufficient to excite its seminal Virtues, and to draw
up its Juices into them, and thereby to ripen its natural Fruits, and in a
word, to comfort and refresh its Inhabitants, and to render it to them a
pleasant, a healthful, and a fruitful Paradise. Since therefore of ten thousand
Millions of Places wherein it might have fixed in that Immensity of Space that
surrounds it, it has fixed upon and does still continue in the best without
any Design or Wisdom of its own, it is plain that there is an overruling
Wisdom without it that chose its place and fixes and determins it thereunto.
Again, How came the Sun (for whether it be the Earth that moves about the Sun,
or the Sun about the Earth is all one to our Enquiry) how came this Sun, I say,
which has no Reason to govern it self by, to be determined to such a useful
Course of Motion? what makes this vast and mighty Body move round the Earth in
twenty four hours, in finishing which spacious Circle of Motion it must fly far
swifter than a Bullet from a Canons Mouth; and yet through so many Ages each
twenty four hours it has constantly performed it, without being so much as one
Minute faster or slower; whereby it makes those just and regular Returns of Day
and Night to both the Hemispheres, so that neither the one nor the other is
either too much heated by his Presence, or too long benighted by his Absence,
because as soon as the one has been sufficiently warmed and cherished with his
Rays, he immediately retires from it into the other, and by so doing he gives
the active Animals leave to rest, the overheated Air to cool, and the Gasping
Earth to repair its fainting Virtues, which a continued Heat would soon exhaust
and extinguish. Thus by returning Day and Night to both Parts of the Earth once
in twenty four Hours, he preserves both their Heat and Moisture upon which all
Generation depends, in a due and regular Temper, so that neither their radical
Moisture is consumed by the parching Droughts of the Day, nor their vital Heat
extinguished by the cool Moistures of the Night, but the one still allays and
tempers the other by their quick and alternate Revolutions. How then came the
Sun that understands no utility and designs no End, to be determined to this
Course of Motion, which above all others is so admirably useful and
advantageous to this World we live in? Again, What is the Reason that since he
thus equally moves round the Earth, he does not always move in the same Circle,
but runs out every Day into a different Circle almost a whole Degree farther
northward or southward, and this so constantly and so precisely that in six
thousand succeeding Revolutions, he has never varied so much as one Minute
from his Course either one way or the other, and by these his stated
Ex-currencies toward the North and South he makes the Seasons of the Year,
gives a Summer and a Winter, a Spring and a Fall to all Parts of the Earth,
without which the Earth would long ere this have been utterly useless, and all
its Fruits and for want of them its Animals too would have for ever perished?
For some Parts of it would have been scorched with everlasting Heat, other
bound up with everlasting Frost; here it would have been all a Sandy, there all
an Icy Desert, and so both Vegetation and Generation would every where have
utterly ceast either for want of Moisture or for want of Heat. How came the Sun
then which has neithr Sense nor Reason of his own to guide him, to be directed
into such a commodious Course of annual Motion, whenas in that vast Space he
moves in, he might as well have run ten thousand other Courses of Motion? He
might have moved all the Year round the Earths Equator; but if he had done so,
all the middle Tracts of Earth both Northward and Southward would soon have
been scorched up with his continual Presence, and all the remoter Parts both
ways would quickly have died with Cold through his perpetual Absence: or he
might have run his annual Course on one side only of the Earths Equator, and
made his circular Excursions to or beyond the Pole; but if he had done so, he
must have left a great Part of the opposite Hemisphere exposed to everlasting
Night and Cold, whereas in the annual Course of Motion he now performs, he
sheds forth his Light, and Heat, and Influence over all the World, and by turns
gives every Part its yearly Seasons; which is a plain Evidence that all his
Motions are conducted by a wise and overruling Mind, which among so many
Courses of Motion that lie before him in the boundless Space he moves in, has
determined him to that which for Perpetuity is much the best and most
commodious.

AND the same is to be said of the Motions of the Moon, which Nature has
designed for a vicarious Light to the Sun, to supply his Absence and perform
his Office in this lower World. For what makes this senseless and irrational
Planet, that moves without any Intention of its own, wander by turns Northward
and Southward some Degrees beyond the Sun? And what makes it move Northward
when the Sun is Southward, and again Southward when the Sun is Northward,
whereas in that immense Space wherein it swims, it has room enough to run a
thousand other Courses of Motion, none of which could have been so advantageous
to us as this? For by moving Northward when the Sun is Southward and so e
contra, it moderates the Cold and Darkness of the winter Nights, and by passing
beyond the Tropicks which are the Boundaries of the Sun, it in some measure
supplies his Absence, by enlightening those long and tedious Nights in which the
Regions toward the Poles are buried; which is a plain Instance of the singular
Care of Providence, that no Parts of the Earth should be left altogether
destitute of the necessary Comforts of the heavenly Light and Warmth.

Again, How came the Air which has no Design in it self to place it self so
commodiously as it has done between the Earth and the Heavens? Why is there
not a wide vacuity between? Or if some Body must needs intervene, why was it
not Fire or Water as well as Air, which of all other Bodies is the most
commodious? For had it been a void Space, there could have been no Intercourse
between Heaven and Earth; or had it been filled with Fire or Water, it would
have consumed or drowned the Earth and all things belonging to it; but as for
the Air which is a thin, soft, fluid and transparent Body, it is of all others
the most proper Vehicle of the Celestial Influences. For what other Body is
there that through such a stupendous Distance could have conveyed down to us
the Light and Heat of the Sun, with such an ineffable Swiftness; or what other
Element could have been so proper for Animals to move and breath in? Since
therefore this Space between the Earth and Heavens might have been supplied
with other Bodies, but with none so fit as Air, which yet is no way conscious
of its own Fitness, and so cannot be supposed to choose this Space for it self,
it is a plain Evidence that there was a wise Mind without it that chose this
Habitation for it.

AND now we are come down to this terrestrial Globe which consists of Earth and
Water, let us briefly consider the admirable Use of both, and of all things
appertaining to them. How came the senseless Water to bore Holes and Channels
in the Banks of the Ocean through long Tracts of Earth, and against its own
Nature to climb up to the tops of Mountains, that so it may be able not only to
run down again with Ease, but also to carry it self to such Heights afterward,
as the Necessities of Men and Beasts require, and to unite into large Rivers
that run into all the inland Parts of the Earth, watering both them and their
thirsty Animals all along as they go, till at last they return into the Ocean
again? How comes this dull and senseless Element that can consult neither its
own Convenience nor that of other Beings, to be salt where it is convenient for
it self to be salt, viz. in the Ocean, by which it is preserved from
Putrefaction; and fresh where it is convenient for other Beings that it should
be fresh, viz. in the Fountains and Rivers, that so it may be fit to fructify
the Earth, and be a wholesome Drink for its Animals? How come so many Rivers and
Fountains which do all arise from the salt Waters of the Sea, to be stripped of
their salt Particles, by oosing through the Pores of the Earth, and thereby to
be rendered both fruitful to the Ground and wholesome for Men and Beasts? How
comes it to pass that so many Clouds as are drawn up out of the salt Ocean,
should in their Ascent so far shake off their Salt as to descend back again
upon the Earth in sweet and fresh Showers? And how come those Vapors of which
the Clouds consist, and which are much thicker and heavier than the Air, to be
drawn aloft as they are by the Rays of the Sun, which have neither Pumps nor
Buckets to exhale them? And when they are aloft in the Air, how come they to
gather into thick Clouds, and not rather to disperse themselves about in that
vast Expansum, or to return back again to the Earth in thin Vapors as they
arose; and while they hang in the Air, what is it that susteins their Weight,
and when they fall, how comes it to pass that they ordinarily fall in soft and
gentle Showers that water the Roots of the Grass and Corn without any Prejudice
to their Stalks and Blades, and not rather in Mists or Streams, which either
would be insufficient to moisten the Earth, or lay wast its Corn and Fruit with
the Violence of their Fall? All which are illustrious Instances of a wise and
powerful Providence, that directs and orders this senseless Element, and causes
it ordinarily to move and act as if it had Wisdom in it self and did
therewithal industriously consult the public good of the World; but this
Argument you may find handled more at large in a late excellent Treatise de Deo.

AND now we are arrived to the Earth whereon we live and move and have our
Beings, which tho it self be of a broken and irregular Figure, and seems to be
rather the mighty Ruins of some more beautiful Structure, than an original
Effect of the divine Art and Contrivance, yet contains in it the most amazing
Instances of an alwise and alpowerful Providence. For how came this dull and
stupid Lump to be impregnated with such an infinite Variety of seminal Virtues,
all which do proceed as orderly and artificially in the Formation of their
Plants and Fruits, as if they were every one endued with a most wise and
intelligent Mind? For since the Plants do all derive their Nourishment from the
inward Parts of the Earth, it is necessary that some Parts of them should be
buried under Ground, that so they may come at their Food; and that these Parts
should be fitted with spongy strings to fasten them to the Earth, and to suck
in those Juices of it whereon they feed; and accordingly the seminal Virtue of
every Plant first forms it self a Root under Ground, which runs out more or
less from the Center of it into greater or smaller Strings proportionable to
the Magnitude of the Plant it bears, that so how great soever it be it may by
these Strings be so fastened to the Earth, as that the Wind to which its upper
Parts are exposed, may not be able to tear them up; then this seminal Form
whatsoever it be, digests these Strings into a porous and spongy Substance fit
to suck in the Juices of the Earth on every side, and bores little Holes or
strait Fibers through them from one end to the other, that so by these
Conduit-pipes they may all convey the Juices they imbibed into the Center of
the Root; and having thus formed its Root, and by these Strings or nervous
Filaments supplied it with plenty of Juice, by strange mysterious Art it
concocts the liquid Matter into a hard and solid Substance, through which it
also bores an infinite number of strait Fibers from the very Center of the
Root, to convey up with it those Juices that are lodged there, with the thicker
Parts of which it nourishes and increases its more solid Substance, thrusting
forth the thinner toward the Surface, and the thinnest at the Extremities of
its Branches; the former of which it digests into a Bark wherewithal it clothes
the tender Body of its Plant, to defend it against the Violences of Heat and
Cold; the latter into Leaves, and therewithal adorns its Branches, and shelters
its Fruit from the scorching of the the Sun, and the excessive Moisture of the
Rain; and by thus distributing the still-rising Juices, it still increases its
Plant till such time as it arrives to its full growth and Maturity; so that
from the utmost Strings of the Root, to the Center of it, from the Center of
the Root to the highest Branches of it, from the Branches to the Leaves and
Fruit of it, these porous Fibers run on, by which every part how distant soever
from the Root, sucks up its Juices and digests them into its own Substance; for
even the Leaves and Fruit are hung upon the Branches by little, soft and Spongy
Stalks, through which there run innumerable Fibers that convey the Juice from
the Branches, and by stupendous Art distribute it by their Pores through all
the whole Body of the Leaves and Fruit. Vide Lessius de Prove.
But then by what particular Art the seminal Virtues of each particular kind
does so constantly and regularly concoct and elaborate the Juices of the Earth
into their own specific Smells and Tastes, and Figure and Colors, is a Mystery
that confounds and puzles all our Philosophy. Now whence I beseech you proceeds
this curious, inimitable Art which we with all our Reason can neither
transcribe nor comprehend? Not from the things themselves sure; for how can
they have Art that have no Reason? And therefore of Necessity it must proceed
from some alwise, superintending Mind, that either immediately contrives and
frames them, or else impresses their seminal Virtues with its own alwise and
powerful Art whereby they contrive and frame themselves.

AND if in the Composure of every Plant there are such visible Footsteps of a
divine Art, how much more of every Animal, whose Parts for infinite Variety,
delicate Smalness, exquisite Shape, Position and Temper, do as far excel the
other, as the Offices for which they are designed? For tho the plastic Soul
that forms the Animal, has not the least Ray of Art or Reason of its own, yet
in the Formation of it, it proceeds with as much curious and incomparable Art
as if it were endowed with the most perfect Reason. For first it Spins out the
thicker Parts of the seminal Matter into little Threads or Fibers, part of which
it hollows into Pipes, and part into Spunges, some whereof are more thin, and
some more solid; all which with wondrous Art it cuts and prunes in diverse
places, fitting their Ends to one another, and in diverse Manners knitting them
together into a well-proportioned Structure of Bones and Members; then of the
thinner Parts of the seminal Matter it forms the Intrails, viz. the Liver and
Heart and Brains, drawing out from each certain Fibers to be framed into Veins,
and Arteries and Nerves, for which End it bores and hollows them through,
extends and stretches them out at length, and divides them into innumerable
Branches, which it spreads through all the Intrails, and thereby maintains a
mutual Communication between them, and derives the Nourishment and animal and
vital Spirits through all the Body; and having thus spun the several Parts out
of the seminal Matter, and curiously woven them together, it concocts the
remainder of the Matter which is still supplied with new Nourishment into the
Substance of those several Parts, and this in such precise and regular
Proportions, as to form every one of them, tho infinitely various from one
another, into its own proper Figure, and Measure, and Proportion; so that
within seven days after the Conception, the whole Body is entirely framed, and
distinguished into all its proper Parts and Members, which though they are so
vastly great in their Number, so strangely different in their Size and Figure,
so infinitely various in their Motions and Tendencies, do all contribute one
way or other to the Beauty and Benefit of the Whole; some to propagate the
Kind, others to preserve the Individual, others to distinguish what is
necessary, convenient and pleasant from what is dangerous, offensive or
destructive to its Nature; some to pursue what is good, others to shun what is
evil, others to enjoy those goods, and others to defend it against those evils
that threaten or invade it; so that of all these infinitely numerous and
diverse Parts, not one can be wanting or defective without some considerable
Damage to the Whole. How then is it conceivable that such an infinite number of
different Animals, which are all so perfect in their Kind, so amazingly curious
in their Composition, as that we with all our Reason can discern nothing in
them that is either superfluous or defective, nothing in their Figure that is
irregular, nothing in their Position that is misplaced, nothing in their Motion
that is exorbitant; should all of them be framed by their several Plastic
Souls, which are utterly blind and irrational, without the Conduct and
Direction of an all-wise and all-powerful Providence? Should you behold a
confused Heap of Earth, and Stone, and Iron and Timber without any visible
Artificer near it, fall a pollishing its own Parts, fitting them to one another
and disposing them into Order according to the Rules of Architecture, and at
length frame them all together into the Form of a most beautiful Palace, would
you not conclude that some skillful Mind were invisibly present there, and did
work upon this senseless Heap, and dispose its Parts into this comely Order?
And yet in the Composure of any one Animal there is infinitely more Art than in
the most beautiful structure in the World. How then can we imagine that the
blind, artless Matter of which it is composed, could ever have framed it self
into this admirable Form and Contexture, had not some great Mind been invisibly
present at the Composition of it, or at least imprinted on its artless Mattter,
some powerful Signature of its own wise Art to direct, and order and contrive
it.

I might from hence have proceeded to the formation of Man, the Masterpiece of
all this lower Creation, in whose Frame and structure there are such Miracles
of Art as do outreach both the Imitation and Wonder of the most raised and
comprehensive Minds. For who can sufficiently admire the skilful Contexture of
his Corporeal Parts, which though almost infinite in Number and Variety, do not
only compose a Body of a most amiable Symmetry and Proportion, but are also as
exactly framed, and tempered and adapted to perform the Offices of Life and
Motion, and Sense and Reason, as Art or Wit can fancy or imagine them? But then
how much more admirable is the Soul which inhabits and animates this Body; for
of whatsoever Substance this thing we call our Soul is, it is evidently framed
for great and noble Operations, to disclose the Mysteries of Nature, and to
dive into its deep Philosophy, to penetrate into the Causes of things, and with
its nimble and sagacious Thoughts to survey this ample Theater of Beings; to
recollect things past, and to foretell things to come, to invent the most useful
Arts and comprehensive Sciences, to dictate good Laws, and project wise
Policies for the Government of Humane Societies, and in a word, to understand
the right Reasons of things, and to regulate its Will and Affections by them:
And is it possible we should imagine a Being thus exquisitely framed to be the
Product of a blind and artless Matter, to be nothing but a lucky Jumble of
senseless and irrational Atoms? For suppose it were nothing but elaborated
Matter, yet certainly it requires infinite Art and Skill to contrive and
fashion it into all those curious Springs, and Wheels and Mechanic Knacks that
are necessary to render it not only a living and feeling, but also a wise and
rational Matter. For how is it conceivable that a little Drop of Water without
the Assistance of any Mind or Providence, should form it self not only into all
the Parts and Lineaments of a Humane Body, but also into a Humane Mind, a Mind
of vast Desires and infinite Capacities of Knowledge, that can form Ideas within
it self of every thing that is round about it, and from them can frame
innumerable Propositions, and deduce them into Arts and Sciences: and in a
word, that can move it self and the Body it lives in, by its own internal
Springs, and form it self into so many various and contrary Affections by the
mysterious Force and Energy of its own Reason and Discourse? If you beheld a
dead Pencil move without any visible Hand, and dip it self into various
Colors, and draw but an exact Picture of a Man, you would doubtless conclude
either that some invisible Limbner had infused into it the Art of Limbning, or
did immediately manage and direct it. But should you find this Picture when it
is drawn and finished, not only live and move, but reason and discourse, and
exert all sorts of Animal and Humane Operations, could you imagine that ever
the blind, irrational Pencil formed it of it self without being managed or
directed by some superior Mind or Providence?

AND thus I have given some brief Instances of the constant Direction of all
sorts of things, how stupid and irrational soever, to some wise and good End,
which is a plain Evidence of an universal Providence over the World, that in a
constant and uniform Series directs things to their proper Ends that have no
Aim or Design of their own, and so are utterly incapable to guide and direct
themselves.

II. ANOTHER sensible Evidence of a divine Providence is, the sagacious
Providence of things that have no Foresight in themselves. For among irrational
Beings that can neither apprehend for what Ends they act, nor by what Means
they may best effect them, how strange is it to consider with what Insight and
Providence they many of them act in storing up Provisions for themselves
against a time of Extremity, in framing their own Beds and Nests, and defending
themselves and their Young against approaching Dangers; in educating their
Young, and propagating their Kind through all succeeding Generations, insomuch
that if they were every one endued with Reason of their own to foresee their
own Dangers, and forecast their own Convenience and Safety, they would not act
with more Skill and Sagacity than they do. For thus the Plants that have
neither Sense nor Reason to discern the Periods of their own Growth and Decay,
when they have almost spent themselves, and are ready to wither and die, run up
into Seed, as if they foresaw their own approaching Fate, and did thereupon
bethink themselves of propagating their Kind before it be too late, and leaving
a numerous Posterity behind them. And therefore since they have neither Thought
nor Forecast in themselves, it is evident that there is a Providence that thinks
and forecasts for them.

Thus also those Plants that shoot up on high, but are too weak to support
themselves, such as the Hop and Vine and Ivy, run out into little strings or
tendrils with which they lay hold upon some body that is stronger than
themselves, as if they were conscious of their own weakness, and so to prop up
themselves did designedly twist about those stronger bodies that are best able
to support them. And therefore since they neither know their own weakness, nor
yet the strength of the Trees or Wall they depend on, it is evident that there
is a wise Providence that knows both, and guides and directs them to their
safety.

And as there is a visible Providence over Plants, so there is also over brute
and irrational Animals, and especially over the smallest and most contemptible,
who by reason of their natural weakness and impotence are less able to provide
for themselves. For thus the Spider is a Creature as void of Reason as the
Plant of Sense, and yet with what wondrous Art does he spin his Web out of a
viscous matter within his own Bowels? He extends the threads of it cross to one
another, leaving equal Angles in the middle, fastening the extreme to the
opposite threads, and then least through the weakness of the slender threads of
which it is composed the Fly he hunts should happen to break through, he weaves
several under-nets one within another, and with a wondrous Art fastens them all
together, that so if one should fail, the other might hold; and when he has
thus fixed and spread his subtle and strange-contrived Snares, he lies in wait
in a little Den without, made by him on purpose to conceal himself; from
whence, as soon as the Fly is entangled, he swiftly runs and seises it, and
having killed it carries it away and lays it up in a safe Repository against a
time of Famine. In all which performance this irrational Insect proceeds as
providently and wisely as if in a long deduction he had inferred one thing from
another and acted upon the most rational deliberation; and therefore since he
is void of reason himself, and does not determine himself by any natural Logic
of his own, he must proceed by the reason and direction of some wise Mind
without him, that has the guidance and disposal of his motion. For he begins
not to exercise his Art after he is arrived to a riper age, but is born with
his Trade about him, and spins and weavs fpom his very Infancy; nor is there
any diversity in his Manufacture, as there uses to be in those of rational
Artificers, but it is always woven in the same manner, and figure, and fashion,
which is a plain evidence that he effects it not by any art or reason of his
own but by mere natural instinct, which is nothing but the impression of the
art and reason of the Author of Nature, which impression knows not what it
does, nor upon what reasons it proceeds, but only answers to the Reason of God
as the signature does to the Seal that impressed it, and like an Echo
articulates and resounds his Voice without understanding what it means. And as
the senseless Echo when it reverberates words that carry Sense and Reason in
them, supposes the original Voice to proceed from some intelligent Mind; so
these irrational Instincts of Nature which express so much art and reason in
their operations, do necessarily imply that there is some wise Mind or
Providence to which they owe their original and continuance.

FOR thus to instance farther, with what a strange and wonderful Art do the
Bees frame their Combs, which they divide on each side into a world of little
six-corner'd cells, and then prop them up with middle walls of pillars which
they raise from the floor into an arch, by which as they are rendered more
strong, so the Bees have an entrance through to repair them whenever they
decay; and having thus artificially built their houses, with what industry do
they wander to and fro to gather the sweet dews of Heaven, whereon they live,
from the herbs and flowers of the field, and with what care do they treasure
them up in those little cells against winter, when they can neither go forth by
reason of the cold to seek their sustenance abroad, nor yet find it if they
could; and when they have filled their cells with their winter provision, they
providently draw over the mouth of them a thin skin or membrane to preserve the
grateful liquor lest it should drop out and be lost; and in a word, in what a
regular order do they live, they rest and labor all together, and in the
discharge of several offices conspire to the same work; some press the flowers
with their feet, others with their mouths or down of their bodies gather up the
moistures which these press out and carry them home to their cells; some bring
home the materials of which these cells are composed, others disburthen them of
it, others build with it, and others plane and polish the building. Thus all
hands are at work first to build the house they are to dwell in, and to divide
it into its several apartments, and then to store them all with provision
against the ensuing time of scarcity. Now therefore (not to mention their
wondrous polity and government of which so many curious observations have been
made) how is it possible they should do all these things with so much
regularity and exact order, without being guided by some art and reason? But
yet it is certain it is not by any reason of their own; they do not at all
consider when they build, how needful houses are for themselves and their
Winter provisions, nor how convenient that waxy matter which they gather is to
build those houses, nor what necessity there is of dividing them into distinct
cells and apartments; they understand not the nature of those sweet dews which
they gather, whether they are food or poison, and when they gather more than
they have present need of they know not why they do it, they reason not with
themselves that Winter is approaching, wherein neither these dews will fall
upon which they live, nor themselves be able to go forth and gather them, and
that therefore it behooves them to store themselves beforehand against the
ensuing famine; and when that they have laid up their store and are binding it
in with the membrane they draw over it, they do not consider that it is a fluid
matter that will be apt to run out and be lost; and yet all these things they
perform with as much regularity and art, as if they had thoroughly weighed and
considered and perfectly understood the reasons of them; which is a plain
evidence that they are acted by a reason that is not their own, and what other
reason can this be than that of the divine mind which governs and disposes all
things? And the same may be said of Ants, and Moles and Palmer-worms and
innumerable other animals, which though they have no reason of their own, are
yet in many instances as evidently conducted by reason as any rational beings
whatever.

For with what admirable art do the irrational Birds form their nests a little
after their coupling; they begin to build though they neither consider that
they are breeding, nor yet do foresee when they shall lay; by which it is plain
that there is a Providence which considers and foresees for them; and though
they understand not what materials are fittest to build their nests nor in what
order to frame and dispose them, yet there is a very wise understanding that
directs them both to choose and contrive the materials, and this with greater
art than we with all our reason can do. For as for the outward surface of the
nests which comes not near their bodies, they frame it with sticks and thorns
which with inimitable art they twist and interweave into a round and uniform
hollowness, which they commonly dawb round with mud to render it more compact
and warm; when this is done though they understand not their own specific frame
and constitution, yet they proceed as if they did, and suit their nests to the
strength or weakness of their natures; for those of them that are of a hardier
make content themselves with this inward plaistering, and when it is dried
proceed to lay and hatch their eggs on it, without troubling themselves to line
it with any softer materials, as if they knew beforehand that the constitution
of their young would be such as would not need any softness or delicacy;
whereas those that are of a tenderer frame take care to cloth the hard
plaistering with straw or hay or moss, upon which those that are tenderest of
all make another layer of hair or down or feathers, as if they perfectly
understood what degree of softness and warmth would be necessary for the
preservation and nourishment of their tender off spring. Since therefore it is
certain that they know none of all these things, and yet they act as if they
did, they must necessarily be supposed to act by the direction of some wise
Mind that perfectly knows them all. And then again considering with what
patience and diligence the female sits upon her eggs when she has laid them,
as if she understood the plilosophy of her own warmth, how necessary it is to
form and animate and hatch them, and with what care and industry the male
brings her in provision whilst she is sitting, that so she may not be forced by
the necessities of Nature to neglect her eggs and leave them too long exposed
to the cold air which in a short time would destroy the tender principles of
life within them; and in a word, with what care and industry they both conspire
to cherish and feed their young when they are hatched, till such time as they
are clothed and fledged and can fly abroad to seek provision for themselves;
considering, I say, how in all these things they proceed as if they perfectly
understood the reasons and necessities of their own actions, it is plain that
they must be guided either by a reason in their own or in some other mind that
has the command and conduct of their motions. Now that it is not by a reason
of their own is evident, because whatsoever they do, they necessarily do, and
cannot possibly do otherwise, for they never vary in their operations, never
try any new experiments, but always proceed in the same road and repeat the
same things in the same method, which is a plain sign that they cannot do
otherwise, and consequently that they act not from reason but necessity; and
therefore since they are made and impelled to act as they do, and yet do act so
rationally and wisely, that which impels them must be a rational mind either
acting upon them immediately, or by a fixed and permanent impression of its art
and reason on their motions. For as Aristotle has long since observed (...),
they do these things neither by any art nor council nor deliberation of their
own. They are not masters of the wisdom by which they act, but are merely
passive to the impressions of that wisdom, that are made upon them. For so men
we see for their own profit and others pleasure can teach Dogs and others
animals to dance the measures of tunes and other artificial motions, the rules
and ends of which they understand not; for when they perform these motions,
they neither think of their masters profit nor the spectatour's pleasure, which
is the end and design of them, nor understand the proportions of music which
is the rule of them, so that the reason of their motions is only in their
teachers mind, who by frequent use does by degrees imprint the practice of his
art upon their fancies; and if a man can so imprint his art upon these artless
creatures, as to make them practice it without understanding either the grounds
or reasons of it, how much more may an allwise and Almighty mind. And therefore
since de facto we behold a world of curious art among brute animals, that far
exceeds all the little feats we can teach them, why may we not as reasonably
believe, that any one of these dancing animals learnt all his artificial
motions, the reasons of which he understands not, without any arts-master to
teach him, as that Ants and Bees acquired all the art and Providence they
practice, without either discovering the reasons of it by any understanding of
their own, or being ever instructed in it by any other provident mind; for art
and providence cannot be supposed without reason, and therefore since the
reason of their art is not in themselves, it must necessarily be in some mind
without them that has the conduct and direction of all their motions.

III. ANOTHER sensible evidence of a divine Providence is the mutual agreement
and correspondency of things that have no understanding of themselves or of one
another. For if we look abroad into the World we cannot but observe an
admirable harmony among things which yet have no kind of knowledge of one
another, and therefore cannot be supposed to have framed and adapted themselves
to one another, nor yet to be so framed and adapted, but by the Art and
contrivance of some very wise and intelligent Mind. For how can any cause fit
any two things to one another without having some Idea in his mind of the
natures of them both? If therefore in the nature of things we can discover a
world of mutual suitabilities, of this to that and of one thing to another, it
will be a sufficient argument that they all procced from some wise Cause that
had an universal Idea of their natures in his mind, and saw how such a thing
would suit such a thing, before ever he actually adapted them one to another.

NOW not to insist any further upon the admirable fitness of the Sun and Earth,
the Water and Earth, the Air and Heaven and Earth one to another, which I have
largely discoursed already, how exactly is every animal fitted for its element,
and every element for its animals? Thus the Birds for instance, are fitted with
wings to fly aloft in the air, and the air is fitted to bear them up, and to
yield to the vibration of their wings: the Fishes are fitted to swim in the
water, having finns which serve instead of oars to cut through and divide the
streams, and the waters are fitted for the fish to swim in, being a soft and
fluid substance that is easily cut and divided; and as for the earth and those
earthy animals that inhabit it, there is an admirable congruity between them;
for they being all framed to walk or creep must have an hard and solid matter
to move on, and the earth being an hard and solid matter requires such animals
as can walk or creep on it; and as every element is fitted for the motion of
its animals, and every animal to move in its element; so every element has a
food that is proper to the appetites of its animals, and, every animal an
appetite that is proper to the food of its element. So that as every animal is
fitted within with all those faculties and organs that are requisite to its
procuring and enjoying what is good for it, and its shunning and repelling what
is hurtful, so it is also furnished without with all that is necessary or
convenient for its support and satisfaction. Thus every faculty within has an
object without prepared for it, that is exactly correspondent therewith,
without which, as has been excellently observed, the faculty would become vain
and useless, yea and sometimes harmful and destructive, as reciprocally the
object would import little or nothing if such a faculty were not provided for
and suited to it. For thus the Eye would be perfectly useless if it were not
for the light, and the light would be much less considerable if it were not for
the Eye; for if all light were extinguished, all those curious colors into
which the light is refracted would be utterly insignificant; and if all those
colors were extinguished, the Eye would be utterly deprived of one of its most
pleasant entertainments. And what use would there be of all that infinite
variety of melodious sounds, fragrant odours, and delicious savours which this
frame of nature affords, were there no hearing, smelling or tasting faculties?
and what would these faculties signify were there no such sounds or odours or
savours? So that these objects and faculties are all as perfectly fitted one to
another as it was possible for art to fit them: nothing could be better sitted
for seeing than the eye, nothing better framed to render things visible than
the light, and light can be refracted into no color so grateful unto the eye
as green, which is the great color of Nature; and the same may be said of the
ear and sounds, the smell and odours, the taste and savours; and if the eye were
made to see and the ear to hear, as there is no doubt but they were, being so
exquisitely framed for that purpose; to be sure light was made for seeing and
sounds for hearing, and so for all the rest; and how is it possible that so
many things should be made so exactly harmonious and agreeable with one another
without the powerful art and direction of some very skilful mind, that knew
beforehand that this thing would perfectly fit that, and consequently had a
perfect Idea of them both? When therefore we behold such exact correspondencies
between the motive faculties of Animals and the elements they move in, between
the fruits and products of those Elements and the faculties of taste, digestion,
and nutrition in those animals that inhabit them, and in a word between all
sensible objects without and sensitive objects within, how is it possible we
should be so senseless as not to trace out an all-directing wisdom by footsteps
that are so expressed and remarkable? For suppose you heard a musical Instrument
move its own strings into an exquisite harmony and run long divisions of
curious and well-proportion'd notes, without the impulse of any visible Artist,
would you not conclude either that some invisible hand did immediately touch
and play upon its strings, or that they were moved by some internal spring and
contrivance of a musical mind? how then can we attend to the admirable
harmonies of Nature, to the natural references and due proportions and exact
correspondencies of all its innumerable parts to one another without believing
that there is some great harmonical mind which tuned it at first and still
plays upon it by the immediate touch and impulse of its own invisible hand.

AND as all things are thus fitted and adapted together, so are they also most
regularly subordinated to one another according to their rank and worth; the
senseless elements with all their fruit and product being subject to the use of
animals to whom they afford a vast variety of all conveniences and necessaries
answerable to their desires and needs; so that of all those vast numbers of
sensitive Beings there is no one kind or individual, no not so much as a fly,
or worm, or insect but what is plentifully supplied out of these common
storehouses of Nature. And as the elements are subjected to the use of
animals, so both are subject to the use of Man, who is as much superior to the
brute animals, as they are to the senseless elements. To him therefore, as it is
most fit and congruous, all things here below pay tribute; the Earth ingenders
within its bowels quarrie's of stone and mines of coal and metals to serve his
necessary uses and conveniences, and spreads its surface with a vast variety of
herbs and flowers and fruitful trees to supply him with food and with Physic,
and treat him with pleasure and delight; to entertain his eye with beautiful
colors, his smell with fragrant odours and his palate with delicious savours;
the Waters serve to quench his thirst, to dress his food, to fructify his
fields and gardens, to cleanse his body and habitation and to maintain and
facilitate his intercourse and traffic with all parts of the World; the Air
fans him with refreshing gales, supplies him with breath and with vital and
animal spirits; the Fire warms and cherishes him, concocts his meat and drink
into fit and wholesome nourishment, and serves him in his most necessary Arts
and manual operations. And as all the four elements do one way or other
conspire to our use and benefit, so do all the animals too that inhabit them,
though as yet there are sundry of them whose use we have not discovered, but as
for the generality of them they are innumerable ways adapted to our use; some
to furnish our Table with food and delicacies, others to prevent or to remove
our Diseases with their medicinal Virtues; some to cloth and some to adorn our
Bodies, others to assist us in and others to ease us of our labors, and others
to entertain us with cheerful sports and recreations. Thus all things here
below have as plain a reference to the use of Man who is the noblest part of
them, as if some wise and powerful Mind had contrived them on purpose to serve
and benefit him; as on the contrary Man has so plain a reference to them
considering his needs and his sensitive and rational faculties, as if the same
wise Mind had framed him on purpose to use and enjoy them.

AND is it possible that after all this we should be so stupid as not to
discern those bright beams of wisdom which shine through so many perspicuous
correspondencies? For it is certain that either they must be designed by Wisdom,
or happen by Chance; and is it possible that a blind Chance which can do
nothing regularly and is the Parent only of monstrous and deformed births,
should thus exquisitely fit and adapt things to one another in such a long and
orderly series; that Chance which never yet composed a tune or wrote a line of
coherent sense should ever be the Author of this great frame of things, in
which there is more of harmony than in all the musical composures, and more of
sense and Philosophy than in all the studied Volumes in the World? And if it
cannot be the effect of Chance it must be the product of Wisdom and Providence.

IV. ANOTHER sensible evidence of a divine Providence is the continuation of
things in the same comely order which have no government of themselves. That
things are put into a most useful, wise and artificial order has been
sufficiently demonstrated under the foregoing particulars; now I would fain
know what was it reduced them to and still continues them in this order; did
the blind parts of the matter whereof these things are composed, once upon a
time as they were wandering through the field of infinite space becken to one
another, and by common consent assemble themselves into a General Council, and
there advise together how they should rank and marshal themselves into a World,
and when upon grave and mature advice they had agreed upon, and described and
chalked out the laws of their motion did they break-up Council, and set forth
in their several lines to the execution of their Canons and Decrees, till by
their oblique, parallel and counter-motions, they at last interwove themselves
into all those beautiful contextures we behold? He who can imagine this to be
either probable or possible, must himself be as dull and stupid as those
senseless parts of matter are, of which he dreams. Well then, since these things
could not be effected by any Council or contrivance in the matter it self, was
it by mere chance that these blind parts of matter floating in an immense
space, did after several justlings and rancounters jumble themselves into this
beautiful frame of things? alas, this is a conceit, if possible, more
ridiculous than the former; for how is it possible to imagine that Chance
should ever make a Man? in the contexture of whose parts there are such wonders
of Art as do as far exceed the most curious Engines and Machines that ever
humane Art invented, as the most glorious and magnificent Palace does a Castle
of Cards. And if Chance cannot so much as draw the picture of a Man, which is
but a rude imitation of his outside, how much less can it shape Temper and
connect all those hidden and subtle springs of life and motion, sense and
imagination, memory and passion within him? Well then, since it was neither
from any wisdom in the matter of them, nor from any casual motion of that
matter that this orderly series of things did proceed, was it from a blind
necessity? but pray what made this necessity? how came the matter of these
things that might have moved otherwise having an infinite space about it, and
no principle within i^ to incline it one way more than another, to determine it
self to this series of motion? if you say it was by Chance, I have showed it is
impossible; and if you say it was from Eternity, that is all one. For as an
excellent Author of our own has observed, Whether it were now, or yesterday,
or from Eternity infers no difference as to our purpose; not the circumstance
of the time, but the quality of the Cause being only here considerable; the
same cause being alike apt or unapt yesterday as to day, always as sometimes,
from all Eternity as from any set-time to produce such effects. So that it is as
possible for matter fortuitously moved without any Art or Council to compose a
World now, and to frame it into Animals and Men a^ it was from Eternity; that
is, it is from all Eternity, and now equally impossible; and if it were by the
Council of some intelligent Mind that it was framed into this world of Beings
and orderly series of things, then it is doubtless by the same Mind that its
order and harmony is still continued and preserved. For it is altogether as
impossible for matter of it self unguided by Wisdom and Art to pursue any
constant course, as to fall into any regular form, it being as we see all torn
and broken into little parts innumerably many, and infinitely diverse in their
size, and figures, and motions, and thence only fit in their several courses
to cross and confound each other. How then is it possible without vast Wisdom
and answerable Power so to manage this wild and disordered swarm of Atoms as
to determine them to their proper bounds, continue them in their regular ranks
and files and preserve them in the same tenure of action, so as that in all
those new productions of the individuals of every kind of Plants and Animals
which are every day compounded out of them, they should none of them ever
extravagate in their motions so as to disturb and hinder one another, and
finally disorder and interrupt the natural course of Generation? When therefore
we consider how this great Machine of the World (as the above cited Author
expresses it) whose parts are infinite for number and variety, has stood six
thousand years together always one and the same, unimpair'd in its beauty,
unworn in its parts, unwearied and undisturbed in its motions; through what an
infinite series of generations and corruptions all its plants and animals have
past, and yet how after they have been corrupted over and over, and their whole
frames have been broke in pieces, and all their parts divided and dispersed,
they have still been generated anew, and rallied into the same specific
natures, which, though they still consist of numberless parts are constantly
drawn up into the same postures and figures and positions, and with strange
regularity digested into the same handsome order, as if they all kept time with
the musical Laws of some Almighty Mind, as the stones of Thebes did with
Amphion's Lute, and thereby continually danced into their natural figures;
When, I say, we consider these strange and wondrous things, what tolerable
account can we give of the performance of them without an overruling
Providence? For how is it imaginable that in a six thousand years course of
Generations and Corruptions these blind and undesigning parts of matter, which
by reason of their infinite diversity are so naturally apt to thwart and
disturb one another, should maintain such regular courses of motion as still to
concenter in the same forms, so as that through all this vast tract of time not
so much as one kind of plants or animals should miscarry; how, I say, could
this have been, had they not all along been conducted by a steady and unerring
Providence?

V. ANOTHER Sensible evidence of a Divine Providence is the miraculous events
that have happened in the World. By Miraculous Events, I mean such as either for
their matter or manner of production do exceed the Power of natural Causes, or
at least are produced by them out of their established course and order. Such
as dividing the Sea, stopping the Sun, raising the Dead, curing the sick, and
blind, and lame, with a touch or word; of all which we have notorious instances
both in the Old and New Testament, and these attested with as full and
convincing Evidence as ever any matters of Fact were that are recorded in
History. For as for the Miracles of the Old Testament, besides that they were
sundry of them performed in the public view of Nations, and were recorded in
those very Ages wherein they were wrought, and so could have been easily
disproved by ten thousand living Witnesses had they not been true; besides that
they were attested by the most ancient Heathen Poets and Historians in their
Mythologies and Histories, who to be sure would never have yielded the glory of
such wondrous Effects to a Nation whom they hated and despised, had they not
been forced to it by undeniable Evidence; In a word, besides that they were
confirmed by the succeeding Prophets of that Nation, who both by the Miracles
they wrought, and by the exact accomplishment of their Predictions have
sufficiently evidenced themselves to be supernaturally inspired; Besides all
which, I say, the Miracles of the Old Testament are abundantly attested by the
New, the credit whereof is ratified and confirmed by a world of new Miracles
wrought by our Savior himself, and particularly by his Resurrection from the
dead, which are not only in part confessed by the Jews themselves, his most
mortal Enemies, and by the Heathen Writers who were implacable Persecutors of
his Religion, but also by his own Disciples and Apostles, who, as I shall show
hereafter, were Eyewitnesses of these Miracles, and did not only attest them
with their Mouths, but also sealed their testimony with their blood, and
confirmed it before all the World with infinite other Miracles which they
wrought in his Name, and which they continued to work for several Ages
together, as is evident not only from the wondrous success of their Ministry,
which without being attested with such miraculous Effects could never have
propagated in so short a time such an hated Religion over all the World, but
also from the confident Appeals which the Christian Writers frequently make to
their heathen Enemies, in which they Subpoena them in as daily Spectators of
their wondrous Works, and for the truth of them challenge their own Eyes and
Ears. So then that there have been such miraculous Effects can no more be
doubted than that there have been such Men as Pompey the Great or Julius
Caesar, the former being attested, all things considered, with much more
Evidence than the latter.

AND if this attestation be true, there must be a Providence; for how is it
possible that blind Nature which neither deliberates nor chooses, should of it
self ever vary or interrupt its course without rushing into utter confusion and
disorder? How should any part of it, when it is once moved either faster or
slower than ordinary, so restrain, or quicken its own motion as to reduce it
self back again to its established Course? For if it once move faster, it must
have some degree of motion super-added to it, and till that is withdrawn it
must move faster for ever: if it move slower, it must have some degree of
motion withdrawn from it, and 'till that be restored it must move slower for
ever: how then is it possible that Nature or any part of it which moves by a
blind necessity, should of its own accord either hasten and then slacken, or
slacken and then hasten the course of its motion, as it must do in the
production of miraculous Effects, without being influenced by an Almighty
Providence? We have several miraculous Instances of the diverting natural
Causes from their course and stopping them in it; such as causing the Waters to
divide and stand still, and the Sun to move backward. Now how is it conceivable
that any natural Cause that has no will of its own to move and determine it,
should either stop its own motion and then move again, or divert from its
course and then return again, if it were not under the command of some will
without it, that guides and disposes it according to its own Council? But
besides these Scripture Miracles, there are sundry miraculous Instances of the
rewarding good Men and punishing bad publicly recorded in the Histories of all
Ages; some of vindicating the Innocence, others of restoring the lives, others
of relieving the necessities of good Men; some of detecting the Crimes of bad
Men, others of striking them dead in their impious facts, others of punishing
them in kind, and others of inflicting on them those very Plagues which they
have imprecated on themselves to give credit to a falsehood; of some or other of
which there is scarce any Age of the World which has not been furnished with
sundry notorious instances; so that unless we will give the Lie to all humane
testimony, and condemn the Records of all Ages for public Cheats and
Impostures, we cannot deny but that there have been sundry Miracles in the
World, and if of all these Miracles that have been so strongly attested there
be but any one true and real, that one is a sufficient argument of an
overruling Providence. For if ever any thing has been effected that is either
above the Power or contrary to the established Course of natural Causes, it
must be brought to pass by the Power of God, and if God does sometimes visibly
exert his own immediate efficacy on this World, that is a plain evidence that
he always governs it; for whenever he thus exerts it, it is for some reason to
be sure, and for what other reason should he thus strip his Arm and visibly
exert his Power upon or before us, but either to awaken our attention or to
confirm our faith, or alarm our fear, or encourage our hope; and if ever he had
any such design upon us, it must be in order to his governing us; for to what
other purpose can an Almighty Being be supposed to address himself to our Hope
and Fear, and Faith and Attention, but to subdue and reduce us under his Rule
and Government.

VI. And lastly, Another visible evidence of a divine Providence is Predictions
of future aad remote contingencies. That there have been such things has been
universally acknowledged by Heathens as well as Jews and Christians. As for the
Heathen, Tully gives numerous instances of it in his two Books of Divination;
In the first of which he sets down this as the great Principle of Prediction:
Esse Deos and eorum providentia mundum administrari eosdemque consulere rebus
humanis, nec solum universis verum etiam singulis, i. e. That there are Gods,
and that by their Providence the World is governed, that they take care of
humane Affairs, and this not only in general, but in particular. And of these
Predictions he tells us there was one Chrysippus who wrote a large Book, in
which he gives innumerable instances of them, all confirmed by very good
Authority. Besides which there were their Oracles and their Sybilline Writings,
among which if there had not been a great many true Predictions, it is not to
be imagined that ever the wiser and more inquisitive part of Men should be so
far imposed on as they were to pay such a mighty respect and veneration to
them, and that not only for a little while, but for several Ages together. But
as for their Oracles, there are sundry of them recorded in ancient Historians
together with their punctual accomplishments; and Tully in particular tells us
of one of Apollo his Oracles which foretold a thousand years before that
Sypselus the Tyrant should reign at Corinth. And Varro makes mention of one
Vectius Valens an Augur in the time of Romulus, who when Rome was building
foretold by the flying of twelve Vultures that the City should continue a
thousand two hundred years, which accordingly happened. But as for the reality of
Predictions we need seek no farther than the Holy Scriptures, in which you have
sundry Prophesies of things which happened a long time after, as particularly of
the deliverance of the Jews from those two Captivities, the one in Egypt, the
other in Babylon; the former of which was foretold four hundred years, and the
latter above seventy years before it came to pass, and yet both of them
accomplished punctually to a day, as you may see in Genesis 15.13. compared with
Exodus 12.41. and Jer. 25.12. compared with 2 Chronicles. 36.21, 22. which latter*
Prophecy is not only recorded in Scripture, but mentioned by Eupolemus an
heathen Historian cited by Eusebius, Prepar. page 454. Thus also you have Esaias
his Prophecy of Cyrus whose name and achievements he most exactly foretells
long before he was born, Esaias 44.45. And then for Daniel's Prophesies of the
grand Revolutions of the Empires of the World, they do so punctually describe
what happened long after, that Porphyry himself, though a mortal Enemy to
Christianity, is forced to confess the exact agreement of his Prophesies with
the succeeding Events, vid. St. Chrysostom. cont. Jud. Tom. 6. p. 326. and has
no other way to evade the force of them but by affirming without any color of
Reason or Authority that they were written afterward in or near the time of
Antiochus Epiphanes, though it is evident that the LXX Interpreters who
translated the Old Testament a hundred years before, translated this Prophecy
of Daniel with it. And Josephus expressly tells us, that Jaddus the High Priest
showed this very Prophecy to Alexander the Great, who lived long before
Antiochus, Joseph* Antiqu. l. 11. But to name no more, there are the Prophesies
of the Messiah, of the place and most particular circumstances of his Nativity,
and Ministry, and Life, and Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension, all which
were so punctually accomplished in our Blessed Savior, that did not the Jews,
in whose hands they have been always preserved, own and acknowledge them, one
would be apt to suspect that they were forged on purpose by some Christian to
countenance our Saviors pretense of being the true Messiah.

AND if there be any such thing as Prophecy, if but any one of all these
Instances be real (and that none of them should, would be very strange) this
one will be a sufficient evidence of a Divine Providence; for to foresee things
at a distance, and before their Causes are in being, so as to describe before
hand the precise Time, and Place, and Manner of their existence, or to foresee
things casual and contingent, that wholly depend upon the free choice and
determination of voluntary Agents, requires a mind of infinite comprehension,
that sees through all the whole Series of Causes, and has a perfect prospect
not only of those things that actually exist, but also of all that are future
and possible. For how is it possible to foresee a remote futurity in all its
particular Circumstances, whose immediate Cause is either unborn, or free and
undetermined, without having a perfect inspection not only into the natures,
and inclinations, and tendencies of things, but also into all their particular
Conjunctions and Conspiracies; and that Mind which sees into all these, must
needs be all-seeing and have nothing concealed from it, that is either present,
or future, or possible. So that if there be any such thing as Prediction of
remote and contingent futurities, it must necessarily proceed from an
all-seeing Mind; and if there be an all-seeing Mind that oversees the whole
World, and accurately inspects all that is past, or present, or to come in it,
is it imaginable that such a Mind should sit looking on as an idle Spectator
and act no part it self in such a vast and busy Scene of thihgs? For that it
thus exactly inspects and takes notice of the World, is a plain Argument that
it is greatly concerned for it; and that it should be greatly concerned for it,
and yet do nothing about it, nor exercise any Providence over it, is altogether
inconceivable. And thus I have shown, with all the plainness I could, what
Evidences there are to create in us a belief of a Divine Providence, which I
persuade my self are such, as duly considered, cannot but prevail with Minds
that are not steeled against all convictions, and utterly abandoned both of
their Reason and Modesty.

SECT. III. The Objections against Providence considered and answered.
I Now proceed to the third and last thing proposed to be treated of in this
Chapter; and that is to show the Insufficiency and Unreasonableness of the
common Pretenses to Infidelity in this matter; and here not to insist upon all
the little and shameful Cavils which have been made against Providence, which
are so very inconsiderable that 'twould be too great a Credit to them to be
seriously confuted; I shall insist upon those only which are the common, and do
carry the fairest show of Reason with them, and they are these five:

1. That the Exercise of a Providence does not comport with the Majesty of God.
2. That it does not consist with the Ease and Happiness of God. 3. That it is
not reconcilable with the manifold Evils which we behold in the World. 4. That
if there were such a Providence, it could not admit of the unequal Divisions of
Goods and Evils which are made in this World. 5. That it is not to be
reconciled with the wretched State and Condition to which we behold the
greatest part of Mankind abandoned.
I. IT is objected against the Being of Providence, that it does not comport
with the Majesty of God to take notice of, or concern himself about the little
Affairs of this World. Which is such an Objection as carries its own Answer
with it; for I would fain know which is most suitable to Majesty, to sit still
or to act, to wrap up it self in everlasting Sloth and Idleness, or to display
it self in a vigorous Activity? And if it be greater and more Majestic, as
doubtless it is, for any Being to employ and exercise its Powers, than to let
them lie asleep and make no use of them, I would fain know in what higher
Sphere can God exercise his Powers than in governing the World. For to govern
well is the best and greatest thing that we can frame an Idea of; it is to do
the greatest good, to dispense the noblest Virtues, and to shed forth the
amplest Sphere of Benefits. And therefore since the World is such a vast
Dominion, doubtless the most glorious Employment that the largest Mind can
undertake, is to rule and govern it; and there is nothing can be greater and
more Godlike, than to sit at the Helm of this floating Universe, and steer its
Motions to their Ends with a steady and unerring Hand. What therefore can God
do more worthy of himself than to govern the World well and wisely? Or wherein
can he better display the Glory of his own Perfections, than in keeping this
mighty Engine in such an admirable Order, so as that though its Parts are
infinite in Number and Variety, and in their several Lines of Motion do
frequenly cross and intersect each other, yet do they neither clash nor
interfere, disturb nor confound one another, but in their different Functions
mutually assist each other, and all conspire in a common Good, composing out of
their infinite Discords a most elegant Harmony, in which mighty Performance
there is scope enough for an infinite Power to exert its utmost Activity, for
an infinite Wisdom to employ its utmost skill, and for an infinite Goodness to
put forth its utmost Beneficence.

So that to undertake this Province of governing the World, is so far from
being beneath the Majesty of God, that it would be an unpardonable Arrogance
for any but a God to undertake it; and if Contrivance be the End of Wisdom,
Action of Power, Beneficence of Goodness, as doubtless they are; where can the
infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of God find a more ample Sphere for
Action, Contrivance, and Beneficence than in the Government of the World? And
if it be the proper Exercise of Majesty to govern, what can better comport with
the greatest Majesty than to display it self in the Government of the largest
Dominion, which is that of the World?

BUT then considering that God himself is the Father of all this great Family
of Beings, how can it be beneath his Majesty to take care of his own
Offspring? Why should it be below him to provide for any thing which was not
below him to create? If there be any thing in this World so contemptible as not
to deserve his Regard, why did he create it? If there be not, why should he
disdain to govern it? And if every thing in this World has some End for the
sake of which God thought it worthy to be one of the Objects of his Creation,
why should he not as well think the constant Direction of it to that End, to be
an Object worthy of his Providence?

II. IT is further objected against the Being of Gods Providence, that it is
inconsistent with his Quiet and Happiness. For to attend to such an infinite
number of things as the Government of the World includes, cannot but distract
his Thoughts, and thereby disturb him in the Enjoyment of himself. All which is
a gross mistake, arising from no other cause but our measuring God by our
selves; because we find our own Minds so narrow, and our own Powers so limited,
as that we cannot without Distraction attend to many things at once, therefore
we conclude that this mighty Business of governing the World must needs be very
uneasy to God. Whereas if we considered God as a Being that is infinitely
perfect, whose Almighty Power implies an Ability to do whatsoever is possible,
and whose infinite Knowledge includes an universal Prospect of all things past,
present, and to come, this would easily convince us of the Vanity and Falsehood
of this Objection; for it is by reason of Imperfection that Beings operate with
Labor and Difficulty; it is because their Powers are weak and not able to
conquer without struggling the Resistances of the Objects upon which they
operate; but against perfect and infinite Powers there are no Objects can make
such Resistance as to put them upon struggling and Labor; so that to an
omniscient and omnipotent Mind there can be nothing difficult to be known or
effected; and it is altogether as easy to it to know all things that are
knowable, and do all things that are possible, as to know or do any one thing
whatsoever; because whatsoever it does it does perfectly. How then can the
Government of the World be difficult or uneasy to God, whose Knowledge and
Power are perfect and infinite; and consequently can inspect and govern all the
Beings in the World with as much Facility as if they had only one Being to take
care of; and if one Man can with Ease manage one Business which he perfectly
understands, why may not God manage all who understands all better than we
understand any one; and suppose the things of the World were infinite, yet
since Gods Knowledge and Power are infinite too, there is the very same
Proportion of Infinite to Infinite as of One to One.

FOR it is to be considered that the natural Tendency of infinite Power is to
Action, of infinite Wisdom to Contrivance, of infinite Goodness to Beneficence;
and how can we imagine that it should be any Disturbance to God to follow the
Inclination of his own Perfections? And therefore since it is equally easy to
his infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness to exert themselves in a larger
Sphere of Action, Contrivance and Beneficence as in a narrower, why should it
more disturb him to govern a whole World, than one single Being? It would
doubtless be rather a disturbance to him to act nothing, to contrive nothing,
and to do no good; because this would be to cross the Inclination of his own
Perfections; but since it is as easy to him to exercise those Perfections
about many things as about few; to exercise them about a world of things must
rather be a Delight than a Disturbance to him, because the more he exercises
them, the more he complies with their natural Tendencies and Inclinations.

AND what though this World be a great and cumbersome Mass of things; it can be
no Labor to God to move and actuate it, who as an universal soul is diffused
through it, and vitally present with every part of it; for he moves it not as
Bodies move Bodies by thrusting and pressure, but as Souls move Bodies by
Thought and Will; and as our Soul does move its Body, and determine the Motion
of its Members merely by thinking and willing, without any material Pressure,
without any Machines or Engines, even so God, who is the great Soul of the
World, does actuate every Part, and regulate every Motion of it without any
laborious heavings or thrustings, merely by the all-commanding Influence of his
own Almighty Thought and Will. And if it be no Labor to our Soul to think and
will, and therewithal to move our Body, why should we think it any Labor to
God by the same Operations to move the World? For suppose our Soul were clothed
with a Body as large as the whole Universe, and were but vitally present with
every Part of it, it would doubtless move it all with as much Ease, and command
it every way with as much Freedom as it does the Body wherein it now resides;
how then can it be difficult to a perfect Mind which penetrates all through,
and coexists with every Part of this material World, to move and actuate the
Whole, and moderate all the Motions of it according to its own Will and
Pleasure?

III. IT is farther objected against a Providence, that it is not consistent
with the manifold Evils, both moral and natural, which we behold in this World.
If there were a just and gracious Providence overruling the World, how can it
be imagined that it should ever permit so many Irregularities as we every day
behold in Men's Lives and Manners, or suffer so many Calamities and Miseries to
befall its Subjects? Both which as I shall show you are very fairly consistent
with a just and righteous Providence.

FOR as for the first, to wit, the moral Evils or Irregularities of Men's
Manners, the Permission of them in the World is no more inconsistent with the
Goodness of Gods Providence, than his making of free Agents was with the
Goodness of his nature. For his Permission of sin is no more than his
permitting free Agents to act freely, and according to that Liberty to Good and
Evil wherewith he framed and created them; and why may he not as well permit
them to act freely as create them to act freely? But to be essentially
determined to good, so as not to have any natural Liberty to Evil, seems
inconsistent with the State of a Creature; for there is no Will can be
naturally and essentially determined to good, which is not conducted by an
infallible Mind; for whilst the Mind which is the Guide may possibly err, the
Will which is guided by it must be liable to go astray. Since therefore no Will
can be essentially good but that which is guided by an infallible Mind, and
since no Mind can be essentially infallible but one that is omniscient, it
necessarily follows that to be free to Good and Evil is as natural to all
reasonable Creatures, as to be finite in Knowledge and Understanding; and
accordingly our Savior declares that to be naturally and essentially good is
the incommunicable Prerogative of the divine Nature, Luke 18.19. and if so,
then either God must have made us free to Good and Evil, or not have made us at
all, and there must have been no such Orders of Being as Men and Angels, which
are the Crown and Glory of all the Creation; and is it not much better that
there should be such Beings, than that there should be no such thing as Liberty
to Good and Evil? And if it were not inconsistent with the Divine Goodness to
create free Agents, why should it be inconsistent with it to permit them to act
freely? It Is true indeed we are naturally more free to Evil than the Angels,
and some Angels perhaps were more free to it than others; but what then? Was
God obliged in Goodness to make all Kinds of Beings equally perfect? If so,
there must have been but one Kind of Beings in the whole Universe, and
consequently there must have been infinite Kinds of Beings that are capable of
Happiness for ever unmade, or for ever unprovided for. Wherefore since the
Goodness of God was so infinitely fruitful as to communicate it self in
different Degrees of Perfection to all Possibilities of Being, that so there
might be no Kind wanting to complete the Universe, it was requisite that there
should be a mean Degree of Perfection between Angels and Brutes; otherwise
there would have been a Gap and Chasme in the World, not only a possible Kind
of Being wanting, but a Kind which by partaking both of Reason and Sense, of
Spirit and of Matter, is the (...), as Simplicius expresses it, i. e. the vital
Joint that clasps the upper and lower World together; and if it were no way
unsuitable to the Goodness of God to create the two Extremes, viz. Angels and
Brutes, why should it be thought unsuitable to make a middle Nature between them?

IT is true, by partaking of both Natures we are not only free to Evil in
common with Angels, but also liable to stronger Temptations to it than they;
because we are placed in a tempting Body among a great many brutish Passions
and Appetites, and that Body is placed in a tempting World among a great many
sensitive Goods and Evils, that are continually importuning those Appetites to
mutiny against Reason, and to carry us away captive into Folly and Wickedness;
but to place us in this state is so far from being inconsistent with the
Goodness of God, that it is exactly pursuant to the Design of a most wise and
gracious Providence. For since we are placed by the Condition of our Natures in
a lower Rank of Being and Perfection than Angels, we have no more reason to
complain of that, than Ants or Flies have that they are not Men. But in this
imperfect state the highest good that Providence could design us was to put us
into a state of Trial and Probation, wherein by the good use of our Liberty we
might by degrees fit our selves for and at length arrive to a better and more
raised Condition, and by an orderly Progression from this rude and imperfect
state, might in the different Periods of our Lives grow up into higher and more
excellent Capacities, and at length ripen into Perfection. Now in order to our
Trial it was tequisite we should be placed among Difficulties, without which no
Proof can be made of our Virtues, of our Patience, and Temperance, and Chastity
and Equanimity, Meekness and Sobriety; all which are proper to us as Beings
made up of Angel and Brute; from the latter of which Natures all those brutal
Appetites arise in us, in the good or bad Government whereof consists the
Nature of Humane Virtue and Vice. So that this present state of our Life is
intended by God for a Field of Combat between our Sense and our Reason, our
brutal and angelical Nature, and that the Victory of our Reason might through
the Difficulty of it be rendered more glorious and rewardable, God has
furnished its Antagonist with the Weapons of worldly Temptation to assault and
oppose it, to try its strength and Mettle, and to exercise both its active and
passive Virtues; intending when it has conquered, to translate us hence as a
Reward of our Victory into a free and disintangled state, where we shall be
vexed and enticed no more with the Importunities of sensual Lust and Affection,
but to all Eternity enjoy the Serenity and Pleasure of a pure, angelical
Nature. And what is there in all this that is any way unsuitable, yea, that is
not every way answerable to the Goodness of Providence? It Is true, instead of
conquering, we may, if we please, yield our selves captive to Folly and
Wickedness; but what then? Is Providence to be blamed for leaving Men's Hands at
Liberty, because some have been so desperate as to cut their own Throats? It Is
sufficient that he has proposed to us Reward enough to encourage us to
contend, and contributed to us Assistance enough to enable us to conquer, and
having done all that becomes a wise and good Governor to prevent our Sin and
Ruin, who is to be blamed for it but our selves? God leaves us at Liberty
indeed among Temptations to Evil; and this the very State and Composition of
our Natures requires; but all he designs by it, is to exercise our Virtues, and
thereby to improve and train us up to a state of higher Perfection, and to
furnish us with glorious Opportunities of fighting for and winning Crowns and
Rewards; and this is so far from any way reflecting on the Goodness of his
Providence, that it is an illustrious Instance of it; and yet it is only thus
far that he is concerned in the Being of sin in the World; all the rest is
owing to our own mad and desperate abuse of our natural Liberty, to our wilful
Opposition to his gracious Intentions, and obstinate Resistance to his powerful
Arts and Methods of preventing our Sin and Ruin. What then can be more
unreasonable than for us to object against the Goodness of Gods Providence that
which is purely the Effect of our own Madness and Folly?

AND if the Evil of Sin be no way inconsistent with the Goodness of Providence,
much less is the Evil of Misery, since the Generality of those Evils which we
suffer in this World are either the natural Effects, or the just Punishments,
or the necessary Antidotes and Preventives of our sin. And therefore when you
come into a great School of wild and unruly Boys, you may as well argue that
there is no Master of it, because there are Rods and Ferulaes in it, as that
there is no Providence over this sinful World, because there are Miseries and
Afflictions in it; for upon the Being of Sin in the World, the Being of Misery
is so far from being an Argument against Providence, that it is rather a
Demonstration of it; because a^ sinful World can no more be governed without
Misery, than an unruly School without Correction.

IV. ANOTHER Objection that is made against Providence is that unequal division
of Goods and Evils that is made in this World. If there were a just Providence
that overruled the World, one would think it should make a more visible
Distinction between good and bad Men in the Distribution of its Rewards and
Punishments; whereas in the ordinary Course of things we see all things happen
alike to all, and many times it fares worst with the best, and best with the
worst of Men. Now because this is the greatest and most universal Objection
that was ever urged against the Providence of God, I shall in answer to it
endeavor to show, 1. That it is for the most part false and groundless, 2.
That so far as it is true, it is no Argument at all against a Providence.

First, I say this Objection, that there is no Difference made among Men as to
the Goods and Evils of this World, is in a great Measure false and groundless.
For I make no doubt but in the ordinary Course of things good Men are more
prosperous even in this World than bad; as for times of Persecution, they are a
just Exception from the general rule of Providence; because therein God to
serve his own Glory, and the great Ends of Religion, exchangeth with good Men
spiritual for temporal, and heavenly for earthly Enjoyments, which is such an
Exchange as no man will account a Robbery that understands the just value of
those different Commodities.

IT IS true, it has been an usual Complaint in all Times and Ages, that it
fares best with the worst, and worst with the best; and through the commonness
of it, it is now grown into a Maxim. But it is to be considered that Men always
pity the miserable and envy the prosperous, and that these Passions do
naturally bribe their Judgments to think worse of the one, and better of the
other than either deserve; for those whom we pity we are inclined to love, and
those whom we love we are inclined to think well of; as on the contrary, those
whom we envy we are inclined to hate, and those whom we hate we are inclined to
think ill of; and then because God does not reward and punish Men according to
the Sentence that our blind Pity or Envy passes on them, we are ready to
quarrel with his Providence. And besides, there are a world of close
Hypocrites, that under a mighty show and Ostentation of Piety do secretly
indulge themselves in sundry wastful and ruinous Vices, which many times reduce
them to Poverty and Misery, and these we commonly rank among the good it fares
ill with; as on the contrary there are abundance of good Men, that in the
Course of a reserved, modest and unaffected Piety, whieh makes but very little
show in the Eye of the World, are blessed and prospered, and these we as commonly
rank among the bad that fare well. Since therefore we are such incompetent
Judges of good and bad Men, we should be very careful how we object against the
Providence of God such Maxims as are only founded on our own fallacious
Observations. But could we strip our selves of Pity and Envy, and penetrate
into the insides of Men, I doubt not but we should soon be satisfied that good
Men have much the Advantage of bad, even as to the Happiness and Prosperity of
this World; for though perhaps there are many more bad Men prospered than good,
because there are far more bad than good Men in the World, yet in Proportion to
their Numbers I doubt the prosperous good would far exceed the prosperous bad,
though there should be but thirty of the one to forty of the other; and
supposing that in Proportion there were more bad Men than good advanced to
worldly Greatness, (which yet is very doubtful, considering how prone we are to
judge ill of great Men, and to reckon more of them into the Number of the bad
than we ought, through Envy and Misunderstanding the Reasons of their Actions)
yet it is to be considered that the true state of worldly Happiness and
Prosperity consists not in a great but in a moderate Fortune, and that the good
things of this World are no where so freely and entirely enjoyed, as in the
middle Region between Poverty and Riches; for as Poverty is attended with
Famine and Cold and Anguish, so Greatness is attended with Hurry and Tumult,
impaled with Cares, and imprisoned with Pomp and tedious Ceremony; so that the
truly unfortunate are the Necessitous and the Great, while the middle State
without partaking of the evils of either, includes all that is truly desirable
in both Extremes; all that Poverty wants, and all that Greatness enjoys; and in
this happy state I dare boldly affirm there are proportionably far more good
Men than bad; For it is a very rare thing for a good Man that is honest and
industrious, and depends upon God for a Blessing, to be reduced to extreme
Necessity; so very rare, that David in all his life time could not produce one
Instance of it, Psalm. 37.25. for miserable Poverty is usually the Consequence
either of Idleness, or Luxury, or Faction, or Knavery; all which are
inconsistent with true Goodness; and a good Man in any Condition on this side
pinching Necessity, is ordinarily even in this Life far more happy than the
most gay and prosperous Sinner, whose outward Glory and Greatness is usually
nothing but the gaudy Cover of a Tragical Inside, of a Mind that is tortured
with Pride and Envy, with boundless Hopes, insatiable Desires, and horrible
Reflections, that dash and embitter all his Enjoyments, while the good Man
under his mean and simple Outside, carries a great and happy Soul, a contented
Mind, a cheerful Heart, and a calm Conscience, which mightily sweeten all his
Enjoyments, and make his homely Morsel outrelish the most studied Luxuries. Let
us therefore but judge impartially of Men, and but truly state what is the most
happy Condition of humane Life, and proportion the number of the good to the
bad, and balance the Insides of the one with the Outsides of the other, and I
doubt not but we shall be easily convinced that even in this Life the good
ordinarily fare much better than the bad; for in true Computation Necessity and
Greatness are the only unfortunate States of humane Life, and in these there
are far more bad Men than good; but between these two all Conditions are in a
manner indifferent as to the Happiness of Men; and in this happy Mean there are
far more good Men than bad; and then the Minds of good Men having infinitely
the advantage of the Minds of bad, as to the rendering their outward Condition
happy, it is impossible but that ordinarily and generally they must be the more
happy and prosperous.

Secondly, So far as this Maxim, that all things happen alike to all, is true,
it is no Argument at all against a Providence; and that upon these following
Accounts. 1. Because many of the Goods and Evils of this World happen to us not
as Rewards and Punishments, but in the necessary Course of secondary Causes. 2.
Because the Goods and Evils of this World are in themselves so mean and
inconsiderable that it would be beneath the Wisdom of Providence to be very
exact and curious in the Distribution of 'em. 3. Because this Life is properly
the state of our Trial and Probation, and not of our Reward and Punishment. 4.
Because the Goods and Evils that befall us here are not so truly to be
estimated by themselves as by their Effects and Consequents. 5. This
promiscuous Distribution of things, so far as it is, is very requisite to
assure us of a Judgment to come. 6. Because the exact Adjustment of things is
reserved for a future Judgment.

I. THE happening of all things alike to all is no Argument against Providence;
because many of the Goods and Evils of this World happen to us not as Rewards
and Punishments, but in the necessary Course of second Causes. For in this Life
good and bad Men are so mingled together, rhat in Cases of common Calamity what
happens to the one must happen to the other without a miraculous interposal of
Providence. Thus while God leaves second Causes to their natural Course, how is
it possible that War, or Plague, or Famine should distinguish between the good
and bad that are incorporated together in the same Societies; and so long as
free Agents are left to act freely, wicked Parents will frequently spoil their
Constitutions by the repeated Excesses of their Riot and Wantonness; and while
they do so, their Diseases, without a Miracle, will descend upon their
righteous as well as unrighteous Posterity; and wicked Neighbors, whilst it
lies in their way, or serves their Interest, will wrong and oppress the just
and unjust without any distinction. But you will say, why then does not
Providence interpose between second Causes and good Men, and miraculously
protect them from their mischievous Effects? To which in short I answer, that
in some extraordinary cases God has interposed, of which there are innumerable
Instances both in sacred and profane History; but to expect that he should
ordinarily and constantly do this, is very unreasonable, because it cannot be
done without giving a perpetual Disturbance to the Course of Nature, which
being in the whole most orderly and regular, full of admirable Beauty and
Contrivance, ought not to be disturbed and inverted upon ordinary Occasions.
For if the established Course of things be wise and regular in the whole, why
should we expect that God should be perpetually tampering with it, and
interrrupting and varying it by his immediate Interposals, as if he were
dissatisfied with his own Contrivance, and upon every Revisal of this great
Volume of the World, did still discover new Errataes in it to be corrected and
amended. The Evils therefore which good Men suffer are not ordinarily so
momentous as to oblige a wise and good God to interrupt the Couse of Nature to
prevent them; and it is much better that some violences should be offered to
good Men, than that a constant violence should be offered to the Nature of
things; and since God can carry on his good Designs to good Men in a still and
silent Path, and cause all their adverse Accidents to unwind of themselves, and
at last to clear up into a blessed Close, is it not much better he should do it
this way, than by offering perpetual Violence and Disturbance to Nature?

II. THE happening of all things alike to all is no Argument against a
Providence, because the Goods and Evils of this World are so mean and
inconsiderable, that it would be beneath the Wisdom of Providence to be very
exact and curious in the distribution of them. It is no part of wisdom to be
nice and curious about Trifles. 'Twas ridiculous enough in Caligula to employ a
mighty Army only to gather a great heap of Cockle shells; but when he had
gathered them, it would have been much more ridiculous to have taken a great
deal of care to divide them amongst his Soldiers in exact Proportions to each
ones Merit and Desert. Now though we look upon the Goods and Evils of this
World as things of vast and mighty Moment, yet God who sees them with far
better Eyes than we, knows very well that they are but Trifles in comparison
with those endless Goods or Evils we must enjoy or suffer in another World, and
that it is a very inconsiderable thing whether we fare well or ill this moment,
who immediately after must fare well or ill for ever; and therefore he looks on
it, as he justly may, as a thing beneath his infinite Wisdom to be very exact
and curious in dividing to us these momentary Trifles in just Proportions to
our particular Deserts; and did we not strangely magnify them, by looking on
them through the false Optics of our own fantastic Hopes and Fears, we should
be so far from objecting against Gods Providence these unequal Distributions of
them, that were they more exact and equal we should rather object against his
Wisdom, as thinking it a very mean Employment for a Deity to be very nice and
curious in proportioning such momentary Enjoyments and Sufferings to the Merit
or Demerit of immortal Creatures. So that considering of what little moment the
present Goods and Evils are which good Men suffer and bad Men enjoy, they ought
rather to be looked on as an Argument of Gods Wisdom than as an Objection
against his Providence; for he understands the just value of things, and knows
that the best of these worldly Goods are bad enough to be thrown away upon the
worst of Men, and so expresses his just scorn of these admired Vanities, by
scattering them abroad with a careless Hand; for why should he partake of the
Errors of vulgar Opinion, and express himself so very regardful of these
Trifles as to put them in gold Scales and weigh them out to Mankind by Grains
and Scruples.

III. THAT all things here do happen alike to all is no Argument against
Providence, because this Life is properly the state of our Trial and Probation,
and not of our Reward and Punishment. The divine Providence has placed us here
as Candidates and Probationers for those everlasting Preferments it designs us
hereafter, that so by training and exercising us in all those excellent Virtues
that are proper to our Natures, it may improve us from one degree of Perfection
to another, 'till at last it has accomplished us for the heavenly State; in
order to which Design it is necessary that there should be an unequal
Distribution of things, whereby good Men may sometimes suffer and bad Men
prosper; otherwise there would be no occasion for any of our passive Virtues,
nor any trial of our active. For Affliction is the Theater of Patience and
Fortitude, and Resignation to God, and without it there would be no room in the
Lives of good Men for the Exercise of these virtues, which for want of Objects
to act on, would rust and wax languid. Again, Difficulty is the Touchstone of
our Love and Faith and Ingenuity; but should Providence be always crowning the
Righteous, and dragging Offenders to Execution, such a Procedure would determine
our Liberty, and leave us no room for the Exercise of our Faith and Ingenuity;
for then the Rewards and Punishments of Providence would be so sensibly and
continually present with us, and so urgently press upon our Hopes and Fears,
that it would be impossible for us not to believe in God, and next to
impossible not to obey him; and being thus forced to believe and obey, what
Excellency would there be in our Piety and Virtue? What Charity is it for a
Miser to lend his Money upon Assurance of twenty per cent? Or what Loyalty for
a Traitor to discover his Conspirators within sight of a Wrack? And just as
little Virtue would there be in any of our good Works, were there an exact
Equality in the Distributions of Prodence. For then we should never do a good
Work but upon the certain Prospect of an immediate Reward, nor repent of a bad
one but upon the irresistible Dread of some immediate Punishment. But in this
inequality of things wherein the good often suffer and the wicked prosper, we
are left in a free and unconstrained Condition, and whether we are virtuous or
vicious, devout or profane, it is out of Choice and not of Necessity. So that
now to believe and obey the sacred Dictates of Religion is generous and
ingenuous, and our Faith and Obedience is our virtue and Excellency, because we
believe and obey without Force and against Temptations and Difficulties.

AND as this unequal State of things is of absolute Necessity to try and
exercise our Virtues, so it is also very assistant thereunto. For that
Providence does generally and not universally bless and prosper good Men, is a
great support to a wise and rational Belief. For as a late excellent Author
has well observed, if things were constantly managed one way without any
variation, we might be apt to conclude that the World was under the rigid Laws
of a fatal Necessity; if on the other side there were no Rule observed, no
Footsteps of Method in the Dispensations of Providence, we might be tempted to
believe that Chance rules the World; but when we observe that in the management
of things there is an Intermixture of these two, viz. that there is a general
Rule, and that there are particular Exceptions from it, we have just reason to
conclude that all is under a free Almighty Agent, that rules the World
according to the Determinations of his own Will. As this way of Providence,
viz. to interweave into good Men's Fortunes Adversity with Prosperity, is in
this respect very advantageous to their Faith, so is it also to the whole State
of their Virtue; for as on the one hand a continued train of prosperous Events
would be apt to bloat and elevate their Minds, so on the other a continued
series of Adversity would be apt to sink and depress their Spirits, whilst this
middle way of Interchange in their Condition balances them on both sides, and
keeps them in an even, steady and well-poized Temper. Since therefore this Life
is the state of our Trial, it is evident that an exact Equality of things would
be a much stronger Objection against the Wisdom of Providence, than all these
present Inequalities are against the Justice of it. For Hardships and
Difficulties are necessary to a state of Trial, and were good Men always blessed
and bad Men always punished, this Life instead of being a Probation to either
would be the Heaven of the one and the Hell of the other; and since some
Afflictions are necessary to try good Men, and some Prosperities to try bad, it
would be a strange oversight of Providence, when it designs the Trial of both,
to fix them in such a Condition, wherein no through Experment can be made of
either. So that for us to object against Providence for making such unequal
Distributions in a state wherein it designs our Trial, is in effect to object
against Wisdom for acting most sutably to its own Designs.

IV. THAT all things here do happen alike to all is no Argument against
Providence, because the Goods and Evils that befall us here, are not so truly to
be estimated by themselves as by their Effects and Consequents. For the divine
Providence, which runs through all things, has disposed and connected them
into such a Series and Order, that there is no single Event or Accident but
what is purely miraculous, but depends upon the whole System, and has
innumerable Causes antecedent to it, and innumerable Consequents attending it;
and what these Consequents will be, whether good or bad, is beyond our Skill to
prognosticate; so that though the Event be never so good or bad singly and
apart by it self, yet in Conjunction with all those Consequents that will most
certainly attend it, the best Event for all we know may prove most mischievous,
and the worst most beneficial to us. So that for us boldly to pronounce
concerning the Good or Evil of Events, before we see the Train of Consequents
that follow them, is very rash and inconsiderate. As for instance, you see a
good Man oppressed with Sorrows and Afflictions, and a bad Man crowned with
Pleasures and Prosperities; and considering these things apart by themselves,
you conclude that the one fares very ill and the other very well; but did you
at the same time see the Consequents of the ones Adversity and the others
Prosperity, it is probable you would conclude the quite contrary, viz. that the
good Man's Adversity was a Blessing, and the bad Man's Prosperity a Curse. For I
dare boldly affirm that good Men generally reap more substantial Benefit from
their Afflictions than bad Men do from their Prosperities; the one smarts
indeed at present; but what follows? perhaps his Mind is cured by it of some
Disease that is ten times worse to him than his outward Affliction; of Avarice
or Impatience, of Envy or Discontent, of Pride or vanity of Spirit; his Riches
are lessened, but his Virtues are improved by it; his Body is impaired but his
Mind is grown sound and hail by it, and what he has lost in Health or Wealth,
or Pleasure or Honor, he has gained with vast advantage in Wisdom and
Goodness, in Tranquillity of Mind and Self-enjoyment. And methinks no Man, who
believes he has a Soul, should grudg to suffer any tolerable Affliction for
the bettering his Mind, his Will and his Conscience. On the other hand the bad
Man triumphs and rejoices at present; but what follows? his Prosperity either
shrivles him into Miserableness, or melts him into Luxury; the former of which
impoverishes, and the latter diseases him; for if the former be the Effect of
his Prosperity, it increases his Needs, because before he needed only what he
had not, but now he needs both what he has not and what he has; his covetous
Desires treating him as the Faulkner does his Hawk, still luring him off from
what he has seized to fly at new Game, and never permitting him to prey upon
his own Quarry. and if the latter be the Effect of his Prosperity, that is, if
it melts him into Luxury, it thereby wastes his Health to be sure, and commonly
his Estate too; and so whereas it found him poor and well, it leaves him poor
and diseased, and only took him up from the Plow and sets him down at the
Hospital. In general, while he is possessed of it, it only bloats and swells
him, makes him proud and insolent, griping and oppressive, pampers and inrages
his Lust, stretches out his Desires into an insatiable Bulimy, sticks his Mind
full of Cares and his Conscience of Guilts, and by all these woeful Effects it
inflames his Reckoning with God, and treasures up Wrath for him against the day
of Wrath; so that comparing the Consequents of the good Man's Adversity with
those of the bad Man's Prosperity, it is evident that the former fares well even
in his worst Condition, and the latter ill in his best. It Is well for me, says
good David, that I was afflicted, for before I was afflicted I went astray, but
now I have kept thy Commandments, Psalm 119.67. But on the contrary, when the
Wicked spring as the Grass, says the same Author, and when all the workers of
Iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm 92.7.
If then in the Consequents of things good Men are blessed in their Afflictions,
and bad Men plagued in their Prosperities, as it is apparent they generally
are, these unequal Distributions are so far from being an Argument against
Providence, that they are a glorious Instance of it. For wherein could the
divine Providence better express its Justice and Wisdom together, than by
benefiting the good and punishing the bad by such cross and improbable Methods?

V. THAT all things here do happen alike to all, is no Argument against
Providence, because it is very requisite it should often do so, to assure us of
a Judgment to come. For were the Affairs of this World managed with that exact
Equality as that the good did never suffer nor the bad escape unpunished, we
should be deprived of one of the best moral Arguments of a future Judgment. For
as on the one hand should Providence never reward the good nor punish the bad
in this Life, but confound them together without any Distinction, it might
tempt us to despair of any just Retributions from it in the Life to come; so on
the other hand were the Goods and Evils of this Life weighed out to Men in
exact Proportions to their Merit and Demerit without any Inequality, we might
be tempted to think that there is no need of, and consequently no ground to
expect any Judgment to come. For what occasion would there be for any future
Judgment if all things were already exactly balanced and adjusted; and
therefore as to confirm us in the Belief of the Justice of Providence, it was
requisite the same plain Instances should be given of its Distinguishing the
good from the bad by present Rewards and Punishments; so to confirm us in the
Expectation of a Judgment to come, it was no less requisite that there should
be some In equality in the present Management and Distribution of things, and
that the Goods and Evils of this World should not be administered with that
exact Regularity as to prevent the necessity of a day of Judgment; but that
there should be undecided Cases enough remaining for a future Tribunal to
adjust and determine. So that as in the present management of things there is
Equality enough to induce us to believe a just Providence; so there is also
Inequality enough to induce us to expect a future Judgment; God having wisely
provided in his present Administration of things, to give us Instances enough
of his just Procedure toward the good and bad, and yet to leave us Instances
enough of unrewarded Virtue and prosperous Wickedness, to assure us that he
intends an after Reckoning. For how can we reflect upon these repeated Examples
of just Reward and Punishment, which in every Age almost God sets before us,
and not believe that he governs the World? And how can we reflect upon those
manifold Evils which some good Men suffer, and Goods which some bad Men enjoy,
without believing that he has appointed a Day wherein he will adjust these
Inequalities and vindicate the Cause of oppressed Virtue, and crush triumphant
Wickedness into everlasting Confusion?

VI. And lastly, That all things here do happen alike to all, is no Argument
against Providence, because the exact Adjustment of things is reserved for a
future Judgment. I confess were God to make no other Distribution to the just
and unjust, but what is made in this Life, the Inequality of it would be a
strong Objection against his Providence; but then considering that all this
cloudy Scene of things will shortly close up in a righteous Judgment, wherein
for the Evils which the good have suffered they shall be awarded an eternal
Happiness, and for the Goods which the bad have enjoyed they shall be doomed to
everlasting Wretchedness, this is sufficient to vindicate the Justice of
Providence were these present Inequalities a thousand times greater than they
are. For suppose that after a short Melancholy Dream good Men were to live
happily, and after as short a pleasant one bad Men were to live wretchedly but
for a thousand years in this World; we might as well object against Providence
this unequal Distribution of the melancholy Dream to the good, and the pleasant
one to the bad, notwithstanding the succeeding thousand years of their
Happiness and Misery, as we do the sufferings of the Righteous and Prosperities
of the Wicked, which bear far less Proportion to that Eternity of Happiness and
Misery that is to succeed them, than the Sorrow or Pleasure of a Moments Dream
does to a thousand years real Calamity or Blessedness.

FOR the Providence of God from the first to the last is all but one continued
Plot, like that of a well-contrived Comedy, which at first is very obscure and
intricate; so that by what is past or present there is no guessing at the
Conclusion; for all through the intermediate Acts Virtue and Honor fight their
way through Difficulties and Disappointments, and sometimes the Hero acts a
sad, and sometimes the Villain a prosperous Part, at which the unskilful
Spectator grieves, and is ready to damn the Poet for distributing such unequal
Fates; but then in the fifth and last Act all the cross Accidents clear up, and
issue in a fair Conclusion; and in the close of all, the Hero is crowned, and
the Villain hissed off the Stage. Let us therefore have but the patience to
stay 'till Providence has finished its whole Plot, and closed up all its
mighty Scenes in the general Judgment of the World, and then we shall see all
these Inequalities set right, and the Fates of good and bad Men determined by a
most just Award. But for us to quarrel at Providence now, who are yet got no
farther, it may be, than to the middle of the great Drama, and to find fault
with its Procedure for crossing the good and prospering the bad, is rudely to
overturn the Stage before the Entrance into the fifth Act, and to hiss off the
Almighty Poet for not completing his Design before he is arrived to the
Conclusion. And thus I have endeavored to answer more at large this Objection
against Providence, because it has been more insisted on than any other, and
has more generally stumbled Men's Belief of divine Providence.

V. And lastly, It is farther objected that the Being of a just and good
Providence, is not to be reconciled with that wretched State and Condition to
which we behold the greatest part of Mankind abandoned For if there were a good
Providence that overruled the Affairs of this World, how is it imaginable that
ever so great a part of Mankind as the Infidel World includes, should be left
so utterly destitute as they are of the Knowledge of God, and of the Means of
attaining their everlasting Happiness? To which I shall briefly answer these
three things:

I. THAT the Infidel World is not perhaps left so utterly destitute as we are
apt to imagine; for they have the Law of Nature to direct them, by which alone
they must be tried, and stand or fall at the Day of Judgment; which as to the
main strokes of their Duty, is so plain and intelligible, that no sincere
Inquirer can be ignorant of it; and if when they may understand it they will
not, or if when they do understand it, they wilfully transgress and violate it,
the Divine Providence has been sufficiently good to them to leave them for
ever inexcusable. For so far as their Ignorance is invincible it is not their
Sin, nor shall they ever be accountable for it, or for any sinful Omission or
Commission thence proceeding, and if they only answer for not understanding
their Duty when they might, or for not performing it so far as they understood
it, they can have no reason to complain that they are hardly dealt with. But
then,

II. As they have not those vast Advantages that we have of becoming good, and
growing up into the state of Perfection and Happiness, so proportionably less
Degrees of Good will be accepted of those that do well, and less Degrees of
Punishment exacted of those that do ill; for that Maxim of our Savior, Luke
12.48. To whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required, necessarily
implies the contrary, viz. that to whomsoever less is given of him less shall
be required; and if so, it is certain that so much as their means of being good
are less than ours, so much the less good God will accept of them than of us;
and as God will accept less good of the best Infidels, so he will exact less
Punishment of the worst; for so our Savior himself has assured us, that it
will be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, and Sodom and Gomorrah in the last
Day, than for those who persist in their Unbelief and Disobedience in despite
of the Proposals of the Gospel. If then in Proportion to their present
Disadvantages less good will be accepted of those who make any Improvement, and
less Punishment exacted of them who make none, neither the one sort nor the
other has any reason to complain; and though their Condition were worse than
it is, yet under these Circumstances it would be fairly consistent with the
Goodness of the Divine Providence. But then,

III. And lastly, Though their Condition were a great deal worse than it is,
yet it would be very unreasonable for us to object it against the Goodness of
the divine Providence, unless we better understood than we do, how God will
dispose of them in the other World. Indeed if Men's Fate consisted in what they
suffer and enjoy in this Life, we might better judge of Providence by what is
before us; but since our main state is beyond the Grave, whatever befalls us
here is very inconsiderable, compared with what we must suffer or enjoy
hereafter; and as for the present Disadvantages which the heathen World lies
under, they are but very short and momentary, and if Providence pleases, it can
abundantly compensate them in the World to come; and therefore since yet we
know not what it will do, as having no Revelation in the Case, it becomes us to
suspend our Judgment 'till the Event has determined it.

THIS we know, that Providence has ways enough, and time enough too between
this and the Day of Judgment, to supply these Destitute Souls with all those
spiritual Advantages in the other Life, which for Reasons best known to it self
it has hitherto withheld from them; it may if it pleases extend their Trial
and Probation beyond this Life, and discover in the other Life the Light of the
Gospel, to so many of them at least as have here made any tolerable
Improvements under the Light of Nature, and if they make good use of it, reward
them accordingly. For though we Christians have no reason to expect any farther
Trial after this Life is expired, because we have passed the utmost Trial
already, yet who knows but God may make a farther Trial of those in the other
Life, upon whom the great Experiment of the Gospel was yet never made; and
therefore since Providence can yet be infinitely good to them notwithstanding
their wretched Condition at present, and since for all we know it will be so,
we ought not to object against it its present Disregard of them, till we see
the final Issue of things; for that their present Condition is so bad is no
ground for us to argue against Providence, unless we were sure it would never
be better; because for all we know it may yet be rendered good enough not only
to justify, but to glorify the Goodness of Gods Providence toward them.

AND now to conclude this great Argument. Since we see how necessary the Belief
of Providence is to our being truly religious, and what unanswerable Evidence
there is of the Truth and Reality of it, what remains but that we heartily
endeavor by a calm, fixed, and impartial Consideration of these things,
thoroughly to instruct our selves in the Nature, and firmly to establish our
selves in the Belief of it; For our Religion must necessarily ebb or flow
according as it is influenced more or less by our Understanding and Belief of
the divine Providence, which are the great Principles that move and govern it.
For every Branch of the Divine Providence is an inexhaustible Fountain of
religious Rhetoric and Persuasion, and in this single Proposition, that God
upholds and governs the World, there are a thousand times more Inducements to
Piety and Virtue, than in all other Topics in the World. But how pregnant
soever it is with Arguments, and how powerful soever its Arguments are, it is
impossible it should prevail upon any reasonable Mind that understands not the
Force; and believes not the Truth of it; for all the possible Access which
outward Objects have to our Minds, is through our Knowledge and Belief of them,
without which the most momentous Proposals are no more capable of affecting us
than one of Tully's Orations is of calming the North wind; but he who firmly
believes the Truth, and understands the full Emphasis of a Divine Providence,
must necessarily be affected by it, if he be but within the Reach and Power of
Persuasion; and unless his Will be impregnably fortified against all the Force
of Argument and Reason, he will find himself so besieged with Motives on every
side persuading him to submit to the Obligations of Religion, that it will be
almost impossible for him to defend himself against their powerful
Importunities. For what Man in his Wits can sit unconcerned under the lively
Belief that he is in the hands of a most just and gracious, alwise, and
Almighty Providence, that is conscious to his inmost Thoughts and Purposes, and
beholds all his Actions with infinite Complacency or Abhorrence; that has the
disposal of his Life and his Soul, and of all the Goods he can hope for, and
all the Evils he can fear, and will certainly reward him a thousand-fold if he
does well, and if he does ill as certainly pursue him with a dire Revenge? This
Belief carries with it such constraining Terrors and Allurements as cannot but
affect all reasonable Minds, and finally prevail with their Hopes and Fears
against all contrary Temptations. Wherefore if ever we would fix the
Obligations of Religion upon our Minds, it concerns us above all things to be
thoroughly instructed in the Nature, and confirmed in the Belief of the divine
Providence.

CHAP. V. Of the necessity of believing divine Rewards and Punishments in order
to our being truly Religious.
HUMANE Nature is framed to move upon the Hinges of Hope and Fear, and to be
elicited and drawn forth in Action either by the Proposal of some attainable
Good or Prospect of some avoidable Evil, the former of which begets Hope in us,
and that Pursuit; the latter Fear, and that Flight and Avoidance; and
accordingly we find all Laws address to the Hopes and Fears of Men with
Proposals of Reward and Punishment, as to the Master-Springs and Principles of
their Action, by which they are moved to do or forbear according as they are
required and enjoined. And indeed to give Laws to Men without enforcing them
with Rewards and Punishments, would be to leave it indifferent whether they
obeyed them or no, which is inconsistent with the Nature of Laws; for Laws
necessarily imply an Obligation to Obedience; but what Obligation could we have
to obey them, did they leave it indifferent as to any Good or Evil accrewing
from it, whether we obeyed them or no; for if it will be as well for us one way
as the other, what matter is it which way we determine our selves? And this holds
good in nothing more than in the Matter of our Obedience to the Laws of
Religion, to which our corrupt Nature is above all things backward and averse;
all that spiritual Exercise which those Laws require being quite against the
Grain of our Earthy and sensual Inclinations; so that were we not drawn to it
by the Hope of Good, and driven by the Fear of Evil, to be sure our own bad
natures would keep us at an eternal Distance from it; but unless we believe God
to be a Rewarder of those that obey, and a Punisher of those that despise him,
we have no ground to hope for any Good, or to dread any Evil at his hands.

For unless we believe that he will Crown those that serve him with some Mark
of his Favor, how can we think he is pleased with them; there being no other
way for him to express his being Pleased, but by Crowning 'em with some signal
Reward; and if he be not Pleased with those that serve him, to be sure he is
not Displeased with those that Neglect him; and if he be not Displeased with
'em, what Reason have we to apprehend that he will Punish 'em? Thus the
unbelief of Gods being a Rewarder of those that obey him draws after it an
unbelief of his being a Punisher of those that Despise him, and so on the
contrary. For unless we believe him to be so much concerned for his Service as
to punish those that neglect it, we have no reason to think he is so much
concerned for it as to reward those that embrace it. So that the belief and
unbelief of Gods being a Rewarder and a Punisher do by necessary consequence
mutually imply each other; and unless we believe Both there is no reason we
should believe Either. And when our nature is so averse, as it is, to his
Service, what should induce us to serve him when we expect no Good from him, or
hinder us from slighting him when we fear no Evil? And what is there can bring
us home to God when we are carried away from him with an impetuous Tide of
corrupt Inclinations, and have neither Hope nor Fear to Bound or Restrain it?
So that considering the Aversation of our Nature to Gods service, it is morally
impossible we should ever be heartily reconciled to it without being Drawn with
the Hope of Reward, and Driven with the Fear of Punishment.

In the Prosecution of this Argument I shall endeavor to show,

First, How far it is necessary that our Belief of divine Rewards and
Punishments should extend.

Secondly, What Evidence there is to induce us to believe them.

Thirdly, By what Means this is to be Begotten and Confirmed.

SECT. I. How far it is necessary that our belief of divine Rewards and
Punishments should extend.
FOR to induce us to submit to the Obligations of Religion, it is by no means
sufficient that we believe in the general that God will Reward us if we do
well, and Punish us if we do wickedly. For this we may firmly believe, and yet
at the same time prefer the Pleasures of sin as much greater Goods than the
Rewards of Virtue, and Dread the Difficulties of Virtue as much greater Evils
than the Punishments of sin; wherefore to Render our Belief of divine Rewards
and Punishments an Effectual Principle of Religion these four things are
necessary.

First, That we should believe that God is so far a Rewarder of those that
serve him, and so far a Punisher of those that neglect him, as to make a Plain
and sensible Distinction between them.

Secondly, Considering how Promiscuously the Goods and Evils of this World are
distributed among Good and Bad men, it is necessary we should believe, That
there is a Future state of Rewards and Punishments.

Thirdly, It is necessary we should believe those Future Rewards and
Punishments to be such as do Infinitely Transcend any Good we can Reap by our
sins, and any Evil we can Incur by doing our Duty.

Fourthly, It is necessary we should believe that there is no other way for us
to Avoid those Punishments but by forsaking our sins, or to Acquire those
Rewards but by submitting to our Duty.

I. IT is necessary we should believe that God is so far a Rewarder of those
that serve, and so far a Punisher of those that Neglect him, as to make a plain
and sensible distinction between them. For unless we believe that God makes
some Distinction between those serve and those that neglect him, we shall
Confound Good and Evil in our own Apprehensions, and look upon all humane
actions as Indifferent, and thereby dissolve all the Ties and Obligations of
Religion. For things are in Themselves, as they are in the Judgment and Esteem
of God, who cannot be mistaken in Estimating their Natures; and therefore
unless there be some Distinction between Men and Men, and Actions and Actions
in the Esteem of God, rhey must be all Alike and Indifferent in their Own
natures. And if all Actions are Indifferent in themselves, we are free from all
the Ties and Obligations of Religion, and it is left Indifferent to us whether
we will Worship God or Blaspheme him. So that unless we believe that God makes
some Distinction between the Good and bad, Religion can have no force at all
upon our minds.

But now there is no other way for God to Distinguish between Men and Men, but
by Rewarding and Punishing them; because if he make any Distinction in his
Affections between us, we may be sure his Love will incline him to Reward, and
his Hatred to Punish us; and since it is as Easy to him to follow his
Inclination as not, since he can Reward where he Loves, and Punish where he
Hates without any Disturbance to his own Happiness, what should hinder him from
doing it, supposing that he really loves or hates, or makes any Distinction in
his Affections between those that serve and those that neglect him? So that
unless he Reward the one and Punish the other, he can make no Visible
Distinction in his Affections between them. If he be Contrarily affected to
Good and Bad men, his Affections will infallibly appear in his Actions; but if
he use them Alike, it is plain they are Alike to him. So that unless we believe
that God distinguishes between Good and Bad men by Rewarding and Punishing
them, we must look upon Both as Indifferent to him, and believe that he
concerns himself neither with the one nor the other; and if we think it is
Indifferent to God whether we are Good or Bad, to be sure it will not be
Indifferent to us, whose natures are so Biassed with Bad Inclinations, which
having neither Hope nor Fear to Restrain them, will Run toward Bad Objects
without Rub or Interruption. And what likelihood is there that we who are so
Prone and Inclinable to evil, should concern our selves in the service of God,
whilst we look upon it as a thing Indifferent to him whether we serve him or no?

Wherefore to the subduing our minds to the Obligations of Religion, it is
necessary we should believe that God is so far a Rewarder of Good, and Punisher
of Bad Men, as to make a sensible Distinction between them, and demonstrate
that he is differently affected toward them. For to what end should we serve a
God that takes no notice of us, that regards not what we do, but sits above in
the Heavens as an unconcerned spectator of our Actions; why should we cross our
own inclinations, and forsake our beloved lusts, for his sake, when it is
altogether Indifferent to him what we do, or whither we go, or what becomes of
us?

II. Considering how Promiscuously the Goods and Evils of this life are
distributed among Good and Bad Men, it is necessary that we should believe
there is a Future state of Rewards and Punishments. For though sometimes in
this life God rewards Good men, and punishes Bad with such signal and
Remarkable Goods and Evils as are sufficient Indications of the vast
Distinction he makes between them, yet this is Extraordinary and besides the
Constant and Regular Course of his Providence, which for wise and excellent
ends and purposes does ordinarily scatter Good and Evil among men with an open
and undistinguishing hand; insomuch that as the Wise man observes, Eccles. 9.1,
2, 3. No man knows either Love or Hatred by all that is before him; all
things come alike to all, there is one event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked, and as is the Good so is the sinner, and he that swears as he that
fears an Oath; this is an evil among all things that are done under the Sun
that there is one Event to all. Since therefore Gods love of Good men and
Hatred of Bad appears not by any thing before us, we must either conclude that
they are both Indifferent to him, which would be to Raze the very Foundations
of Religion, or that there is a Future state of Rewards and Punishments wherein
there will be no more such Promiscuous Distributions, no more such
Cross-coupling of Prosperity with Vice, and Misery with Virtue, but all things
will be Adjusted sutably to men's Deserts and Qualifications, and those that are
Good Advanced to immortal Glory and Honor, and those that are Bad Deprest into
eternal Shame and Confusion. For the Difference which God makes between them in
the present course of his Providence is too small and indiscernable to induce
us to believe that he makes any Difference between them in his Esteem and
Affection; and therefore either we must believe that there is another state
wherein he makes a far wider difference between them, or conclude that they are
both Indifferent to him, and that he has no more Regard to the one than the
other, or that he has no Regard at all to Either, which as I showed before,
utterly dissolves the Obligations of Religion.

III. IT is necessary we should believe those Future Rewards and Punishments to
be such as do Infinitely Transcend any Good we can reap in our sinful neglect
of God and any Evil we can incur by our submission to him. It Is true, were our
natures equally inclined to submit to or neglect him, we should need no more
Good and Evil to move us one way than the other; but the same Proportion of Goods
and Evils which tempts us now to Forsake and Abandon him, would equally tempt
us to serve and obey him: but alas, this is far from our case; for in
submitting to God we move counter to our selves, we cross the Grain of our
Degenerate Nature, and run away from our dearest Inclinations; whereas in
forsaking him, we Row with the Tide, and are driven on with an impetuous
current of sinful Lusts and Affections; and the case being thus, the
temptations on the one side must be incomparably greater, if ever they prevail
with us, than they need be on the other. For Men are easily tempted to act in
compliance with their own Inclinations; and the smallest Goods or Evils that
can be proposed to 'em from without, will readily induce 'em to do what they
have a mind to; but to prevail with a Man to do that which he is extremely
averse to, to act against Nature, and live in defiance with his own
Inclinations, requires a mighty force of outward temptation; and it must be a
very great Good that he will not lose, a very formidable Evil that he will not
incur, rather than enter into any course of action that is irksom and
ungrateful to his nature. So that unless we believe the Goods and Evils of the
other World to be incomparably greater than all the pleasures of Sin, and all
the sufferings of Piety and Virtue, there will not be force enough in our Faith
to persuade us; because those future Goods and Evils move against Nature, and
persuade us to a course of life we are extremely averse to, whereas these
present ones join hands with our Inclinations, and find a ready concurrence in
our wills and affections; and a very small temptation will prevail against a
great one, when it has Nature, that Bosom Orator, to solicit and plead for
it. Wherefore unless we believe the Rewards and Punishments of the future state
to be such as infinitely outweigh those present Goods and Evils that tempt us
to sin, they will never be able to prevail against 'em; because they must not
only out-tempt them, but, which is the much harder task of the two, they must
out-tempt the Reluctances of our Degenerate nature; and yet for future Goods
and Evils to out-tempt present ones is not so easy a matter neither;
especially if those future ones are invisible and out of the Ken of our sense,
which is the case here. For Futurity lessens all Objects to the Mind, even as
distance does to the Eye, and makes things appear to us much smaller than they
are in their own natures; So that the futurity of the Rewards and Punishments
of the other life are a mighty disadvantage to 'em when they stand in
competition with present Goods and Evils; because the later appear to us in
their full Proportion, and Magnitude, with all their tempting circumstances
about 'em, whereas the former exhibit to us a dim and confused Landscape of
things afar off, of things which we never saw nor felt, and which by reason of
their distance imprint very dark Idea's on our minds. And as their Futurity
lessens their appearance, and renders it confused and indistinct, so their
Invisibility weakens their force and influence on our minds, which no Objects
can so nearly affect as those that strike upon our Senses. So that unless by an
immense magnitude they compensate for being future and insensible, it is
impossible they should prevail with such minds as ours against present and
sensible Goods and Evils. Wherefore to render our belief of a future State
effectual to reduce us to God and our Duty, it is absolutely necessary we should
believe the Rewards and Punishments of it to be infinitely greater than all the
Goods and Evils that can tempt us to Sin; and that not only because our natures
are extremely averse to that which these Rewards and Punishments tempt us to,
but because the Goods and Evils which tempt us the contrary way have the
prevailing Advantages of being present and sensible.

IV. And lastly, IT is necessary we should believe that there is no other way
for us to acquire these Rewards or avoid these Punishments, but by submitting
to the Obligations of Religion. For to be thoroughly convinced and persuaded of
the immense Rewards and Punishments of the other life, is by no means
sufficient to reduce us unto God, so long as we do but Dream of any possible
way to obtain those Rewards and avoid those Punishments without submitting to
Him, to which above all imaginable ways our corrupt nature has the greatest
Antipathy. So that though we were never so much convinced of the absolute
necessity of escaping Hell and purchasing Heaven, yet if at the same time we
have a prospect of any other way or means of effecting it, to be sure we shall
shun this this most ungrateful one of forsaking our Sins and returning to God.
And if listing our selves into Godly Parties, or putting on a demure and
sanctified countenance, if being moped, dejected or unsociable, if whining or
fasting, or long prayers, or an affected Gurb, or rigid observance of holy
Times; if consuming our lives in a barefooted Pilgrimage, or wearing a hair
Shirt, or whipping our Bodies, or spending our Estates in Masses and
Indulgencies; if being made free of a holy Confraternity, or visiting Altars
and Shrines, or numbering Prayers, like Faggots by a Tally of Beads; if these
or any of these will but secure us of Heaven and from going to Hell, we shall
think 'em a thousand times more tolerable and easy than to submit our wills to
God in all the instances of true Piety and Virtue; in the doing of which we
must strangle the corrupt inclinations of our nature, tear our beloved Lusts
from our hearts, rack off our earthy affections from their Lees, and refine and
spiritualize 'em into a divine Zeal, and Love and Devotion, than which there is
nothing in the World more irksom to a degenerate nature. So that 'till we are
reduced to an utter despair of reaping the Rewards and escaping the Punishments
of the other Life by any other means than this of submitting our selves to the
Obligations of Religion, our faith will be altogether ineffectual.

SECT. II. What Evidence there is to induce us to believe these future Rewards
and Punishments.
THAT there are future Rewards and Punishments is a Doctrine universally
assented to by all Ages, and Nations, and Religions, and there is scarce any
first Principle in Phisosophy, in which Mankind are more generally agreed. Thus
among the Heathen Poets, Divines and Philosophers, there is an unanimous
acknowledgment of these future States, although their descriptions of 'em are
generally nothing but the dreams of an extravagant fancy. For so as Josephus
observes, speaking of the Essenes Doctrine concerning the future State of the
blessed (...), etc. i. e. they teach, as all the Greek Nations also do, that
for good Souls there are blessed Seats prepared beyond the Ocean in a Region
that is always free from Rain and Snow, and excessive heats, being perpetually
fanned with gentle breeses from the Ocean; which description he has translated
almost verbatim out of the 4th. Book of Homers Vlyssea, where he brings in
Proteus thus bespeaking Menelaus, (...), etc. i. e. The Gods shall send thee to
the Fields of Elysium which lie on the utmost parts of the Earth where thou
shall live secure and happy, there being neither Rain, nor Snow, nor Winter,
but the blessed Inhabitants are perpetually refreshed with the gentle breathing
of cool Zephyrs from the Ocean. Plato tells us of an ancient Law concerning
Men, (...), i. e. which was always and is still in force among the Gods, that
those who lived just and holy lives should after their death go into the Isles
of the blessed, where they should enjoy all manner of happiness without the
least intermixture of misery; but that those who lived here unjustly and
ungodly should be sent into that Prison of just punishment, which is called
Hell, Plat. Gorg. p. 312. Thus also Tully Tuscul. lib. 1. permanere animos
arbitramur consensu nationum omnium, i. e. We believe, as all Nations do, that
the Souls of Men do survive their Bodies; and to name no more, Seneca Epist.
117. tells us, Cum de animarum aeternitate disserimus, non leve momentum apud
nos habet consensus omnium aut Timentium Inferos, aut Colentium, i. e. when we
discourse of the Eternity of Souls, the general consent of all Men either
fearing or worshipping the Hellish powers is of very great moment. And indeed
this belief of the future states being so generally imprinted on Men's minds is
a very probable argument of the reality of them, it being hardly conceivable,
how the Reason of all mankind should have so unanimously consented in it, had
it not been extremely agreeable to the make and frame of our minds, and we
cannot suppose any false proposition to be agreeable to the frame of our mind,
without reflecting dishonourably upon the truth of him that framed it. And
indeed this notion of a future state is such as has been generally embraced by
those Persons who are least capable of deducing it by a Logical dependence of
one thing upon another, and therefore since it has no dependency in their
minds on any other antecedent notion, how could it have been so generally
entertained, did not the common dictate of Nature or Reason acting alike in all
Men, move 'em to conspire in it, though they knew not one another minds. For
it has been believed with a kind of repugnancy to sense, which discovers all
things round about it to be mortal, and which upon that account would have been
too apt to have seduced ruder minds into a disbelief of any other state; had
not some more powerful impression on their Souls forcibly urged 'em to believe
it.

BUT because this Argument drawn from universal consent is liable to some
little exception, I shall not insist upon it, but endeavor to prove the
reality of this future state of Rewards and Punishments from these Topics:

First, From the Wisdom of God's Government.

Secondly, From the Justice of his Providence.

Thirdly, From the natural capacity of our Souls to survive our Bodies, and to
enjoy future Rewards, and suffer future Punishments.

Fourthly, From the natural expectance we have of future Rewards, and dread of
future Punishments.

Fifthly, From the excellent frame and structure of humane Nature.

Sixthly, From the Testimony of the Christian Religion.

I. FROM the Wisdom of God's Government. That Mankind is under the Government
of God, is evident from that Law which he has imprinted on our nature, by
which our actions are distinguished into Good and Evil, Virtuous and Vicious;
of which sufficient proof has been given, Chapter 1. and since God has given a
Law to our natures, there is no doubt to be made but he has taken sufficient
care to enforce the observance of it by Rewards and Punishments, otherwise his
Government over us would be very insecure and precarious. For that Law giver
does only Petition his Subjects to obey, who does not promise such rewards and
denounce such penalties as are sufficient to oblige 'em thereunto.

BUT now there is no Reward can be sufcient to oblige us to obey, which does
not abundantly compensate any loss or evil we may sustain by our obedience; no
punishment sufficient to deter us from disobeying that does not far surmount
all the Benefits and Pleasures which we can hope to reap from our Disobedience;
but unless there be a future state, the Law of Nature can propose no such
Rewards and Punishments to us. For if we have nothing to dread or hope for
beyond the Grave, our present interest is all our concern, and in reason we
ought to judge things to be Good or Evil according as they promote or obstruct
our temporal happiness. Now though it is certain that in the general there is a
natural good accrewing to us from all virtuous actions; as on the contrary a
natural evil from all vicious ones; and it is ordinarily more conducive to our
temporal Interest to obey than to disobey the Law of our natures; yet there are
a world of instances wherein Vice may be more advantageous to us than Virtue,
abstracting from the Rewards and Punishments of another life. It is ordinarily
better for me to be an honest Man than a Knave; it is more for my Reputation
and usually for my Profit too; and it is more for the public good in which my
own is involved; but yet in several circumstances it may be better for me with
respect only to this World to be a Knave than an honest Man. For whenever I
can cheat so secretly and securely as not to fall under the public lash nor
impair my reputation, and I can gain more by the Cheat than I shall lose in the
damage of the Public, it will be doubtless more advantageous for me as to my
worldly interest to cheat than to be honest; and how often such fair
opportunities of cozenage do occur, no Man can be insensible that has but the
least insight into the affairs of this World. So that if there were no future
Rewards and Punishments, this great Law of Righteousness would not have force
enough universally to oblige us; because there are a world of instances wherein
we might gain more good and eschew more evil by doing unrighteously, than all
its present Rewards and Punishments do amount to. And the same may be said of
all other laws of Nature, which without the great motives of future happiness
and misery can no longer induce Men to obey 'em than it is for their temporal
interest to do so. For suppose I can secretly stab or poison a Man whom I hate
or dread, or from whose death I may reap any considerable advantage, what
should restrain me from it? If you say the Law of Nature, pray what Reward does
the Law of Nature propose that is sufficient to compensate for the
disatisfaction of my Revenge, or for the danger I run in suffering my Enemy to
live; or what punishment does the Law of Nature denounce that can balance the
advantage of a thousand or perhaps ten thousand pounds a year that may accrue
to me by his death?

IF you say the Law of Nature proposes to me the reward of a quiet and
satisfied Mind, and denounces the punishment of a guilty and amazed Conscience;
I easily answer, that this peace and horror which is consequent to the
forbearance or commission of sin, arises from the hope and dread of future
Rewards and Punishments; which being taken away, to sin or not sin will be
indifferent as to any peace or horror that can follow upon it; and when this
restraint is taken off, what consideration will there be left that is
sufficient to withhold me from the bloody fact, when ever I have an opportunity
to act it securely, and am furiously spurred on to it by my own Revenge and
Covetousness? So that if there be no Rewards and Punishments in another life to
enforce the commands of the Law of Nature, it is certain that there are no such
annexed to it in this as are universally sufficient to oblige us to observe
'em. For as for the Goods and Evils of this life, they are ordinarily
distributed among Men with so little respect and discrimination, as not only to
occasion but to justify that famous observation of the Wise Man, that all
things happen alike to all. Either therefore there are other Goods to be hoped
for, and other Evils to be feared, or there are a world of cases wherein God
has not sufficiently provided to secure our obedience to the Law of our
Nature; and to imagine that God should give a Law to his Creatures, and take no
care to secure the Authority of it, is a most senseless Blasphemy of the Wisdom
of his Government; for this would be to expose his own Authority to contempt,
and to cast his Laws at the feet of his Creatures to be spurned and trampled on
by 'em at their pleasure.

IF it be Objected, that all that this Argument proves, is, that to secure our
obedience to the Law of Nature, it is necessary we should believe that there are
future Rewards and Punishments; but that it does not hence follow that it is
necessary that there should be future Rewards and Punishments; because whether
there be any such things or no, our belief of 'em will be sufficient to secure
the Authority of the Law; I answer, That if our belief of future Rewards and
Punishments be necessary, one of these two things must inevitably follow;
either that the Objects of our Belief are real, which is the thing I am
proving, or that to countenance the Authority of his Laws, it is necessary for
God to impose upon our faith, and deceive us into the belief of a falsehood. For
if to enforce God's Law, it is necessary we should believe that there are future
Rewards and Punishments, either there must be such things really existing, or
God must enforce his Law with our belief of a falsehood; and to imagine, that
when God might have created for us a future state of Reward and Punishment, if
he had so pleased, and governed us by the hopes and fears of it, he has rather
chosen to govern us by Tricks and Lies, and to wheedle us into obedience by a
cheat and delusion, is a Blasphemy no less senseless than horrid. Since
therefore to secure the Authority of that Law by which the humane Nature is to
be governed, it is necessary that it should be enforced with the motives of
everlasting Reward and Punishment, one of these three things necessarily
follows; either that God has not sufficiently enforced his Law, which is a
soul imputation on his Wisdom, or that he is fain to enforce it with a Lie,
which is an impious reflection on his Truth, or that there are everlasting
Rewards and Punishments.

II. FROM the Justice of the divine Providence. For if there be a divine
Providence presiding over the World (as, that there is, has been already
sufficiently proved) Justice and Equity, which is the most glorious perfection
of an Overruling power, must necessarily be included in the notion of it. For
without Justice, overruling power is nothing but an impotent Tyranny, whch to
attribute to God is far more dishonorable and incongruous to the nature of his
perfections, than to strip him of all Providence, as Epicurus did, and shut him
up in the heavens in a state of everlasting Sloth and Luxury. For not to
Govern, is only to do Nothing; but to Govern without Justice, is to do
Mischief; and it is a much less Derogation from the Perfection of any Being, to
suppose it to be Idle than to suppose it to be Mischievous. So that allowing
that God, who is the most perfect of all Beings, governs the World, it would
not be only Blasphemous, but Nonsense to imagine that he governs it unjustly.
Now the proper justice of Government consists in the Equality of its
Distributions; for since there is such a thing as immutable Good and Evil in
the actions of free and reasonable Agents, it is naturally fit and due that
those who do good should receive good, and those who do evil, evil, from their
hands who have the Government of actions; and this proportionably to the good
and evil of their doings. So that Gods Governing the World justly, consists in
Distributing good to those that do good, and evil to those that do evil, or in
other words in Proportioning Rewards and Punishments to men according to the
Good and Evil he finds in their actions; and unless we suppose him to do this,
it is nonsense to imagine that he Governs the World.

BUT if all his Distributions are confined to this life, and there is neither
Reward nor Punishment to be expected from him in another, there are infinite
instances of his Providence wherein it will be impossible to defend his
equality and justice. For if there be no other Scene of good and evil, reward
and punishment, but only this life, all the afflicted good and prosperous bad
men that ever were in the World, of which there infinite instances, are so many
reproachful. Monuments of the woeful inequality of the divine Government. For
how many Millions of brave Souls have there been, who have thought nothing too
dear for God and his service, and have sacrificed their lusts, their lives, and
their fortunes to him, and yet upon this supposal have reaped no other
recompense for so doing but only a miserable life, and a woeful death, and an
obscure dishonorable grave? As, on the contrary, how many Millions of Millions
of wicked men that have lived in open defiance to all that is sacred, and just,
and good, blasphemed God, affronted his authority, and trampled upon all the
Laws of his Government, and yet, supposing there is no other life, have
undergone no other punishment for so doing but to live prosperously, and die
quietly, and lie inshrined in a Marble Monument? Now how can we otherwise
Apologize for the justice of Providence when it thus cross-couples Prosperity
with Vice, and Adversity with Virtue, but only by supposing this present life
to be only the state of our Trial and Probation, which will quickly determine
in our everlasting Recompense or Punishment, according as we behave and acquit
our selves in it; upon which supposal the justice of Providence may be fairly
accounted for, were the present distributions of it a thousand times more
unequal than they are? For then we need not wonder that good and bad men are at
present so unequally treated, since now they are only upon their Proof and
Trial, which, as I have shown before, requires such a treatment, but their
Reward and Punishment is reserved for another state, wherein all these seeming
inequalities shall be fairly adjusted, and Virtue shall be crowned with
everlasting Glory and Pleasure, and Vice damned to eternal horror and
confusion. But if the Goods and Evils of this present life, are all the reward
and punishment that good and bad Men are to expect, where is the Justice of the
divine Government, that many times oppresses its Friends, and advances its
Enemies, and in the conclusion extinguishes their Beings together, and
therewith all possibility of making any future retribution of good to the one,
or evil to the other? And therefore if it be true, that the Judge of all the
World will do righteously, that first or last he will certainly distribute his
Rewards and Punishments to his Subjects accord to the Merit and Demerit of
their actions, it must be as true, that for the main he has reserved the doing
it to a future state; since it cannot be denied but that at present he very
often does the quite contrary; and if it be but as evident that there is such a
future state as it is that God governs the World justly, I think it is as fair
an assurance of it as any modest Man can require.

III. FROM the natural capacity of our Souls to survive our Bodies, and enjoy
future Rewards and suffer future Punishments, it also follows that there is a
future state of Reward and Punishment. For we find in our Souls a certain
innate force and power, whereby they determine themselves which way they please
in their motions and operations; whereby they are exempt from the necessitating
influence of any thing that is foreign to 'em; and this innate liberty or power
of self-determination is necessarily supposed in the management of all humane
Affairs; in Commerce and Treaties, in Government and Laws and Administrations
of Justice, in Councils, Admonitions, reproofs and persuasions: in all which
applications are made to our Souls as to free and self-determining Agents, that
have the absolute disposal of their own motions, and can direct 'em which way
they please; and indeed were not our Souls left to their own free disposal, but
concluded by the Laws of a fatal necessity, as we see all material Agents are,
such applications to 'em as these, would be very absurd and ridiculous, and we
may as reasonably hope to tame Wolves and Tigers by reading Ethics to 'em, or
to still the North Wind by sending Ambassadors to him to propose Articles of
Peace, as to prevail upon Men's minds by moral addresses and persuasions;
because if they are not masters of their own choices, whatsoever the rigid Laws
of necessity determine 'em to, they must necessarily choose in despite of all
persuasions to the contrary.

NOW by this self-determining Power our Souls do evidently manifest themselves
to be immaterial substances, and consequently not liable to Death and
Corruption. For if they were matter they would be moved like matter, i. e. by
the pressure or thrusting of other matter upon 'em; and it would be no more in
their power to move any other way than that which some other matter presses and
impels 'em, than it is for a stone not to move upwards when it is impel'd by the
force which your Arm impresses on it, and not to move down again when that
force is spent, and it is pressed back by its own weight and gravity. Whereas we
feel in our Soul an innate power to determine it self which way it pleases, and
even to move quite contrary to all foreign impressions. For when it is pressed on
by outward Object to such and such thoughts and purposes with all imaginable
vigor, it often stems the impetuous Tide, and thinks and purposes the quite
contrary. How then can that be matter which is not determined in its motions by
matter, but when it pleases can either move counter to all material
impressions, or of two material impressions can move counter to the strongest.

THAT our Souls therefore are immaterial, is just as evident as that they have
liberty of will; and that they have liberty of will, needs no other proof than
the common sense and feeling of mankind; and whatsoever essence feels this
freedom within it self, whereby it is absolved from the rigid Laws of matter,
may with all the reason in the World conclude it self immaterial; and if our
Souls are immaterial substances, to be sure they can naturally subsist and live
without these Bodies, and must necessarily do so unless God destroys 'em, as
having no contrary qualities or divisible parts, no principles of death or
corruption in 'em; and since God has made our Soul of an immaterial and
immortal nature, we have all the reason in the World to conclude that he will
not unravel his own workmanship, but permit it to survive its Body, and enjoy
or endure that happy ot miserable Fate which it self has chosen and made.

IV. FROM the natural expectance we have of future Rewards and dread of future
Punishments, it is also evident that there is a state of future Rewards and
Punishments. Thus after the commission of any flagitious wickedness there
naturally arise ill-abodings in Men's minds of a dire after-reckoning; and
though the Commission be secret and concealed from all humane cognizance, so
that there is no reason to dread the corrections of public Justice for it,
yet when ever the Man reflects on it, it fills his mind with horrible presages
of a woeful Futurity; as, on the contrary, when ever a Man does any great good
or conquers any violent temptation to evil, it lifts up his Soul into a blessed
expectation, and swells his hope with the promise of a future Reward; and
though the good he has done, or the evil he has avoided, gives him no kind of
prospect of any present advantage, yet his mind is soothed and ravished with
the contemplation of it, which naturally suggests to him the joyous hopes of a
recompense to come. For, whence should this hope and dread spring up in Men's
minds upon the Commission of good and bad actions, but from some common
impression upon humane nature, intimating to us a future state of Reward and
Punishment? If you say, it is from those religious Principles which we imbibe in
our Education; I would fain know how came this Principle concerning the future
state to be so universally imbibed, if there were not something in it that is
very agreeable with the reason of all mankind? For, whatever is the matter, we
see it is very easily embraced, but very difficultly parted with; Men's Minds do
catch at it with a strange kind of greediness, but when once they have
swallowed it, it never comes up again without straining and violence; and what
should be the reason of this, if there were not something in it that is very
agreeable with the natural taste and relish of our understandings? We know
there have been great Wits and Philosophers that have taken as much pains to
raze the belief of a future state out of Men's minds as ever any others did to
imprint it there; and yet though their Doctrine has been always highly
befriended by Men's wicked lusts and affections, to which the belief of a future
state is the most terrible and vexatious thing in the World, yet with all their
Wit and Sophistry they have never been able to root it out of Men's minds. If
then our hopes and fears of another World be merely owing to our Teaching and
Education, why should not teaching erase as well as imprint 'em; especially
when it is so powerfully seconded with all the Bosom Rhetoric of Men's vicious
inclinations? Whereas on the contrary, those who have most industriously
attempted to extinguish their sense of another World, have generally been very
unsuccessful, and though in the Riot of their sinful delights, they many times
charm and stupifie it for the present, yet no sooner do they retire into
themselves and coolly reflect upon their own minds, but it presently awakes
again, and haunts and pursues 'em; and though they use all imaginable ways to
divert their minds from the thoughts of another world, and, to avoid these
Bosom Accusers and Tormentors, run for Sanctuary to all things without 'em, to
Sports and Recreations, to Wine and Women, to Care and Business, yet still they
pursue 'em, and ever and anon break in upon 'em, and scare and terrify 'em;
and because their minds are so haunted with these importunate terrors of the
World to come, they are afraid to look inwards, but are fain to live abroad in
their own defense, as not daring to trust themselves alone with themselves; all
which are plain Presages of a future Judgment and Vengeance that awaits wicked
Souls after this life. For if this dread of future Punishment be natural to us
(as its sticking so closely and universally to humane Nature plainly argues it
is) it must be impressed on us by the great Author of Nature; and for him to
impress a Passion on us which has no real Object, would be to impose a Cheat
upon our Natures and abuse our minds with a false Alarm. So that either we must
suppose that God has implanted in our Natures a ^^ead of that which is not,
which is a dishonorable reflection on his Truth and Veracity; or that there is
really a future Punishment answerable to that dread.

AND as the dread of future Punishment is natural to us when we do ill, so the
desire and expectance of future Reward is no less natural to us when we do
well. For I dare boldly say there never was any virtuous Man, of whatsoever
Nation or Religion, or sect of Philosophers, whose mind has not been winged
with earnest hopes and desires of a future happiness, and there is none that
ever yet either denied or despaired of it, but only such as have first
debauched the very Principles of their Nature. For such it is evident were the
Sadduces and Epicureans, sects of Men that had drowned all that was humane in
'em in sensuality and voluptuousness and are branded upon Record for their
shameful Indulgence to their own brutish Genius; and such are no Standards of
humane Nature, but ought rather to be looked upon as Monsters of Men. And
therefore as we do not judge of the natural Figures and proportions of humane
Bodies by monstrous and misshapen births, so neither ought we to judge of what is
natural or unnatural to Men by those brutes in humane shape, who, by submitting
their Reason to their passions and Appetites, have disfigured their Natures and
distorted it into an unnatural Position; But if we would know what is humane
and natural to us, we must take our measures from those who live most
conformably to the Laws of a Rational Nature; and these are they whom we call
Pious and Virtuous, who are therefore to be looked upon as the true Standards
of humane Nature, by whom we may best judge of what is natural and unnatural to
us; and if we judge by these, we shall most certainly find that Virtue, and the
hopes of Immortality are so nearly allied, that like Hippocrates Twins they
live and die together. For though while Men live a brutish and sensual Life,
their future hopes are usually drowned in their present Enjoyments; yet when
once they recover out of this unnatural state, and begin to live like
reasonable beings, immediately they feel great desires and expectations of a
future happiness springing up in their minds, and so arising higher and higher
proportionably as they advance in virtue and goodness; which is a plain
evidence that these hopes and desires are natural to us and interwoven with the
frame and constitution of our Souls. But now how can it consist with the
goodness of God to implant such desires and hopes in our Natures, and then
withhold from 'em that which is the only Object that can suit and satisfy 'em?
For as a great Divine of our own has well observed, Other Beings, we see, have
no natural desire in vain, the good God having so ordered things that there are
Objects in Nature apportioned to all their natural Appetites; but if there be
no future state of happiness reserved for good Men, We are by a natural
Principle most strongly inclined to that which we can never attain to; as if
God had purposely framed us with such inclinations, that so we might be
perpetually tormented between those two Passions Desire and Despair, an earnest
propension after a future Happiness, and an utter incapacity of enjoying it; as
if Nature it self whereby all other things are disposed to their perfection did
serve only in Man to make him miserable, and, which is more considerable, as if
Virtue which is the perfection of Nature, did only serve to contribute to our
infelicity, by raising in us such desires and expectations as without a future
Happiness must be for ever disappointed. But if this Desire and Expectation be
natural to us, as it evidently is, it must be implanted there by the God of
Nature, with whose truth and goodness it can never consist to inspire us with
such Desires and Hopes as he knows have no Object in the nature of things, and
so can never be fulfilled and accomplished.

V. FROM the excellent frame and constitution of humane Nature, it is also
evident that there is a future state of Reward and Punishment. For whoever
shall impartially consider the frame of our Natures, will easily discern that
we are made for much greater purposes than to enjoy this World, and that our
faculties are as much too big for these sensitive fruitions as the Channel of
the Ocean is for the streams of a little River. For the highest happiness we
can frame an Idea of, is the enjoyment of God by contemplation and love and
imitation of his Perfections, as I have proved at large, Part. 1. c. 3. which
does as far excel all Worldly happiness, as the Enjoyments of a Prince do the
pleasures of a Fly; and yet it is evident that our minds are framed with a
natural capacity of enjoying this supreme Beatitude, i. e. of contemplating,
and loving and imitating God. For as for the Being and Existence of God, all
things round about us preach and proclaim it, and which way soever we turn our
Eyes we behold the footsteps of his Power and Wisdom; and being endowed with a
reasoning faculty, we can easily ascend to the infinite Perfections of his
Nature by those borrowed Perfections we behold in his Creatures, which are so
many lively Comments and Paraphrases upon him, and so far forth as they are
Perfefections, must necessarily meet and concenter in him; and then such is the
frame of our natures, that from the contemplation of the Beauty and Perfection
of any Being, we naturally proceed to admire and love it; so that unless our
wills be violently prejudiced against the Perfections of God, our contemplation
must necessarily kindle our love of 'em; and then those Perfections which we
love and admire in another, we are naturally ambitious to transcribe into our
selves; so that being once inflamed with the love of God, that will be
continually prompting us to imitate him, and that will by degrees mould us into
a fair and glorious resemblance of him. Thus God has implanted in the very
frame of our Nature a most forward capacity of enjoying himself, which in the
perfection of it infinitely transcends all that can be imagined in a
terrestrial Paradise. And yet though we have faculties that we are sure are
naturally capable of enjoying him to Perfection; of contemplating him without
weariness, of loving him without aversion, of imitating him without difficulty
or interruption; in this present state of things it is morally impossible we
should ever arise to it. For our faculties are clogged with so many sinful
prejudices, interrupted with so many bodily necessities, diverted with so many
secular occasions, that it cannot be reasonably expected even from the best Men
in the World, that they should in this life approach the Perfection of the
happiness of divine Enjoyment; especially if there were no other life but this,
for then it would be folly so much as to attempt it. For what Man in his Wits
would ever think it worth the while to spend a considerable part of his life in
waging War with himself, mortifying his Affections, crossing and starving out
his dearest inclinations (which yet he must do ere he can arrive to any
comfortable degree of divine Enjoyment) if there were no other recompense to be
expected at last, but to live a few days longer in a Rapturous Muse, and then
lie down in everlasting darkness and insensibility. Were he not a thousand
times better please and gratify himself at present, content his craving
desires with the goods that are before him, and take his fill of those sensual
delights that readily offer themselves to his Enjoyment, than run away from 'em
in a long and wearisom quest of spiritual joys, which for all he knows he may
never arrive to, or if he does, is sure within a few moments to be deprived of
for ever. So that if there be no other state but this, it is plain we are made
naturally capable of the highest happiness to no purpose; we are naturally
capable of enjoying God, and yet such are our circumstances in this present
state, that if there be no other, it is not to be expected we should ever
arrive to any high degree of Enjoyment, and if it were, all things considered
'twould be an egregious piece of folly to attempt it; Now how can it consist
either with the divine Wisdom or Goodness to create in us such vast capacities
of spiritual happiness, and then place us in such circumstances wherein 'twould
be both imprudent and in vain for us to pursue any other happiness but what is
carnal and sensual? No wise Man would build a House unless he meant it should
be inhabited; and can we imagine that the All-wise God would ever have created
in us such vast and boundless capacities of happiness, merely to stand empty
and be for ever uninhabited; that he who always proposes to himself the most
noble and worthy ends of his Actions, would ever have formed in us such
superfluous capacities, or built such spacious Rooms in our Nature when he
never intended to make any use of 'em?

AND then considering the Goodness as well as Wisdom of God, what likelihood is
there that he should create such ample capacities in our Nature and furnish it
with such excellent faculties, for no other end but to enjoy the trifling goods
of this life; that he who has created goods for all other creatures that are
every way adequate to their natural capacities, should make us capable to
partake of the felicities of Angels, and then stake us down to the pleasures of
Swine? Especially considering that by making us capable of a higher happiness
and sensible of our own capacity, he has almost necessitated us to expect and
desire it; and what is this, if he does not intend it for us, but to create in
us an appetite merely to vex and tantalize it; as if it were a recreation to
him to sit above in the Heavens and behold the work of his own hands spending
it self in weary struglings toward him, and vexed all the while it continues
in Being with an impotent desire of that which it shall never enjoy, and which
by giving it a capacity to enjoy he has encouraged it to desire and expect.

VI. And lastly, FROM the Testimony of the Christian Religion it is also
evident that there is a future state of Reward and Punishment; which in most
express terms assures us of another life beyond this, wherein we shall be for
ever happy or miserable according to what we have done in the flesh; So that we
have as full evidence of the reality of future Rewards and Punishments as we
have of the truth of Christianity, and as full evidence of the truth of
Christianity as all the miraculous works of our Savior can give, and as full
evidence of the truth of his Miracles as the most credible Testimony of eye
witnesses can give, who not only confirmed their Testimony by other Miracles of
their own, but at the last sealed it with their blood, which is the highest
security that mortal men can give of their fidelity; but though this Argument
be of all others the most convincing and satisfactory, yet I shall insist no
farther on it in this place, because I shall have occasion to prosecute it at
large in the seventh Chapter.

SECT. III. By what means this belief of divine Rewards and Punishments is to
be begotten and confirmed in us.
THOUGH the evidences of future Rewards and Punishments be such as are
sufficient to convince any reasonable mind, yet it is evident that in this
degenerate state of our natures there is a strong repugnancy to the lively
belief of them, insomuch that the bare proposal of evidence is not sufficient
effectually to persuade us; wherefore before we dismiss this Argument, it will
be neeessary to add to what has been said such means and directions, as,
together with the evidences, are proper to dispose our minds to the effectual
belief of the future state; and these I shall reduce to these four particulars,

I. IF we would effectually believe the future state of Rewards and
Punishments, we must fix and inure our minds to serious thoughts and
considerations. For whilst our minds are taken up with fancies and levities,
with wild or ludicrous or incoherent Ideas, or entertained with the cares or
pleasures of this life, they will not be at leisure to turn their thoughts
toward another World. For to think close of another World requires a very
serious and thoughtful mind; because the other World does not press upon our
Senses as this World does, which wheresoever we turn our selves is continually
thrusting its Objects into our minds through our Eyes and Ears, and whispering
to our thoughts through the Organs of our Senses which are the most immediate
Entries and Inlets to our Mind. So that the other World being quite out of
sight, and this always in view, it is as difficult for us to keep the one out
of our Minds as to let the other in. For before we can set our selves to think
closely of the other World, we must shut our Eyes and Ears to the Objects of
this; otherwise they will obtrude themselves upon us, and draw away our
thoughts and meditations; we must gather in our thoughts from the Objects of
Sense that are round about us, take leave of this World, and retire into our
own minds, and shut up our selves within our selves, that none of these
sensitive things may come at us, and that we may be wholly at leisure to
entertain our selves with the invisible things of another World. And this we
shall never be able to do so long as our Minds are vain, and roving, and
desultory, and possessed with wild imaginations or restless cares or
extravagant mirth and Jollities; for these things will put our thoughts upon so
many vagaries, and render them so loose, and wild, and incoherent, that they
will never be able to hang long enough together to form any serious
conceptions. So that when we would fix them upon the other World we shall
scarce be able to gather them in from those outward Objects among which they
are squandered; or if we do, we shall never keep them long enough together to
form any serious apprehensions of it; but as soon as they have taken a cursory
view of it, they will be flying abroad again, and roving into vanity and
impertinence. So that while our Minds are light and vain, they cannot think
enough of another World seriously to apprehend and believe it; the Rewards and
Punishments of that invisible state are things too serious for our wild
thoughts to dwell on; and 'till our minds are grown more fixed and steady, till
they are more withdrawn from sensitive Objects, and more accustomed to retired
thinking, they will be too volatile and fugitive seriously to apprehend, and
heartily to believe a future state. If therefore we would attain to a firm
belief of it, we must endeavor to reclaim our wild thoughts by accustoming our
selves to serious thinking; and when by sad and serious meditations we have
rendered our minds more fixed and retired, we must

II. Endeavor to remove those vicious prejudices which indispose us to the
belief of future Rewards and Punishments. For while men live in opposition to
God, and have therefore reason to apprehend his displeasure, this will strongly
prejudice our minds against the belief of a future state; because this belief
must necessarily gall and disturb us, and render our vicious courses extremely
troublesome and uneasy. For when a Man is resolved to lead an ill course of
life, and at the same time believes it will conclude in eternal wretchedness,
his faith will be a perpetual plague to his Mind, like Belteshazzars Mean Tekel
it will scare and alarm him in his sinful Carouses, and imbitter the gust of
them with many a sad thought and dire reflection; and 'till he either shakes
hands with his Creed, or his ill Resolution, it will be impossible for him ever
to be quiet. Whilst therefore he resolves to continue his ill courses, it is
his interest to believe there is no other World but this; he is obliged to it
in his own defense, and as he hopes to enjoy himself, and sin without
disturbance; and then his interest having bribed his affection, his affection
will be sure so to biass his reason, that it will be a difficult matter for him
to convince and persuade himself. For if there be future Rewards, he knows he
has no interest in them; if future Punishments, he is conscious he must feel
and endure them; and to believe that there are such goods as he shall never be
the better for, and such evils as he shall be infinitely the worse for, must
needs be extremely repugnant to his inclinations. For that which men would not
have, they are averse to believe; and that which they are averse to believe
they are not easily convinced of, because their aversion will cast such a mist
before their minds as that they will hardly be able to discern a fair
Probability in a clear Demonstration. Wherefore if ever you would arrive at a
firm belief of the future Rewards and Punishments, you must endeavor to dispel
from your minds those prejudices against it with which your own ill courses are
apt to inspire you, by resolving with your selves to lay aside your sinful
affections and interests while you are examining the evidences of another
World, and not to suffer them to intermingle with your reasonings; concluding
that in a matter of such infinite moment it is the greatest madness in the world
to think as you wish and believe as you affect; that it is not your unbelief
will either extinguish the joys of Heaven, or quench the flames of Hell, and
that since the nature of things will not bend to your wishes, and be as you
would have them, it is your true interest to believe that they are what they
are, especially in a matter of such infinite concern to you; that if Heaven and
Hell are not dreams but realities, you will most certainly find them so
whatever you think of them, and that therefore it concerns you as much as an
eternity of happiness or misery amounts to, to believe that they are real if
they are so, lest out of a vain confidence that there are no such things, you
forfeit Heaven and incur Hell fire. With such thoughts as these you must often
encounter those prejudices which sin raises in your minds; and when once you
have conquered them, and reduced your minds to an impartial desire of being
rightly informed in this matter, and in order to that, to give an equal hearing
to the reasons on both sides, you are fairly prepared for the belief of another
World, which cannot fail to obtain upon your understandings, if

III. YOU duly examine those motives of credibility upon which those future
Rewards and Punishments are proposed. For though Faith be the gift of God, yet
it is a gift which he confers upon us as he does all his other blessings, in
the use of due and proper means; and as it is the blessing of the Lord that
makes rich, but not without the concurrence of the diligent hand, so it is the
grace of God that gives us faith, but not without our application to the
natural means. Now the natural means of faith is a due consideration of the
evidence upon which the matter to be believed is founded and proposed. For
though the matter be never so evident in it self, yet it is not evident to us
'till we have duly considered it; and if we believe without evidence, we
believe with our wills, and not with our understandings; whereas in reality
believing is properly an act of the understanding, whereby it assents to a
thing as true, which it cannot do without some proof and evidence that it is
so; and therefore when we assent to things as true with our wills without our
understandings, or, which is the same thing, without proof and evidence, we
cannot so properly be said to believe, as not to disbelieve them. For there are
a world of things which men do neither deny nor affirm, believe nor disbelieve,
that is, about which they never concern their thoughts, nor trouble their heads
one way or the other. And thus it is here; there are many who pretend to believe
another World, but if you ask them why, they can give no reason, nor did they
ever enquire whether there be any to be given; so that it is plain whatever
they imagine, they do not believe it; for to believe without understanding, is
as perfect nonsense as to understand without evidence, or believe without
faith. So that that which they call faith, is only not disbelieving; whether
there be another World or no, they never troubled their heads to enquire, and
so having no evidence pro or con, their understanding does neither affirm nor
deny, believe nor disbelieve, but negligently leaves the matter in suspense and
uncertainty.

The natural means of faith therefore, you see, is a due enquiry into the
evidence of the truth and reality of the things we believe; and therefore if we
would indeed believe that there is a future World of Rewards and Punishments,
we must seriously consider the reasons and evidences that prove and assert it,
and urge them close to our understandings, 'till they have forced and extorted
from them a rational and well-grounded assent; which if we do, laying aside all
partiality and prejudice, there is no doubt but they will be found weighty
enough to turn the Scale against all Objections to the contrary; especially if

IV. And lastly, You add to all these means fervent and hearty Prayer. For
Prayer in it self is a very proper and useful means to beget and confirm in us
the belief of the other World, because it is an abstraction of the mind from
those sensitive and material objects which stand like hills and mountains
between us and the invisible World, and intercept our Prospect of it. For
whenever our mind is engaged in a serious and hearty prayer, it dispels all
earthly things before it, and scatters them out of sight, and having no Mists
or Clouds in its way, nothing but a fair and clear heaven above it, thither it
directs its Eyes, and Thoughts, and Desires without any let or interruption.
Now the very withdrawing our minds from sensible things to converse with
spiritual and invisible ones, does, as I showed before, mightily dispose us to
the belief of another World. When therefore by frequent and hearty prayer our
minds have been accustomed to retire from the objects of sense, and to fix
their thoughts and contemplations upon God, they will be able to turn
themselves with more ease and readiness to the invisible things of another
World, which the more familiar they are to us, the better able we shall be to
apprehend and believe them.

But then, by our fervent and hearty prayers we shall also obtain the
assistance of God, without the concurrence of whose grace we can do no good
thing, and much less effectually believe the Rewards and Punishments of another
life, which is the root and principle of all true Piety and Virtue. For to the
forming a firm belief of this Doctrine in our minds, there is required a very
severe and impartial consideration of the Proofs and Evidences upon which it is
founded; and considering how vain and roving our thoughts are, how apt to fly
off from any serious argument, and especially from this of another World, which
is so offensive to our vicious appetites and affections, what likelihood is
there that we should ever fix our mind to such a through examination of the
Proofs of another World as is necessary to beget in us a lively belief of it,
unless God, who alone can command our thoughts, co-operates with us, and
animates our faint endeavors with his grace and assistance; unless he by
suggesting the evidences of the future state to us, and by urging and repeating
them, imprints them on our minds with all their natural force and efficacy; in
a word, unless by following our flying thoughts with these his holy
inspirations, and importuning them with, and almost forcing them upon them, he
at last prevails with them to stay and look back and consider and seriously to
ponder the weight and force of them, it is very improbable they should ever
abide long enough upon our minds to settle into a firm and efficacious belief.
Let us therefore earnestly implore the aid and assistance of God, and beseech
him frequently to inspire our minds with the Arguments of a future life, and to
urge, and repeat and set them home upon our thoughts, 'till by a due
consideration of them we have extracted all their force and evidence, and
digested it into a lively and active belief; and if to the use of all the
abovenamed means you do but add this of Prayer and Supplication, you may depend
upon it, that he who has promised to open unto all that knock, and to be found
of all that seek him, will never deny you any grace or assistance that is
necessary to produce in you this fundamental Principle of Religion, viz, an
effectual belief of the Rewards and Punishments of another world.

To conclude this Argument therefore, since this belief is so absolutely
necessary to subject our minds to the obligations of Religion, let us endeavor
as much as in us lies, to found it in our reason, by convincing our minds of
the truth and force of those evidences upon which it is proposed. For while we
believe upon trust and we know not why, our faith must needs be very weak and
infirm, and like a Tree without root in the midst of a storm, be unable to
outstand any blast of temptation. For the temptations of sin are such goods and
evils as are evident to our senses, which do most certainly assure us that
there are such things in the World as pleasure and profit, reproach and
persecution; and therefore unless when we are tempted, our faith can confront
the evidence of Sense with the evidence of Reason, and produce good proof of
those future Goods and Evils which it puts in the balance against these
present temptations, it will hardly be able to withstand 'em. For what
likelihood is there that the things which we believe without proof and
evidence, should have comparably that force and influence upon us, as the
things which we know, and feel and experience? So that when we come to oppose a
Heaven and a Hell of whose reality and existence we have no evidence, to
pleasures or profits, reproaches or persecutions, which strike immediately on
our senses, it is easy to prognosticate which will be most prevalent.

BUT if our belief of the future Rewards and Punishments be founded on such
evidence as satisfies our reason, what temptation in the World is there that
can prevail against it; what good is there that can outbid Heaven, or what evil
that can vie terrors with Hell? For we see by experience that the Objects of
our faith, when it is grounded upon satisfactory evidence, do as much influence
our minds as the Objects of sense; they who never saw the Indies unless it were
in a Map, and so can only believe that there are such Countries, are yet as
much affected with the rich Merchandise they abound with as those who have been
there, and as ready to venture their Estates and Persons thither, through the
danger of the Sea, in hope of a prosperous return. If therefore we believe that
there is such a state as Heaven, with as full satisfaction of mind as we do
that there is such a place as the Indies, doubtless our Faith would affect us
as much as our Eyes, and we should be as forward to go to Heaven and venture
through all dangers and difficulties thither, as if we had been there already
and had seen with our own Eyes all the Glories and Delights it flows and
abounds with. So that the evidence of our Faith, if it be clear and
satisfactory, will as much affect our minds as the evidence of our sense; and
Heaven and Hell will as vigorously influence our hope and fear, if with a full
satisfaction of mind we believe 'em, as if we had seen and felt 'em. Conceive
then that you had spent but one hour in Heaven, surveying with your own Eyes
the glories of that Place, the Triumphs and Exultations of its blessed
Inhabitants, and the rapturous Joys and delights wherewith it entertains 'em;
conceive that after this you had been sent for another hour into Hell, and had
there been spectators of the horrors and agonies of the damned, of their
torture, and rage, and dire convulsions of Soul, caused by a desperate and
remediless misery; in a word, conceive that after all, you had been dismissed
into this World again, to choose your own fate and determine your selves to
that happy or this miserable portion for ever; think now what your mind and
resolution would be; whether you would not be willing to lose any thing rather
than Heaven, or to endure any thing rather than Hell; whether any good or evil
sin can tempt you withal, would be able to out-tempt the Rewards and
Punishments of Eternity. Doubtless no; the remembrance you would have of the
infinite Joys and intolerable Miseries you saw in that other World, would prove
an invincible Antidote against all temptation. Now what your sense of the other
World would be if you had seen it, that will your belief of it be, when it is
founded upon clear and satisfactory evidence; 'twill be an infallible
Counter-charm against the most bewitching temptations; 'twill render the
greatest goods dreadful to us that becken us to Hell, and the greatest evils
desirable that drive us toward Heaven. For Faith, says the Apostle, is the
substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
that is, it renders its invisible Objects as real and evident to us, as our
sense does visible ones; and when Heaven and Hell are become as evident to our
faith as sensible things are to our senses, what good or evil is there in all
the World that can out-tempt 'em? For what good is there so good as Heaven, or
what evil so bad as Hell? So that if our belief of the future Rewards and
Punishments be but founded on such evidence as gives a full satisfaction to our
minds, 'twill draw our Souls to God like an invincible Loadstone, in despite
of all the oppositions of temptations from without, and of all the
counter-strivings of a corrupt nature from within; and there is nothing in the
World will be able to withstand it; no good or evil that sin can promise or
threaten that will have the power to resist its Almighty persuasions, but
'twill force its own way through all oppositions, and like an overflowing
Torrent bear down all our carnal considerations before it.

WHEREFORE if ever we mean to disingage our selves from the slavery of sin, and
entirely to devote our selves to God and his Service, let us in the use of the
abovenamed Means endeavor to establish our minds in a firm and well-grounded
belief of the other World; that so our faith being built upon a sure foundation
of Reason, may be able to outstand all the waves of temptation, and to chase
all those goods and evils before it that stand in the way of our return to God;
and when by our faith we have so far overcome the World as to submit and resign
our selves to God in despite of all its temptations, we shall find our belief
of the other World every day grow and improve upon our hands, 'till at last it
commences into a certain assurance. For it is not so much men's reason as their
lusts that do object against the reality of the future World; they are loath to
believe it, because it disturbs 'em in their sinful enjoyments, and so their
will employs their reason to argue against it; and when once their wills are
engaged in the controversy, a very slender probability will weigh more on that
side than a clear Demonstration on the other. When therefore our wills are
taken off by a free resignation of 'em to God, all that sinful prejudice which
renders us now so averse to believe, will vanish from our minds; and then we
shall see things as they are, and the arguments of another World will appear to
our minds with such a convincing evidence, as will quickly dispel all our
doubts and uncertainties, and render our Faith equivalent to a clear Vision. So
that we shall pass through all the temptations of the World with the same
constancy and resolution of Soul, as if we walked in open view of Heaven and
Hell, and these mighty Objects which do so infinitely transcend all the Goods
and Evils which sin can tempt us withal, will have as victorious an influence
on our lives as if they were present and did strike immediately on our senses.
And then how is it possible that any temptation whatsoever should be able to
cope with or prevail against 'em? For he who is fully persuaded of the reality
of Heaven and Hell, must be utterly abandoned of all his reason, if he sin for
any Goods sake that is less than Heaven, or for any Evils sake that is less
than Hell. When therefore we are drawn to God by such invincible hopes and
fears as the firm belief of the other World will suggest to us, how is it
possible that any temptation of sin should either dissuade us from coming to
him, or persuade us to forsake him? Wherefore it concerns us to take all
possible care to ground our faith well and improve and strengthen it, that so
in despite of all temptations it may influence our wills and govern our
practice, and safely conduct us through all the snares of this Life, and at
length bring us home to everlasting Happiness.

CHAP. VI. Of the necessity of having right Apprehensions of God, in order to
our being truly Religious.
IT is a Noble and Celebrated passage of Epictetus, Chapter 38. (...), i. e. Know
that the main foundation of Piety is this, to have right apprehensions of the
nature of God, and to be sensible that he is, and that he governs the World
well and justly; and accordingly the Psalmist speaking of God, tells us, They
that know thy name will put their trust in thee, Psalm 9.10. i. e. They who
have made a true discovery of thy Nature, and by observing as I have done the
glorious effects of thy Wisdom, and Power and Justice and Goodness, have formed
in their minds right and genuine apprehensions concerning thee, will make no
scruple to place their whole trust and confidence in thee; which is equally
true of all other acts of Piety and Religion. For the true knowledge of God will
as much influence our minds to love and adore him, to praise him and submit to
him, as to put our trust in him; and hence St. Paul ascribes all the impiety
and wickedness of the Gentiles to their not liking to retain God in their
knowledge, i. e. to their wicked aversion to the true and genuin Notions of God,
Romans 1.28.

IN the prosecution of this Argument I shall endeavor these three things:

First, To show in what respects right apprehensions of God are necessary to
our being truly Religious.

Secondly, To lay down some Rules for the forming of right apprehensions of God
in our minds.

Thirdly, To assign and remove the common causes of our misapprehensions
concerning him.

SECT. I. In what respects right Apprehensions of God are necessary to our
being truly Religious.
IN general, whatsoever is requisite to render Men truly religious must be
derived from true apprehensions of God, who is the great Object of Religion.
For Religion being the rule of divine Service must it self be regulated by the
divine Nature, and without a right understanding of the nature of God, it is
impossible we should regulate our religion by it. Now to the right conduct and
due regulation of our Religion, it is requisite, first, that we should be
rightly informed what services are pleasing to God; secondly, that we proceed
upon a true Principle in serving him; thirdly, that we direct our Services to a
right end; fourthly, that we be furnished with sufficient motives to engage us
to serve him; the want of either of which will prove an irreparable flaw in the
very foundation of our Religion, and render the whole not only infirm but
defective in its very constitution. And in all these respects right
Apprehensions of God are indispensably necessary.

First, They are necessary to inform us what Services are pleasing to God.

Secondly, They are necessary to inspire us with the true Principle upon which
we must serve him.

Thirdly, They are necessary to direct us to the true end for whieh we must
serve him.

Fourthly, They are necessary to furnish us with proper motives and
encouragements to engage us to serve him.

I. A right apprehension of God is necessary to instruct us what services are
pleasing to God. For to be sure nothing can be pleasing to him but what is
agreeable to the perfections of his Nature, which are the Originals from whence
the eternal Laws of Religion are transcribed; unless therefore we know what his
perfections are, how is it possible we should know what services are agreeable
to 'em? If you would serve a Prince gratefully and acceptably, you must inform
your self beforehand what his nature and disposition is, that so you may
accommodate your self thereunto, and compose your actions and behavior
accordingly; that you may furnish him with fresh pleasures if he be soft and
voluptuous, or blow him up with flatteries, if he be proud and vainglorious;
that if he be covetous and tyrannical, you may sponge and oppress his people
and drein their wealth into his Coffers; if just and beneficent, you may assist
and forward him in righting the injuries, correcting the miscarriages, and
alleviating the burdens of his Subjects. And thus if you would serve the great
King of the World in such ways as are pleasing and acceptable to him, you must
study his Nature, and endeavor to enform your selves which way his infinite
perfections do incline him, that so you may know how to comport your selves
toward him and to render him such Services as are agreeable to his Nature. For
there is no rule in the World but only that of his Nature, by which you can
certainly conclude what will please him; and though he has told you by express
Revelation what services he expects and what will please him, yet without
recurring to the rule of his Nature, you can never be secure either that what
he told you is true, or that what he told you was pleasing to him then, is
still pleasing to him now. For how can you be secure either that he told you
truly what Services were pleasing to him, but only from the truth and veracity
of his Nature, or that the Services which were pleasing to him then, are
pleasing to him now, but from the stability and unchangeableness of his Nature.
So that in our enquiries after what is pleasing to God, we cannot depend upon
his Word without consulting his Nature, which is not only the Security but also
the Test of his Word. For it is certain that that cannot be God's Word which
contradicts his Nature, and what plausible pretense soever any Doctrine may
make to divine Revelation, if it teach or command any thing that is apparently
repugnant to the divine Perfections, we ought for that reason to conclude it an
Imposture; it being much more possible that the most plausible pretense to
Revelation should be false, than that God should reveal any Doctrine that is
repugnant to his Nature. So that in all our Enquiries what is pleasing to God,
our last appeal must be to his Nature, which is the great Standard of Good and
Evil, by which we are to measure what is pleasing and displeasing to him.

WHILST therefore we are ignorant of God's Nature, or possessed with wrong and
false apprehensions of it, we must necessarily wander in the dark, and neither
know what to do nor how to behave our selves toward him. For how can we
imagine what will please or displease a dark and unknown Nature, whose bent and
inclinations we are utterly unacquainted with; but if we are under false
apprehensions of his Nature, they must necessarily mislead us in our behavior
toward him, and put us upon false ways of serving and pleasing him. Thus if we
apprehend him to be a froward and testy Being, that is apt to be pleased and
displeased with Trifles, in conformity to our apprehension of his Nature, we
shall offer him a trifling Service, a Service made up of Pageantry and
Complement, of pompous show and ceremonious respects and empty formalities; For
such a trifling Worship is in it self most proper for such a humorous Divinity.
So if we apprehend him to be of an imperious and tyrannical nature, that
governs himself and the World by a blind and obstinate Will, without any regard
to the eternal reasons of things, we shall worship him as the Indians do their
arbitrary Devils, i. e. follow him with houlings and lamentations, with
trembling hearts and frighted looks, and dismal tones, and by flattering him
with praises and fauning upon him with slavish submissions and addresses
endeavor to collogue with Heaven, and ingratiate our selves with its dreadful
Majesty; for what can be more agreeable to such a tyrannical Divinity than such
a forced and slavish Worship? In a word, if we apprehend him to be a fond and
indulgent Being, that is governed by a foolish pity and blind commiseration, we
shall not fail to render him a suitable Worship, i. e. to retire and grow
melancholy, to whine and bemoan our selves; to deject our looks and disfigure
our countenances, and teaze our Souls into fits of fruitless compunction, that
so by the soft Rhetoric of a well-acted sorrow we may pierce his bowels and
melt him into pity and compassion toward us; for what can be more prevalent
with such a soft and indulgent Deity, than such a mournful and passionate
Religion? Thus whilst we have wrongful apprehensions of God, they must
necessarily mislead us into false ways of Worship, because we can no otherwise
worship him than by rendering him such Services as are suitable to the
apprehensions we have of his Nature; and therefore while we think any otherwise
of his Nature than it is, we must necessarily think such Services suitable to it
as are not.

BUT if we truly understand what God is, we cannot but apprehend what Worship
is suitable to him, by that Eternal congruity and proportion that there is
between things and things; which is as obvious to men's minds, as sounds and
colors to their ears and eyes. If God be a Being endowed with such and such
Perfections, every Man's mind will tell him that between such an Object and such
actions and affections there is a natural congruity, and therefore so and so he
ought to be treated and addressed to, with such and such actions and affections
to be served and worshipped. So that if we apprehend God truly as he is, circled
with all his natural glories and perfections, our apprehensions will produce in
us such affections, and our affections such deportment and behavior toward
him as are suitable to the perfections of his Nature, and we shall worship him
with such Services as will both please and become him; with admiring thoughts
and dutiful wills and Godlike affections; with an ingenuous fear, a humble
confidence and an obedient love; with cheerful Praises and profound Adorations,
with sober, wise and rational Devotions; such as will wing and employ our best
affections and most noble faculties; For it is such a Worship only that can suit
such Perfections and please such a Nature as Gods.

II. A right apprehension of God is also necessary to inspire us with the best
Principle of serving him. For it is certain that there is no Principle in humane
Nature that will so effectually engage us to the service of God, or render our
service so acceptable to him, as that of Love; which will tune our wills into
such an Harmony with Gods, that we shall no longer choose and refuse according
to our particular likings and dislikings, but what is most pleasing or
displeasing to him will be so to us; and our wills being thus united and
subjected to his, our obedience will extend to all his Commands, and admit no
other bounds but his Will and Pleasure. Whereas if we do not obey him out of
love, we shall endeavor to contract our obedience into as narrow a compass as
may be, because we shall render it to him with a grudging mind, and
consequently with a narrow and stingy hand; for we shall serve him no farther
than we are driven by fear and the restless importunities of a clamorous
conscience, and so consequently fall infinitely short of our duty, and take up
in a partial and hypocritical obedience. For while we do not love him, it is
impossible we should obey him with a ready will, which is the proper seat of
his Empire; and while we obey him with a stubborn and rebellious will, we are
only his slaves, but the Devils subjects. 'Till therefore we do obey him, at
least in some measure, from a Principle of love, it is impossible our obedience
should be either universal or sincere.

But to the inspiring our Souls with this Principle, there is nothing more
necessary than right apprehensions of God, who in himself is doubtless the most
amiable of beings, as having all those Perfections in infinite degrees that can
beget or deserve a rational affection. So that we cannot think him to be any
way otherwise than he is, without thinking him less lovely, and detracting more
or less from the infinite beauty of his Nature; For since he cannot be more
lovely than he is in himself, every false apprehension of him must needs
represent him less lovely. But since of all his Perfections that of his
Goodness is the most powerful motive and engagement of Love, there is nothing
more necessary to kindle our love to him than right apprehensions thereof. For
being infinitely good, as he is, in his own Nature, it is impossible we should
conceive him to be better than he is; and therefore every false notion we
entertain of his goodness must necessarily detract from it, and so much as we
detract from his goodness, so much we detract from the principal reason and
motive of our loving him. And therefore in order to the engaging of our love to
him, it concerns us above all things not to entertain any Opinion of him that
reflects a disparagement on his goodness. For too many such Opinions there are
that have been imbibed among Christians as the fundamental Principles of their
Orthodoxy; namely such as these, that Gods Sovereign Will is the sole rule of
his actions, and that he does things not because they are just and reasonable,
but that they are just and reasonable because he does 'em; as if he were merely
an Omnipotent, blind Will that acts without Reason, and did run through the
World like an irresistible Whirlwind, hurrying all things before him without
any consideration of right or wrong; That his Decrees of Governing and
disposing his creatures are wholly founded in his absolute and irresistible
Will, that determins of the everlasting fate of Souls without any reason, or
foresight, or condition; that by this his unaccountable Will he has impaled
the far greater part of 'em within an absolute Decree of Reprobation, for no
other end but that Nimrod-like he might have game enough to sport and breath
his vengeance for ever; and that having nailed 'em to this woeful cross by this
his dire Decree, he bids 'em save themselves and come down, as those cruel
Mockers did our Savior, and because they do not obey, torments and cruciates
'em for ever, though he knows they are not able to do it of themselves, and
has purposed never to enable 'em to do it. Which Opinions do represent God in
such a formidable dress, circled with such a stern and ghastly Majesty, as is
more apt to inspire us with horror than love. For though by persuading our
selves that we are of the small number of his elected Favorites, we may work
our minds into some degree of love to him; yet when we consider how severely he
has treated the rest of our fellow Creatures, without any other reason but his
own Will, this will intermingle such a grimness with his smiles, such a terror
with those Charms for which we love him, as must necessarily damp the fervours
of our love, and ever and anon freez it into horror and astonishment, and so
fear will be at least the predominant Principle of our Obedience; and while it
is so, our Religion must needs languish under great imperfections and
infirmities. For while our fear and dread of God is the governing Principle of
our Religion, we shall but do penance in all our addresses to him, and every
act of our Obedience will be a kind of Martyrdom, so that we shall never be
able to entertain any cheerful converse or friendly Society with him, and yet
serve him we must, for fear our neglect of him should rouse his Vengeance
against us; and between this necessity of coming to him, and this fearfulness
of approaching him, what can there be begotten but a forced and constrained
Devotion, which because we do not love we would willingly leave, did not our
dread and horror of him drag us to his Altars. And as we shall serve him with a
forced Obedience, so we shall obey him with a sordid and nigardly affection;
and while we grudg him our Obedience, we shall be most backward to obey him in
those instances of Duty that are of greatest moment and most pleasing to him,
and most forward in those that are of least concern and most pleasing to our
selves. Thus while our minds are ridden with sour and rigid apprehensions of
God, they will inspire us with a slavish dread of him, and that will restrain
and contract our Obedience to him. Thus Maximus Tyrius excellently represents
the case, (...), i. e. the truly religious Man is the friend of God, but the
superstitious is his flatterer, and the former is happy but the latter
miserable; for the one being encouraged by his own Virtue, approaches God
without any slavish fear and dread, but the other being debased with the sense
of his own wickedness approaches him with trembling and despair, dreading him
as a cruel Tyrant, Dissert. 4.

IF therefore we would render him a cheerful, free, and universal Obedience, we
must endeavor to represent him fairly to our own minds, and to think of him as
he is, and as he has represented himself in the holy Scriptures, i. e. as a
bountiful benefactor to all his Creation, and an universal lover of the Souls
of men; that would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth, and does heartily and readily contribute to our eternal welfare;
that leaves no art of love, no method of kindness unattempted to rescue us from
eternal perdition, and when we have utterly baffled and defeated them all, does
most unwillingly abandon us to the woeful fate we have chosen and prepared for
our selves; that in punishing even the most incorrigible sinners does not at
all design to wreak and gratify his own revenge, but to do good to the World,
and warn others by their sufferings not to imitate their sins; And in a word,
that importunately invites us back when we are gone astray, and upon our return
graciously receives us, and when he has received us is infinitely industrious
to prepare us for happiness, and when he has prepared us abundantly rewards
us, and when he has rewarded us everlastingly triumphs in our Glory and
beatitude; these and such like thoughts are truly worthy of God, and befitting
the infinite goodness of his Nature, and as such do earnestly recommend him to
our affections, as the most amiable and indearing object in the World; and when
by such recommendation they have captivated our affections, and kindled our
hearts into an unfeigned love of him, they have inspired us with such a vigorous
Principle of action, as will both animate and innoble our Religion, and render
it truly worthy of God and our selves; For then we shall serve him with a free
and dutiful will, a liberal affection, and a cheerful heart, and consequently
render him a full, and generous, and willing obedience. For so holy David tells
us, Psalm. 119.32. I will run the ways of thy Commandments when thou shall
enlarge my heart, i. e. when thou shall open and widen my heart with the love
of thee (for so St. Paul expounds the Phrase, 2 Cor. 6.11.) I shall most
readily and cheerfully obey thee.

III. A right apprehension of God is also necessary to direct us to the end for
which we are to serve him; without which it is impossible we should serve him
acceptably. For as a good intention does not justify a bad action, so neither
does a good action a bad intention, and unless both are good, neither are
acceptable. If I do an action that is materially good with respect to a bad
end, I unhallow and vitiate it, and render it formally evil. If I fast for
strife, or give Alms for vainglory, or pray to give a color to my Rapines and
Oppressions; my very Devotion is a cheat, my Mortification a lie, and my
Charity an imposture. So that in order to our serving of God acceptably, it is
necessary we should direct those services we render him to their right and
proper end; and what that is we cannot well understand unless we have a right
apprehension of his nature; for to be sure God has proposed that to us for the
end of our Worship, which is most agreeable to his own perfection, and
therefore unless we have a right Notion of his perfections, how can we rightly
apprehend what end is most agreeable to them? As for instance, the right end of
our serving him, is that we may glorify him for ever in an everlasting
participation of his perfection and happiness; and this we can be no otherwise
certain of, than by a true survey and inspection of his nature, which will
instruct us that being infinitely perfect as he is, he must be infinitely happy
within himself, and so can design no self-end without himself, and consequently
that the end for which he requires our service is not any advantage he expects
to reap from it, or further addition to his own happiness, he being from all
Eternity past as completely happy as he can be to all Eternity to come; and
therefore what other end can he be supposed to aim at than our good and
happiness? It is true indeed, he designs to glorify himself in our happiness;
but how? Not to render himself himself more glorious by it than he is in
himself, for that is impossible; but to display and show forth his own
essential glory to all that are capable of admiring and imitating him, that
thereby he might invite them to transcribe that goodness of his into their
natures, of which his glory is the shine and luster, and thereby to glorify
them selves; and what can more effectually display the glory of a Being who is
infinitely wise and powerful and good, than to contrive and effect the
happiness of his Creatures, and especially of his rational Creatures, who of
all others have the most ample capacity of happiness? Doubtless, the highest
glory of an infinite power, that is conducted by an infinite wisdom and
goodness, is to contrive and execute the most effectual methods of doing the
greatest good; and what greater good can such a power effect, than the eternal
happiness of reasonable Creatures? So that Gods glory and our happiness are so
inseparably conjoined, that we cannot aim right at either, but we must hit both
and whether we say that his end is his own glory or our happiness, it is the
same thing; for his glory is our happiness, and our happiness is his glory, and
when he has perfected our Nature, and advanced it to the highest happiness it
is capable of, it will shine back upon him, even as all other glorious effects
do on their causes, and reflect everlasting honor on that infinite Power and
Wisdom and Goodness from whence it was derived. Thus right apprehensions of the
nature of God will naturally lead us to the great end which he proposes in all
his transactions with us, and thereby direct us what end we are to propose in
our transactions with him. For that which is Gods end ought to be ours, and
therefore since his end is his own Glory, or, which is the same thing, our
everlasting Happiness, it ought to be ours also.

But now while we misapprehend the nature of God we shall be apt to set up
false and indirect ends of serving him; as for instance, whilst we look upon
him as a selfish being, that centers wholly in himself, and separates his
interest from the interest of his Creatures, doing every thing merely for his
own sake, we shall think our selves obliged in all our addresses to him to set
aside our own interest and happiness, and to aim singly and separately at his
honor and glory; and yet this is the great Fundamental of the whole Scheme of
some men's Divinity, viz. That God aims wholly at himself, and regards the good
of his Creatures no farther than it serves his own interest; that he made this
World out of mere ostentation, to boast and magnify his own power and
greatness; and gives Laws to his Creatures, and exacts their obedience for no
other reason but because it is for his honor to be served and worshipped; that
he created Hell only to show the power of his wrath, and prepare an everlasting
Triumph for his vengeance; and erected Heaven for a Theater to show himself on,
that so having filled it with a vast Corona of Angelical and Saintly
spectators, he might display the glory of his Majesty before them, and thereby
provoke them to extol and praise and commend him for ever. And while we thus
conceive of God, how can we hope that he will ever be pleased with us unless we
aim at the same end that he does, i. e. unless laying aside all regard to our
selves and our own happiness both here and hereafter, we entirely direct all
our worship and service to his glory and interest; which being impossible for
us to do, whilst we have so much self-love and so much indigence together, will
either render our Religion wholly unpracticable, or perplex us with eternal
doubts of its truth and sincerity.

And supposing we could direct all our Religion to this end, this instead of
rendering it more acceptable to God would only render it more unworthy of him;
for then we should serve him under the notion of his Benefactors rather than of
his Pensioners, with a design to enrich him rather than to be enriched by him:
And what an unbeseeming presumption is it for such indigent Creatures as we, to
entertain the least thought of contributing to God, or making any addition to
his infinite store? He is above all want, being infinitely satisfied from the
inexhaustible fountain of his own perfections; and for us to imagine that he
needs our Services, and requires them to serve his own interest, is to
blaspheme his Alsufficiency, and suppose him a poor and indigent being, that
for want of a perfect satisfaction within himself, is forced to rome abroad and
raise taxes upon his Creatures to enrich and supply himself. For if we serve
him for any end at all, it must be either to do him good or our selves; if it
be to do him good, we reproach and dishonor him by supposing that he has need
of us and our services, which can do him no good unless he has some need of
them. So that whatsoever some high-slown Enthusiasts may pretend, that it is
sordid and mercenary to serve God for our own good, I am sure to serve him for
his good is profane and blasphemous; and therefore either we must serve him
for no good, or serve him for our own; and since he is so infinitely sufficient
to himself, that nothing we can do can benefit and advantage him, to what
better purpose can we worship and serve him, than to receive benefit and
advantage from him; which instead of being base and mercenary, is a purpose
most becoming both God and our selves? For to serve him with an intent not to
give to, but to receive from him, is to acknowledge his fullness and our own
want, his Alsufficiency and our own Poverty; whereas by serving him to the
contrary purpose, we do in effect set up our selves above him, it being much
greater to give than it is to receive; and to make that the end of our
worshipping God, which does in effect suppose him to be our inferior, is to
make our selves Gods instead of Votaries. What the true end therefore is of our
serving God, may be easily inferred from a right apprehension of his nature.
For do but consider him as a Being that is above all want, that is infinitely
satisfied in his own perfections, and an unbounded Ocean of happiness to
himself, and then what other end can you propose in serving him, but to derive
perfection and happiness from him, in the accomplishment of which he and you
will be Glorified together?

IV. And lastly, A right apprehension of God is also necessary to furnish us
with proper motives and encouragements to serve him. It is the nature of all
reasonable Beings to be drawn forth into action by Motives and Arguments; and
the most powerful Arguments to move us Godward, are drawn from the nature of
God, from his Majesty and Holiness, his Truth and Justice, his Mercy and
Goodness; none of which can have their just and full influence upon us, unless
we have a right and genuine apprehension of them. The consideration of his
Majesty is naturally apt to strike our minds into an awful reverence of his
Authority; but if we look upon it under the notion of a mere Arbitrary
greatness, that Governs not it self by Counsel and Reason, but by a blind, and
absolute, and unaccountable Will, that always chooses and refuses pro imperio,
without any regard to the eternal reasons of things, we may be astonished and
confounded at it, but we can never truly reverence it. The consideration of his
Holiness is naturally apt to deter us from approaching him with vicious and
impure affections; but if we place his holiness in a mere formal affectation of
external decency, respect, and reverence, and not in the immutable conformity
of his Will with the eternal Rules of Righteousness, it may move us to be very
ceremonious and respectful to him, as to the Place, and Garb, and Posture of
our Worship, but it will never prevail with us to cleanse and rectify our
hearts and affections. Again, the consideration of his Justice is naturally apt
to restrain us from affronting his Authority by perverse and wilful violations
of his Laws; but while we look upon it as a stern and implacable Attribute,
which nothing will appease and satisfy but blood and revenge, it may overwhelm
us with horror and despair, but 'twill never persuade us to reform and amend.
Once more, the consideration of his Mercy is naturally apt when we are gone
astray to invite us to return, with the hopeful prospect it gives us of pardon
and reconciliation; but while we look upon it under the notion of a blind pity,
or effeminate easiness and tenderness of Nature, that will admit of no severity
how wholesome soever or necessary to the ends of Government, instead of moving us
to repentance, it will animate us in our rebellion. In fine, the consideration
of his Goodness is naturally apt to work upon our Ingenuity, and to draw us
Godwards with the cords of a man, and the bonds of love; but while we mistake
it for a blind Partiality, that chooses its Favorites without reason, and
rewards them without respect to their Qualifications, instead of captivating
our love, 'twill provoke our disdain, and excite in us a secret contempt and
aversation.

Thus though the nature of God be in it self a most fruitful Topic of Motives
and Arguments to engage us to serve and obey him, yet by the false
representations that are sometimes made of it, it may be perverted into an
inducement to wickedness, and made a plausible pretense to encourage and
justify us in our rebellions against him. Whilst we look upon God as he is in
himself, shining with his own unstained and immaculate Glories, there is
nothing more apt to influence all the springs of motion within us; to inflame
our love, encourage our hope, and alarm our fear, and by these to set the
Wheels of our Obedience agoing. For there is nothing in humane nature that is
capable of being moved and affected by Reason, which has not an answerable
reason in the nature of God to move and affect it. And as in him there are all
the reasons that can affect us, so there is all the force and efficacy of those
reasons, every thing in him being perfect and infinite; in him there is an
infinite beauty to attract our love, an infinite good to inflame our desire, an
infinite kindness to affect our ingenuity, an infinite Justice armed with an
infinite power to awaken our fear, an infinite mercy to invite our hope, and an
infinite truth to confirm and support it. So that it is beyond the power of all
humane imagination to frame or fancy an Object that is so every way fitted to
affect humane nature, and influence all its Principles of action, as God in
himself is. Whilst therefore we apprehend him truly, and as he is in himself,
the consideration of him must needs be of wonderful force to oblige us to serve
and obey him, and there is not one of all those glorious perfections in which
his Nature is arrayed, but will suggest to us some powerful persuasive to Piety
and Virtue, and either by our hope or our fear, our love or our gratitude,
incline our hearts to keep his Commandments. So that if we are ignorant of his
perfections, or do entertain false Notions concerning them, we shall either
want those Motives to Piety which they naturally suggest, or draw Arguments
from them to encourage and justify us in our rebellions against him. And thus
you see in all these instances how indispensably necessary right Notions of God
are to engage us to serve and obey him.

SECT. II. Rules for the forming right Apprehensions of God.
Dionysius the Areopagite, and from him all the Schoolmen, assign three ways by
which we are to frame our apprehensions of the Nature of God, viz. Viam
Causalitatis, viam Eminentiae, and viam Remotionis, i. e. the way of Causality,
the way of Eminency, and the way of Remotion. The first consists in arguing
from those perfections which God has caused and produced in his Creatures to
the perfections of his Nature. For whatsoever degrees of perfection there are
in the Creature, they must either be uncreated, which is a contradiction, or
flow from the Creator as from the immense Ocean of all perfection; but it is
impossible they should flow from him, unless they were first in him. So that
when we behold such and such perfections in the Creature, we may from them most
certainly infer that the same are all in God, who is the cause and fountain of
them; and though the divine Nature abounds with innumerable virtues and
perfections, yet it is impossible for us by our own natural light to discover
any other of them than those of which he himself has imprinted some specimens
upon created Beings; these being the only Scales by which our understanding can
ascend to the reach and view of the divine perfections. But because all created
perfections are not only short in their degrees, but also intermingled with
defects in their very kind and nature; therefore in attributing them to God we
ought carefully to abstract from them whatever is defective whether it be in
kind or in degree. For God is the cause of perfection only, but not of defect,
which so far forth as it is natural to created Beings has no cause at all, but
is merely a negation or nonentity. For every created thing was a negation or
nonentity before ever it had a positive being, and it had only so much of its
primitive negation taken away from it, as it had positive being conferred on
it; and therefore so far forth as it is, its being is to be attributed to that
sovereign cause that produced it, but so far forth as it is not, its not being
is to be attributed to that Original Nonentity out of which it was produced.
For that which was once nothing would still have been nothing had it not been
for the cause that gave being to it; and therefore that it is so far nothing
still, i. e. limited and defective, is only to be attributed to its own
primitive nothingness. As for instance, if I give a poor man an hundred pounds;
that he is worth so much money is wholly owing to me, but that he is not worth
a hundred more is owing only to his own poverty; and just so, that I have such
and such perfections of being is wholly owing to God who produced me out of
nothing, but that I have such and such defects of being is only owing to that
Nonentity out of which he produced me; and therefore since our perfections are
derived from God, but not our defects, it is altogether as unreasonable to
attribute the latter to to him, as it is reasonable to attribute the former.

Now the defects of created perfection which we are to remove and abstract from
God in our conceptions of him, are of two sorts: First of the thing; Secondly,
of the mode of thing. The defect of the thing is when the thing it self is such
as that it wholly excludes something much better and more perfect; thus matter
for instance is defective in the thing, because it excludes spiritual and
immaterial substance, which is much more excellent than it self. The defect of
the mode of the thing is when the thing is so excellent in it self as that it
excludes nothing better, but yet is deficient in degrees of perfection. As for
instance, Wisdom and Goodness, Reason and Understanding are things so excellent
in themselves as that they exclude nothing that is more excellent, but yet as
residing in created Beings want a great many possible degrees of perfection.
Now both these defects being natural are uncaused, and so cannot proceed from
the Author of Nature, and not proceeding from him, they cannot be supposed to
be in him, and therefore in our conceptions of him ought not to be attributed
to him. In respect therefore of these twofold defects in created perfections,
it is necessary we should conceive of God in the way of Remotion and Eminence
as well as of Causality; otherwise we shall injuriously attribute to him the
Defects of his Creatures, of which he is not the cause, as well as their
perfections of which he is. If therefore we would do God right in our thoughts
and conceptions of him, we must in the first place remove from him all defect
in the thing, that is, all matter and material perfections; because they are
defective in their very kind and nature, as excluding such substance and
perfections as are incomparably more excellent than themselves; and this is to
conceive of him in the way of Remotion, which consists in removing all kind of
matter and material affections from our thoughts and apprehensions of God. And
then in the second place we must abstract from him all defect in the mode of
the thing, i. e, all the defect of degrees in those spiritual perfections of
the Creature which we attribute to him, and raise and exalt them in our own
minds to their utmost height and eminence; and this is to conceive of him in
the way of Eminency, which consists in ascribing to God the short and limited
perfections of his Creatures abstracted from all defect and limitation. These
three ways therefore are all indispensably necessary to lead us to a true
discovery of the Nature of God; as will yet farther appear by the following
Rules I shall lay down for the forming a right Notion and Apprehension of him.

First, If we would think aright of God, we must attribute all possible
perfection to him.

Secondly, in forming our Notions of his Perfections we must take our rise from
the Perfections we behold in his Creatures.

Thirdly, In ascribing to him the perfections of his Creatures we must abstract
from them every thing that is defective and imperfect.

Fourthly, In arguing from the perfections of the Creature to the perfections
of God, we must distinguish between the state and relations of God and Creature.

Fifthly, Though in arguing from the perfections of the Creature to the
perfections of God we are not to subject him to the Rules of a Creature, yet we
are always to suppose his Will and his Power to be in perfect subjection to the
perfections of his Nature.

Sixthly, In conceiving of his Perfections we must always suppose them to be
exactly harmonious and consistent with each other.

I. To the forming a right apprehension of God it is necessary that we ascribe
to him all possible perfection. For he being the first and supreme cause from
whence all the perfections of Being are derived, must necessarily include all
perfection in himself, and be all those perfections which he has communicated
to others; for how can he give that which he has not? It is true indeed, free
causes may give less to their effects than they have in themselves, but it is
impossible they should give more; though they may withhold from their effects
any perfection or degree of perfection which they have, they cannot derive to
them any which they have not. Whatsoever therefore is a perfection of Being,
must necessarily be essential to that supreme cause from whence all Being is
derived; otherwise there would be more in his effects than there is in himself,
and consequently more than he could give or be the cause of, which is a
contradiction.

AND as all those perfections that are in created Beings must necessarily exist
in the nature of God, so must all those too that are possible in themselves.
For every perfection that is possible in it self must be possible to him who is
the cause of all things; but no perfection can be possible to him that is not
actually in him, for no cause can produce that perfection in another which it
has not in it self, and therefore if there be any perfection that is not in
him it is impossible it should ever be produced by him, and that which is
impossible to God must be impossible in its own nature, that which is not an
object of omnipotent power is not an object of any power, and that which is not
an Object of any power is in it self impossible. Since therefore every
perfection that is possible in it self must be possible to God, and since no
perfection that is not in him can be possible to him, it necessarily follows
that all the perfections that are possible in themselves are actually existing
in the Nature of God.

II. IN forming our Notions of Gods perfections we must take our rise from
those perfections which we behold in his Creatures. For our understanding being
too short-sighted to penetrate immediately into the substance and essence of
things, has no other way to know and apprehend them, but either by their
causes, or by their effects; but now God being the first and supreme fountain
of all causes cannot be known by his cause, because he has none, and therefore
is knowable only by his effects, that is, by the works of his Creation that lie
before us, and are within the prospect of our understandings; in the which all
that is excellent and good is an illustrious Comment and Paraphrase upon God.

NOW the effects of God are all reducible to these four generals, Substance or
Essence, Life, Sense and Reason; all which are in man, who is the Epitome of
the World, and a complete Model of all the Works of God; and therefore not only
all these, but all the proper excellencies and perfections of these must be
supposed to be in God, from whom they are derived.

THE first effect of God is substance. Now the proper perfections of substance
are Amplitude and Fullness of Being. By the Amplitude of substance I mean its
greatness or largeness as to the diffusion or extent of it, in opposition to
littleness, or, which is the same thing, to being defined to, or circumscribed
within a small and inconsiderable space; by the Fullness of substance, I mean
its having more of Essence or Being, by which it is more removed from not
being, in opposition to things that have but little being in them, that are of
so fleeting and transitory a nature as that they are next to nothing. Wherefore
in conceiving of God we must ascribe to him these perfections of substance even
to their utmost possibility, that is, we must conceive him to be a Being of
infinite Amplitude, that is neither defined nor circumscribed within any
certain space, but coexists with, and penetrates and passes through all things;
and by thus conceiving of him we attribute to him Immensity, which consists in
being unconfined by any bounds of space in the out-spreading of himself to all
places that we can see or imagine, and infinitely beyond them. And then in
conceiving of him we must also ascribe to him infinite Fullness of Being, by
which he is so infinitely removed from not being, as that he cannot but be; and
by thus conceiving of him we attribute to him necessary existence, which
consists in being out of all Possibility of not being.

BUT then secondly, another of those works of God from which we are to take our
rise in conceiving of his Perfections, is Life. For he is the cause and
fountain of all that life that is in the world, and therefore must not only
have life in himself, but the utmost perfection of it also that is possible.
Now the Perfections of life are Activity and Duration; by Activity I mean a
vigorous power and ability to act, in opposition to weakness and impotence,
which must needs be a great perfection of life, which is the spring and
principle of Action; by Duration I mean a long continuance of life in
opposition to that which is short and momentary; for the more lasting the life
is, the more perfect it is, and the more there is of it. Wherefore in
conceiving of God we must ascribe to him the utmost perfection of life that is
possible; that is, we must conceive him to be infinitely active and powerful,
that does what he pleases in Heaven and on Earth, and can effect whatsoever is
possible in it self, and not repugnant to the other perfections of his Nature;
and in thus conceiving of him we attribute Omnipotence to him, which consists
in an ability to do every thing that does not imply a contradiction either to
the nature of the things themselves, or to the nature and perfections of the
doer; and then in conceiving of him we must also ascribe to him an infinite
duration of life, that is, a life that is not bounded either by a beginning or
an end, but is from everlasting to everlasting, and coexists and runs Parallel
with all Duration past, and present, and to come; and by thus conceiving of him
we attribute Eternity to him, which consists in a boundless duration of life
without any term of beginning or end.

BUT then thirdly, another of these effects of God from which we are to take
our rise in conceiving of the Perfections of God, is Sense; by which I do not
understand carnal or material sense only, which consists in perceiving the
strokes and impressions of material Objects on our sensories, but sense in the
general, whether it be of material or spiritual Beings. For that spiritual
Beings have as exquisite a sense of spiritual Objects, as corporal of corporeal
ones there is no doubt to be made; because otherwise we must suppose them
insensible both of pleasure and pain. Now the perfection of sense is Quickness
and Sagacity of Perception, whether it be of painful or of pleasant, grateful
or ungrateful Objects; and this is to be found not only in Beasts and Men, but
also in separated spirits, in Angels, and in God himself. For though none of
these have any corporeal sense to feel and perceive the impressions of
corporeal Objects, yet that both Angels and separated Spirits have a spiritual
sense of spiritual impressions, by which they are subjected to pain and
pleasure, cannot be denied; and though God by the infinite perfection of his
Nature is exempt from all sense of pain, yet it cannot be supposed that he who
is the fountain from whence all sense is derived should himself be insensible;
and if he be not, we ought to suppose him as sensible of all that is truly
pleasant and good as it is possible to be; and where there is an infinite good,
as there is in the nature of God, it is possible to be infinitely sensible of
it; and in thus conceiving, we attribute to him infinite Happiness. For what
else is an infinite sense of good but infinite pleasure and happiness; and this
is the happiness of God, that he is infinitely perfect in himself, and
infinitely sensible of his own perfections and therein infinitely pleased and
delighted.

FOURTHLY and lastly, Another of those Works of God from whence we are to take
our rise in conceiving of his perfections, is Reason. For all that light of
reason which shines in humane and Angelical minds being rayed forth, and
derived from him, he must be supposed not only to have reason in himself, but
to have it in its utmost possible perfection. Now the perfection of reason
consists in Knowledge and Wisdom in the Understanding, and Rectitude or
Righteousness in the Will. By Knowledge I mean considering and understanding
things absolutely as they are in their own Natures, in their Powers and
Properties, Differences and Circumstances; by Wisdom I understand a through
consideration of things as they are related to one another under the Notion of
means and ends, and of their fitness or unfitness to the ends and purposes they
are designed for. Wherefore in conceiving of God we must ascribe to him all
possible Knowledge and Wisdom, that is, a perfect comprehension of all things
that either are, or have been, or shall be, or can be; in short, a knowledge
infinitely extensive, as comprehending all knowable Objects, and infinitely
intensive, as seeing every single Object in all its relations, dependances, and
circumstances with a most perfect and infallible view; and in thus conceiving
of him we attribute to him Omniscience and infinite Wisdom. By Rectitude or
Righteousness in the Will, which is the other perfection of Reason, I mean a
conformity of the Will, and consequently of the affections and actions, to all
that right reason dictates and prescribes; For the proper office of reason is
to conduct the Will, and and to give bounds and measures to our principles of
action; and in following right reason, and choosing and refusing by its eternal
prescriptions, consists the Rectitude of the Will, and in that all Moral
perfection. In conceiving of God therefore we must attribute to him all those
moral perfections which consist in the entire compliance of his Will with the
Dictates of his infallible Reason, in choosing every thing which right reason
approves, and refusing every thing which it disallows, and this with the most
perfect freedom and exactness; and in thus conceiving of him we attribute to
him infinite Goodness, infinite Justice, and infinite Truth. For as for the
first, viz, infinite Goodness, which consists in the invariable inclination of
his Will to do good to, and procure the happiness of his Creatures, by which he
is infinitely removed from Envy and Malice, right reason dictates to him that
being infinitely happy in himself, the best and most becoming thing he can do
is to propagate his own likeness and resemblance by doing good to, and
procuring the happiness of others; and that Envy and Malice, which are the
properties of poor and indigent Beings, are infinitely unbeseeming him who is a
self-sufficient nature; and accordingly his Will which always follows his
Reason is infinitely propense to the one, and averse to the other. And as for
the second, which is infinite Justice, which consists in dealing with his
Creatures according to their several deserts, by which he is infinitely removed
from all partiality and injustice, right reason dictates to him, that since
there is an immutable good and evil in the actions of free and reasonable
Agents, it is fit that those who do good should receive good from him, who is
the supreme Judge and Moderator, and those who do evil, evil, in proportion to
the good and evil of their doings; and that to reward evil actions, and to
punish good ones, or to reward those that are less good beyond those that are
more, or punish those that are more evil beneath those that are less, is to go
cross to the natures and reasons of things; and by these Dictates of Reason his
Will is invariably regulated in all its transactions with his Creatures.
Lastly, as for infinite Truth, which consists in a perfect agreement of his
declarations with his intentions, especially in matters of Promise, whereby he
is infinitely removed from all deceit and falsehood, right reason dictates to
him, that to speak truth is the only natural end of speaking, that to promise
is to give a right, and to intend to perform strict justice; that on the
contrary lying perverts the use of Speech, and betrays a baseness and meanness
of spirit, that to deceive is to injure, and to falsify promise is to commit a
Robbery; and accordingly his Will which is ever guided by his reason, embraces
truth, and rejects falsehood with infinite abhorrence.

AND thus from the various perfections of Gods Works which are before us, we
may fairly argue to all the perfections of God himself. For whatsoever
perfection he has given, he must have, and whatsoever perfection he has he
must have so far as it is possible; for if it be possible, it must be within
his power, and if it be within his power to be sure it is included in his
nature; otherwise he must choose to be less perfect when it is in his power to
be more. And by thus taking our rise to God from the perfections of the
Creature, we discover him to be an immense self-existing substance, that is
omnipotent, eternal, infinitely knowing and wise, just and good, faithful and
happy. But to render our discovery yet more complete

III. IT is necessary that in ascribing to him the perfections of the Creature
we abstract from them every thing that is defective and imperfect. For to be
sure there is nothing can be defective or imperfect in the Cause and Author of
all perfection. So that whereas all other Beings have some defect or other
intermingled with their perfections, and do either want some kind of
perfection, or some degree of those kinds wherewith they are adorned, God has
all kinds and all degrees of all kinds of perfection; and so we must conceive
of him, if we would do him right when we attribute to him the abovenamed
perfections. As for instance, when we attribute to him the perfections of
substance, we must abstract from them the defect of Corporeity or material
extension, which compared with spirituality is a mighty defect and imperfection
of substance both as to its Amplitude and Fullness of Essence. For no Corporeal
substance can be at the same time in the same place where another corporeal
substance is; because it consists of such parts as cannot penetrate each other;
so that every body must be limited in presence, because it cannot be where
another body is; whereas a Spirit being penetrable it self, can penetrate or
pass through all things, and consequently be present at the same time, and in
the same place where not only other bodies are, but other Spirits too. So that
by attributing body or matter to God, we must necessarily confine and limit the
Amplitude of his substance, which if it be bodily must necessarily be excluded
from all those places where other bodily substances are, and consequently have
but a finite and limited presence, which utterly destroys the infinite
Amplitude or Omnipresence of his substance. And then bodily substances being
all compounded of divisible parts, and consequently liable to be divided and
corrupted, cannot have that fullness of Being in them which Spirits have, which
are simple and uncompounded substances, and consequently void of all principles
of corruption; so that by attributing body or matter to God, we substract from
the infinite fullness of his Being, and instead of ascribing to him necessary
existence, which puts him beyond all possibility of not being, degrade him into
a divisible and corruptible nature. Wherefore in attributing to God the
perfections of substance, we must abstract from them all matter and material
affections, and conceive of him as a most pure and simple spirit.

AGAIN, when we attribute to him the perfections of life, viz. Power or
Activity and Duration, we must wholly abstract from them all those
imperfections with which they are commixt in the Creature. As for instance,
activity in the Creature is attended with labor and pains; the not abstracting
of which from the Activity of God made Epicurus suppose him to be a restive
Being, that withdrew himself from action for fear of disturbing his own
happiness by it; whereas labor and pains are the imperfections of activity,
and so ought not to be admitted into our conception of God's, which being
infinite, there is nothing can be difficult or uneasy to him. For it is
because of imperfection that labor and trouble do attend any Beings in their
operations; could they do what they do perfectly, it would be no labor at all
to them. God therefore having an infinite power to effect what he pleases,
whatsoever he does he does it most perfectly, and consequently without any toil
or labor; and since all things were derived from him, and are dependent upon
him, they must all be perfectly subject to his power; and where there is
perfect subjection there can be no resistance, and where there is no resistance
there can be no labor. And then as for Duration, which is the other perfection
of life, in the Creature it is attended with dependence. For there is no life
but depends upon God, to be shortened or prolonged according to his pleasure;
the lives of all Beings are maintained and supplied by his all-enlivening power
and influence, which if he withdraw from them but one moment, they presently
expire; so that the duration of all created life is dependent and precarious,
and even those Beings that shall live for ever have no other tenure of life but
Gods Will and pleasure, who with the breath of his Nostrils can blow them out
when he pleases. But the duration of Gods life is altogether independent; for
he subsists of himself, from that infinite fullness of Being that is in him, and
has done so from all Eternity past when there was no other cause but himself
in being, and therefore can do so to all Eternity to come without the support
or assistance of any other cause. So that he is not at all beholding for his
duration to the good will and pleasure of any other Being, but derives from an
inexhaustible spring of life within himself, whence he also derives life to all
other Beings.

AGAIN, when we attribute to him the perfection of sense, viz. quickness and
exquisiteness of perception, we must wholly abstract from it all that
imperfection with which it is attended in the Creatures; for in them it is
attended with sundry affections which argue imperfection in their nature and
happiness; such as Fear, Sorrow, Repentance, Desperation, and the like; all
which argue a defect of Power or Wisdom, and proceed from a quick sense of evil
past, or present, or to come, which is inconsistent with perfect happiness.
When therefore we attribute to God this perfection of sense, we must abstract
from it all those affections which proceed from the sense of evil or pain. For
he is so infinitely perfect both in nature and happiness, that no evil can
approach him to vex or disturb him, or make any painful impressions on his
nature; and being so, it is impossible that in propriety of speech he should
either fear, or grieve, or repent, or despair. All these affections indeed are
in Scripture attributed to him, but then it is in an improper and Metaphorical
sense; not as if he did at any time feel these passions within himself, but
because he demeans himself toward us as if he did; not as if the affections
themselves had any place in his nature, but because the natural effects of them
appear in his actions and behavior. And though there is no doubt but he
resents all those evils which good men suffer, and bad men commit, yet it is
not from any painful impression that they make upon his nature; for he neither
feels the miseries he pities and relieves, nor is vexed at the sins he detests
and abhors, but all the resentment he has both of the evil of our sufferings
and sins is perfectly calm to himself, and devoid of all passion and
disturbance. It Is true, his Will being perfectly reasonable must be differently
affected toward different Objects, and contrarily affected toward contrary
Objects, because they propose to it different and contrary Reasons; and
therefore as it must be affected with complacency toward good Objects, so it
must be affected with abhorrence toward bad; but this abhorrence arises not
either from any sense of hurt they do him, or fear of hurt they can do him, his
Nature being wholly impassible, but from the repugnancy they bear to his own
infallible reason; and his abhorrence being wholly founded in his Reason, and
not in any sense or feeling he has of the evils he detests, must upon this
account be stripped of all grief and vexation. Wherefore in attributing to God
the perfection of sense, we must take care to abstract from it all those
affections which spring out of the imperfection either of our nature, or our
happiness.

BUT then in the last place, when we attribute to him the perfections of
Reason, viz. Knowledge and Rectitude of Will, we must also abstract from them
all those imperfections with which they are at tended in the Creatures; As for
instance, Knowledge in the Creature is attended with reasoning and discoursing,
that is, inferring one thing from another, arguing Consequents from Principles,
and Effects from Causes, which is a great imperfection of Knowledge, and a
plain indication that it is narrow and confined in it self, and not to be
improved without labor and study. For that we are fain to infer one thing out
of another is an evident token that we know but in part, because in this way
our knowledge must be successive, and we must know one thing before we can know
another; we must know the Principles before we can know the Consequents, and
the Causes before the Effects; else how can we deduce the one from the other?
And this deducing or inferring requires a great deal of study and labor.
Wherefore in attributing Knowledge to God we must abstract from it this
imperfection of reasoning and discourse; for his Knowledge being infinite or
unconfined by the utmost extention and duration of things, does at one
Intuition or simple view behold all things past, and present, and to come, yea,
whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever possible; and beholding as he does all
Consequents in their Principles, all Effects in their Causes, he does not know
one thing after another, but comprehends them all together in his infinite
mind, without any succession or improvement. So that from all Eternity past he
knew as much as he does now, and as much as he will do to all Eternity to come;
for his Knowledge was always infinite, and what is infinite admits not either of
more or less. And then for that other perfection of reason which consists in
Rectitude of Will, in the Creature it is acquired, even as that Knowledge and
Wisdom is by which it is measured and regulated. For Rectitude of Will
consisting in choosing and refusing as right Reason directs, must needs be
acquired in the Creature, because that Right Reason is so, by which it chooses
and refuses; so that there is the same defect and imperfection in the Rectitude
of our Wills as there is in our Reason and Knowledge, that is, that it is not
altogether, but acquired by degrees, and so it may be is infinitely successive
and improvable. Wherefore in attributing to God Rectitude of Will, which, as I
showed before, consists in Goodness, and Justice, and Truth, we are wholly to
abstract from it this imperfection of being acquired. For it is essential to
his Will to follow the Dictates of his Understanding and Reason, and essential
to his Understanding to dictate to his Will all the parts and degrees of
Goodness, Justice, and Truth; so that the rectitude of his Will is infinite
both as to the extent and degrees of it, there being no good, no degree of good
that an infinite reason can propose, but what his Will does most readily
embrace, and perfectly comply with; so that the Rectitude of his Will is such
as could not be acquired part after part, degree after degree, because it is
essentially infinite; and from everlasting he was as good, and as just, and as
faithful as now, and to everlasting he cannot be better, or juster, or
faithfuller than he is, because what is essentially infinite admits no
improvement either of parts or degrees. And thus you see how in all these
respects it is absolutely necessary to the framing a right Apprehension of God,
that in ascribing to him the perfections of the Creature, we abstract all those
defects and imperfections with which they are intermixed.

IV. IT is necessary that in arguing from the perfections of the Creature to
the perfections of God, we distinguish between the state and relations of God
and Creature. For there are many things which are perfections in the Creature
considering their state which would be imperfections in God considering his;
and so on the contrary. As for instance, to be dependent and humble, resigned
and submissive; to be grateful and devout are perfections in the Creature,
because there is a Being infinitely above them in all degrees of all sorts of
perfection, in Knowledge and Wisdom, in Power and Goodness, in Justice and
Truth; a Being to whom they owe themselves, and all the good things they
possess, and upon whom they depend for all that they are, or enjoy, or hope
for; and therefore it infinitely becomes them to abase themselves before him,
to trust to, and depend on him, and resign themselves to him; to supplicate him
for all they want, and thank him for all they enjoy; but for God to be humble,
who is infinitely perfect above all, for God to depend, who is the upholder of
all, for him to submit who is Lord over all, or to be devout and grateful, who
is the supreme Fountain and Proprietor of all, would be to sneak and condescend
far beneath the infinite dignity of his Nature. As on the contrary, to love
himself above all, to set up his Will above all other Wills, and to expect and
require that they should do homage to it; to exact Adoration and Worship from
all, and to appropriate it to himself from all other Beings, are excellencies
and perfections in God, because he is infinitely amiable above all other
Beings, and therefore ought in reason to love himself above all, infinitely
exalted above all other Beings, and therefore ought in reason to expect that
all other Beings should be subject to him; in a word, because he, and he alone
is God, and has all divine perfections appropriate to himself, and therefore
ought in reason to expect that all capable Beings should acknowledge his
Divinity by suitable actions, and restrain their acknowledgment of it wholly to
himself; but for a Creature, that is infinitely less lovely than God, and
infinitely inferior to him, to love it self, and set up its own Will above
him, and invade his Throne and Divinity, and arrogate to it self his Honor and
Worship, is not only unreasonable, but impious. In this case therefore we must
carefully distinguish between the states of God and Creature, and not attribute
to him those perfections of the Creature which are proper to it, under the
notion of Creature, because in so doing we shall infinitely degrade him; but
whatsoever is in it self a perfection, precisely considered from all respects
to the state and relations of a Creature, that we ought to ascribe to God in
its utmost extent and degree.

AND yet even here it will in many cases be necessary for us to keep this
distinction of God and Creature in our minds; for though whatsoever is
absolutely and in it self a perfection in the Creature is also a perfection in
God, yet considering the state of God, that may be an exercise of absolute
perfection in him which would be imperfection in a Creature. As for instance,
Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice are absolute perfections in a Creature, and
therefore ought to be attributed to God, but it does not thence follow that
that is no exercise of these perfections in God which is not so in Creatures.
It is an act of Wisdom in a Creature to pursue his ends by the most probable
means, but it does not therefore follow that it is an act of folly in God to
effect his ends by contrary means, because he being not only all wise, but
all-powerful, which no Creature is, can make the most contrary means as
subservient to his ends as the most probable, and therefore sometimes to
display the greatness of his Power, and to excite our attention and reverence
he chooses to operate by contrary means, and when he does so he chooses most
wisely. Again, it is an act of Goodness in us to succor the unfortunate, and
rescue oppressed innocence from undeserved calamities; and not to do so, when
we can with ease, and without any prejudice to our selves, is a high degree of
malice and ill nature. But it does not therefore follow that it is an act of
malice in God to permit innocence to suffer, when with ease, and without the
least damage to himself he can relieve it, because being infinitely wise and
powerful, which no Creature is, he can infallibly bring good out of evil, and
advance us to happiness by suffering; and therefore sometimes he permits the
innocent to suffer evil, thereby to procure them some great and lasting good;
and when he does so it is an act of great Goodness in him. Once more, it is
Justice in the Creature not to kill or hurt the Innocent, not to deprive them
of any good they are rightfully possessed of, and to act contrary is great
injustice, because we have no right to another man's Life, or Limbs, or Goods,
unless he forfeits them to us by some unjust attempt to deprive us of ours; but
it does not therefore follow, that it would be unjust in God to do so, who
being the supreme Proprietor of our Lives, and Limbs, and Goods, which no
Creature is of any other Creatures, can justly resume them when he pleases, be
we never so innocent, because they are his own; whatever he gave us he can take
away from us, without any injury, because he rather lent it than gave it us,
reserving the absolute propriety in himself; and his right being supreme,
absolute, and independent, and ours but subordinate and conditional, whatsoever
we can justly do he can justly do, and abundantly more; so that though we may
argue this or that is just in the Creature, therefore it is just in God, yet we
cannot argue e contra, this or that is just in God, therefore it is just in the
Creature, because his right in all things is infinitely Paramount to our right
in any thing; and therefore though he cannot without our own fault and
forfeiture reduce us to a worse state than that of not being wherein he found
us, because to do so would be equivalent to the taking away from us more than
he gave us, and consequently more than he has a right to, yet Gods right being
infinitely more absolute and extensive than ours, he can justly take away from
us infinitely more than we can justly take away from one another. And therefore
to correct the iniquities of wicked Nations and Parents, God sometimes lays his
hand upon good Kings, and innocent Children, and either deprives them of their
comforts, and pursues them with constant infelicities, or puts an untimely
period to their lives; and when he does so, he has an absolute right to do it,
which no other Being can pretend to. Wherefore in attributing to God the
perfections of the Creature we are carefully to distinguish between the state
of God and Creatures, and neither to ascribe to him any of those perfections
which belong to a Creature, as a Creature, nor to bound the exercise of those
absolute perfections we ascribe to him by the Rules and Limitations of the
Creature.

V. ALTHOUGH in arguing from the perfections of the Creature to the perfections
of God we are not to subject him to the Rules of a Creature, yet we ought
always to suppose his Will and Power to be entirely subject to the Moral
perfections of his own nature. For God who is infinitely exalted above all
other Beings can be subject to no other Law but that of his own Essential
Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness; and since every thing has a right to
exercise its own faculties so far forth as it is just and lawful, God who is
subject to no other Law but only that of his own perfections has an essential
right to will and do whatever that Law allows and approves of. Now the
perfections of God which give Law to his Will and Power, are those which, for
distinction sake, we call Moral, because their Office is the same in him with
that of moral Virtues in the Creature, viz. to conduct and regulate his Will
and Powers of action; and these Moral perfections are his Wisdom, and Goodness,
Justice, and Truth, which being all essential to him are as much a Law to his
Will and Power, as Moral Laws are to ours; And to suppose his Will and Power
not to be perfectly subject to them, is to suppose him a very defective and
imperfect Being, a lawless Will and Power being the greatest defect in Nature.
Wherefore to secure our minds against all injurious apprehensions of God, this
is a most necessary Rule, that we conceive him to be such a Being as can
neither Will nor Act any thing but what his own Essential Wisdom, and Goodness,
and Justice do approve; that in all his Decrees, Purposes, Choices, and Actions
consults his Moral perfections, and perfectly regulates himself by them, and
does neither choose nor refuse, elect nor reprobate, save nor damn without their
full consent and approbation. For to affirm that he is not obliged to regulate
himself by Wisdom, and Justice and Goodness, or that he can do otherwise, is to
attribute to him a Power to Will and Act foolishly, maliciously, and unjustly,
which indeed is not so properly Power as Impotence; and to suppose that he can
thus Will and Act, is to deny that he is infinitely Wise, and Just, and Good,
which utterly excludes all possibility of being otherwise in any respect or
degree. For to be infinitely Wise and Just is to be infinitely removed from
folly and injustice, which nothing can be that has the least degree of
possibility to act unwisely or unjustly. Wherefore in conceiving of God it is
always to be supposed that his Will and Power are so immutably subject to the
Moral perfections of his Nature, as that it is impossible for him to Will or
Act against them. For all that liberty of Will that is determinable to good or
evil, just or unjust, is a flaw and imperfection in the reasonable nature,
because it speaks the Will to be defective in that which is the utmost
possibility of Goodness and Justice, i. e. in being immutably determined
thereunto; and therefore to attribute such a liberty to God, is to scandalize
his Nature, and reproach it with imperfection. For all that Power which is not
conducted by Justice and Goodness is only power to do mischief, to Tyrannize
over other Beings, and to sport and play with their miseries; which is so far
from being a perfection of Power that it proceeds from the most wretched
weakness and impotence. So that by attributing such a power to God, we foully
asperse and blaspheme him, and instead of a God imagine a worse Devil, and more
qualified to do mischief than any that are now in Hell, who though they are
powerful enough to do mischief, are none of them Omnipotently mischievous; it
is to imagine a God without a Deity, that is, without that Essential Rectitude
of Will wherein all his Moral perfections do consist, which are the Crown and
Glory of his Nature. For to be good and just are the brightest Rays of the
Deity, the Rays that illustrate and glorify all his other perfections, and
without which infinite Knowledge and infinite Power would be nothing but
infinite Craft and Mischief; so that to imagine that he has any Will or Power
that is not Essentially subject to his Moral perfections, is to deface the very
beauty of his Nature, and represent him the most horrid thing in the World.
Wherefore in conceiving of God we ought to fix this as the main and fundamental
Rule of our thoughts, that he has no Will to Choose, or Power to Act but what
are in perfect subjection to infinite Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness; and
this will secure our minds from all those rigid and sour apprehensions of him
which by reflecting on his Moral perfections do him the greatest dishonor, and
represent him the most disadvantageously to mankind.

VI. AND lastly, It is also necessary that in conceiving of the perfections of
God we always suppose them exactly harmonious and consistent with each other.
For all perfections of Being, so far forth as they are perfections, are
consistent with each other, and like strait lines drawn from the same Center
run Parallel together without any crossing or interfering. For there is nothing
contrary to perfection but imperfection, and there is no disagreement but what
arises from contrariety. When therefore we conceive of the perfections of God,
we must so conceive of them, as that there may be no manner of inconsistency or
disagreement between them, otherwise we must admit into our conceptions of them
something or other that is defective or imperfect. As for instance, in God
there is infinite Wisdom, and infinite Justice, infinite Goodness, and infinite
Mercy, wherefore if we would conceive aright of these his glorious perfections
we must take care not to admit any Notion of any one of them that renders it
repugnant to any other, but so to conceive of them altogether as that they may
mutually accord and agree with each other. For while we apprehend his Goodness
to be such as that it will not accord with his Wisdom, we must either suppose
his Wisdom to be Craft, or his Goodness to be Folly; and whilst we apprehend
his Mercy to be such as that it will not agree with his Justice, we must either
suppose his Justice to be Cruelty, or his Mercy to be blind Pity and Fondness;
and it is certain that that goodness cannot be a perfection which exceeds the
measures of Wisdom, nor that Mercy neither which transgresses the bounds of
Justice, and so on the contrary. For if either Gods goodness excludes his
wisdom, or his wisdom his goodness; if either his Mercy swallow up his Justice,
or his Justice his Mercy, there is an apparent repugnance and contrariety
between them, and where there is a contrariety there must be imperfection in
one or the other, or both.

WHEREFORE if we would apprehend them altogether, as they truly are in God,
that is, under the notion of perfections, we must so conceive of them as that
in all respects they may be perfectly consistent and harmonious; as that his
Wisdom may not clash with his Goodness, nor his Goodness with his Wisdom; as
that his Mercy may not justle with his Justice, nor his Justice with his Mercy;
that is, we must conceive him to be as wise as he can be with infinite
goodness, as good as he can be with infinite wisdom, as just as he can be with
infinite mercy, and as merciful as he can be with infinite justice, which is to
be wise, and good, and just, and merciful, so far as it is a perfection to be
so. For to be wise beyond what is good, is Craft, to be good beyond what is
wise, is Dotage, to be just beyond what is merciful, is Rigor, to be merciful
beyond what is just, is Easiness, that is, they are all imperfection, so far as
they are beyond what is perfect. Wherefore we ought to be very careful not to
represent these his Moral perfections as running a tilt at one another, but to
conceive of them all together as one entire perfection, which though like the
Center of a Circle it has many Lines drawn from it round about, and so is
looked upon sometimes as the term of this Line, and sometimes of that, yet is
but one common and undivided term to them all; or, to speak more plainly,
though it exerts it self in different ways and actions, and operates diversely
according to the diversities of its Objects, and accordingly admits of diverse
Names, such as Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and Mercy, yet is in it self but one
simple and indivisible principle of action, all whose operations how diverse
soever are such as perfectly accord with each other, whose acts of Wisdom are
all infinitely good, whose acts of goodness are all infinitely wise, whose acts
of justice are infinitely merciful, and whose acts of mercy are infinitely
just; so that in this, as well as in their extension and degrees they are all
most perfect, viz. that they always operate with mutual consent, and in perfect
harmony. And while we thus conceive of the divine perfections, our minds will
be mightily secured against all those false apprehensions of God which lead to
superstition and presumption; for we shall so apprehend his wisdom and justice
as not to be superstitiously afraid, and so apprehend his goodness and mercy as
not to be presumptuously secure; and as on the one hand his Justice will
protect his Mercy from being abused by our wanton security, so on the other
hand his goodness will protect his wisdom from being misrepresented by our
anxious suspicion. For while we consider his mercy thus tempered with his
justice, and his wisdom with his goodness, we can neither expect impunity from
the one if we continue wicked, nor yet suspect any ill design against us in the
other if we return from our evil ways, and persevere in well doing.

SECT. III. Of the causes of our mis-apprehensions of God.
I Now proceed to the last thing I proposed, which was to assign and remove the
causes of men's misapprehensions of God; many of which are so secret and
obscure, so peculiar to the frame and temper of men's brains, so interwoven with
the infinite varieties of humane Constitutions, that it is very difficult, if
not impossible, to trace them, so as to make an exact enumeration of them all;
and therefore I shall only assign the most common and visible causes by which
the generality of men are mislead in their Apprehensions of the divine Nature,
whinh are reducible to these six Heads:

First, Ignorance of what is the true perfection of our own Nature.

Secondly, Framing our Notions of God according to the model of our own humor
and temper.

Thirdly. Obstinate partiality to our own sinful lusts and affections.

Fourthly, Measuring Gods Nature by particular Providence.

Fifthly, Taking up our Notions of God from obscure and particular passages,
and not from the plain and general current of Scripture.

Sixthly, Indevotion.

I. ONE great cause of our misapprehensions of God is Ignorance of what is the
true perfection of our own Natures. For, as I showed before, in conceiving of
the perfections of God we must take our rise from those perfections we behold
in his Creatures, and particularly in our own Natures, wherein there is a
composition of all created perfections; so that while we are ignorant of what
is the true perfection of our own Natures, our thoughts can have no rule or aim
whereby to judge of God's. That he has all those perfections in himself which
he has derived to us, is the Fundamental Maxim upon which we are to erect our
Notions of him; and therefore unless we know what those perfections are which
he has derived to us, and wherein they consist, our mind has no footing or
foundation whereon to raise any certain Idea of him. For since we have no other
way to conceive of his perfections but by our own, how is it possible that
while we are ignorant of our own we should ever conceive aright of his? This
therefore is one great reason why men do so grossly misconceive of God, because
they have no true Notion of their own perfection, by which they are to form
their conceptions of his.

FOR whereas the true perfection of humane nature consists In Moral goodness,
or an universal compliance of its Will, Affections, and Actions with those
everlasting Laws of righteousness which right reason prescribes, how many are
there that look upon this as a very mean and carnal accomplishment, and place
all their perfection in things of a quite different nature, viz. in the Ebbs
and Flows of their sensitive passion, and the extraordinary Fermentations of
their blood and spirits, that is to say, in unaccountable dejections and
exaltations of mind, in vehement impressions of fancy and Mechanical movements
of affection, in Raptures and Ecstacies and Hypocondriacal incomes and
manifestations, that have nothing of substantial Virtue or Piety in them, nor
commonly any other effect but to cause men to renounce that Righteousness which
they never had, and rely upon that which they have no Title to, and to sooth
and tickle their fancies, and blow them up into glorious opinions of
themselves, and Triumphant assurances of their being the Darlings and
Favorites of God, whilst poor Moral men, that make conscience of regulating
their affections and actions by the eternal Laws of Righteousness are looked
upon by them with a scornful compassion, and placed in the lowermost form of
sinners, at the greatest distance from the Kingdom of God. Now when men take
such false measures of their own perfection, how is it possible they should
conceive aright of the perfections of God, which they have no other way to
conceive of but only by arguing from their own? Wherefore in order to the
forming our Ideas of Gods perfections, it is necessary we should first fix the
true Notion of our own; which is no hard matter for us to do. For our Nature
being reasonable, to be sure its perfection must consist in willing, affecting
and acting reasonably, or which is the same thing, in Governing it self in all
its relations and circumstances by those immutable Laws of goodness which right
reason prescribes, and which are exemplified to us in the holy Scripture; and
when we have fixed in our minds this Notion of our own perfection, it will
naturally conduct our thoughts to God's, and let us see that his perfection
consists not in a lawless and boundless Will, that decrees without foresight,
resolves without reason, and Wills because it will, and then executes its own
blind and unaccountable purposes by dint of irresistible power without any
regard to right or wrong. For if we rightly understand our own perfection, we
cannot but discern that such a Will as this is one of the most monstrous
deformities in nature, because it is the most Diametrically opposite to the
true Idea of our own Perfection, which while we attentively fix our eyes on, we
cannot but infer from it that the true perfection of God consists in the
unvariable determination of his Will by the all-comprehending reason of his
Mind, or in choosing and refusing, decreeing and executing upon such reasons as
best becomes a God to will and act on, i. e. upon such as are infinitely wise,
and good, and just, and merciful. For if to Will and Act upon such reasons as
these be the perfection of our nature, we cannot but conclude that it is the
perfection of Gods too; but if we are ignorant of our own perfection, we must
necessarily think of God at Rovers, without any certain aim or rule to square
and direct our apprehensions.

II. ANOTHER cause of our misapprehension of God, is our framing our Notions of
him according to the Model of our own particular humor and temper. For
self-love being the most vehement affection of Humane Nature, and that upon
which all its other affections are founded, there is no one Vice to which we
are more universally obnoxious than that of excessive fondness and partiality
to our selves, which makes us too often dote upon the deformities, and even
Idolize the Vices of our own temper. So that whether our nature be stern, sour,
and imperious, or fond, easy and indulgent, we are apt to admire it as a great
perfection merely because it is Ours, without measuring it by those eternal
reasons which are the Rules of Good and Evil, Perfection and Imperfection; and
then whatever we look upon as a perfection in our selves we naturally attribute
to God, who is the cause and fountain of all perfection. And hence it comes to
pass that men's minds have been always tinctured with such false and repugnant
opinions of God, because they frame their judgments of him not so much by their
reason as by their temper and humor; and so their different humors being not
only unreasonable in themselves, but repugnant and contrary to one another,
produce in them not only false and unreasonable, but contrary and repugnant
opinions of God. Thus for instance, the Epicureans who were a soft and
voluptuous Sect, entirely addicted to ease and pleasure, fancied God to be such
a one as themselves, a Being that was wholly sequestered from action, and
confined to an Extra-mundane Paradise, where he lived in perfect ease, and was
entertained with infinite Luxuries, without ever concerning his thoughts with
any thing abroad; for this they thought was the top of all perfection, and
therefore thus they would have chosen to live had they been Gods themselves.
Thus the Stoics, who were a sort of very morose and inflexible people, copied
their Notions of God from their own complexion, supposing him to be an
inflexible Being that was utterly incapable of being moved and affected by the
reasons of things, but was wholly governed by a stern and inexorable Fate. And
accordingly the Scythians and Thracians, the Gauls and Carthaginians, who were
a people of a bloody and Barbarous nature, Pictured their Gods from their own
temper, imagining them to be of a bloodthirsty nature, that delighted to feed
their hungry Nostrils with the Nidorous reeks and steams of humane gore.
Whereas, on the contrary, the Platonists, who were generally of a very soft and
amorous nature, took their measure of God thereby, and so framed an Idea of him
that was as soft and amorous as their own complexion, composed altogether of
loves, and smiles, and indearments, without the least intermixture of vengeance
and severity, how just soever in it self, or necessary to the well-government
of the World. Thus as the Ethiopians pictured their Gods black because they
were black themselves, so generally men have been always prone to represent God
in the color of their own complexions; which is the cause that they many times
represent him so utterly unlike to himself, because out of an unreasonable
partiality to themselves they first mistake the deformities of their own
natures for perfections, and then Deifie them them into Divine Attributes. Thou
thoughtest, says God, that I was altogether such a one as thy self, Psalm.
50.21. that is, thou did frame thy conceptions of me according to the Pattern
of thy own ill nature, and so thoughtest basely and unworthily of me. And hence
I doubt not spring most of those misapprehensions of God which have been
received among Christians. For how is it possible for any man that is not of a
fierce and cruel nature himself, to believe it consistent with the nature of
God to snatch poor Infants from their Mothers Womb, that never actually
offended him, and hurl them into the flames of Hell? And considering the stern
and inflexible temper of the famous Author of the Horrible Decree, though
otherwise a rare and admirable person, there is too much reason to suspect that
he transcribed his own nature into his Doctrine, and modelled his Divinity by
his Temper. And so on the contrary, who but a man of excessive fondness and
partiality, that loves beyond all reason, and invincibly doats upon the
deformities of his own darlings, could ever imagine it consistent with the
wisdom and holiness of God to choose his favorites without reason, and, when he
has chosen them, not only to overlook all their faults, but to hide them from
his own eyes with the Mantle of another Righteousness, that so how ill soever
they behave themselves, he may never see cause to be displeased with them? From
these and other instances it is evident that one great cause of our
misapprehensions of God, is our measuring his nature by our own. For first, our
partiality to our selves makes us magnify our own faults into perfections, and
then whatsoever we reckon a perfection in our selves we naturally attribute to
God, and so many times it comes to pass that our Notions of God are nothing but
the Images of our selves, which Narcissus-like we fall in love with for no
other reason but because they reflect our own sweet likeness. As therefore we
would not wrong God in our own thoughts, we must take care not to attribute to
him any thing of our own, but what is a perfection in the judgment of the most
impartial reason; and because our self-love is apt to bribe our own reason into
a favorable opinion of whatever is our own, we ought to admit nothing of our
own into our Notion of God but what is voted a perfection by the common reason
of Mankind.

III. ANOTHER cause of our misapprehensions of God is our obstinate partiality
to our own sinful lusts and affections. For while men are vehemently addicted
to any sinful courses, the true Notion of God must needs sit very uneasily on
their minds, because it will be always quarrelling with them, suggesting
arguments against them, and alarming them with dreadful thoughts and dire
abodeings of a vengeance to come. For there is no true conception of Gods
nature but what is pregnant with some powerful argument against disobedience to
his Will; so that while we obstinately persist in disobedience to him, our
reason cannot truly conceive of him without waging War against our Lusts, and
while a man is thus at variance with himself, and one end of his Soul is at War
with the other, so that he cannot gratify his affection without affronting his
reason, nor comply with his reason without doing violence to his affection, he
can never be at ease within, till either he has forced his affection to submit
to his reason, or his reason to submit to his affection; but while a man's
reason has the true Notion of God and his perfections before it, 'twill be
impossible for him to reconcile it to his sinful affections, against which,
whenever he coolly reflects, it must necessarily dictate bitter Invectives and
denounce horrible Sentences. So that if he be obstinately resolved to side with
his sinful affections, he must either be content patiently to endure the
clamor and fury of his own reason, which is one of the most uneasy Penances
in the World, or endeavor to corrupt and sophisticate his Notions of God with
such opinions as countenance his Lusts. And this, considering the mighty
influence which men's affections have on their reason, is no hard matter to do;
for the least show of probability, backed with a strong affection for an
opinion, is of greater force with corrupt minds than the clearest demonstration
against it. So that if the Opinion be but serviceable to the interest of a man's
lust, that will engage his affection on its side, and then the opinion having
once retained those powerful Orators in its cause, it is secure of a very
favorable trial at the Tribunal of reason, where in all probability only one
side of the Question will be weighed, and Judgment will be given upon hearing
the Arguments for it, without admitting any evidence against it.

THUS when men are hunted and pursued through their wicked courses by the true
Notions of God, it is expedient for them if they resolve to go on to take
sanctuary in false ones, where their Conscience and Will, their reason and
affections may dwell quietly together, and they may be as wicked as they please
without any disturbance. And abundance of such false Notions there are prepared
to their hands, which men's wicked minds have invented in the defense of their
lusts. For thus some, to ease their Consciences, have persuaded themselves,
that God is so wholly taken up with his own happiness as that he is not at
leisure to concern himself about humane actions, and under this persuasion they
sin on with full security that he will never punish them. Others on the
contrary, to reconcile their lusts, persuade themselves that God is wonderfully
concerned about small things; about trifling opinions and indifferent actions,
and the Rites, and Modes, and Appendages of his Worship, and under this
persuasion they hope to atone him for all the immoralities of their lives by
the forms and outsides of Religion, by uncommanded severities and affected
singularities, by contending for Opinions,, and stickling for Parties, and
being pragmatically zealous about the borders and fringes of Religion. Others
there are that to quiet their anxious minds persuade themselves that God, in
Christ at least, is all Mercy and Goodness, without the least allay of
Righteous Severity, or vindictive Justice; and being thus persuaded, they sin
on securely, and under the Wing of his Mercy affront his Authority, without any
disturbance. Others again, that to stifle the sense of their own guilt persuade
themselves that God has irrevocably determined the everlasting Fate of men
without any respect to their doings, and that those whom he will save he will
save irresistibly without any concurrence of theirs, whereas those whom he will
not save he has utterly abandoned to a dire necessity of perishing for ever;
from whence they conclude, that if they are of the number of those that shall
be saved, it is needless for them to endeavor after it, and if in the List of
those that shall perish, it is in vain for them to endeavor to prevent it; and
that therefore their wisest course is to sin on, and expect the Event. All
which are only the Artifices of wickedness to reconcile men's Consciences to
their Lusts, and compromise the quarrel between God and their wicked lives,
that so they may sin on for the future without check or remorse.

WHEREFORE if we would form a right Notion of God in our minds, and preserve it
pure and unsophisticated, we must above all things beware not to let our Lusts
intermingle with our Reasonings about him, or to bribe us to assent to any
opinion concerning him. For this is an eternal Maxim, that there is nothing can
be true of the most holy God, that gives the least countenance or protection to
sin; and therefore when ever it makes for the interest of our Lusts to believe
any opinion of him, for that reason we ought to reject it; for nothing can be
true of God that is not perfectly consistent with his infinite Holiness, and
nothing can be consistent with his infinite holiness that is any way
serviceable to the interest of sin; so that while we suffer our sinful
interests to dictate to us our opinions of God, we make falsehood our Oracle,
and the very foundation of our Faith is a Lie.

IV. ANOTHER great cause of our misapprehensins of God is our measuring his
Nature by particular Providence. The tree is known by its fruit is the common
Rule by which men judge of God as well as of one another, and it is most certain
that every free Agent is as it does, that the ordinary course of its Actions is
an infallible Index of the inward dispositions and inclinations of its mind;
but as for the actions of God, they are not to be judged of singly and apart
from one another, because they have all one general drift and tendency, and so
are mutually dependent upon one another, and closely linked together even from
the first to the second, and so on to the last in one continued Chain and
Series; so that of all those innumerable actions whereof his general Providence
consists there is no one loose or independent Link, but every one is connected
unto all the rest, and all the rest to every one throughout that mighty Chain.
Wherefore unless we had an entire Prospect of the whole Series of Gods actions,
and of the mutual respects and relations which they bear to one another, it is
impossible for us, without a divine Revelation, to make any certain judgment of
Particulars. For though this or that particular action or providence of God,
considered separately from all the rest, may have a very pernicious and
malevolent Aspect, yet it is to be considered that no action of God is what it
would be if it were apart by it self, but what it is in conjunction with all
the rest of his actions, and that that which by it self might prove very
pernicious, may by being contempered with others of a different nature become
exceeding beneficial to the World. For so in the Heavens there are sundry Stars
of a very malignant aspect apart by themselves, which yet in conjunction with
other Stars of a different temper do many times derive a most benign influence
upon us. And if men can give no certain judgment of any single Act or Scene of
Gods Providence without comprehending at once the whole Drama, how is it
possible they should take true measures of his Nature by any particular event
that befalls them? For for all they know those very Events which singly
considered are most noxious to the World, may be most beneficial as they are
intermingled and contempered with other Providence; so that while they measure
God by single Events they will many times deduce sour and rigid opinions of him
from those very Providence which are the highest instances of his benignity
and goodness. Thus, for instance, should Joseph have framed his judgment of
Gods Nature by his being thrown into the Pit, sold into Egypt, and there cast
into Prison for his integrity and innocence, what could he have thought of him
but that he was a very envious and malicious Being, that took delight in
afflicting innocence, and sported himself with the miseries of his Creatures?
And yet considering what followed upon these sad Providence, and how these
were all of them but so many steps to his advancement, it is plain, that had he
thought thus, he had thought very injuriously; those very Providence from
which he must have inferred Gods malice to him, being in conjunction with what
followed most illustrious instances of his Goodness toward him.

AND yet how commonly do we see men pass judgment on Gods Nature from such
particular Providence? They see a world of deplorable Accidents, such as
Famines, Butcheries, Plagues, and Devastations, in which themselves are many
times involved, from whence they are ready to conclude, that certainly God
would never inflict or suffer these things if he were not of a very froward,
cruel, and implacable nature; whereas did they but see these sad accidents as
they lie interwoven with all the rest of his Providence, they would doubtless
see infinite reason to conclude the quite contrary. Sometimes again they behold
Wickedness prosper in this World, and Virtue and Innocence depressed and
trampled on, from whence they are ready to conclude, either that that which we
call Vice and Virtue are things indifferent to God, or that he is unjust in the
distribution of Rewards and Punishments; whereas had they an entire
comprehension of the whole train and series of his Providence, they would soon
be convinced that even in these cross distributions he does most equally and
most effectually punish the Wicked, and reward the Good, by rendering the ones
Prosperity his Bane, and the others Adversity his Restorative. Sometimes again
they are denied those blessings and deliverances which they have a long while
sought with most importunate cries and supplications, from whence they are
ready to conclude that God is of a stern and inexorable nature, not to be moved
or prevailed with by prayers and entreaties; whereas could they but see through
the whole drift of his Providence, they would easily be satisfied that the
goods they pray for are many times pregnant with evils, and the evils they
deprecate with goods which are much greater than themselves, and that that is
the reason why God was deaf to their entreaties, because he could not grant
them what they asked without doing them some great unkindness, and that
therefore these denials are so far from arguing him stern and inexorable, that,
on the contrary, they are signal instances of his tender mercy and compassion
toward us. If therefore we would conceive aright of God, we must not take our
measures of his Nature by particular Providence, which many times import quite
contrary to what they seem and appear, but having formed our Notions of his
Nature out of those perfections we behold in his Creatures, by them we are to
measure all his particular Providence, which though they are sometimes very
dark and obscure, and seemingly repugnant to our common Notions of him, yet
because we see not the ends and reasons of them, we ought to conclude them
good, because they proceed from a good God.

V. ANOTHER main cause of our misapprehensions of God, is the taking up our
Notions of him from dark, and obscure, and single passages, and not from the
plain and general current of Scripture. There is no doubt but that whatsoever
God has revealed of himself in Scripture, is true, because truth and veracity,
being a great perfection in it self, must needs be included in his nature which
is the Center of all perfection; but yet since there are some things in
Scripture hard to be understood in themselves, and other things difficult to
us, who are not thoroughly acquainted with the Customs and Controversies they
refer to, or with the Phrase and Language of the Age they were written in, it
is impossible for us many times to comprehend its meaning by the mere clink and
sound of its words, without expounding its obscure passages by its plain ones,
and its particular propositions by its general current; and to found any
Doctrine or Opinion upon obscure and particular Phrases, that seemingly
contradicts the plain and general drift, and then to expound the plain into the
seeming sense of the obscure, and the general current into the seeming sense of
the particular Phrase, is a most egregious prevarication on the holy Scripture.
And yet this unreasonable practice has occasioned many false apprehensions of
God in men's minds. For there is nothing more evident than that all along
through the general current of Scripture God is represented to us as a most
benevolent Being, that knows no bounds of good will, but stretches out his arms
unto all his Creation, and receives his whole Offspring, excepting only those
Prodigals that run away from him, with free and impartial embraces; as one that
would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, and
readily contributes to them all those aids and assistances that are necessary
to the effecting of these blessed ends; that reprobates none from his kindness
and favor but only such as despise and reject it, and never abandons any to
wretchedness and misery till they have first baffled and defeated all his arts
of saving them. Such is the representation of God which the plain and general
scope of Scripture gives us; so that had men kept themselves to this rule of
expounding obscure Texts by plain ones, and particular Phrases by the general
scope, when they seemingly clash one with another, they had done right to God,
and secured their own minds against sundry very wrongful apprehensions of him.
For that God has destined the greatest part of mankind to endless calamity,
without any respect to their doings; that he has two Wills, viz. a secret and
a revealed one; that his revealed Will is that he would have all men to be
saved, and his secret one, that he would have the greatest part of them perish;
that he has imposed a Law upon men which without his irresistible grace they
cannot obey, and notwithstanding he has decreed to withhold this grace from
the greatest part of them, is resolved to persecute all that do not obey it
with everlasting flames of vengeance; These, I say, are all of them such
opinions as reflect very dishonourably upon God, and have no other foundation
but a few, particular Phrases and obscure passages in Scripture, not only
abundance of plain Texts, but the general drift and scope of it being of a
quite contrary sense. So that had but this necessary Rule been observed, of
interpreting dark passages by plain, and particular ones by the general scope,
such dishonorable opinions of God could never have found shelter under
Scripture Authority. For I would fain know whether those Texts which declare
God to be an universal lover of the Souls of men, be not far more numerous and
plain, than those which seemingly restrain his affection to a small select
number, and reprobate all the rest of mankind; and if it be so, as I think no
modest man can deny, how can this Doctrine de deduced from Scripture without
forcing the far greater number of Texts to subscribe to the smaller, and the
plainer to the obscurer, which is contrary to the most necessary Rules of
Interpretation, and which, if pursued, will open a wide door to the grossest
and most fulsome errors in Religion, Wherefore to secure our minds from false
apprehensions of God, it is necessary that in consulting the Scripture
concerning him, we should follow the plain and general drift of it, and not
entertain any opinion of him upon the credit of a few, or of obscure Texts,
which more or plainer ones seemingly contradict. For it is certain, that that
opinion is either false, or of little moment, that has but one or two Texts to
countenance it, and that very dubious, which has none but obscure Texts to
rely on; but when there are more and much plainer against it than for it, it
must be false, or there is no relying upon Scripture, the sense whereof, as to
all particular opinions, must be supposed to be that which the most and
plainest Texts do countenance. So that he who embraces any opinion that has
more and plainer Texts against it than for it, embraces it for its own sake,
and not for the Scriptures.

VI. AND lastly, Another cause of our misapprehensions of God is the great
dissimilitude and contrariety of our natures to his. For when men have nothing
of God in them, nothing of those amiable graces which are the glory and luster
of his nature, it is impossible they should have any experience of him, any
inward taste or relish of his perfections; so that they can only know him by
the hearing of the Ear, by Books, and dry discourse and reasoning, which
compared with experimental knowledge is very uncertain and defective. For
between the notional and the experimental knowledge of God, there is the same
difference as between the knowledge of a Geographer and a Traveller; the one
has only a faint and rude figure of foreign Countries in his head, copied from
the Globe or Geographical descriptions; whereas the other having traveled
through them, and beheld their Situations, and Cities, and Rivers, and
conversed with their People, and tasted their Fruits, retains a clear and
lively Idea of them, of the exactness whereof he has as firm a certainty as of
the truth of his own senses. Thus he who knows God only by Books and Discourse,
can have but a faint and imperfect Idea of him; he may believe him to be
infinite in all kinds and degrees of perfection, in Goodness, and Mercy, and
Justice, and Truth, and be able to demonstrate it upon dry principles of
reason; but having no experience of these perfections in himself, no sense or
relish of their beauty and excellency, his apprehensions of them are but slight
and obscure, like a deaf man's notions of sounds, or a blind man's of colors,
which for want of the evidence of sense cannot be so clear, and certain, and
distinct as theirs are who see and hear. Whereas he who partakes of the
perfections of God, and is in any degree pure as he is pure, and holy as he is
holy, has as it were traveled into his very Nature, and seen all his
perfections by the light of an infallible experience; he knows what God is, not
so much by reasoning and discourse, as by a quick and lively sense of the
divine perfections, which he has copied and transcribed into his own temper,
and which, like the beams of the Sun, light up his thoughts to that Fountain of
light from whence they were derived. And he who has Gods Picture in his own
breast, and can see his perfections in the Graces and Virtues of his own mind,
knows him by his Sense as well as by his Reason; he sees and feels God in the
Godlike temper of his own Soul, the Graces whereof are so many living Images of
God, and sensible Comments on his nature, which render the man's Notions of him
not only as clear and distinct, but also as certain and indubitable as any
demonstration in Geometry. For there is no evidence will give us so full a
certainty of things as that of our own senses; it was by sensible evidence that
our Savior demonstrated himself to be the Messiah, and confuted the Infidelity
of his Apostle St. Thomas; and it is certain that our bodily senses are not
more infallible than is the purified sense of our minds. When therefore we are
transformed into the likeness of God, and made partakers of his Nature, we
shall have a vital sense and feeling of his perfections within us, by which the
true Notions of him will be more confirmed and ascertained to us than by all
the reasons and demonstrations in the World. For now we shall behold the
beauties of Gods Nature in the God-like dispositions of our own, and beholding
his Face in the Glass of our natures, whenever we reflect on it, his
perfections will be as intimate and familiar to us as the Graces of our own
minds; which will not only awaken our thoughts into frequent meditations of
him, but also heighten and improve our Meditations into the most glorious Ideas
of him. For, when all is done, there is no man can think so well of God as he
who has a Godlike nature, because the resemblance he bears to him will not
only frequently raise up his thoughts to God, but also shape them into a
conformity with his nature; whereas whilst we are unlike to God, we are not
only devoid of all that evidence of his perfections which the purified sense of
our nature would give us, and consequently our Notions of him, for want of that
evidence, will be only superficial and uncertain, but through our partiality to
our own ungodlike dispositions we shall be apt to entertain such Notions of him
as are as unlike him as our selves. For either out of fondness to our selves we
shall look upon our ill dispositions as perfections, and so attribute them to
God, or out of fondness to those ill dispositions we shall be tempted to admit
such opinions of God as will license and indulge them.

WHEREFORE if we would secure our minds against all false apprehensions of God,
we must above all things endeavor to purify our hearts from those evil
dispositions which render us unlike him; from sensuality and injustice, from
pride and discontent, from envy, hatred, and all uncharitableness, which are
the great corrupters of our minds, the bosom Heretics that seduce and pervert
us, and, as much as in us lies, to conform our selves to the nature of God, by
practicing the contrary Virtues; and when once by imitating the perfections of
his nature we have transcribed them into our own, we shall see and feel him in
our selves, and our Sense of him will conduct our Reason, our Experience of him
will correct our Knowledge, and our Vision of him consummate our Faith; and we
shall be more enlightened in our knowledge of him by beholding his face in the
sanctity of our own minds, than by a thousand Volumes of curious Speculations.

And now, having seen what the true causes of all our misapprehensions of God
are, let us from henceforth beware of them, and, so far as in us lies, labor
to avoid them; and considering of what vast advantage to our Religion right and
true Notions of God are, let us diligently apply our selves to the abovenamed
Rules for the regulating our apprehensions concerning him; that so having
thoroughly purged our thoughts of all erroneous opinions, we may see God truly
as he is, arrayed in all the genuine perfections of his nature. And then we
shall find our lives and affections under the Influence of the most powerful
reasons in the World. For every thing of God is full of persuasion, all his
perfections have a constraining Rhetoric in them that by a kind of Moral
violence conquers all that attend to it, and seises and captivates their Wills
in despite of all the reluctances of their natures. So that when once our
minds are thoroughly instructed with the true Notions of God, we shall not need
to seek abroad for Motives and Arguments, for we shall have a Fountain of
divine Oratory within our own Bosoms, from whence our Wills and Affections will
be continually watered with the most fruitful inducements to Piety and Virtue;
insomuch that which way soever we turn our selves we shall see our selves
surrounded with such invincible reasons to trust in God and to fear him, to
admire and love him, to obey and worship him, as will animate our faculties,
wing and inspire our drooping endeavors, and carry us on with unspeakable
Cheerfulness and Alacrity through all the weary stages of Religion; and we
shall no longer look upon Religion as the burden and oppression of our nature,
but readily embrace it as our Ornament and Crown, our Glory and Happiness, as
being fully convinced that in serving of God we serve not only the greatest,
but the best Master in the World.

FINIS.

