A PROCLAMATION, Concerning the Students in the College of Edinburgh.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants,
and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as the Lords of Our Privy Council being informed, that several
disloyal and malicious Persons, frequenting Our good Town of Edinburgh, have
instigated the Students of the College therein, to enter in Bonds and
Combinations, and Convocate in Tumults (knowing that how spacious soever the
pretexts be, yet these tend to Sediton, as Sedition does to open Rebellion)
There was Order taken that the Peace of that Place should secured: And it being
made appear, by the Declarations and Confessions of the Masters, and severals
of the Students, that the Students did enter into Bonds and Combinations, to
which, among other things, contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom, they did
oblidge themselves to adhere to one another, if they were called in question
therefore, and in confidence of that Seditious Combination, they did upon the
Twenty-Fifth of December last, assemble in a Tumultuary way, and assault and
affront several Persons, and to strengthen their Combination, did associat
themselves with Prentices, and introduce a new way of Tumultuating, by putting
up blew Ribbans, as Signs and Cognisances, not only to difference them from
others, but likewise for Convocating themselves, in pursuance of those
Seditious and Tumultuous Designs, (a practice and preparative not to be endured
in any well Governed Kingdom) For which, being (justly) reproved, they did some
few days thereafter, run up and down the Streets in Tumults, disquieting the
Nobility and Gentry of both Sexs, and threatening the Provost of that of Our
City, with the burning of his house of Priest-field, and other injuries; and
accordingly, within some few days thereafter, the House of Priest-field was (to
the horror and astonishment of sober Men) burnt down, by throwing in
Fireballs, and other Combustible Matter, as appears by most convincing proofs,
lying in the Records of Privy Council, which are also notour enough to
convince, even those, who from the same disloyal Principles, that prompted them
to attempt those Boys, continue with a villainous confidence, sutiable to their
malicious porjects, to ascribe the said burning to accidental Causes: Upon all
which, the Lords of Our Privy Council, convinced by these proofs, and
considering how disloyal and mutinous Persons did, in the last Age, bring on
all their dreadful Rebellion, from such beginnings, and that some who
studiously imitate their proceedings, have of late, in this Our Kingdom, used
their utmost endeavors, to incline all Societies to such Disorders (though
without success) Have by an Act of the date hereof, Ordered the Gates of the
Schools of that College to be shut up, till they should be fully informed of
the Root, and progress of these Disorders, and satisfied by the submission and
punishment of the Offenders. We therefore, with advice of Our Privy Council, to
prevent any further Seditious Tumults and Disorders from these Students; do
Command them, and each of them, to retire Fifteen Miles at least from that our
City of Edinburgh, within Twenty-Four hours after the Publication hereof, and
not to come within the limits foresaid, without express leave from our Privy
Council, and that under the pain of being punished as Sidecious Persons, and
contemners of our Authority, discharging here by their Parents, Tutors, and all
others within the bounds foresaid, to resset or intertain them after the time
foresaid, without finding Caution to the Clerks of Council, for their good
Behavior. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Marcat Cross of Edinburgh,
and thereat by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none
pretend ignorance. The which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and severally,
Our full Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly Execute and
indorsat again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the Twentieth-One of January, One
Thousand-Six-Hundred, Eighty and One, and of Our Reign, the Thirty Two Year.
Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. PAT. MENZIES. Cl. Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1681.

And Reprinted at London, January 29th, following.


