C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon flanked by the
English lion and Scottish unicorn
A PROCLAMATION, Concerning Circuit Courts, etc.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To our Lovits (...) Heralds, Macers, Pursevants; or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuch, as by our Proclamation of the twenty seventh day of July last, we
have indempnified and pardoned, with the Exceptions therein specified, all such
as were engaged in the Rebellion, 1666. or the late Rebellion in this present
year 1679. providing they appear before such as our Privy Council shall
nominate, betwixt and the days expressed in the said Proclamation, and enact
themselves in manner therein mentioned; And as it is our Royal Intention, that
the said pardon and indemnity shall be effectual to all such persons as shall
accept the benefit thereof; so it is our express Will and pleasure, that such
persons as shall not enact themselves betwixt and the days expressed in the said
Proclamation, be proceeded with the utmost severity the Law does allow: As
also, it being most just and necessary for vindicating the Honor and
Reputation of this our ancient Kingdom, that the persons guilty of that horrid
Assassination and Murder, of the late Bishop of St. Andrews (which we will
never forget) may be brought to condign punishment; and all legal courses taken
for that effect; Therefore We, with Advice of our Privy Council, do ordain
Justice airs, or Circuit Courts to be holden by the Commissioners of our
Justitiary, at the places, and upon the days after mentioned, viz. At the Town
of Stirling, the first day of October next, for the Shires of Stirling,
Dumbartoun, Clackmannon, Perth besouth the River of E^rn, and the Stewartry of
Monteith: At the Town of Glasgow, the eighth day of October, for the Shires of
Lanerk and Renfrew: At the Town of Air, the fifteenth day of October, for the
Shire of Air and Jurisdiction within the same: At the Town of Dumfriese, the
twenty two day of October, for the Shires of Dumfriese, and Wigtoun, the
Stewartries of Kirkcudburgh and Annandale: At the Town of Cowper in Fife, upon
the first day of the said Month of October, for the Shires of Fife and Kinross:
At the Town of Edinburgh, the eighth day of October, for the Shires of
Edinburgh, Haddinteun and Linlithgow: At Jedburh the fifteenth day of October,
for the Shires of Roxburgh Selkirk, Peebles, Berwick and Bailiry of Lauderdail.
With power to the said Commissioners to divide themselves in two Circuit
Courts, to the effect aforesaid. In which Courts, the said Commissioners are
to proceed against the persons who were engaged in the said Rebellion, and have
not accepted, or shall not except the benefit of our Indemnity* by enacting
themselves in the Terms of our Gracious Proclamation, within the Dyets therein
mentioned, and particularly against the Murderers of the late Archbishop of
St. Andrews; and that the said Commissioners issue Citations against all the
said Rebels, and specially against the said Murderers, containing a
particular description of these Murderers: Which Citations are to be execute at
the Market Cross of the Head Burgh; of the Shires where these persons dwells,
or formerly dwelt, or where they ordinarily haunt or resort, to the effect that
none may supply, harbor, commune, or correspond with the said Murderers, nor
with any other of the Rebels, before these other Rebels, not accessory to that
horrid Murder, enact themselves, conform to our Act of Indemnity; And in case
any person shall contraveen, they shall be proceeded against with all rigor, as
accessory to the said Rebellion and Assassination. And further, We, with advice
aforesaid, do ordain the Heretors and Masters of the ground where any of the
Re-bels have their dwelling and residence, to present to the said Justice airs,
the persons of these Rebels, who shall not before the dyets contained in our
Act of Indemnity, enact themselves not to bear Arms against us, or our
Authority; with power to them to apprehend their persons; And in case of their
refusal to enact themselves (as aforesaid) to send them to the next prison,
there to be detained and kept in safe firmance, until the enact themselves as
aforesaid, within the said Dyets and thereupon be dismissed; or otherwise to
detain and present them to the Justice airs, And in case the said Masters do
not apprehend them, by reason of their being fugitive, or latent, that after
the said Dyets they remove them, their Wives Bairns, and Servants off their
Ground, un earth Certifications contained in the Acts of Parliament. And the
Clerks of the Justice Court, are hereby ordained, to go before the said dyets,
in due time, and take up a portuous Roll of the Names and Designations of the
said Rebels already known and contained in our Proclamation, or that shall be
declared upon Oath to have been in the Rebellion, or to have harbored the
Rebels before enacting themselves (as said is) or the Murderers of the late
Archbishop of St. Andrews, or have been at Field Conventicles since our last
P^oclamation of the twenty ninth of June last, or that since the said day have
threatened, abused, or robbed the Orthodox Clergy, and that they cause i e the
persons guilty of the said Crimes, to the said Justice airs, and that they
take information upon Oath, of the Lands, Sums and Movables belonging to the
Rebels, and that they cause a^^est Rents of their Lands, Sums and movables,
and put upon Inventor, and bond in the custody of their Masters; and in case
their Masters refuse, in the Custody of some other sufficient person to be made
forthcoming, in case they shall be condemned guilty of the said Rebellion, and
that they return an exact account thereof, and of their diligence to our Coucil
at their next diet, being the eighteenth day of Septemb^r next. And We with
advice aforesaid, do hereby require the said Commissioners of our Justiciary,
to proceed against such of the said Murderers as were in the Rebellion (though
in absence) and that it be a part of their Sentence to be hanged in Effigy, in
all the Shiers of Scotland, that they may be more easily discovered and
apprehended, that none be deceived in harboring of them, or communing with
them under false Names and Designations: And for the encouragement of any
person or persons to apprehend the said Murderers. We do hereby give assurance
to any who shall apprehend them, and present them to our Council, dead or
alive, or shall so discover them, as that thereby they be apprehended, they
shall be indemnified and rewarded in the sum of ten thousand Merks Scots Money,
and in case of the concourse of more persons, by discovering, or joining in the
apprehending of them, the said sum shall be divided amongst them; and in case
any of the said Murderers be apprehended and taken, or discovered, so that
thereby they may be taken by any persons excepted in our Acts of Indemnity,
they shall also be indemnified (notwithstanding they fall within the exception)
and a pardon shall be past for them under our Great Seal; and in Case they
apprehend John Balfour of Kinloch, and David Haxstoun of Rathill^t, dead or
alive, they shall not only have their pardon, but also the reward aforesaid.
Our Will is thefore, and we charge you straightly, and Command, that incontinent
these our Letters seen ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, as also to the
Market Croses of the Head Burghs of the Sheriffdoms, Haddington, Linlithgow,
Perth, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Berwick, Peebles, Dumfrie^e, Stirling, Dumbart^n,
Clackmannan, Lanerk, Renfrew, Air, Wigtoun, Fife, Stewartry of Kircudburgh, and
other places needful and thereby open Proclamation, make publication of the
said Circuits, to all our Leidges and Subjects, where through none pretend
ignorance of the same, that the said Circuit, Courts are to be holden upon the
days, and at the Burghs and places respective above written; and that ye
command and charge all Dukes, Marquesses, Arch bishops, Earls, Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, Barons, and others of our Freeholders, who hold Lands of us in
chief, and owe suit and presence within the several Bounds, Shires and
Precincts belonging to the said respective Circuit Courts, to compear before
the said Commissioners, at the said Courts, upon and at the days and places
foresaid, with continuation of days, to do whatever in Law is incumbent, and
ought to be done by them in that behalf: As also, that ye Command all and
sundry the said Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Lords Spiritual and Temporal; as
also, Lords of Regalites, Stewarts, Barons, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
Bailies, Cham-berlains, Magistrates and Ministers of our Laws, and all
subordinate Judges within our Sheriffdoms above written, and whole Leidges of
the same, that they and every one of them, give all due espect to our
Commissioners and Justices foresaids, and such special assistance as to their
Offices and Duty appertains, and as is incumbent to them by the Laws and Acts
of Parliament of this our Ancient Kingdom, as they and every one of them will
answer upon the contrary, and under all highest pain and charge that after may
follow: and particularly that ye Command our Sheriffs that they cause
sufficient and legal men compear before our said Commissioners, at the forsaid
dyets, and such dyets and places as the said Commissioners shall appoint for
Assizes and Witnesses, as they shall be cited to that effect: As also, that the
said Sheriffs and Free holders within the said Shires and Bounds, meet our said
Justices, st their entry into the fame, and convoy them into the same, and
accompany them during their remaining there, ay and while they be received by
our next Sheriff, and his Deputs, into the next Shire. And We ordain these
Presents to be Printed.

Given under our Signet, at Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of August, one
thousand six hundred seventy and nine years. And of our Reign, the thretty one
year. Al. Gibson. Cl. Sti. Concilii,
Here follows the Names of those appointed to take Bond from the Rebels, in the
several Shires following, viz.
For the Shire of Edinburgh, The Lord Collington. Haddingtoun, The Earl of
Wintoun. Linlithgow, The Earl of Linlithgow. Perth* The Marquess of Montross.
Roxburgh, The Earl of Rexburgh. Selkirk, The Lord of Hayning. Lanerk, The Earl
of Cornwath. Dumfreise, The Earl of Queensberry. Air. The Earl of Glencairn.
Dumbartoun. The Earl of Wigtoun. Fife and Kinross, The Lord Chancellor.
Wigtoun. The Lord of Burghtoun. Stewartry of Kigkcudburgh, The Earl of
Nithisdale. Peebles, Sir Will. Murray of Stenhop, Stirling, The Earl of Mar.
Renfrew, The Lord Ross. Berwick, The Earl of Home.




EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1679.


