royal blazon or coat of arms WM RR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROITA PROCLAMATION, Anent the BEGGARS.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas several good Laws have been made by our Royal Predecessors, for
maintaining the poor, and relieving the Leidges of the Burden: of Vagabonds,
In prosecution, whereof, We hereby require the Heretors, Ministers and Elders
of every Paroch to meet on the second Tuesday of September next at their Paroch
Church, and there to make Lists of all the Poor within their Church, and to
cast up the Quota of what may Entertain them according to their respective
Needs, and to cast the said Quota, the one half upon the Heretors, and the
other ha^f upon the Householders of the Paroch, and to Collect the same in the
beginning of every Week, Month, or Quarter, as they shall judge most fit: And
to appoint two Overseers Yearly to Collect and Distribute the said Maintenance
to the Poor, according to their several Needs: And likewise to appoint an
Officer to serve under the said Overseers, for in bringing of the Maintenance,
and for expelling Stranger Vagabonds from the Paroch, Whose Fee is to be
stented on the Paroch, as the rest of the Maintenance for the poor is stented:
And such Poor as are not provided of Houses for themselves, or by their
Friends, the Heretors are to provide them with Houses, on the Expense of the
Paroch in manner foresaid; and if any Paroch shall fail in providing
sufficiently for their own Poor, the Paroch so failing, shall pay the Sum of
two Hundredth pounds Scots, to be uplifted: A third part to the Pursuer, and two
parts to be applied to the Maintenance of the Poor of the Paroch, and that
Monthly, toties quoties, as they shall fail in their Duty; And if there be any
Mortifications already, or if any hereafter shall accrue to any Paroch, the
same shall be applied by the advice of the Heretors and E^ the use foresaid*
but ^hout diminution of the Stock of the said Mortifications. And the Heretors
and Elders are her^ appoin^ed, to have (...) second Meeting at the said
Paroch-kirks, this year on the second Tuesday of October next, for a more exact
settling of this Matter; And yearly thereafter the Heretors, Ministers and
Elders of every Paroch are to meet on the first tuesday of February, and the
first Tuesday of August, yearly to Consult and Determine herein as shall be
thought fit, for every ensuing half year: And to appoint Overseers by the year,
or half year as they shall conclude: And all the Ministers are hereby required
to give eimous Information to the Sheriff of the Shire, if any Paroch shall
fail in performance of this Christian Duty, in whole, or in part; and the
Sheriff ot Sheriff Depute are hereby required, to call the Delinquents before
them without any delay, and if guilty to fine them in double of the Quota,
which the Minister shall attest to be wanting, and to cause Poynd for the same
immediately; and where Churches are Vacant, that two of the greatest Heretors
residing within the Paroch shall be appointed by the first Meeting in September
next, to enquire in the duty of Parochiners and Overseers, and to inform the
Sheriff of their Delinquency: And if any of the Poor in the Paroch be able to
Work, the Heretors of the Paroch are hereby Authorized and required, to put
them to Work according to their Capacities, either within the Paroch, or in any
adjacent Manufactory, as they shall find expedient, furnishing them always
with Meat and Clothes. And if any young Children be found Begging, under the
Age of fifteen Years, any Person who shall take the said Children, and bring
them before the Heretors, Ministers and Elders, and cause registrat the Name
and Designation of the Child in the Session Book, and shall there Enact himself
to Educate the said Child, either for Trade or Work, and take an Extract of the
Act from the Clerk of the Session: The said Child shall be obliged to serve the
said Person, so Educating him for Meat and Clothes, until he pass the
thirtieth year of his Age. And all Manufactories are declared to have the same
Privilege as to the Education of such young Ones: and this to extend, not only
to the Children of Beggars, but also to poor Children whose Parents are Dead,
or with Consent of the Parents, if they be alive: And if any young Ones above
fifteen years of Age, shall voluntarly engage themselves upon the like
Conditions, the same method is to be extended to them in every point: And if
any of the young Ones so Educated, shall disobey their Masters when reasonably
i^ployed, their Masters are hereby warranted to Correct them, as they judge
expedient, life and torture excepted. And if any Person, Harbor or Reset any
such servant belonging to any other, they shall return them to their Masters on
Demand, under the pain of one Hundredth Merks toties quoties, as often as they
shall be required so to do: And if any Masters shall exact any Inhumane or too
rigid Service, from any such Servant, the Sherriffs or Justices of Peace upon
Application by the Servants are to judge in the Case; and if the severity so
deserve, the servant may be loosed from such a Master: The Servant or some for
him paying the Master, as much yearly as the Fee of Servants of that Quality
would extend to each year, in the number of years wanting, to the thirtieth
Year of the Servants Age. And the Heretors Meeting on the days appointed, or
Major part of them are Authorized and Required, to Conclude and Determine
Matters for that half year: And to the end that all the Poor may be returned to
their own Paroches, and the Nation freed of Vagabonds, We strictly Require and
Command, all the Beggars within the Kingdom, forthwith to Repair to their
several Paroches with all Diligence, and to keep the ordinary Highways to the
same, and so soon as they come to their Paroch, to present themselves to the
Heretors and Elders, that their Names may be Listed amongst the Poor of the
Paroch, and they Lodged and Entertained accordingly; with Certification to all
who shall be found Begging, without the bounds of their Paroch, after the said
second Tuesday of September next: They shall be Seized as Vagabonds, Imprisoned
and Fed on Bread ^d Water for a Month^ or till they be sent Home to their
Paroch, in manner after-mentioned: And if they be found Vaging a second time,
they are to be Marked with an Iron on the Face: And all the Leidges are hereby
prohibited, to give any Alms to such Begging Vagabonds, other than Bread and
Water allenarly, after the said second Tuesday of September, until they arrive
at their own Paroches: And to the End, that Our will hereanent, may be the more
Speedily made Practicable; We strictly Command and Charge, all our Leidges
within this Our Ancient Kingdom, to apprehend such Beggars as they shall find
Vaging without their own Paroch, after the Second Tuesday of September, and
forthwith to carry them to the Principal Heretor of the Paroch where they are
apprehended, if it be in Landward: And to one of the Baillies in Towns, who
shall examine the Beggar in the Shire and Paroch where he was Born, and shall
direct him forthwith to the nearest Paroch that lies in the Road, to the
Paroch of his Birth, and deliver him to the nearest Heretor, that lies in that
Highway in the next Paroch, and so forth from Paroch to Paroch in the same
Road, until he arrive to the Paroch of his Nativitie, who shall then List him,
and Entertain him amongst their Poor. And the Heretors to whom the Vagabonds
are delivered, are hereby Authorized and Required, to send two Fencible Men of
their Paroch, to Convoy every Beggar to the Heretor of the next Paroch, and to
send a Note of the Beggars Name, and the Paroch where he was Born, which is to
be delivered to the next Heretor who receives him, and every Heretor who
receives him, is to return a Note signed of his Receipt, and so forth from
Heretor to Heretor in every several Paroch: And if any of the said Beggars
shall offer to make their Escape in their Transportation, the Beggar so doing,
shall be Scourged and Fed on Bread and Water during the rest of his Journey:
And whoever gives Alms to any Beggar not in their Paroch, after the said second
Tuesday of September, and shall not seize him in order to his Transportation as
said is, shall be fined in Twenty Shilling Scots, toties quoties, to be
uplifted by the Overseers, and applied to the use of the Poor of the Paroch;
and if the Heretor to whom the Vagabond shall be brought, fail in his Duty of
sending him, he shall be Fined in Twenty Pound Scots, toties quoties, to be
applied as said is; and if any Fencible Man sent to Convey them refuse, or fail
in his Duty, he is to be Fined in two Merks Scots, toties quoties, to be
applied as said is; and the said Fencible Men are to be Chosen by Turns, in
the said Paroches. And whereas, by the eighteenth Act of the third Session,
second Parliament Charles the Second, Correction-houses are appointed to
Erected, in several Burghs therein mentioned, for employing of poor People in
Work as they are Capable, which have been hitherto too much neglected, (until
the Lesser Burghs be able to perform what is there Required, least so good a
Design should Totally fail:) We hereby strictly Require Our Burghs of
Edinburgh, Stirling, Dundie, Aberdeen, Inverness, Glasgow, Jedburgh, Dumfreis,
and Cowper in Fyfe, or such of them as have not already Established
Correction-houses, in manner, and to the Ends prescribed by the said Act, to
Erect and Establish such Houses, and to receive such poor for Work therein, as
shall be sent to them from any Paroch, in manner, and on the Conditions
prescribed by that Act, and this but prejudice of Erecting of Correction-houses
in other Burghs therein-mentioned, with all convenience. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE,
and we charge you straightly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters
seen ye Pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the
whole Head Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom: And there in Our Name
and Authority by open Proclamation make publication of the Premises, that none
pretend Ignorance: And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of August. And of Our
Reign the fourth Year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCRIEFF. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM, 1692.


