EDINBURGH, the seventh day of June, 1679.
Forasmuch as the Insurrection in the Western Shires, is grown to an open
Rebellion, and that the number of these desperate Rebels do increase so, that
all His Majesty's loyal Subjects in their several Shires, ought timeously to
look to their own security, and put themselves in a posture to defend. the
Kings Authority, and to oppose all attempts of desperate and wicked Rebels; And
albeit His Majesty's Privy Council have already issued forth their Orders for
drawing forth the Militia Forces, Horse and Foot in several Shires, and
appointed particular days of Rendezvous, and upon such occasions may require
all sencible persons, betwixt sixty and sixteen, to rise for suppressing of
these Rebels; yet at this time, they have thought sit only to call out and
require the Regiments of the Foot Militia, in the Shires aftermentioned; and
all Heretors and Freeholders, who are sencible persons, and their Servants and
followers, to come out upon Horseback; And for this cause, to forbear to
require the Militia-Troups, in these Shires underwritten, at this time,
notwithstanding of the Orders already issued forth, in so far as concerns the
Horse Militia alanerly: And do hereby Require and Command all Heretors and
Freeholders, who are sencible persons, with so many of their Servants and
Followers as they can bring on Horseback with Arms, within the Shires of
Edinburgh, Linlithgow, and Peebles, Haddingtoun, Stirling and Clackmannan,
Berwick, Roxburgh and Selkirk, Fife, Perth, Forfar, Kincardin and Marischals
part of Aberdeen, Bamff; and Errols part of Aberdeen, Ross, Elgin, Forres,
Nairn, and this side of Ness, to conveen at the places and times
after-mentioned, and to receive their Orders, and to be under the Command of
the persons underwritten, viz. Edinburgh to meet at the Links of Leith upon
the eleventh day of June instant, and to be under the Command of the Lord
Collingtoun; Linlithgow and Peebles to meet at the Links of Leith the eleventh
day of June instant, and to be under the Command of General Dalyell; the Shire
of Haddingtoun to meet at Beinstoun-Muire, the eleventh day of June instant,
and to be under the Command of the Viscount of Kingstoun; Stirling and
Clackmannan to meet at the Town of Stirling, and from thence to march to the
Links of Leith upon the eleventh day of June instant, and to be under the
Command of the Lord Elphirgstoun; Berwick to meet at Fogo-muire upon the
eleventh day of June instant, and to be under the Command of the Earl of Home,
and in his absence, his brother Charles Home; Roxburgh and Selkirk, to meet at
Ancrum-Bridge upon the sixteenth day of June instant, and to be under the
command of the Lord Elibank, and the Lord of Stobbs, who are to command
according to the devision of the Militia Troops; Fife to meet at Coupar. the
twelfth day of June instant, and to be under the command of the Lord Newark;
Perth to meet at Perth, the thirteenth day of June instant, and to be under the
command of the Marquess of Montrese, and such persons under him as he shall
appoint; Forfar to meet at Forfar, upon the thirteenth day of June instant, and
to be under the command of the Earl of Southesk; Kincardin and Marischals part
of Aberdeen, to meet at Aberdeen Links upon the nineteenth day of June instant,
and to be under the command of the Earl of Aboyn; Bamff and Errols part of
Aberdeen, to meet at Turress upon the nineteenth day of June instant, and to be
under the command of the Earl of Kintore; Elgin, Forres, Nairn, and this side
Ness, to meet at Forres upon the twentieth day of June instant, and to be under
the command of the Earl of Murray, and in his absence the Lord Duffus; Ross to
meet at Chanry the twenty third day of June instant, and to be under the
command of the Earl of Seaforth; and ordains all the Heretors and Freeholders
of the Shires benorth Forth, to march immediately after the Rendezvous to the
Bridge of Stirling; and all the Heretors and Freeholders of the Shires on the
south side of Forth, to march after the Rendezvous to the Links of Leith, there
to continue till further Order: With full power, to them to seize upon all
disaffected persons, and in case of resistance, to use them as enemies, within
their respective bounds, or such as shall be suspected to be going out of the
Shire to the Rebels: With power likewise to the said Commanders to appoint
Officers under them, to command in the several Divisions of the Shires
abovementioned; Ordaining hereby the respective Commanders aforesaid, to cause
public Proclamation and Intimation to be made hereof to the respective Shires
under their command, at the several places already appointed for the first
days Rendezvous of the Militia, that the said meetings may be punctually
kept: Cerrifying hereby, all such Heretors and others foresaid as shall not
come out upon Horseback themselves with their best Horses and Arms, with so
many of their servants and followers as they can bring out upon Horseback,
they shall be liable to the pains and penalties provided by the Acts of
Parliament, against such as do not attend the Kings Host, or desert the same,
and looked upon as disaffected persons, and savourers and compiyers with
Rebels, and pursued and punished accordingly. And ordains these Presents to be
Printed, and Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places
foresaid, that none pretend ignorance.

Tho. Hay, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1679.


