THE MODEL OF THE GOVERNMENT Of the PROVINCE OF EAST-NEW-JERSEY IN AMERICA; And
Encouragements for such as Designs to be concerned there.

Published for Information of such as are desirous to be Interested in that
place.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, And Sold be Alexander Ogston Stationer in the
Parliament Closs. Anno DOM. 1685.

TO JAMES Earl of PERTH, Lord DRVMMOND and STOBHALL, etc. Lord High Chancellor
of SCOTLAND. JOHN Viscount of Melfoord, Lord Drummond of Gilston, Secretar of
State for the Kingdom of Scotland, one of the Members of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council in both Kingdoms. GEORGE Viscount of Tarbet, Lord
Mccloud and Castle -- Haven, Lord Clerk Register of Scotland, and one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council there.

My Noble Lords,
AS your Lordships concern in East-Jersey, makes it appear to all intelligent
persons, that it is a National interest to advance in general the design of a
Plantation, hence to America; so that in particular, East-Jersey is the most
proper place; seeing your Lordships have chosen it among all the other parts of
that continent, to settle your interest there; Yet my Lords, there are (to our
shame) a parcel of people, who whether out of Ignorance or Malice, I cannot
well determine, decry the design; I believe they have a share of both, and
thereby weakens not a little the hands of a number of well meaning people, who
would gladly promot the same effectualy, were they not imposed upon by the
false rumors, industriously spread abroad to stiffle any such inclinations.

I have been advised to consent to the publishing of the following sheets, at
first collected, only for my own divertisement, and more clear information in
the affair; As what may tend some what to prevent any foolish misrepresentation
when by the perusal of the accounts, from thence the least jealousy is
removed of any cheat in the thing it self, so advantageous a Character of the
place coming from so many different hands.

I have had too many demonstrations, of your Lordships favor, to fear your
displeasure upon account of my presuming to send the same abroad under your
Patrociny; yea, I dare further adventure, without the least apprehension of
your dissatisfaction with me upon that head, to mind your Lordships that as you
have laid the foundation of this design, as to any concern of this Country, in
that place; so it is expected your Lordships will continue to encourage the
same: in process of time your Lordships may render your Names and Families as
considerable in America as they are in Europ.

My Lords, having resolved to dedicate my self, Family, and Fortune, to the
promoting of this design; I should the more easily digest any frauns of
Providence I have been trysted with; were I so fortunat as to find the
opportunity, in Jersey of testifying my resentments of the favors I have
received at your Lordships hands in Scotland, by noticeing any of your
Lordships concerns there, and contributing what in me lies to advance the same;
nothing shall be wanting in me to testify how much I am,

My Noble Lords, Your Lordships most, humbly devoted Servant, George Scot.

Advertisement be the Printer to the Reader.
That whereas the Authors other pressing affairs hindered him from overseeing
the Press, as otherwise he would; there is not that correctness requisite in
the following sheets; it is hoped the Reader will upon this reason pardon the
same, and with his pen help what he finds amiss. The pages 62, and 63, are
misplaced: and are to be read according to the number.

An Account of the Encouragement for promoting a Design of Planting; in
East-New-Jersey, containing the Constitutions, and Model of Government of that
Province, in a Letter from a Gentleman at Edinburgh, concerned there; to his
Correspondent in the Country.
Sir,
PErceiving by your last Discourse, that you not only appeared somewhat
resolved to be your self concerned in promoting the present Design of carrying
on a Plantation in America, but to endeavor to engage several of your Friends
in the same undertaking, when you found any probability of its taking effect. I
find my self obliged for your more full Information (...) let you know at more
length the Reasons, inducing me to be so much concerned in the promo^ing this
Affair, submitting very willingly, the grounds prompting me hereto, to your
most narrow scrutiny, whether in so doing I act Rationally or not?

Having at London in the year 1679, the opportunity of frequent converse with
several Substantial and Judicious Gentlemen, concerned in the American
Plantations, I had thereby the opportunity of understanding thoroughly the great
advantage redounding to that City, from Undertakings of this nature, and
rational grounds of Conjecture, That their Commerce with that place of the
World, has been one of the greatest Improvements of that Trade, they have for
many years enjoyed, which has rendered it now one of the most considerable
Cities in Europe; the Customs thereof which in Queen Elizabeth's time, were
farmed at Fifty thousand pounds, paying now in to the Exchequer, near seven
hundred thousand pounds yearly, which great Improvement may be much attribute
to their Trade with America, brought now in a great manner to Perfection, which
at that time was but in its Infancy.

From that time I began to have strong inclinations, to be more fully informed
in that Affair, and to be at all imaginable pains, to notice the same very
concernedly* and for my more full satisf^ction, I judged i^ requisite to trace
the very beginnings of all the English Plantations, and their gradual
progresses ere they arrived at that perfection they presently are at; I could
not rest satisfied with the first Methods I proposed to my self, in Order to
this, of discoursing at large with such as had been in the several Plantations,
by putting such interrogators to them thereanent, as I judged most proper, for
informing my self in all things relative to that knowledge, I judged requisite
for my own clear information, and for being a foundation to a Design I then
began to frame, of being therein my self some way interested; And tho I found
one and the same account given me in Solution of the most material Questions I
proposed; Yea, from several hands, who were such, whose knowledge in other
things with the good Character they generally went under, obliged me to notice
their information as truth without the least jealousing the verity of the
account they gave me; yet for my more full satisfaction, I proposed what I
judged would contribute more clearly to my full understanding that affair, to
wit, the perusal of all the Geographicall descriptions of these places in
America inhabited by the English.

The first thing which offered to my view, in this search, was a question in it
self, both pleasant and material, What way the continent of America came first
to be inhabited after the Flood, it being a World wholly unknown to the
Europeans, Asiaticks and Africans, till the late discovery thereof by Americus
Vesputius, and Cristophorus Columbus, since by all ci^cumstances, it is
apparent that it has been long inhabited: Laetius in his discourse anent the
Original of the Americans, Declaring, That the Spaniards destroyed thirty
mi^lions of them in these parts of America, usurped by them, which is not the
100 part of that continent. And since it is by all agreed, that after the
Flood, Noah and his three Sons had their habitations in some parts of Asia;
there being no probable evidencies that any of their Descendants led out the
first Collonies thither, being so divided from the rest of the World, to wit,
from the Western coast of Europe, and Africa, by the vast Atlantic Ocean, from
the North parts of Europe, by the great frozen Seas lying betwixt it and
Green-land, appearing to be the Northern Coast of America, from the Northern
part of Asia, Tartaria and Cathat, by the Fretum Annium, from the Fast part of
China, and the Philippine Islands, by the Oceanus Pacificus, above 2000.
Leagues in breadth, and divided from the great lately discovered Island
Delphago, by the Straits of Magellan; and that Island divided again from the
uttermost Southern Continent (if any be) by a great Sea not formerly known to
the Europeans, and Asiaticks, being divided from Asia and Africa, by the great
Indian Ocean, lately discovered by De La Mers Navigation; the only probable
means of such a Migration, being of a far later perfection, than what could
answer such a population of so great a continent.

To this apparently difficult question I find a very satisfying answer given
very fully by the Learned Hales, his Assertion, to wit, That notwithstanding
these apparent difficulties, a Migration unto America from the Descendants of
Adam, and Noah, was not only possible, but probable, that the samine was
successive, that tho the time or manner of these Migrations cannot certainly be
defined, yet many of them were long since, some thousand of years; Yet after
the universal Deluge, that the means of this Transmigration of the Descendents
of Adam and Noah, from Asia unto America, has been both by Sea and Land. That
the readiest means of the Migration of Colonies unto the Western World, from
the Eastern, was by the help of Navigation, whereof much might be casual by
Tempests, or contrary Winds. But the more Principle from design, he judging it
probable, that the use of Ships was not unknown to the Old World before the
Flood, tho not in that perfection that after; But that the Ark of Noah, being
an exact piece of Arihitecture, did give a patron for Vessels of a greater
burden, that from that time the skill of making and navigating Ships had been
certainly improved. Heathnish Histories giving us account, that Navigation was
ancient among the Grecians, especially among the Phenicians, Tyrians, and
Carthaginians Pliny in his Natural History, relating, That the Navigation of
the Argonauts to Colchis for the Golden Fleece, happened about 1000. years
after the Flood; And that 200. years before that, Danaus sailed out of Egypt
unto Greece. And tho there be no express mention of the Pixis Nautica for many
years, after the mention of the use of Navigation, yet the same Author relates,
That the Phenicians steered their Course by observation of the Stars.

But the Sacred Scripture gives a better account of the Antiquity of
Navigation, Jacob died 600. years (...) the Flood, yet he mentioned Ships and
Havens for shipping, as things well known; and particularly Sidon, as a great
Port for shipping, where Zebulons Lot was to be cast, Genesis 49.13. Balaam in
the time of Moses mentions, the Ships of Chittim, or Grecians, as a known
thing, Numb. 24.24. In the Reign of Solomon, the Tyrians are noticed as expert
Seamen, he having a Navy upon the Coast of the Red Sea, from thence making
Voyages with the Tyrans to Ophir, and Tarshish, places apparentlie in the East
Indies, thence bringing Gold and other Commodities, 1 Chr: 8.18.9.21.

The Histories of all succeeding Ages of the Grecians and Persians, of the
Tyrians, Phenicians and Carthaginians, of the Romans, Egyptians and Chinenses;
And in the latter times of the Venetians, Sicilians and Rhodians, Spanish,
Dutch, French, and English, give us a full account, how Sedulous and
Industrious all Maritim Coasts have been in advancing of Navigation in
multiplying of Shipping, in Merchandising and Trading in searching out and
subduing Foreign Countries, when either afflicted at home by war, or otherway^
(...) or grown over populous.

And therefore says the forecited Author, as latter years, has given us of
this Age witness of the Transplantations to America, from Spain, France,
Portugal, England, Scotland, and Holland, and some Ages before that have given
instances of Transplantations from Norway unto Green-land, and Iseland; So it
appears not only possible, but probable, that either by Casuality or Tempest,
or by Intention and Design, either for Lucre of Gold, or for disburthening of
the Countries sur charged with multitudes of Inhabitants, or by greatness of
mind, affecting Noble Undertakings, or by Reason of Hardships, Oppression, and
Wars at home, or by some of all these ways, several parts of this great
Continent, at several times have been planted with Inhabitants, which through
process of time, have multiplied unto these many Nations, and have forgot there
Original, and the Manners, Religions, and Customs of these People, from whom
they descended in Asia, Europe, or Africa.

His Judgment is, That the Countries in Asia and Europe, which with greatest
probability, have first Peopled America appear to be the British, the
Norwegians, the Tartars, or Scythians, the Phenicians, Carthaginians, or the
Chinese; Not mentioning the late Migrations of the Spanish, French,
Portuguize, Dutch, English, or Scottish.

Doctor Powels relates, That anno 1170, Madoch one of the Sons of Owen Guineth,
went over twice unto the Northern coast of America, and made there a British
plantation; This is at large prosecuted by Laetius in his second Observation.

Grotius has some Observations touching the Migrations of the Norwegians.
Laetius grants, that Iseland, and some part of Green-land, were planted by
Ericus Rufus, anno 928. that probably from hence Collonies were brought over
unto the Northern parts of America, over the Fretum Anian, in respect of the
easiness and shortness of that passage, from Nova Zembla, and the farthest
North-east part of Tartary, over that narrow Sea, and partly by Reason of the
congruitie of the Barbarous customs of the Americans and Scythians.

Hornius thinks the Migration of the Phenicians and Carthaginians, especially
unto the South-east part of the continent of America, as Mexico and Brasile,
very probable upon many accounts, 1: Upon the great skill and long practice of
Navigation, and the multitude of Shipping of the Phenicians and Carthaginians.
2: Upon the Accommodation of the Port of Carthage, and other African ports
bordering upon the Mediterranean Sea, to make their Voyages Westward, and the
great advantage of the constant Easterlie Winds which makes the Voyage to
Mexico, and Brasile more easy. 3. Upon some ancient Histories, intimating the
progress of the Phenicians and Carthaginians Fleet unto some Islands, or
Continents in or near the Atlan ick Ocean.

And lastly, he finds much of the Origination of the Americans attribute to
the Migration of the Seni or Sinenses from the Eastern parts of China, and the
Philippine Islands, from the Islands of Borneo, and the Moluccas and Japan,
through the Mare Pacificum, unto the Western parts of America, which tho it be
a large Ocean of above 2000. Leagues betwixt the Philippine Islands, and the
West of the American Continent, and the passage hither difficult, in respect of
the constant Easterly Winds betwixt the Tropicks; yet many reasons appear to
the liklyhood of a plantation, from thence, 1: in respect of the Peopling of
China, which Mr. Web, says, Was first Peopled after the Universal Deluge; Sem
the son of Noah, first settling here, it being the most ancient and primitive
Language, that by means of the Antiquity and Settledness of this Monarchy,
having continued ever since the Universal Deluge: It is most probable, the
Western continent of America was Peopled hence. 2: Because they were the
greatest Masters of Shipping, and best skilled in Navigation of any part in the
World; The Pixis Nautica being there known, and used long before the knowledge
thereof in Europe. 3. The many Islands upon the South, and South-east part of
China, as Borneo, Javae, Gilolo, Celebes, and others near the Equator are
disjoined, but by very narrow Seas, not much broader than between England and
France, from the neck of Land, called Terra de Papes, or Nova Guinea, and Nova
Hollandia new discovered; to be at least in some parts disjoined from the more
Southern Continent, by a great Sea, but anciently thought to have been a part
of the Southern Continent.

Upon these and the like Probabilities, Judge Hales thinks it reasonable to
conclude that the Americans had their Original from the Inhabitants of Europe,
Asia, and Africa, that Transmigrated into that Continent, either intentionally
or Casuallie, or both. 2. That these Migrations were not of one single People,
but of many and diverse Nations. 3. That these Migrations were not altogether,
or at one time, but successivelie in several Ages, some earlier, some later. 4.
That therefore it is impossible to determine the time of such Migrations, only
that they have been all since the Flood, now above 4000. years ago; some
Migrations 2, 3, or 400. years after the Flood; some later according to various
Accidents; but that is no ways probable that the earliest Migration hither was
above 4000. years since, for of one hundred pair they might easily propagat a
number competent to People all that Continent. 6. That it appears that since
the last of these ancient Migrations, suppose that of Madoch and his Brittons,
until our late Migrations by the Spaniards, French, English, Dutch and
Scottish; there probably interceeded an interval of, at least 4. or 500. years;
in all which Interval the Commerce and Communication between Europe or Asia,
and America, has as it were slept and been forgot both by them and us. 7. That
in this interval of 500. years or there abouts in all parts, but in some parts
far greater; there must in all Probability happen a great forgetfulness of
their Original; a great Degeneration from the Primitive Civilitie, Religion,
and Custom of these p^aces, from whence they first derived a Ferine and
necessitous kind of Life, by a conversation with these that having been long
there, were fallen into more barbarous habit of Life and Manners, would easily
assimilate; at least the next Generation to barbarism or ferinn^ss; where a
Colony comes and keeps it self in a Body as the Roman Colonies did; and the
Plantations in Virginia, and New England do; and the New Accessions incorporat
and join themselves unto that Body, Custom, both Religious and Civil, And the
Original Language are kept entire, but where the Accessions are but thin, and
spairing and scattered among the Natives of the Country, where they come, and
are driven to conform themselves unto their Customs, f^r their very
subsistence, safety and intertainment; it falls out that the very first
Planters do soon degenerate in their habits, customs, and Religions, as a
little wine poured into a great veshell, loses it self; but if they escape a
total assimilation to the country where they thus are mingled; yet the nixt
Generation in such a mixture, is quicly assimilated to the corrupt manners, and
customs of the people, among whom they are thus planted; so that it is no
wonder, if (...) such kind of small Accessions, successively from one and the
same, or several Countries, The third Generation forgot their Ancestors, and
the Customs, Religions and languages of these people, from whom they were first
derived; and assume various temperaments in their language and customs
according as the places of their habitatation, and the Company among whom they
live, obtain. But there remains yet a great difficulty, touching the noxious
untameable Beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Bears, which that continent
abounds with; how they come to be conducted over the seas, to be preserved in
the Ark, and after to be transported again thither, it not being probable that
they could be transported by shipping, seeing no man would be at the pains,
charge and hazard, with such Beasts, which would do more harm than good: And
although possibly, the Frozen Northern Seas might be a Bridge for their Passage;
yet that appears unlikly in respect of the great Snows which accompany such
frosts; and the impossibility of supply of food in so great and troublesome a
journey and as to swimming tho the Seas between Tartary and Cathay, and some
parts of America, be not so wide as the Atlantic, or Pacifick Ocean; yet they
are too large to afford a passage by Sea for Tigers and Lions not apt to take
the water; and it is not yet certainly discovered, tho conjectured, that there
is any neck of Ground or passage by Land from any part of Europe, or Asia, unto
any part of the continent of America.

The only thing then remaining to accommodat this difficulty, is to suppose,
that tho it should be granted there is no such Land passage extant, yet within
the compass of 4000. years elapsed since the Flood, there have been some such
juncturs or land passages between the Northern parts of Asia or Europe, and
some Northern parts of the continent of America; or between the South cast part
of China, or the Philipine Islands, and the Southern continent, tho latly there
be discovered an interposition of Sea, between the Isleand Delfago, and that
Southern continent, whereby either from Asia to Greenland in the North; or from
China to Terra-Australis incognita on the South, a land passage might be from
Asia to America for men and beasts, tho for some ages past either by the
violence of the water or by floods, or earthquakes, which has made great
alterations in the Globe of the Earth and Seas that Bridge or Line of
communication be now broken or obliterat; and truly such as observe the
infinite number of Islands lying between the continent of China and Nova
Guinea, almost contiguous to each other, has probable reason to believe that
these have been all formerly one continent joyining China and Nova-Guinea
together, tho now by the eruption of the Seas crumbled unto small Islands; hence
there is ground to believe there has been anciently necks of land which
mantained passage of communication by land betwixt the two continents. Pliny
tells us of the great Atlantick-Island mentioned by the Egyptian Priest, in
Platos, Timeus, almost contiguous to the western part of Spain and Africa, now
wholly swallowed up by that Ocean; which if truth for ought we know might
afford a passage from Africa to America, by land before that Submersion.

BUT to return from this, I hope not unpleasant digression, having seriously
considered the advantages which may be rationally conjectured, to redound from
the right managment of a concern in America. I resolved to lay my self out
wholly for the promoting such a design in this Country, as what I was
convinced, would in the end not only tend to the Honor and Advantage of Our
Nation in General, but to the Particular Interest of such as would resolve to
be therein effectually concerned; tho I am abundantly sensible; there are not
a few who take upon them to censure this undertaking, who have not the capacity
to pry unto the advantages, which may rationally be proposed in prosecuting
thereof: the strong^st argument they are able to bring against it, being taken
from the practice of our Ancestors, altogether innocent of any such design, tho
reputed abundantly wise in their generation; that therefore in their Children
it can be no less then folly, to introduce such a novelty, the same appearing
to thuart the verity of some of our old Scottish Proverbs, that ill Bairns are
best heard at home. Fools are fain of flitting; And a Bird in hand is better
then two in the bush; esteemed no less by them, then sometimes were the Oracles
of Apollo, at Delphos. Yes sir, I have heard some whose pretensions, to wit,
were so great that they were upon the borders of Commensing Vertuosi, snarling
at this intention, who having been engaged in the debate bewrayed their
ignorance so far in the affair, as to inquire, whether the places treated
anent, as the proper seats for a Collonie, from thence were Islands, or on the
continent, if such so little-versant in America, be competent Judges of a
matter of this import? I leave it to your determination, and therefore judging
them altogether unworthie of being otherwise noticed, then to pity their
ignorance, not envying them; the satisfaction of their own Opinions. I proceed
more at length to acquaint you with the grounds I walk upon, in resolving to be
so effectually concerned in promotting this design, as to hazard my self,
Family, and Fortune, in Prosecuting thereof, submitting very cheerfully the
consideration thereof to your narrowest and most exact scrutiny; whether the
motives prompting me hereto be founded upon solid Reason or not?

I find the most brutish of Mankind proposes some end to himself, whereby he
is actuated, the Voluptuous seeks after his ple^sure, the Ambitious his
preferment, the Covetous his treasure: whence it is apparent, that all the
intentions of man, how unrational soever, are actuated by one of these three
great engines of Jucundum Honestum, and Utile; In the effectual promotting this
design I judge a man may rationaly have a prospect to all these three.

I must confess, there is in the generality of Mankind a natural inclination to
love the Land of their own Nativity, beyond other places, tho upon several
Considerations, every way preferable, according to that of the Poet, Nescio quo
natale solum dulcidine cunctos.
Tangit and immemores non sinit esse sui.


Yet we see, it has been frequently so ordered in providence, that severals
upon different motives, have been brought to quit th^i^ Native Soil, and
inclined to make choice of strange and remot Countries, for their habitation:
and it is clearly seen, that this the^r removal has tended both to their
honor an^ outward more plentiful accommodation, hen^ the Northern Climats, tho
barren as(...) their Soil have been observed to produce bodies of Men, in
greater abundance, more strong, and vivid than the more Southern and fertile
places of the World, whence great multitudes of people pinched with the straits
of their own Country, have ishewed forth to more agreeable and fertile places.
Thus the Goths, Vandals, and Hunns overspead the Roman Empire, seating
themselves in Italy and Spain, and a great part of Africa; hence the eruption
of the Franks from the Rhine, upon the more pleasant Valleys of the Loire S^in,
and giving thus rise to most flowrishing Kingdoms.

I grant that upon the first view, it may appear somewhat of a Novelty, and
that upon this consideration, the Undertakers may be liable to the censure of
such, as prye not further into the Affair; Yet I am ready to believe that the
more s^rious and Judicious will have other sentiments of this Design, when they
consider, that not only is this practice warranted by the Scripture, but that
the effectual prosecuting thereof, will be made clearly to appear, to be
contributive as well to the honor of the Vndert^kers as to their particular
Interest, and l^kewise to the general advantage of the Nation.

The placing of a People in this or that Country, is from the appointment of
GOD, the Apostle speaks of it as grounded in Nature, Acts 17.26. GOD has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of our habitation, Deuteronomy.
2.8.5. and 9. GOD would not have the Israelites meddle with the Edomites or the
Moabits, because he had given them the land for a possession.

I do not find any taking upon them to define what particular summons the first
Undertakers of planting Collonies had, whether from the mouth of GOD
immediately, (as Abraham first and the Children of Israel thereafter,) or from
the advice and Counsel of Men; Yet that the Wisdom of GOD directed them in this
course is evident from Moses, his testimony, affirming, that he separated the
Sons of Adam, and set the bounds of their habitation, Deuteronomy. 32.8. So that
whoever set on the work, GOD acknowledges it as his own; we read also in the
16 of the Acts, verse 12. Of a Collony, (which is a company of People agreeing
to remove out of their Country, and settle a City or Commonwealth elsewhere)
which GOD blessed and prospered exceedingly, and made it a glorious Church.

That Collonies as other States in Humane Society, have their Warrant from
GODS direction and Command, is apparent to all. No sooner was Man created, then
he was commanded to replenish the Earth, and subdue it, Genesis 1.26. by these
words, and the repetition of them to Noah, Genesis 9. verse 1. We see a promise
expressed (as the title of a Benediction, and thereto prefixed) So it may also be
perc^ived, that they include a direction or command. Calvine say^s upon these
words, Jubet cos crescere and simul benedictionem suam destinat; And Junius,
pro ut vim intus indiderat sic palam mandatum, dedit curandae propagationis and
dominationis exercenda^. And Paraeus, Jubet igitur replere terram, non solum
generatione and habitatione, sed cum primis potestate cultu and usu, etsi vero
nonullae orbis parts manent inhabitales, habemus nihilominus totius dominium,
Jure Divino licet non habeamus totius orbis usum culpa and defectu nostro.

If it be alleged, that tho it must he granted, that the words have the force
of a Precept, yet it was but to continue during the Worlds infancy and no
longer; upon dew consideration it will be found, that there is no ground here
for such a Limitation; For tho some Commandments founded upon, and respecting
some present State and Condition of Men, received end and alteration, when the
condition was ended; yet Precepts given to the body of Mankind, as these to
Adam and Noah, receive neither alteration in the substantials, nor
determination, while Men and any void places of the Earth continue; so that
allowing this Commandment to bind Adam, it must bind his Posterity; and
consequently our selves in this Age, and our Issue after us, as long as the
Earth yields empty places to be replenished.

Where there is an empty vacant place, there appears hence to be Liberty for
the Sons of Adam, or Noah, to come and inhabit; Abraham and Isaac sojourned
among the Philistines. Yea, I do not see that either they bought or asked leave
of the Inhabitants; By sojourning, is meant a constant residence there, as in a
possession of their own; although it be so termed, as if they had been
Strangers, because they neither pretended to the Sovereign Government of the
whole Country, neither did incorporate themselves unto the Commonwealth of
the Natives, to submit themselves to their Government; they did not buy that
land to feed their Catttle, because they said, there is room enough,
intimating, that the Natives were no ways injured by their Neighbourhead; and
so did Jacob pitch his tents by, Schem, Genesis 34. verse 21. Hamor said, there is
room enough, therefore let them sit down among us, yea we see that in case the
people who were former Inhabitants, did disturb them in their possessions,
they complained to the King, as of injury done to them, as Abraham did, because
they took away his well, Genesis 21.25. for his right thereto, he pleaded not his
immediate call from GOD, for that would have seemed frivolous among the Heathen,
but his own industry and culture in digg^ng thereof, yea, we see the King does
not reject his Plea, with what had he to do to dig wells in their Soil? but
admits it as a principle of Nature, that in a vacant soil he who takes
possession thereof, and bestows Culture and Husbandry thereupon his right it
is; the ground hereof being from the Grand Charter given to Adam and his
posterity in Paradise, Genesis 1.28. Multiply and replenish the Earth, and subdue
it, which Charter was renewed to Noah, Genesis 9.1. fill the Earth and multiply.
In the next place, the gift of the Earth, is to the sons of Men, Psalm 115.16.
this necessarly enforces their duty to people it. Were it not an injury done
to the most High, to think, He does ought in vain? or that He tenders a gift to
Mankind, which He never meant should be enjoyed; And what way can Men make
benefit of the Earth but by habitation and culture? Neither do I judge it a
rational answer to this, that GODS intention is satisfied, if some part of the
Earth be replenished and used; tho the rest he wast, because we are still urged
with the same difficulty, that the rest of which we receive no fruit, was never
intended for us, because it was never GODS Mind, we should possess it. If it be
then granted, that it has been the mind of GOD, that Man should possess all
the parts of the Earth; it must be acknowledged that we neglect our duty, and
cross His Will, if we do it not when we have Occasion and Opportunity, and do
little less than undervalue His blessing.

Does not also that Order which GOD annexeth to Marriage, in His first
institution, viz. That married Persons should leave Father and Mother, and
cleave to other, warrant this practice; seeing frequently there is a necessity
that young married People should remove out of their Fathers Families, to live
apart by th^mselves; whereby new Families are erected. Now what are new
Families, but petty Colloni^s? and so at last removing further and further,
they overspread the whole Earth; so long therefore as there shall be use of
Marriage, there will be a warrant for deducing of Collonies from one place to
another.

We find that GODS directions have a double scope, Man's good, and His own
Honor, that this Commandment of GOD is directed to Man's good, Temporal or
Spiritual is more apparent; for it is most certain, that the life of Man is
made comfortable, affording a more plentiful supply in a large scope of ground,
which moves them to be so unsatiable in their desi^^s, to join house to house,
and land to land, till there be no more place. Exce^ding I grant therein the
measure and bounds of Justice, and yet building upon a principle suggested b^
Nature, that a large place best secures sufficiency, as we see by Nature, Trees
flowrish fair, prosper well, and wax fruitful in a large Orchard, which would
otherwise decay, if they were straightened in a little Nursery; These that are
stronger Plants and better rooted, would increase, overtop, and at last starve
the weaker sort. Do we not see it thus fall out in our Civil State, where a few
Men flowrish best, furnished with Abilities, or best fitted with Opportunities,
and the rest wax weak, and languish, as wanting room and means to nurish them.
Now that the Spirits and Hearts of Men are kept in better Temper by spreading
wide, will be evident to any Man who considers, That the Husbanding of
unmanured ground, and shifting unto empty lands, enforces Men to Frugality,
and quickneth invention; and the settling of new Estates requires Justice, and
affection to the Common Good; and the taking in of large Countries, presents a
natural remedy against covetousness, fraud and violence, when every man may
enjoy enough without wrong or injury to his Neighbor. Whence it was that the
First Age, by these helps were renowned for golden Times, wherein Men being
newly entered into their Possessions, were enforced thereby to Labor,
Frugality, Simplicity and Justice having neither leisure nor occasion to
decline to Idleness, Ryots, Wantonness, Fraud, or Violence; the ordinar fruits
of well Peopled Countries, and of the abundance and superfluities of long
settled Estates.

But that which should most stay our hearts, is the respect unto GODS Honor,
which is much advanced by this work of replenishing the Earth, whereby the
largeness of his bounty is tasted hy settling of men in all parts of the World,
whereby the extent of His munificence to the sons of Men is discovered; the
Psalmist tells us, that GOD is much magnified by this, that the whole Earth is
full of His Riches; yea, and the Red sea too, Psalm 104.24. And GOD when he
would have Abraham know what he had bestowed on him, when he gave him Canaan,
wills him, to walk through it, in the length of it, and the breadth of it, Genesis
13.17. GODS Honor is hereby advanced, when together with Men's Persons,
Religion is conveyed to several parts of the World, and all the quarters of the
Earth, sound with His Praise, and CHRIST JESUS takes in the Nations for his
inheritance, and the ends of the Earth for His Possession; according to GODS
Decree and Promise, Psalm. 28.

Seeing then it must be acknowledged, that even those Collonies which have been
undertaken upon the desire either of disburthening full states of unnecessary
multitudes, or of replenishing wast and void Countries, have a clear and
sufficient Warrant from the Mouth of GOD as immediately concurring with a
special end that GOD aimed at in the first institution thereof, when GODS
Honor and Glory, and next Man's Salvation is his own proper scope in this and
all his ways; it must be more necessarly acknowledged, that the desire and
respect unto the publishing his Name where it is not known, and reducing men
who live without GOD in this present world, unto a form of Piety and Godliness,
by how much the more immediately it suits with the mind of GOD, and is further
carried from private respects, by so much the more it advances this work of
planting Coll^^ies above all Civil and Humane ends, and deserves Honor and
Approbation above the most glorious conqueasts or most succesful interprises,
which ever were undertaken by the most renowned men which the Sun has seen,
and that by how much the subduing of Satan is a more glorious Act, than a
Victory over Man; and the inlargements of CHRIST'S Kingdom, than the adding unto
Men's dominions; and the saving of Men's Souls, than the provision for their
Lives and Bodies.

It appears, this end in Plantation has been specially reserved for this
latter days of the World, seeing before CHRIST, the Decree of GOD that suffered
all Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16. Shut up the Church in the
narrow bounds of the promised land, and so excluded men from the propagation of
Religion to other Countries. And in the Apostles times, GOD afforded an easier
and speedier course of converting Men to the Truth by the gifts of the Tongues,
seconded by the power of Miracles, to win the greater credit to their Doctrine,
which most especially and first prevailed upon Countries civilized, as the
History of the Acts of the Apostles makes manifest; As for the rest it is not
questioned, but GOD used the same way to other barbarous Nations, which he held
with these whom he first civilized by the Roman Conquests and mixture of their
Collonies, with them that Religion, might be afterward brought in, seeing it
cannot be imagined that Religion should prevail upon these who are not subdued
to the rule of Nature and Reason. It may be rationally conjuctured that GOD did
especially direct this Work of Erecting Colonies, unto the planting and
propogating of Religion in the West Indies, and that for diverse reasons, which
ought to be taken unto serious consideration, as affoording the strongest
motives which can be proposed to draw on the hearts and affections of men to
their work: There are men of Note, both for Place and Learning in the Church,
that conceive the course held by GOD from the beginning, in the propagation of
Religion, falls in the last age, upon the Western Parts of the World. It is
most certain that from the first Planting of Religion among Men, it has
always held a constant way from East to West, and has in that Line proceeded
so far, that it has extended to the uttermost Western bounds of the formerly
known World, so that if it make up any further passage upon that point of the
Compass, it must necessarly light upon the West Indies, And it is conceived
with all, that our Saviors Prophecy, Matthew. 24.27. points out such a progress
of the Gospel, its true that the comparison there used, taken from the
lightning, aims at the sudden dispersing of the knowledge of CHRIST by the
Apostles Ministry but whereas it is known, that the Ligthning shins from
diverse places of the Heaven, showing it self indifferently, sometimes in the
West, sometimes in the North or South; Its judged probable that our Savior
does in this similitude, choice to name the lightning that comes out of the
East unto the West, to express not only the shining out of the Gospel, but
withal the way and passage by which it proceeds from one end of the World to
an other, that is from East to West.

But passing by that only as a probable argument, the following seems to carry
greater weight, the knowledge of CHRIST must certainly be manifested to all
quarters of the World, according to diverse predictions of Prophets ratified
and renewed by Christ and his Apostles; but that the knowledge of Christ has
been never as yet fully discovered to these Western Nations is clearly
demonstrated, seeing till the time that the first Planters went over from
England, not many years since, no History for 500. years before Christ, ever
mentioned any such Inhabitants upon earth; much less l^ft any record of passage
to them or commerce with them; so that unless we should conceive a miraculous
worth of conceiving knowledge without means, it cannot be imagined, how these
Nations should have once heard of the Name of CHRIST?

But further* what shall we think of that almost miraculous opening the passage
unto, and discovery of these formerly unknown Nations, which must needs have
proven impossible to former Ages, for want of the Knowledge of the use of the
Lodestone, as wounderfully found out as these unknown Countries by it. It were
little less then impiety to conceive, that GOD, whose Will concurrs with the
lighting of a Sparrow upon the ground, had no design in directing one of the
most difficult and observable works of this Age, and as great folly to imagine,
that He who made all things, and consequently, Orders and Directs them to his
own Glory, had no other scope, but the satisfying of Men's greedy appetites, who
thirsted after the riches of that new World; And to tender to the bloody and
cruel Spainard the objects of such barbarous cruelties, as the World never
heard of. We have then ground to conceive, that GOD in that great Discovery,
aimed at this, that after he had punished the Atheism and Idolatry of these
Heathens, and brutish Nations by the Conquerours cruelty; and acquainted them
by mixture with some other peoples civility, he might at length cause the
Glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST shine out to them as it did to other Nations,
after the sharp times of the bitter dissolations thereof betwixt the Romans and
them. That this Nation is able and fit to send out Collonies unto foreign
parts will evidently appear to any who considers our overflowing multituds,
this being admitted for a received principle, that Countries superabound in
people, when they have mo then they can well employ, seeing we know men are not
ordained to live only, but withal and specially to serve one another, throw
love in some profitable and useful calling; and tho it be granted, that this
Land by GODS ordinary blessing yields sufficiency of Corn and Cattle, for more
then the present inhabitants; yet that we have more people, then we do or can
profitably employ, will appear to any man of understanding, willing to
acknowledge the truth, and to consider that many among us live without
employment either wholly or in the greatest part.

We have as much opportunity as any Nation to transport our men, and necessar
provisi^ns b^ Sea unto these countries, witho^t which advantage they cannot be
peopled from ^a^ part of the World; from this Christian part at least, and how
useful a Nighbour the Sea is to the furthering such a work, the xample of the
Graecians and Phenicians, who filled all the bordering coasts with ^ol^o^^es,
do sufficiently prove unto all the wo^ld ^^ither is it to be doubted, but the
first (...), wanting this conveniencie, as Abraham ^n his removing to Charan
first, (...) to Canaan afterward; must needs h^ve sp^^^^ much time, and
endured much trouble in ^^ssing their companies and provisions by land, ^ver
Rivers, and throw Woods, and Thick t^ h unbeaten paths.

I k^ow it will be asked, what call or warrant a m^n has to remove, when he is
w^ll where he is? Or, what warrant particular men have to engadge their
Persons, and Estates, in this employment of planting Collonies.

As for he first of these, we find we may remove for the gaining of knowledge,
our Savior commends it in the Queen of the South, that she came from the
uttermost ends of the Earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, Matthew. 12.24. And
surely with him she might have continued for the same end, if her Personal
Calling had not recalled her home. We find it also allowable to remove, and
travel for Merchandise, and Gain-sake; Daily Bread may be sought from a far,
Prove. 31.14: Yea, our Savior approves travel for Merchants, Matthew. 13.45.
when He compares a Christian to a Merchant man seeking Pearls; for he never
fetches a Comparison from any unlawful thing, to illustrate a thing Lawful;
the comparison from the unjust Steward, and from the Thief in the night, not
being taken from the unjustice of the one, or the Theft of the other, but from
the Wisdom of the one, and the suddenness of the other, which in themselves are
not unlawful.

We find from Scripture, its lawful to remove to plant a Collonie, that is, a
Company agreeing together to remove out of their own Country, and settle a
City or Common Wealth elsewhere; of such a Collony (as is already mentioned) we
read in Acts 16.12. which GOD blessed and prospered exceedingly, and made of it
a glorious Church. Nature teaches Bees to do so, when as the Hyve is too full,
they seek abroad for new dwellings; so when the Hyve of a Kingdom is so full,
that Tradesmen cannot live one by another, but eat up one another, in this case
its lawful to remove.

But further, GOD allows a Man to remove, when he may employ his Talents and
Gifts better elsewhere, especially when he is not bound by any particular
ingadgement to the place where he is; thus GOD sent Joseph before to preserve
the Church, Joseph's Wisdom and Spirit was not fit for a Shepherd, but for a
Counselor of State, and therefore GOD sent him to Egypt.

Where people find themselves straightened in point of their opinion, no
reasonable man will question their call to go, whereby Law they are allowed
that Freedom, in this point which they themselves would desire; this is one
great encouragement to any so circumstantial, to remove to any of the new
Plantations; the interest of which oblidgeth to lay this as a fundamental,
that no man shall be any way imposed upon in matters of principls, but have
their own freedom without the least hazard.

It will certainly be allowed by all that in the present circumstances of the
Protestants in France, where the free exercise of their Religion is denied to
them, it is very allowable for them to remove where without hazard they may
live in the free exercise of their own principles, being upon that account
obnoxious to no hazard as guilty of the breach of the Law.

I believe some may object, that no man undertakes this task without an
extraordinary warrant, such as Abraham had from GOD, to call him out of
Mesopotamia to Canaan; their opinion appears to be founded upon this argument,
that the planting of Collonies is an extraordinary work; and therefore these
who undertake it, must have an extraordinary call. In answer to this, I think
it cannot be granted, that the planting of Collonies is an extraordinary work
this argument lying strongly against it.

That duty which is commanded by a perpetual law, cannot be accounted
extraordinary.

But the sending out of Collonies is commanded by a perpetual Law.

Therefore it is no extraordinary duty.

Now that the commandment is perpetual, has been proved, first, because it was
given to Mankind. 2. Because it has a ground which is perpetual, to wit, the
emptiness of the earth, which either is so, or may be so, while the World
endures, for even these places which are full, may be emptied by Wars, or
sickness, and then an argument passes as strongly the contrary way, the
undertaking of an ordinar duty needs no other then an ordinary warrant, but
such is planting of a Collonie as being undertaken by Virtue of a perpetual
Law, therefore the undertaking to plant a collonie needs no extraordinary
warrant.

I must grant Abraham's undertaking was in many things extraordinar, and
therefore needed an immediate direction from GOD, he was to go alone with his
Family and Brethren, to such a certain place far distant, possessed already by
the Canaanits who were to be expelled, that land was to be wholly appropriat to
himself and his Issue, he was not to plant it at present, but only to Sojourn
in it, and walk through it for a time; Now none of these circumstances fit our
ordinary collonies; and consequently Abraham's example is nothing to this
purpose, because the case is different, tho in some other things alike.

It may be further objected, that tho Men may adventure upon the Work, upon an
ordinary Warrant, yet none can give that but the State; therefore it may be
judged that a Command from the Highest Authority unto such as ingadge
themselves in this Affair is necessary; That the State has power over all her
Members to command and dispose of them within the bounds of Justice; is more
evident then can be denied; but this power is diversely executed, sometimes by
Command, sometimes by Permission, as in preparations to War; sometimes Men are
compelled to serve, sometimes they are permitted to go Volunteers; sometimes
the Supreme Power takes care of the whole business; sometimes as in Musters
commits it to Delegats. If the Government then proclaim Liberty to such as will
go about such a design, and commit the care to themselves, to associat whom
they think fit. It cannot be denied, but the State has given a sufficient
Warrant, as will appear by your perusal of the Advertisement published
thereanent, adjoined to the close hereof.

Neither does it appear that any State did more; the Romans use was to
proclaim, That they intended to plant a Collonie of such a number in such a
place, and as many as would give in their names, should receive so many Acres
of ground, and enjoy such other privileges as they thought fit to grant them;
which they then expressed, these who gave in their names were enrolled till the
number was full: and then they had certain Commissioners appointed; to see all
things ordered accordingly, and every Man put in possession of his Inheritance;
Neither did the State interpose their Authority, in assigning and choising out
the Men, but left it free and voluntar to every Man to take or leave, seeing
nothing can bear out the Hazards and inconveniences of such undertakings, but
a willing mind; Men can disjeast any thing which themselves do choice or
desire, but a Commandment makes a pleasant thing harsh; how much more harsh
things intolerable!

By what is above written, I apprehend you will find it sufficiently cleared,
that the prosecuting this Design is warranted from the Word of GOD; it remains
for your further satisfaction, as to the reasonableness thereof, to be made no
less apparent, that the effectual carrying on thereof will contribute to the
advantage of the Nation in general, and to the honor and particular interest
of these who are active Undertakers ^herein; and I am much in a mistake, if I
make not that appear as clearly as the other, but before I begin to condescend
upon particulars, I judge you will not find it improper in the first place, to
offer to your consideration, a general Survey of the present cireumstances of
the Nation, whe^eb^ you will the more easily be satisfied of some particulars
properly to be noticed, for your more clear conviction of the truth of this
assertion.

Tho there be some particular parcels of Our Country here and there to be
found, which both for the nature of the Soil, and other pleasant and agreeable
accommodations are in themselves sufficiently desirable, yet where I have the
general prospect thereof in my view, I find my self oblidged to acknowledge, it
is not among the most fertile places of the world, to say no worse, but tho we
cannot compate with Our Neighbor Nation, as to the fertility of the Soil in
general, or the flourishing of trade; in some things it will be acknowledged we
are comparativly nothing inferior to them, this kingdom has plenty of
Inhabitants, whereof yearly it may cast a Fleece, without the least prejudice
of the general interest of the Nation, as actually it has done since the year
1618. that the wars began in Germany; it is suffici^ntly known what multitudes
of People have gone hence yearly since that time, the truth of this well appear
to these who consider, that in the Swedish Army at one time there were 27.
Scottish Collonies and that Douglas Regim^nt in France has since His Majesty's
Restoration, taken hence upwards of thirty thousand men, besides what number
have during all that time gone to Flanders, and Holland, where there have been
three Regiments of Scots Men, of standing Forces constantly till this day kept
in pay; and are at present yet standing; whereby is occasioned the transport of
a considerable number of men yearly for their recruits.

Sir, you may easily consider, what an interest Scotland might have had in
America, had all these who have gone from their native Country in queast of
Honor and Fortunes, to these places, steered their course to this Airth; there
is hardly any noble family in Scotland, or Gentlemen of any note, but ere this
time should have had some interest in America; If these had all settled in one
place, it should have been a very considerable Collony ere this time; Women
also of our own Nation would not have been wanting to these Men, by which the
foundation of a very flowrishing Collonie should have been laid; You know as
well as I, that Our Country People want not their Sagacity in Country
Affairs, they know abundantly well how to manage their own Business, according
to their Capacities, they are painful and laborious, inured to hardship; these
who know how to make a Livelihood in this Country, will certainly know much
better how to live in a more Fertile Soil, where their Pains and Industry would
be more plentifuly rewarded, than can be expected from the natural barrenness
of our Native Soil, when compared with the Fertility of these places in America.

It is on the other hand sufficiently known to all, who are in the least
acquainted with Our Scottish Histories, That, Our Gentry who have ordinarily the
advantage of Education, whereof our Commonality are deprived, are in nothing
inferior to any Gentry in Europe; by this I mean not only Our Nobility and
Gentry, and the Eldest Sons, their Representatives, but the younger of both, to
whom it is observed; Nature gives no less Vivacity of Spirit than to the Elder,
(if not more.) Though by Our Law they are deprived of being proportionably
sharers in their Fortune; Whence it is, that these of them who have any Spirit,
sensible of this disadvantage, choice rather to go abroad upon their own
Purchase, than to be oblidged to a slavish dependence upon the elder Brother
for a Livly-hood, which by the custom of the Country, these of no Spirit are
frequently ingadged to, how insignificant so ever he may be.

I desire to know, if a more easy or honorable way could be proposed? Or a
more probable mean to expect a comfortable Livly-hood, than with what small
Fortune will be allowed by their Parents, (from the elder Brothers Estate) to
be settled in such a place of America, as shall be judged a proper seat for
these who go upon such a Design from this Nation? Their Parents can always
with ease provide them with a convenient number of the Commonality, as Servants
who in this Country can never be wanting to Gentlemen. Our Common People will
quickly come to understand their particular interest in this affair, se^ing
after their four years service, they may rationaly propose to live more
plentifully and more at ease* after a very l^ttle moderat pains and labor,
then they can do at home, when they have spent their whole time, aft^r the
ordinary m^thod of this country, according to their accustome^ slavish toil
they are used to.

I am ready upon very good ground to believe that within a few years, the elder
brothers left at home intan^led in the ordinary debts of the Family; and so in
a mann^r what by that, and what by the other public burdens, ingadged in a
most slavish life, when he is every morning in the reverence of hie Creditors;
will quickly come to envy the happiness of the ^^unger brothers in America,
when they come to be informed ^n what plenty they live, recreating themselves
with no less pleasant, then harmless divertisements that Coun^rey in great
plenty affoords, and divertising primative recreations, where every one shall
have such a competent suff^cien^ or ^^mself, as h^ shall not have the least
occasion of envying his Neighbor upon account of his or ^ne; each having for
himself what in reason can be judged a comfortable accommodation.

But however, weighty this consideration may be, I leave the further
prosecuting thereof to offer to your serious thoughts, a point of no less
moment, as being in my weak judgment more ma^erial, and of greater weight in
their times, then the other, are not the distractions of this Kingdom, anent
matters of Opinion, in reference to Church Government, come to that hight that
the sad and fatal consequences thereof, are astonishing to all sober persons;
many who upon some scruple, cannot comply with the present Model of Government,
are yet confounded and ashamed, to consider the unwarrantable practices of
some, who give themselves out, as owning their principles, while their inhuman
and barbarous practices are a scandal not only to the Protestant Religion, but
inconsistant with Christianity. Yea, Humanity it self! what the further result
of these differences shall be, I will not take upon me to determine, only the
consequencies are like to be not a little prejudicial to the Protestant
Religion; each of the Parties endeavor to blame the other, without any design
of Accommodation, or yielding one to another. There is nothing impossible to
the Omnipotent Power; But a reconsiliation of the differences among our
Churchmen appears improbable in the highest degree; So fixed both Parties do
seem to be in their own Principles. If Mackquare and Broun vent publicly the
justification of their Tenets, for the further incouragem^nt of their own
Party, in opposition to the other.

The Bishop of St. Asaph will not be behind with them, seeing rather as not to
have the occasion of reaching them a blow, he choiceth affrontedly in the face
of the World, to cut off from his Native Prince, Forty of his Royal Ancestors.
I desire not to reflect upon any of his Lo: Character, but I may be allowed
without giving offense, to say, whatever demonstration his Lo: has given in
that piece, of reading, he has evidenced small sense of his gratitude to so
bountiful a Prince, to whom he owed so much, to have so treated him; as his
malice against our Nation, is thereby made sufficiently apparent, so you now
see his gross ignorance in that particular laid open to the world, by a very
ingenious Pen, ( Sir G. McK.) which probably may have that effect upon his Lo.
as to oblidge him for the future to treat in matters wherein he is more
versant, and which are more becoming a Gownman, then so publicly to endeavor
to affront a Nation, by injuring their King, and his own.

But to return from this digression, you see so it is now judged the interest
of the Government altogether to suppress the Presbiterian Principles; and that
in order thereto, the whole force and bensill of the Law of this Kingdom, are
levelled at the effectual bearing them down, that the rigorous putting these
Laws in execution, has in a great part ruined many of these, who
notwithstanding thereof find themselves in conscience oblidged to retain these
principles; while in the other hand Episcopacy is by the same Laws supported,
and protected; I would gladly know what other rational medium can be proposed
in their circumstances then either to comply with the Government, by going what
length is required by Law, in conforming, or to retear; where by Law a
Toleration is by His Majesty allowed; such a retreat does at present offer it
self in America; and is no where else to be found in His Majesty's Dominions. I
would be informed if such as cannot comply with the present Laws would not act
more rationally, to bestow what is yet left them in making an interest in that
place, transporting themselves thither where they are by Law allowed, the free
exercise of their principles, beside what other accommodations they may upon
just grounds propose to themselves, rather then by still living where they are
resolved not to comply with the Government, expose themselves wholly to ruin,
which appears absolutely inevitable, otherwise then by a full compliance, with
the Laws, whereby may be obviated the penalty; such will otherwise be liable
to the exacting, whereof will certainly tend to their ruin in the close.

And to conuclude you will find no small ground of further encouragement to such
as are resolved effectually to bestirr themselves in carrying on this design,
from the consideration of the great success of the only undertaking of this
Nature this Kingdom was ever concerned in, whereby ^s made clearly evident that
we want not people for managing such design, it was but about the latter end of
King James the sixth, his days, that we began to be concerned in sending some
people to Ireland, and yet the small beginning that design had, from the
undertaking of a very few Gentlemen, has come this length that I am informed
by Creditable Authors, that Kingdom this day could bring to the fields an
hundred thousand of our country men; Yea, I had an account thence lately from
an acquaintance of mine, who was serious in advancing this design, That the
Province of Ulster, where most of our Nation are seated, could spare Forty
thousand Men and Women, to an America Plantation, and be sufficiently Peopled
it self. The Gentleman who gave me this Information, is since settled in
Maryland, the account he sends of that Country is so encouraging, that I hear
a great many of his Acquaintances are making for that Voyage; one thing is
considerable in this to be observed, That the difficulties of such an
undertaking were far more terrifying at that time, then now to our Country
Men, seeing a Voyage from the West of Scotland to Ireland, not 16. hours
sailing, was then more formidable generally to People, who otherwise would have
undertaken willingly the Voyage, then now from Lies to America, whether
several Ships have gone without the least discouraging accident.

But now to come to the Answer of your most material Question, to wit, What I
judge the most proper place in America, for a seat to these who would resolve
to go hence upon such a Design For your satisfaction in this, I shall very
freely, tell you my own Opinion, that having for some time made it my work to
consider all the Coast of America, from the River of Canada, Northerly, to the
River of May, Southerly, in that part of Flonda now called Caralina; having in
my search had the opportunity of informing my self of the different nature of
the Soils, the temperature of the Climats, the healthfulness of the places, the
Constitutions of the several Governments, the conveniences of Access, the
advice given to Phaeton, appears very apposite, medio tutissimus ibis, and so
East-Jersey, upon the River of Hudson, is the place I find my self oblidge to
prefer to any other of the English Plantations upon that coast, upon some or
other if not most of the above named considerations.

That you may be convinced of the truth of this, I here send you what
description I have of that place, as it is narrated in a Treatise thereanent,
emitted lately by the Scots Proprieters; I send you also the doubles of several
letters from thence all agreeing in one, to the advantage of that place,
confirming all spoken in the said Treatise, after your perusal of what does
follow, you will see whether I have ground or not to make this choice.

It is time now to show how some of our Contrymen, in order to so
advantageous a Project, have already purchased an considerable Interest in a
Plantation, which is justly esteemed not Inferior, if not beyond any place,
upon the whole continent of America, belonging to the English Dominions, called
East-New-Jersey. The deduction of the right of it is thus;

The KING by Patent to the Duke of York granted a great tract of Land lying
betwixt Virginia and New England, It was formerly in the hand of the Dutch, and
considerably improved by them, and called New-Netherlands, And by treaty after
the first Dutch Wars, Surrendered to the King that part of it, lying betwixt
Delaware and Hudsons River, called New-Cesaria, or New Jersey; which is betwixt
the 39. and 41. Degree of Northern Latitude: was by the Duke of York, granted
to John Lord Barkley, and Sir George Cartwright. That part, which belonged to
the Lord Barkley, being assigned to Edward Billings. Afterward by a deed of
Partition betwixt the said Edward Billings and Sir George Cartwright, The West
Part lying upon Delaware River, was allotted to Edward Billings for his share;
and the East part lying upon Hudsons River, nearest to the Province of New
York, was appointed to Sir George Cartwright for his share. Which part, now
called East-New-Jersey, is from Sir George Cartwright conveyed to twelve
Persons in and about London, who have since conveyed an half to other twelve,
so that as well the Right of Government as the Soil, stands now in 24.
Proprietors, in favors of some of whom the Duke of York has been latey pleased
to make a new Grant of Confirmation, both of Soil and Government to the twenty
four Proprietors, with the same Power and Privileges, he has in his Patent
from the King, which are as large as any other Plantation has, for the Words
of the Dukes Patent are as follows;

The Patent from the King, to James Duke of York, etc.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Men to whom these Presents shall
come, Greeting, Know ye that WE, for diverse good causes and considerations, Us
hereunto moving, have of Our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion,
Given and Granted, and by these presents for Us* Our Heirs, and Successors, Do
give and grant unto Our dearest Brother JAMES Duke of York, his Heirs and
Assigns, All that part of the Maine-Land of New England, beginning at a
certain place, called or known by the name Saint Croix, next adjoining to
New-Scotland in America, and from thence extending along the Coast, unto a
certain place called Pamaquin, or Pemaquid, and so up the River thereof, the
farthest Head of the same as it tends Northward, and extends from the River
Kenbequin, and so upwards by the shortest course, to the River of Canada
Northward; and all that Island or Islands commonly called by the several name
or names of Mattawax, or Long Island, situate and being toward the West of
Cape-cod, and the narrow Heggansets, abutting upon the main Land between the
two Rivers, there called or known by the several names of Conectecute and
Hudsons River, together also with the said River called Hudsons River, and all
the Land from the West Side of Conectecute River to the East Side of Delaware
Bay; And also all those several Islands called or known by the name of
Martins-Vineyard, and Hantucks, alias Hantuckett, together with all the Lands,
Islands, Soyls, Rivers, Harbors, Mines, Mineralls, Quarries, Woods, Marshes,
Waters, Lakes, Fishing, Haukings, Huntings, and Foulings, and all other
Royallities, Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments to the said several
Islands, Lands and Premises belonging and appertaining, with their and every
of their Appurtenances, and all Our Estate, Right, Title, and Interest, Benefit
and Advantage, Claim and Demand of, in or to the said Islands or Premises, or
any part or parcel thereof, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders together with the Yearly and other Rents, Revenues and Profits of
the Premises, and every Part and Parcel thereof; To have and to Hold all and
singular the Lands and Premises, with their, and every of their Appurtenances
thereby given and granted, or herein before mentioned to be given or granted,
unto Our said Dearest Brother, James Duke of York, his Heirs and Assignies for
ever. To be Holden of Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, as of Our Manner of
East-Greenwich in the County of Kent, in free and common Soccage, and not in
Capite, or by Knights Service, Yield and Rendering. And the same James Duke of
York; for himself, his Heirs and Assigns, DOES Covenant and Promise to yield
and render unto US, Our Heirs, and Successors, of, and for the same yearly, and
every year, Forty Beaver skins, when the same shall be demanded, or within
ninety days after such Demand made. And WE do further of Our special Grace,
certain Knowledge and mere Motion, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, give and
grant unto Our said Dearest Brother, James Duke of York, his Heirs, Deputes,
Agents, Commissioners and Assignies, by these Presents full and absolute Power
and Authority, to Correct, Punish, Pardon, Govern and Rule all such Subjects of
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, or any other Person or Persons, as shall for
time to time adventure themselves into any the Parts or Places aforesaid; Or
that shall or do at any time hereafter inhabit within the same, according to
such Laws, Orders, Ordinances, Directions, and Instructions, as by Our said
Dearest Brother, or his Assigns shall be Established, and in defect thereof in
cases of necessity according to the good Directions of his Deputy
Commissioners, Officers or Assigns respectively, as well in cases and matters
Capital, and Criminal, as Civil, and others; so always as the said Statutes,
Ordinances and Proceedings be not contrary to, but as near as may be agreeable
to the Laws, Statutes, and Government of this Our Realm of England; AND Saving
and Reserving to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, the Receiving, Hearing, and
Determining the Apeale, and Apeales of any Person or Persons, of, in, or
belonging to the Territories or Islands aforesaid, or touching any Judgment or
Sentence to be there made, or given: And further, that it shall and may be
Lawful to and for our said Dearest Brother, His Heirs, and Assigns, by these
Presents, from time to time, to Nominate, Make, Constitute, Ordain, and Confirm
such Laws, as aforesaid, by such Name, or Names, Style or Styles, as to him or
them shall seem good: And likewise to Revoke, Discharge, Change, and Alter, as
well all and singular Governors, Officers, and Ministers, which hereafter
shall be by him or them thought fit, and needful to be in, or used within the
aforesaid Islands and Parts: And also to Make, Ordain, and Establish all manner
of Laws, Orders, Directions, Instructions, Forms, and Ceremonies of Government
and Magistracy fit and necessar for, and concerning the Government of
Territories and Islands aforesaid. So always as the same be not contrary to
the Laws and Statutes of this Our Realm of England, but as near as may be
conformable thereunto, and the same at all times. hereafter to put in Execution
or Abrogate, Revoke, or Change, not only within the Precincts of the said
Territories or Islands, but also upon the Seas in going and coming to and from
the same, as he or they in their good Discretion shall think fittest for the
good of the Adventurers and Inhabitants. AND We do further of Our special
Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, Grant, Ordain, and Declare, that all
such Governors Deputes, Officers, and Ministers, as from time, to time, shall
be Authorized, and appointed in manner and form aforesaid, shall and may have
full power, and Authority within the Territories aforesaid, to use and exercise
Martial Law, in cases of Rebellion, Insurrections, and Mutiny, inas large and
ample a manner as our Leiutenents in our Countries within Our Realm of England,
have or ought to have, by force of their Commissions of Leiutenency, or any
Law, or Statute, of this our Realm. And We do further, by these presents for us
our Heirs and Successors, grant unto Our Dearest Brother James Duke of York,
his Heirs and Assigns, that it shall and may be Lawful to and for the said
James Duke of York, his Heirs and Assigns, in his or their Discretions, from
time to time, to admit such and so many person or persons, to Trade and
Traffic into and within the Territories and Islands aforesaid, to every and
any part and parcel thereof, and to have, possess, and enjoy any Lands, and
Hereditaments in the part and places aforesaid, as they shall think fit
according to the Laws, Orders, Constitutions, and Ordinances, by our said
Brother, his Heirs Deputies, Commissioners and Assigns, from time to time, to
be made and established, by virtue of, and according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and under such Conditions, Reservations, and
Agreements, as our said Dearest Brother, his Heirs and Assigns, shall set
down, Order, Direct, and appoint; and not otherwise, as aforesaid. And We do
further, of Our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere motion, for US, Our
Heirs, and Successors, Give and Grant, unto Our said Dearest Brother, his Heirs
and Assigns, by these presents, that it shall and may be Lawful to, and for
him, them, or any of them, at all and every time or times hereafter, out of any
of our Realms, or Dominions whatsoever, take, load, carry, and transport, in,
and unto their Voyages, for and toward the Plantations, of our Territories and
Islands aforesaid, all such and so many of our loving Subjects, or any other
Strangers, being not prohibited or under restraint, that will become our loving
Subjects, and live under our Allegiance, and shall willingly accompany them in
the said Voyages, together with all such Clothing, Implements, Furniture, or
any other things usually Transported, and not Prohibited, as shall be necessary
for the Inhabitants of the said Islands, and Territories, and for the use and
defense thereof, and Mannaging, and carrying on the Trade, with the people
there. Yielding and paying unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, the Customs and
Duties thereof, due and payable, according to Laws and Customs of this our
Realm. And we do also for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto our said
Dearest Brother JAMEs Duke of York, his Heirs and Assigns, and to all and
every such Governor or Governors, or Deputies, their Officers, or Ministers,
as by ou^ said Brother, his Heirs or Assigns shall be appointed, to have Power
and Authority of Government, and Command in, and over the Inhabitants of the
said Territories, and Islands, that they and every of them, shall, and may
lawfully, from time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter For their
several Defense and safty, Encounter, Repulse, Expel, and Resist, by force of
Arms, as well by Sea, as by Land, and all ways and means whatsoever, all such
person and persons, as without the special License of our Dearest Brother, his
Heirs and Assigns, shall attempt to Inhabit within the several Precincts, and
Limits, of our said Territories and Islands; and also all, and every such
person, and Persons whatsoever, as shall Enterprise, and Attempt, at any time
hereafter, the Destruction, Invasion, Detriment, or Annoyance, to the parts,
places, or Islands aforesaid, or any parts thereof. And Lastly, our will and
pleasure is, And We do hereby declare, and grant, that these out Letters
Patents, or the Inrollment thereof, shall be good and effectual, in the Law, to
all intents, and purposes whatsoever, notwithstanding the not well, and true
Receiting, or mentioning of the premises, or any part thereof, or the Limits,
or Bounds thereof: or of any form, or other Letters Patents, or Grants
whatsoever made, or Granted of the premises, or of any part thereof, or the
Limits or bounds thereof, or of any former, or other Letters Patents, or
Grants, whatsoever made, or Granted, of the Premises, or of any part thereof,
by US, or any of Our Progenitors, unto any Person, or Persons, whatsoever
bodies, Politic, or Corporate, any other Law or other restraint, in
certainty, or imperfection, whatsoever to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, Although, express mention of the true yearly Value, or
certainty of the Premises, or any of them, or of any other Gifts or Grants by
Us, or by any of our Progenitors heretofore made to the said James Duke of
York, in these presents is not made or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision,
Proclamation, or Restriction heretofore had, made, enacted, or provided, or any
other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding: In witness whereof, We caused these Letters, to be made Patent,
Witness our self, at Westminster, the 29. day of June, in the 16. Year of Our
Reign.

The SCOTS Proprietors are the Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor of
SCOTLAND, his Brother, the Viscount of Metfoord, Secretar of State for this
Kingdom, and the Viscount of Tarbit, Lord Register, Five hundred thousand
Acres, being seven parts of the 24. belongs to these three, and some other
Gentlemen.

This Province or Collony lies betwixt 39. and 41. Degrees of Latitude, being
about 12. Degrees more to the South, then the City of London. It is in the same
Climate with the Kingdom of Naples, and Montpelier in France. The Summer is
hotter, and longer then in England, and the Winter colder and shorter, the
days about an hour longer in Winter, and as much shorter in Summer. Is bounded
South-East with the Maine Sea, East by that vast Navigable Stream, called
Hudsons River, which divides this from the Province of New York, West by a Line
of Division, which separates this Province from West-Jersey, and North upon the
Maine-Land. And extends it self in length upon the Seacoast and along
Hudsons River, one hundred English miles and upward.

The situation of this Country is just, as it were, in the Center of the
English plantations in America, betwixt the South parts of Carolina, which is
over hot; and the North parts of Pemaquitte, next New Scotland which are
coldest; so that its conveniencie of situation, temperature of the Air, and
fertility of the Soil is such, that there is no less then seven Towns
considerable already, (viz.) Shretsburry, Midletonn, Berghen, New-wark,
Elizabeth-town, Woobridge, and Piscataway, which are well inhabited by a sober
and industruous people, who have necessary provisions for themselves and
families, and for the comfortable entertainment of Travelers and Strangers.

And the Quit-rents, or Fewes (as they are called) of these Towns and other
plantations, already in the Country, yields to the 24 Proprietors above 500.
lib. sterling, yearly Revenue, and the Air of this Collony, is experimentallie
found generally to agree well with English Constitutions, and consequently with
Ours.

For Navigation it has these advantages, not only to be situate along the
Navigable parts of Hudsons River, but lies also fifty miles along the Main
Sea, and near the midest of this Province is that notted Bay for ships within
Sandy-Hook, very well known, not to be inferior to any Harbor in America,
where ships not only harbor in greatest storms, but there Ride safe with all
Winds, and sail in and out thence as well in Winter as Summer. For Fishery the
Sea-banks are very well stored with variety of Fishes, not only such as are
profitable for Exportation, but such as are fit for Food there; There are
Whales, Coad-fish, Colling, and Hake-fish, and large Mackeril, and also many
other sorts of small Flate-fish; The Bay, also, and Hudsons River, are
plentifully stored with Sturgeon, and other Scal-fish, Eills, and Shel-fish, as
Oysters, in abundance.

This Country is also plentifully, supplied with Lively-springs, Rivolets,
Inland-Rivers, and creeks, which fall into the Sea, and Hudsons-River, in which
also there is variety of Fresh-fish, and water Fowl.

There are little hills from Rariton-River, which is about the middle of this
Province, that go to the very North-West-bounds of it, in which are abundance
of good Mill-Stons to be had, and there is many, both Corn, and Saw-milnes set,
and setting up already, also on the other side of these Mountains, there is
brave fresh Rivolets, fit for setting of In-Land-Towns, and a great deal of
Meadow-ground upon the banks thereof, So that there is abundance of Hay to be
had for Fodering of Cattle in the Winter time, and these Meadows shows the
Country is not altogether covered with timber.

Its true, the first difficulty meets People in Planting there, is the cutting
down Wood (Tho having some Meadow intermixed already well covered with Hay, is a
great ease) yet the trouble is compensed by the advantage, which the timber
being cut down, yields, being good Oak, fit for Shipping and Masts; and also
Chesmite. Walnut, Poplar, Cdar, Ash, Fir; And also, by the fertility of the
Soil, being cleared, which yields a vast increase not only of Indean Corn,
which is a very wholesome Food, but of English grain, as Wheat and Barley,
whereof it usually yields betwixt the 20. and 30th. fold, and with far less
labor (the timber being once removed) then in Britan. And to show the labor
of the cutting down the Trees, and clearing the ground, is not so great as some
may Imagine; It is known by experience, that two men arriving there in
September, or October, may clear as much ground, as usually brings by Harvest
following twenty Quarters, that is ahout 40. Scots Bolls of grain.

This Country also, produces good Flax, and Hemp, which they now spine, and
Manufacture into Linen Cloth, and the very Barrens there (as they are called)
are not like most in Britain, but produces Grass fit for Grazing Cattle in
Summer time; There is also upon Ground (already cleared) store of good English
Claver Grass growing; the Country is well stored with wild Deir; Connies, and
wild Fowl of several sorts; As Turkeys, Pigeons, Partridges, Plevers, Quaills,
wild Swans, and Geese, Ducks in great plenty; It produces variety of good and
delicious Fruits; as Grapes, Plumes, Mulberries, and also Appricocks, Peaches,
Pears, Apples, Quinches, Water Millons; which are in England planted in
Orchards and Gardens; but grow there with fare less labor; and many more
Fruits, which come not to perfection in England, are the more natural product
of this Country. It is thought Olives would grow well there; and being store
of Mulberrie Trees, Silkworms would do well there; for they were tried in
Virginia, and proved very well, if the laziness of the People, and there being
wholly set upon Tobacco, and the Interest of Merchants, who were afraid it
might spoil their Silk-Trade from the Straits, had not hindered.

To show how Fruit Trees do advance in that Country, it is credibly reported,
that about Burlingtoun, in West Jersey, which is Northernly then the greatest
part of this Province, from an Apple-tree-Seed in four years, (without
grafting) there sprung a tree, that in the fourth year bore such a quaintitie
of Apples, as yielded a barrel of Syder.

There is there also, great store of Horses, Cowes, Hoggs, and some sheep,
which may be bought at reasonable prices with English, money, or English
Commodities, or man's labor; where goods and money are wanting.

For Minerals, It is thought there are not wanting of several sorts, For there
is an Iron-work already set up, where there is good Iron made; And also, there
is discovered already abundance of Black-Lead.

It is exceeding well furnished with safe, convenient Harbors, for shipping,
which is of great advantage; and affords already for Exportation, great plenty
of Horses, and also Beef, Pork, Pipstaves, Bread, Flower, White, Barley, Rye,
Indian Corn, Butter, and Cheese, which they export for Barbados, Jamaica,
Mevis, and other adjacent Islands; As also to Portugal, Spain, and the
Canaryes, their Whale Oil, and Whale-Fins, Beaver, Mink, Racon, and
Martine-skins (which this Country produces) they transport for England.

The Indian Natives in this Country are but few, comparative to the
Neighboring Collony; And these that are there, are so far from being
Formidable, and injurious to the Planters and Inhabitants, that they are really
serviceable and advantageous to them, not only in hunting, and taking the Deer,
and all other wild Creatures, and catching of Fish, and Fowl fit for food, in
their seasons; But in the killing and destroying of Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and
other Vermin, whose Skins and Furs they bring the English, and sell them at
less price, then the value of the time, that people must spend to take them.
Like as, that this Collony may be founded in Justice, and without any thing of
Oppression, as all that is already Planted; is is truly Purchased from the
Indians, so there is a great deal more of the Province cleared by their
consent; and all is intended by paction with them to be obtained; so that
whoever Purchase; or Plant under the Proprietors; shall be fred of that
encumbrance; and if there were any hazard from the Indians as really there is
none; yet this Province could hardly be in any danger; In respect that to the
North, upon the Main-Land; from whence the hazard; if any must come; the
Province of New York comes betwixt it and them, and 20. miles and more, above
upon Hudsons River, there is a Fort called New-Albany.

There were Constitutions of Government made by the Lord Barkley, and Sir
George Cartwright, in which such provision was made, both for Liberty of
Religion, and Property, that the Province has been considerably Peopled and
many resorted there from the Neighboring Collonies, so that the Planters are
able already to Muster 500. well Armed Men.

The Concessions and Agreement of the Lord Proprietors of the Province of
New-Caesarea, or New Jersey, to and with all and every the Adventurers, and as
such as shall settle or plant, there granted by Lord John Barclay, and Sir
George Cartwright the then Lord Proprietors upon their sending their people to
Plant, Anno 1664.
IMprimis, We do consent and agree, that the Governor of the said Province
has power by the advice of his Council to depute one in his place and
Authority, in case of death, or removeall, to continue until farther order,
unless we have Commissionated one before.

2. Item, That he has (likewise) power to make choice of, and take to him six
Counselors at least, or twelve at most, or any even number betwixt six and
twelve; with whose consent and advice, or with at least three of the six, or
four of a greater number, (all being summonded) he is to Govern according to
the Limitations and Instructions following, during Our Pleasure.

3. Item, That a Chief Secretary or Register, which we have chosen or shall
choice, we faillieing that; he shall choice, shall keep, exact entries in fair
books of all publict affairs; and to avoid Decreets and Law Suitts, shall
record and enter all grants of Lands, from the Lords to the Planters, and
Conveyances of Lands houses or from man to man, as also all Leases for Land
house or hous^s made or to be made by the Landlord to any tennant, for more
then one year, which Conveyance or Lease shall be first acknowledged by the
Granter or Leaser, or proved by the each two witnesses, to the Lease or
Conveyance before the Governor, or some chief Judge of a Court for the time
being, who shall under his hand upon the back side of the said deed or Lease,
attest the acknowledgement or Proof as aforesaid; which shall be a warrant for
the Register to record the same, which conveyance or Lease so recorded shall be
good and effectual, in the Law, notwithstanding any other conveyance, Deed or
Lease, for the said Land, house or houses, or any part thereof, although dated
before the Conveyance, Deed or Deed, or Lease so recorded as aforesaid. And the
said Register, shall do all other thing or things, that we by our Instructions
shall direct, and the Governor, Counsel, and assembly shall ordain for the
good and wellfaire of the said Province.

4ly. Item, That the Suerveyour general, that we have chosen or shall choice
such faillieing, that the Governor shall choice, shall have power by himself,
or deputy to Survey Lay out and bound all such Lands, as shall be granted from
the Lords to the Planters; and all other Lands within the said Province, which
may concern particular men as he shall be desired to do. And a particular
thereof certified to the Register to be recorded as aforesaid. Provided, that
if the said Register and Surveyer, shall so mis-behave themselves as that the
Governor and Counselor, Deputy, Governor or Counselor, the Major part of
them, shall find it reasonable, to Suspend their actings in their respective
employments; It shall be Lawful for them so to do until further order from us.

5ly. Item, That the Governor, Counselors, Assembly Men, Secretary,
Surveyer, and all other Officers of Town shall Swear or Subscribe in a book to
be provided for that purpose, That they will bear true allegiance to the King
of England, his Heirs and Successors. And that they will be faithful to the
interest of the Lords Propietors, of the said Province, and their Heirs
executors and Assigns and endeavor the peace and wellfair of the said
Province, and that they will truly and faithfully discharge their respective
trusts in their respective officses, and do equal Justice unto all men
according to their best skill, and Judgment; without corruption, favor, or
affection. And in the names of all that have Sworn to Subscribe to be entered
in a book; And whosoever shall Subscribe and not Swear, and shall violate his
promise in that Subscription, shall be liable to that same punishment, that the
Persons are or may be that have Sworn and broken their Oaths.

6ly. Item, That all persons that are, or shall become Subjects to the King of
England, and Swear and Subscribe allegiance to the King; and faithfulness to
the Lords, shall be admitted to plant and become a Free man in the said
Province; and enjoy the Freedoms and Immunities hereafter expressed until some
stop or contradiction be made by us the Lords, or else the Governor, Council and
Assembly, which shall be in force until the Lords see cause to the contrary.
Provided, That such stopes, shall not any ways prejudice the right or
continuance of any person that has been received before such Stop; or order
come from the Lords or General Assembly.

7ly. Item, That no person as aforsaid within the said Province at any time
shall be any ways molested, punished, Disquyeted, or called in question for
any Difference in Opinion, or Practice in matters of Religious Concernments,
who do not actuallie disturb the Civil peace of the said Province. But that
all and every such person and persons may from time to time, and at all time
freely and fully, have and enjoy his and their Judgment and Consciences in
matters of Religion throughout all the said Province, They behaving themselves
peaceably and quyetlie and not useing this Liberty to Licentiousnes to the
civil injury or outward disturbance of others; Any Law, Statute, or Clause
contained, or to be contained Usage or Custom of this Realm of England to the
contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

8ly. Item, That no pretense may be taken by us, our Airs, or Assigns; for or
by reason of our right of Patronage and power of Advousone granted by his
Ma^esties Letters patents, unto his Royal Highness, James Duke of York, and by
his said Royal Highness, unto us thereby to infringe the General Clause, of
Liberty of Conscience aforementioned. We do hereby grant unto the General
Assembly, of the said province power by Act to Constitute such and so many
Ministers or Preachers, as they shall think fit, and to establish their
Maintenance, giving Liberty besides to any person or persons to keep and
Maintain what Ministers or Preachers they please.

9ly. Item, That the Inhabitants being Free men or chief Agents to others of
the province aforesaid, do, as soon as this our Commission shall arryve, by
virtue of a Writ, in our names by the Governor to be for the present (until
our Seall comes) Sealled and Signed; make choice of twelve Deputes or
Representatives, from among themselves, who being chosen are to join with the
said Governor and Council for the making such Laws, Ordinances and
Constitutions as shall be necessary for the pr^sent good and welfare of the
said Province. But so soon as Parishes, Divisions, Tribes, and other
Distinctions are made, that then the Inhabitants or Free holders of the several
and respective Parishes, Tribes, or Dominions and Restrictions aforesaid, (do
by Our Write under Our Seal, which we engage shall, and be in due time issued,)
annually meet on the first day of January, and choice Freeholders for every
respective Division, Tribe or Parish to be the Deputies or Representatives of
the same; which body of Representatives or the major part of them, shall with
the Governor or Counsel aforesaid be the General Assembly of the said
Province, the Governor, or his Depute being present unles they shall wilfully
refuse, In which case, they may appoint themselves, a President during the
absence of the Governor, or Depute Governor.

Which ASSEMBLIES are to have Power,
1. To appoint their own time of meeting, and to adjourne their Sessions from
time to time, to such times and places as they shall think convenient; As also,
to as certain the number of their Quorum; Provided, the said number be not
less then the 36. part of the whole, in whom (or more) shall be the full power
of the General Assembly, viz.

2ly. To Enact and make all such Laws, Acts, and Constitutions; As shall be
necessary for the well Government of the said Province, and them to repeall;
Provided, That the same be consonant to Reason, and as near as may be
Convenientlie agreeable to the Laws, and Customs of his Majesty's Kingdom of
England; Prvided also, that they be not against the Interest of us the Lords
Proprietors, our Airs, and Assigns, or any of these our Concessions;
Especially that they be not repugnant to the Article for Liberty of Conscience
abovementioned; which Laws, etc. so made shall receive Publication from the
Governor and Council (but as the Laws of us, and our General Assemblies) and
be in force for the space of one year and no more, unless contradicted by the
Lords Proprietors, within which time they shall be presented to us, our Heirs,
etc. for our ratification; And being confirmed by us, they shall be in
continual force, till expyred by their own Limitation, or by Act of Repeal, in
like manner to be passed (as aforesaid) and confirmed.

3ly. By Act as aforesaid, to constitute all Courts, together with the Limits,
Powers and Jurisdictions of the same; and also the several Offices, and number
of the Officers belonging to each Court, with their respective Salaries, Fees,
and Perquisits, their Appellations and Dignities, with the Penalties that shall
be due to them, for the breach of their several and respective Duties and
Trusts.

4ly. By Act as aforesaid, to lay equal Taxes and Assesments equally to raise
Moneys or Goods upon all Lands, (except us the Lords Proprietors before
settling) or Persons within the several precints, hundreds, Parishes, Manours,
or whatsoever other Divisions shall hereafter be made, and established in the
said Province, as often as necessity shall require; and in such manner as to them
shall seem most equal and easy, for the said Inhabitants in order to the
better supporting of the public Charge of the said Government, and for the
mutual Safety, Defense and Security of the said Province.

5ly. By Act as aforesaid, to erect within the said Province such and so many
Manours, with their necessary Courts, Jurisdictions, Freedoms and Privileges,
as to them shall seem meet and convenient. As also to divide the said Province
into Hundreds, Tribes, Parishes, or such other Divisions and Districtions as
they shall think fit, and the said Divisions to distinguish by what manner we
shall Order or Direct; And in default thereof, by such names as they please; As
also within the said Province to creat and appoint such and so many Ports,
Harbors, Creeks and other places, for the convenient Loading and Unloading of
Goods and Merchandise out of Ships, Boats, and other Vessels; and shall be
expedient with such Jurisdictions, Privileges and Franchises to each Ports,
etc. belonging, as they shall judge most conducing to the general good of the
said Plantation or Province.

6ly. By their enacting to be confirmed as aforesaid, to Erect, Raise and Build
within the said province, or any part thereof, such and so many Forts,
Fortresses, Castles, Cities, Corporations, Burrows, Towns, Villages, and other
places of Strength and Defense, and them or any of them to incorporate with
such Charters and Privileges as to them shall seem good, and the Grant made
unto us will permit; And the same or any of them to fortify and furnish with
such provisions and proportions of Ordnance, Powder, Shot, Armor, and all
other Weapons, Ammunition, and habiliments of War, hoth Offensive and Defensive
as shall be thought necessary, and convenient for the Safety and Welfare of the
said Province; But they shall not at any time Demolish, Dismantle, or
Disfurnish the same without the consent of the Governor and the Major part of
the Council of the said Province.

7ly. By Act as aforsaid, to Constitute, Train-bands, and Companies with the
number of Soldiers, for the Safety, Strength and defense of the said
Province, and of the Forts, Castles, Cities, To Suppress all Munities and
Rebellions, to make war, Offensive and Defensive with all Indian Strangers, and
Forrainers, as they shall see cause. And to pursue an enemy by Sea, as well as
by Land, (if need be) ou^ of the Limitts and Jurisdictions of the said
Province, with the particular cons nt of the Governor and under his conduct,
or of our Commanders in chief or whom he shall appoint.

8ly. By Act as aforesaid to give unto all Strangers, as to them shall seem
meet, a Naturalization and all such Freedoms and Privileges within the said
Province as to his Majesty's Subjects do of right belong, they Swearing or
Subseryving as afores^id, said Stranger so Authorized and Privileged shall be
in all respects accounted in the said Province as the Kings natural Subjects.

9ly. Item, By an Act as aforesaid, to prescrive the quantities of Land, which
shall be from time to time allotted to every Head, free, or servant, Male or
Female; and to make or ordain Rules, for the casting of Lots for Lands, and the
laying out of the same; provided, That they do not in their prescriptions
exceed the several proportions, which are hereby granted by us, to all persons
arriving in the said Province or adventuring thither.

10ly. The General Assembly by Act, as aforesaid, shall make provision for the
Maintain^nce and support of the Governor; And for the defraying all necessary
Charges of the Government; As also, the Constables of the sa^d Province shall
collect the Lords Rents, and shall pay the same to the Receiver, that the Lords
shall appoint to receive the same, unless the said Gene^al Assembly shall
prescrive some other way, whereby the Lords may have their Rents duly
collected without charge or trouble to them.

11ly. And Lastly, To Enact, Constitute and Ordain, all such other Laws, Acts,
and Constitutions, as shall or may be necessary for the good, property, and
setlement of the said Province (excepting what by these presents is excepted,)
and conforming to the Limitations herein expressed.

The Governor with his Council before expressed, is,
First, To see that all Courts established by the Laws of the General Assembly,
and all Ministers and Officers, Civil and Military, do and execute their
several Offices and duties respective, according to the Laws in force; and to
punish them for swerving from the Laws, or Acting contrary to their Trust, as
the nature of their Offense shall require.

Sccondly, According to the constitutions of the General Assembly, to nominate
and commissionate the several Judges, Members and Officers of Courts, whether
Magistratical or Ministerial, and all other civil Officers, Coroners, etc. And
their Commissions, Powers and Authorities to revoke at pleasure; provided, That
they appoint none but Freeholders in the Province aforesaid, unless the
General Assembly consent.

Thirdly, According to the constitutions of the General Assembly, to appoint
Courts and Officers in cases Criminal; And to empower them to inflict penalties
upon Offenders against any of the Laws in force in the said Province, as the
said Laws shall ordain, whether by Fine or Imprisonment, Banishment, Corporal
punishment, or to the taking away of Member, or of Life it self, if there be
cause for it.

Fourthly, To place Officers and Soldiers for the safety, strength, and
defense of the Forts, Castles, Cities, etc. according by the number appointed
by the General Assembly, to nominat, place and Commissionat all Military
Officers under the dignity of the said Governor, who is Commissionated by Us,
over the several Trained Bands, and Companies constituted by the General
Assembly as Colonels, Captains, etc. And their Commissiones to revoke at
pleasure. The Governor with the advice of his Counsel (unless some present
dangers will not permit them to Advise,) To Muster and Train all the Forces
within the said Province, to prosecute War, pursue an Enemy, suppress all
Rebellions and Mu^inies, as well by Sea as by Land, and to exercise the whole
Militia, as fully as we by the Grant from his Royal Highness can empower him
or them to do; provided, that they appoint not Militia Forces, but what are
Freeholders in the said Province, unless the General Assembly shall consent.

Fifthly, Where they see cause after Condemnation, to reprive until the cause
be presented, with a copy of the whole Trial, proceedings and proofs to the
Lords, who will accordingly either pardon or command execution of the Sentence
on the Offender, who is in the m^an time to be kept in safe Custody till the
pleasure of the Lords be known.

Sixthly, In case of Death, ot other removal of the representative, within the
year to issue summonds by write to the respective division or divisions, for
which he or they were choosen, Commanding the Freeholders of the same to
choose others in their stead.

Seventhly, To make warrands, and to seall grants of Lands, according to these
our Concessions; And the prescriptions by advice of the General Assembly, in
such form as shall be at large set down in our Instructions to the Governor
in his Commission, and which are hereafter expressed.

Eighthly, To Act and do all things, that may conduce to the Safety, peace, and
well Government of the said province, as they shall see sit, so that they be
not contrare to the Laws of the said province.

For the better security of the Province of all the Inhabitants.
First, They are not to impose, nor suffer to be imposed, any tax, custom,
subsidy, talladg assesmant, or any other duty whatsoever upon any color or
pretense, upon the said province, and Inhabitants thereof, other then what
shall be imposed by the Authority and consent of the General assembly, and
then only in manner as aforesaid.

Secondly, They are to take care that Land quietly held, planted and possessed
seven years, after its being first duly surveyed by the Surveyor or General,
or his order, shall not be subject to any review, resurvey, or alteration of
bonds, one what pretense soever by any of us, or any Officer or Minister under
us.

Thirdly, They are to take care, that no man, if his cattle stray, or range, or
graze on any ground within the said Province not actually appropriat, or set
out to particular persons shall be liable to pay an^ trespase for the same to
us our Heirs, etc. provided, that custom of Commons be not thereby pretended
to, nor any person hindered from taking up and appropriating any Lands so
grazed upon; And that no person do purposely suffer his cattle to graze on such
lands.

And that the planting of the said Province, may be more speedily Promo^ed.
First, We do hereby grant unto all persons who have already adventured unto
the said province of New Cesarea, of New Jersey, or shall transport themselves,
or Servants before the 1. of January which shall be in the year of our Lord
1665. these following proportions; viz. To every freeman that shall go with the
first Governor from the poart where the Embarks (or shall meet him at the
rendezvous he appoints) for the setlement of a plantation, there Armed with a
good musket, bearing twelve bullets to the pound, with ten pounds of powder,
and and twenty pounds of Bulletts, with bandeliers and match convenient, and
with six months provision for his own person arriving there, One hundredth and
fifty Acres of Land English measure. And for every able Man Servant, that he
shall carry wi^h him armed and provided as aforesaid, and arryving there; the
like quantity of 150. Acres of land English measure. And whosoever shall send
servants at that time shall have for every able man servant, he or she shall
s^nd so Armed, and provided as aforesaid and arryving there, the like quantity
of 150. Acres. And for every weaker servant or slave, male or female, exceeding
the age of 14. years, wh^ h any one shall send or carry, arryving there 75
Acres of land. And to every Christian Servant, exceeding the age aforesaid
after the expiration of their time of service 75. Acres of Land for their own
uses.

2ly, Item, To every Master or Mistress, that go before the first day of
January, which shall be in the years of our Lord 1665. One hundredth and twenty
acres of Land, and for every able man servant that he or she shall carry, or
send Armed, and pro^yded as aforesaid and arryving within the time aforesaid,
the like quantity of 120 Acres of and. And for every weaker Servant or slave,
male or female, exceeding the age of 14. years, arryving there, 60 acres of
Land and to every Christian servant to their own use and behoof 60 acres of
Land.

3ly, Item, To every Freeman or ree-woman that shall arryve in the said
Province armed, and provided as a aforesaid within the second year, from the
first day of January 1665, to the first day o^ January 1666. with an intention
to pl^nt 90. acres of Land English measure; and for every able man servant that
^he or she shall carry or send armed and provided as aforesaid, 90 acres of
Land of like measure.

4ly, Item, For every weaker servant or Slave, aged as aforesaid, that shall be
so carried, or sent thither within the second year aforesaid, 45 acres of Land
of like measure. And to every Christian Servant- that shall arrive the second
year 45, acres of Land of like measure, after the expiration of his or their
time or service, for their own use and behoove.

5ly. Item, To every freeman and free woman armed and provided as aforesaid,
That shall go and adventure with an intent to plant within the third year from
January 1666, To January 1667, 60 Acres of Land of like measure. And for every
able manservant, that he or they shall carry or send over, within the said
time, Armed and provided as aforesaid, the like quantity of 60. Acres of Land.
And for every weaker Servant or Slave aged, as aforesaid, that he or they shall
carry, or send, within the third year, 30. Acres of Land, and to every
Christian Servant so carried, or sent, thirty 30. Acres of land, of like
measure after the expiration of his or their time of service. All which land
and all other that shall be possessed in the said Province, are to be held on
the said Terms and Conditions, as is beforementioned; and as hereafter in the
following Paragraphs is more at large expressed: Provided always, that the
forementioned land, and all other whatsoever that shall be taken up, and so
settled in the said Province, shall afterward from time to time, for the space
of 13. years from the date hereof, be held upon the conditions aforesaid,
containing one able man servant or two such weaker servants, as aforesaid, on
every 100 acres, a Master or Mistress shall possess, besides what was granted
for his or her own person. In failie of which on notification, to the p^es^nt
occupant, or his assignies there shall be 3 years given to such for their
completing the said number of persons, or for their sale, or other disposure
of such part of their Lands as are not so peopled, within which time of three
years if any person holding any Lands, shall fail by himself, his agents,
executors, and assignies, or some other way to provide such number of persons,
unless the General Assembly shall without respect of party, Judge it was
impossible, for the party so failing to keep or procure his or her number of
servants to to be provided as aforesaid. In such case we the Lords, to have
power of disposing of so much of such lands as shall not be planted with its due
number of persons as aforsaid, to some other that will plant the same Provided
always, that no persons arryving into the said province, with purpose to
settle ( they being Subjects or naturalized as aforesaid, be denied a grant of
such proportions of Land, as at the time of there arryvall, there are due to
themselves, or servants, by concession from us, as aforesaid. But have full
license to take up and settle the same in such order and manner, as is granted
and prescribed. All Lands (notwithstanding the powers in the Assemblies
aforesaid) shall be taken up by warrant from the Governor, and Confirmed by the
Governor and Council, under a Seal to be provided for that purpose in such
order and method as shall be set down in this declaration, and more at large in
the Instructions to the Governor.

And that the Lands may be the more regularly laid out, and all persons be
better ascertained of their titles and possessions. The Governor and Council,
and General Assembly (if any be) are to take care and direct that all Lands be
divided by General Lots, none less then Two thousand one hundredth acres, and no
more then twenty one thousand acres in each Lot. Excepting Cities, Towns, etc.
And near Lots of Township, and that the same be divided into seven parts, one
seventh part by Lot to us our Heirs and Assignies, The remander to persons as
they shall come to plant is such proportions as is allowed.

2ly, Item, That the Governor or whom he shall depute, in case of Death or
absence, if some one be not before Commissionated by us as aforsaid; do give
to every person to whom Land is due, a warrant signed and sealed by himself,
and the Major part of his Council; and directed to the Surveyor general or his
Deputy, Commanding him to Lay out, Limit, and bound Acres of Land (as his due
proportion) for such a person in such Alottment, according to the warrant. The
Register having first recorded the same, and attested the record upon the
warrant; The Surveyor General or his Deputy, shall proceed and certify to
the Chief Secretary the name of the person for whom he has Laid out Land, By
virtue of what Authority, and the date of the Authority or warrant, the number
of Acres, the bounds, and on what point of the Compass the several Limits
thereof Lie which certificate the Register is likewayes to enter in a book to
be prepared for that purpose, with ane Alphabetical table referring to the
book, that so the certificat may be the easier found, and then to fill the
certificats, and the same to keep Safely. The certificat being entered, a
warrant comprehending all the particulars of Land mentioned in the Certificat
aforesaid, is to be signed by him, and his Council, or the Major part of them
as aforesaid, they having seen the entry, and direction to the Register, or
Chief Secretary, for his preparing a grant of the Land, to the party to whom
it was laid out, which grant shall be in the form following, viz.

The Lords Proprietors of the Province of New-Cesarea or New Jersey, do hereby
grant unto A: B: of the (...) in the Province aforesaid, a Plantation
Containing. (...) Acres English Measure bounding (as in the certificat) To be
holden to him (or her) his or her Airs and Assigns for ever: Yielding and
paying yearly unto the said Lords proprietors their Airs or Assigns, every
five and twenty day of March the English account of (...) Lawful money of
England for every of the said Acres: to be holden of the Manner of (...) in
free and Common Soccadge. The first payment of which Rent to begine the five
and twenty day of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord, one Thousand
Six hundredth and seventy, according to the English accounts. Given under the
Seal, of the said province the (...) day of (...) In the year of our Lord 1666.

2ly. To which Instrument the Governor or his Deputy has hereby full power
to put the Seal, of the said Province, and to Subscribe his name; also, the
Council, or Major part of them, and subscribe their names, And then the
Instrument or grant is to be by the Register recorded in a book of records for
that purpose, All which being done according to the Instructions; We hereby
declare the same shall be effectual in Law for enjoyment of the said
Plantations, and of all the benefits, and profits of, and in the same (except
the half part of mines of gold and Silver paying the rent as aforesaid.
Provided, that if any Plantation so granted shall by the space of 3 years be
neglected, to be planted, with a Sufficient number of Servants, as is before
mentioned: That then it shall and may be Lawful for us, otherwise to dispose
thereof in whole or in part, this grant notwithstanding.

2ly. Item, We do also grant convenient Proportions of Land for Highwayes and
Streets, not exceeding one hundredth foot, in breadth Cities, Towns, and
Villages, etc. And for Churches, Forts, Wharfes, Keys, Harbors; and for
publict houses, and to each parish, for the use of their Ministers, two
hundredth acres in such as the General Assembly shall appoint.

4ly. Item, The Governor is to take notice that all such Lands laid out for
the uses and purposes aforesaid, in the next proceeding, Articles shall be free
and exempt from all Rents, Taxes, and other charges and duties whatsoever
payable to us, our Aires and Assigns.

5ly. Item, That in laying out of Lands for Cities, Towns, Villages, Burghs, or
others Hamiletts, The said Land be divided into 7 parts, one seventh part
whereof to be Laid out by Lot for us, and the rest to be divided, to such as
shall be willing to build thereon they paying after the rate of one penny or
half penny per Acre (according to the value of the Land) yearly to us; As for
their other Lands aforesaid, which said Lands in Cities, and Towns, etc. is to
be assured to each Possessor by the same way; and Instrument as is before
mentioned. That all rules relating to the building of each street, or quantity
or ground to be alloted to each house within the said respective Cities,
Burghs, and Towns, be wholly l^ft by Act as aforesaid to the Wisdom and
discretion of the General Assembly.

6ly. Item, That the Inhabitants of the said Province, have free Passage
through or by any Seas, bounds, Creeks, Rivers, etc, in the said Province;
through or by, which they must necessarily pass to come from the Main Ocean to
any part of the Province aforesaid.

7ly. Lastly, It shall be lawful for the Representative of the Freeholders,
to make any address to the Lords touching the Governor or Council, or any of
them, or concerning any grievance whatsoever, or for ny other thing they shall
desire, without the Consent of the Governor, and Council or any of them. Given
under our Seal of our said Province the tenth day of January In the year of our
Lord, one Thousand six hundredth sixty and four.

John Barclay, G. Cartwright.


By this Constitution of Government by the Lord Barclay, and Sir George
Cartwright, such provision is made both for Liberty of Religion, and Property,
that the Province has been considerably peopled; many resorting thither from
the Neighboring Collonies, beside what have gone from England, and this
Kingdom, within this few years, so that the planters are able to muster 600
well Armed Men.

The Proprietors have framed a new Schem of Government, which is not yet fully
concluded on, but it is intended rather to be an enlarging; than an
abbreviating of the former, and making more easy, and advantageous for the
Inhabitants, the chief parts of it are.

That the 24. Proprietors shall choose a Governor, 16. of them has a Conclusive
Vote in it, after the death of him now chosen, he shall continue but for 3
years, and be liable to the Censure of the Proprietors, and great Council, and
punishable if he transgress, There is a great Council to meet once a year (and
sit, if they see meet, for three Months) consisting of the 24. Proprietors,
and 28. chosen by the Planters, and Inhabitants, two thirds Conclude, the one
half of the Proprietors assenting; and no money can be raised, or Law made, to
touch any man's Liberty or Property; but by this Council. There is a Common
Council to sit constantly, Consisting of the 24. Proprietors, or their Proxies,
and nine chosen out of the Representative of the Planters, in all 33. to be
divided into three Commities; 11. to each one for the Public Policy: One for
the Treasury and Trade, and one for Plantations.

To aviod Lording over one another, No Man can purchase above the 24th. part of
the Country; And on the other hand, least any should squander away their
Interest, and yet retain the character of the Government, that belongs to
Property, and thence be capable to betray it, as not being bound by Interest,
there must be a suitable quantity retained, otherwise the Title in the
Government extinguishes in him, and passes to another, to be Elected by the
Proprietors, that Dominion may follow Property, and the inconveniency of a
Beggarly Nobility, and Gentry may be avoided.

No man can be judged in any cause, either Civil, or Criminal, but by a Jury of
his Peers, and to avoyid in that all Caballing, the names of all the County or
Neighborhood, Capable to be Chosen; are to be write in little pieces of
Parchement, and the number of the Jury to be taken out by a Child under 10.
years of age, And the Proprietors as well as others are to be liable to the
like trial, and not under any Exception.

Liberty in matters of Religion is established in the fullest manner. To be a
Planter or Inhabitant, nothing is more required but the acknowledging of One
Almighty GOD, and to have a Share in the Government, A simple profession of
faith of Jesus Christ, without descending into any other of the differences
among Christians, only that Religion may not be a cloak for disturbance, who
ever comes into the Magistrature, must declare, they hold not themselves in
conscience obliged, for Religions sake, to make an alteration, or to endeavor
to turn out their partners, in the Government, because they differ in Opinion
from them, and this is no more then to follow that great Rule, To do as they
would be done by.

These are the Fundamentals, which are not alterable by any Act of the great
Council, as other things, by the voices of 2 thirds, but only by an universal
agreement; so it is hoped, that this hint will satisfy all sober and
understanding people, what Encouragement such a Government may give.

For Husbandmen that hes a Stock, able to transport themselves and Families,
with a few Servants, and to have but a 100. pound Scots, or a 100. Merks more,
to carry over in Commodities, they shall have upon their arrival 100 Acres of
good ground, measured out to them, or above, not exceeding 500. Acres: And for
their encouragement, shall for the first 7. years pay nothing, and then have
what they please, not under 100. nor exceeding 500. Acres, confirmed to them,
and their heirs for ever, paying half a Crown an Acre, never to be raised upon
them: And for the Charge of the first year, they may easily Calculate, carrying
over as much Oat-meal, as will serve them Bread, and the fraught will be
inconsiderable, and they will get flesh enough in the Country for killing,
without charge, and will be able to clear more ground the first winter, then
will* double serve their Families after the first harvest, so that they will
only have to buy with the Commodities they carry over with them, Seed, and
Beasts.

The Charge of transportation, is, for every Man or Woman 5. lib. starling,
passage and intertainment, for children under 10. years of age, 50. shilling,
and Sucking children nothing, 40. shillings for the tunn of goods, and often
under.

The Voyage is judged less Sea hazard then either to Holland, or London, and
if there be any tolerable winds, it is easily made in 6. weeks, There went a
ship last harvest to West Jersey, from the Road of Aberden: and they came to
Delaware-River-mouth in 8. weeks, though they had great Calmes, and of betwixt
30. and 40. Passengers that went out of Aberdeen several women, and children,
not above 4. of them had been at Sea before, not one dyed, nor was sick by the
way.

For Ordinary servants, who are willing to go over, after 4. Years service from
the time of there arryvall there, during which time they shall be well
entertained in meat and clothing) they shall have set out to each 25. Acres to
them and theirs for ever, paying 2. pence an Acre, as much Corn as will sow an
Acre, and a Suit of now clothes; Now, Considering that there is 5. pound
Sterling paid for their Passage, this is good terms; and that after the term
of their Service is expired, they will gain more in one year there, then they
can do in two at home, toward the gaining of a Stock to their land, and it may
be easily conceived that they will be well treated by their Masters, since it
is their Interest to do so there more then here, for that they would be
Considerable Losers, either by their Death, or sickness, being out so great an
advance for them, if, by any hard-ship, they shall be disabled to serve out
their times.

All Sorts of Tradesmen may make a brave Livelihood there, such as Carpenters,
Ship-wrights, Rope-makers, Smiths, Brick-makers, Tailors, Tanners, Cowpers,
Mill-wrights, Joyners; Shooemakers, etc. and any such like, who are willing to
go serve the four years, not having to transport themselves, shall in
consideration of their Trade, have (after the expiring of their Service) 30.
Acres, 2. pence the Acre, as much Corn as well sow 2. Acres, a cow and a Sow:
And for the encouragement of any such Trasdmen, who are willing to go over and
transport themselves, they shall have the like quantity of Land, at the same
rent, and the Proprietors will oblidge themselves to find them work for a year,
after their arryval, at as good Rates as they can have here, until they
furnish themselves with some Stock to make better advantage upon the Place.

We will not encourage any to go there in expectation of Gold and Silver mines;
yea, tho there were such in the Country, we should not be curious nor
industrous to seek them out: being besides the Toil, and Labor, but occasions
envy, and Emulation: Nor yet is their Suggar or Indigo there, or Cotton, nor
any store of Tobacco, tho it grows there very well. But We consider it not our
interest to employ much ground on it; The Riches of this Country Consists in
that which is most Substantial and necessar for the use of men, to wit, Plenty
of Corn and Cattle (and they have besides Vines, and Fruits in abundance, as
before has been said) so that who dwell here, need not to be oblidged to any
other Plantation, for any thing necessar for Life; and all other Plantations
are beholden to them for necessaries, without which, their other Curiosities
would little avail them: This with the Province of New York, being the Granary
or Storehouse of the West Indies, without which Barbados and the Leewards
Islands* could not subsist; Yea, New England is forced to come there every year
for Corn, this, with the advantage of Fishery, being considered, will easily
induce Sober and industrious People, to prefer a Plantation here to most other
places.

The Duke of Yorks grant of East-New-Jersey, to the twenty four Proprietors.
THis Indenture made the fourteenth day of March, in the five and thirtieth
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of
GOD, of ^ngland, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Anno Domini, 1682. between His Royal Highness, the most Illustrious Prince,
James Duke of York, and Albany, Earl of Ulster, etc. only Brother to our
Sovereign Lord the King, of the one part, And the Right Honorable James Earl
of Perth, of the Kingdom of Scotland, the right Honorable John Drummond of
Lundin, Scotland Esquire, Robert Barclay of Urie in the Kingdom of Scotland,
Esquire, on the other part, etc. Whereas our said Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, in, and by Letters Patent, under the Great Seal of England, bearing
date the twelfth day of March, in the sixteenth year of His said Majesty's
Reign, did amongst several other things therein mentioned, Give and Grant unto
His Royal Highness James Duke of York, his Heirs and Assignies, all that tract
of land adjacent to New England, in the parts of America, and lying, and being
to the Westward of Long Island, and Manhattas Island, and bounded on the East
part by the Main Sea, and part by Hudsons River, and extends Southward to the
Main Ocean, as far as Cape May, at the mouth of Delawar Bay; and to the
Northward as far as the Northern-most branch of the said Bay, or River of
Delawar; Which is one and forty Degrees, and forty Minutes of Latitude; and
crosing over thence in a straight line to Hudsons River, in one and forty
Degrees of Latitude; Which said tract of Land was then after to be called by
the name of New-Cesaria or New Jersey, with all the Lands, Islands, Soylls,
Rivers, Harbors, Mynnes, Minerals, Quareries, Woods, Marshes, Waters, Lakes,
Fishings, Hauckings, Huntings, and Fowlings, and all other Royalties, Profits,
Commodities, and Hereditaments, unto the said premises belonging, and
appertaining with their and every of their appertainances. And all his said
Majesty's Estate, Right, Title* Interest, Benefit, Advantage, Claim, and
Demand of, in and to the said Provinces, or any part or parcel thereof, and
the Reversion, and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, together with the
yearlie, and other Rents, Revenues, and profits of the same; And of every part
and parcel thereof. To hold unto his Airs Royal Highness, the said James Duke
of York, his Airs, and Assigns for ever: To he Holden of his said Majesty his
Airs, and Successors, among other things therein granted as of his Majesty's
Manor of East Greenwich, in his Majesty's County of Kent, in free and Common
Soccage, and not in Capite, or by Knight Service, under the yearly-rent therein
mentioned. And whereas, His Royal Highness, The said James Duke of York, Did
theretofore by Several good and Sufficient Conveyances, and assurances under
his hand, and Seall duly executed, and daited the Twenty third, and Twenty
fourt days of June, in the Sixteen year of his said Majesty's Reign, for the
Consideration therein mentioned; Grant, and Convey the said Tract of Land, and
Premises before mentioned, to John Lord Barclay, Baron of Stratton, and one of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, And sir George Cartwright of
Saltram in the County of Devon, Knight and Barronet, and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, and their Heirs, the said Tract of land, and
premises particularly before mentioned. And the Reversion and Reversions,
Remander and Remanders of the same, to hold unto the said John Lord Barclay,
and sir George Cartwright their Heirs and Assignies for ever, under the yearly
Rent of twenty Nobles Sterline, payable as the same is therein reserved to be
paid. And whereas his said Majesty did by others his Letters Patents, dated
the twenty ninth day of June, in the six and twentieth yea^ of his said
Majesty's Reign, grant and convey unto his said Royal Highness and his Heirs
for ever; as well the said tract of Land, and premises herein before recited,
to have been granted, and conveyed by his said Royal Highness, unto the said
John Lord, Barclay, and Sir George Cartwright as aforesaid: As all other the
Lands and Hereditaments, in, and by the said herein first before recited
Letters, Patents, granted, or mentioned to be granted. And whereas His said
Royal Highness by his indentures of Lease and release bearing date the (...)
days of July, in the six and twenty year of his said Majesty's Reign. Did
grant and convey the said tract of Land, and premises to the said Sir George
Cartwright, his Airs and Assigns as by the said Indentures, Relation being
thereunto had may appear. And whereas, upon a partition made of the said whole
and entire premises between the said Sir George Cartwright, And William penn
of Worminhurst in the Country of Sussex Esquire, Gavin Lawrie of London
Merchant, Nicolas Lucas of Hertford, in the Countey of Hertford Malster, and
Edward Billing of West-minster, in the Countey of Midlesex, Gentleman; In whom
the Fee Simple of the said John Lord Barclays undivyded Moyeties of all and
Singular the premises, by good and sufficient conveyance was then vested. The
said William Penn, Gavin Lowrie, Nicolas, Lucas, and Edward Billing, did
bargian sell, release, and confirm unto the said Sir George Cartwright his
Heirs and Assigns, all that Easterly part share and portions and and all these
Easterly parts, shares and portions the said whole and entire Tract of Land,
and Premises beforementioned, Extending Eastward, and Northward along the
Seacoasts, and the said River, called Hudsons River, from the East Side of a
certain place or harbor, lying on the Southren part of the same tract of Land,
and commonly called, or kn^wen in a Mape of the said tract of Land by the name
of Little Egg harbor, to that part of tho said River, called Hudsons-River,
which is in forty one degrees of Latitude being the farthermost part of the
said Tract of Land, and Premises; which is bounded by the said River, and
crosing over from thence in a Straight Line, extending from that part of
Hudsons-River, aforsaid to the most Northermost branch of the aforementioned
River, called Delawar River, And to the most Northerly point and Boundarie of
the said entire Tract of Land and premises, now called the North-partition
Point. And from thence (that is to say) from the North partition point.
Extending Southward, unto the more Southerly point, by a straight and direct
Line, drawn through the said tract of Land from the said North partition
point, unto the said South partition point; by the consent and agreement of ohe
said parties, now called the Line of partition, And by them intended for the
dividing and making a partition of the said Easternly part, Share and portion
from the Westernly part, Share, and portion of the said tract of Land, and
premises; And all and every the Isles, Islands, Rivers, Mynnes, Mineralls,
Woods, Fishings, Hawkings, hunttings, and Foullings, and all other Royalties,
Governments, powers, Forts, Franchises, Harbors, Profits, Commodities, and
Hereditaments, whatsoever unto the said Easternly part, Share, and portion, of
the said Tract of Land and premises belonging, or in any waves appertaining,
with their and every of their appertenances; And all the Estate, Right, Tittle,
Interest, Property, Claim, and Demand whatsoever, of them the said William
Penn, Gavin Lowrie, Nicolas Lucas, and Edward Billing, and of each and every of
them, of, in, to, and out of the said Easternly part, Share, and portion of the
said Tract of Land and Premises, and every part, and parcel thereof, And the
Reversion, and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the same, and every part
and parcel of the same; All which said Easternly part, Share, and portion,
parts, Share, and portions, was, and were then, and now is, and are by the
Consent and agreement of the said parties to the said partition, called and
agreed from thenceforth, to be called by the names of East-New-Jersey, and is
all that, and only all that part, Share, and portion, and all this parts,
shares, and portion of the said Tract of Land and premises, so conveyed by his
said Royal Highness, as aforesaid; as lies extended Eastward from the
Eastside of the said Line of partition before mentioned; To hold unto the said
Sir George Cartwright, his Heirs and Assigns in severaltie, to the use of him
the said Sir George Cartwright, his Heirs and Assigns for ever. Upon which
partition so made and such conveyances so executed as aforesaid; He the said
Sir George Cartwright became Seized of all that Easternly part of the said
premises, now called East-New-Jersey, with the appertenances in Severaltie.
And whereas, the said Sir George Cartwright, being by virtue of the said
Assurances, and partition aforesaid, soll Seized to him, and his Heirs of the
said premises, called East-New-Jersey, by his Last Will and Testament in
writing, bearing date on about the first day of December, in the year of Our
Lord, one Thousand six hundredth seventie, and eight, Did devise the same, and
all his Estate therein, amongst other things, To the Right Honorable Edward
Earl of Sandwich, the Right Honorable John Earl of Bath, The Right Honorable
Thomas Lord Crew Barron Crew of Steane, The Honorable Bernard Greenvile
Esquire brother of the said Earl of Bath, The Honorable Sir Robert Atkins
Knight of the Bath, and the Honorable Sir Edward Atkins Knight, one of the
Barrons of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and their Heirs in trust, to sell
the same for payment of his Debts and Legacy, as in, and by the said will,
relation being thereunto had may appear and shortly after d^ed. And whereas,
the said John Earl of Bath, Thomas Lord Crew, Bernad Greenvile, Sir Robert
Atkins, and Sir Edward Atkins by Indentures of Lease, bearing date the fifth
and sixth days of March, in the 32* year of his Majesty's Reign, Conveyed, the
said Premises amongst other things, to Thomas Cremer of the Parish of Sanct
Andrews Holbern, in the Countey of Middle sex Gentleman, and Thomas Pecock of
the same Gentleman; As by the said Indentures; Relation being thereunto, had,
it may appear. And whereas, the said Earl of Sandwick by his Indentures,
bearing date the Twenty day of February last past, Has released all his
Estate, Interest, and trust in the said Premises, To the said Earl of Bath,
Lord Crew, Bernard Greenvile, Sir Robert Atkins, and Sir Edward Atkins, and
their Heirs, As by the said Indenture, relation being thereunto had may appear.
And whereas, the said Earl of Bath; Lord Crew, Bernard Greenvile, Sir Robert
Atkins, and Sir Edward Atkins by the Consent and directions of Dam Elizabeth
Cartwright Relict and Executrix of the said sir George Cartwright and the said
Thomas Cremer, and Thomas Pecock by the consent and directions of the said Dam
Elizabeth Cartwright; Earl of Bath, Lord Crew, Bernard, Greenvile, sir Robert
Atkins, and Sir Edward Atkins, Have by Indentures of Lease, and Release bearing
date the first and second days of February last past, Granted and conveyed to
the said William Penn, Robert West, Thomas Rudyard, Samuel Groom, Thomas
Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox of London Goldsmith, Ambrose Rigg, John
Haywood, Hugh Hartshorn, Clement Plimisted, and Thomas Cowper, their Heirs and
assigns all the said premises, called East-New-Jersey, Together with all
Isles, Islands, Rivers, Mines, Mineralls, Woods, Fishings, Hawkings, Huntings,
Foulling, and all other Royalties, Privileges, Franchess, Forts, Harbors,
Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever thereunto belonging; As in,
And by the said Indentures, relation being thereunto had may more at large
appear. And whereas, the said William Penn, Robert West, etc. Have since
conveyed one Moyties of that said tract of Land, called East-New-Jersey, and of
all other the Premises to the said James Earl of Perth, John Drummond, Robert
Barclay, Robert Gordon, Arent Sonmans, Gavin Lowrie, Edward Billings, James
Branie, William Gibson, Thomas Barker, Robert Turner, and Thomas warn, who are
hereby become tennents in common of the said Premises called East-New-Jersey,
with the said William penn, Robert West, Thomas Rudyard, Samuel Groom, Thomas
Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox, Ambrose Rigg, John Hay Wood, Hugh Harthorns,
Clement Plumsted, and Thomas Cowper. And whereas, the said Thomas Wilcox has
since conveyed all his Share, Estate, and Interest, in the said Premises to
the said David Barclay, and his Heirs, And whereas, by the said several
recited Letters Patents made by his said Majesty, unto his said Royal
Highness, as aforesaid, several powers and Authority are, and were, Given
granted unto his said Royal Highness his Heirs and Assigns, to be execut by
his said Royal Highness his Heirs or Assigns or by the Deputies, Agents, or
Commissioners, of his said Royal Highness his Heirs or Assigns, which are
necessary as well for the Planting, Peopleing, and Improving of all and every
the respective Lands, Places, and Territories thereby granted, And for the
Transporting thither from time to time such of his Majesty's Subjects as should
be willing to go, or be Transporting into these parts, or any of them, As for
the Defending, Guarding, and keeping of the same. As also, for the well
governing of the same, and of all such as are, and shall be inhabiting in the
same. And for the making, ordaining, and executing of necessary and convenient
Laws and, Constitutions, in order to such Government, and the Punishing and
Pardoning Offenses, and Offenders, as occasion shall require. And to Nominat,
Make, Ordain, Constitut, and Confirm, And also to Revock, Discharge; Change,
and Alter, all, and Singular Governors, Officers, and Ministers, which by his
said Royal Highness his Heirs or Assigns, shall be from time to time thought
fit, and needful to be made ordained, appointed, or used in the said parts,
or places or any of them; And to do all other things needful, useful, and
necessary, for the well Governing, keeping, Defending and preserving the said
respective places, and Territories and of every of them, and all such as are or
shall be Inhabiting there; Now These Presents Witnesses, That for, and in
consideration of a competent sum of Lawful English money, unto his said
Royal Highness in hand paid; And for the better Extingushing all such claims
and Demands as his said Royal Highness, or his Heirs, may any ways have of,
or in the Premises aforesaid, now called East-New-Jersey, or any part of them,
And for the further and better settling, and conveying, Assuring and
Confirming, of the same, and of every part thereof according to the purport and
true meaning of these presents, His said Royal Highness, the said James Duke of
York, has granted, bargained, sold, released, and confirmed; And by these
presents, as far as in him lies, Does grant, bargain, sell, release, and
confirm, unto the said James Earl of Perth, John Drummond, Robert Barclay,
etc. their Airs or Assigns. All that part, share, and portion, and all these
parts, shars, and portions, of all that entire Tract of Land, and all these
entire premises so granted by his said Royal Highness, unto the said John Lord
Barclay, and Sir George Cartwright, and their Airs, as in, by, and upon the
said partition was, and were Vested in the said Sir George Cartwright, and his
Airs, and then agreed to be called by the name of East-New-Jersey; Together
with all Islands, Bays, Rivers, Waters, Forts, Mines, Querries, Royalties,
Franchises, and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the same belonging, or in any
ways appertaining. And all the Estates, Rights, Title, Interest, Reversion,
Remainder, Claim, or Demand whatsoever, as well in Law as in Equity of his
said Royal Highness James Duke of York, of, in, to, or out, of the same or any
part or parcel of the same; As also the free use of Bays, Rivers, and Waters,
leading unto or lying between the said Premises, or any of them, in the said
parts of East-New-Jersey for Navigation, free Trade, Fishing or otherwise; To
have, and to hold unto the said Earl of Perth, John Drummond, Esquire, etc.
their Airs and Assigns for ever. To the only use and behoove of them, the said
Earl of Perth, John Drummond, Esquire, etc. their Airs and Assigns, for ever.
Yielding and paying therefore yearly for the said whole entire premises unto
his Royal Highness, his Airs and Assigns; the yearly rent of ten Nobles of
Lawful English money, at or in the middle Temple-hall of London, at, or upon
the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel yearly. And the said James Earl of
Perth, John Drummond, etc. do for themselves severallie, and for several and
respective Airs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, Covenant, Promise and
Agree to and with his said Royal Highness, his Airs or Assigns to pay or cause
to be paid the said Annualrent of Ten Nobles on the days, and times herein
before limited for payment thereof. And these presents, farther witness, that
for the better enabling the said Earl of Perth, John Drummond, Esquire, etc.
their Airs and Assigns to improve and plant the said premises with people,
and to exercise all necessary Government there, whereby the said premises may
be the better Improved and made more useful to them their Airs and Assigns,
and to the Kings Majesty, His said Royal Highness, has likewise Given,
Granted, Assigned and Transferred, And does by these presents, Give, Grant,
Assign, and Transfer unto the said Earl of Perth, etc. their Airs and Assigns,
Proprietors of the said Province of East-New Jersey, aforesaid for the time
being all and every such, and the same Powers Authorities, Jurisdictions,
Governments and other matters, and things whatsoever, which by the said
Respective before received Letters Patents, or either of them, are or were
granted, or intended to be granted to be exercised by his said Royal Highness,
his Airs, Assigns, Deputies, Officers, or Agents in, or upon, or in Relation
to the said premises hereby confirmed, or intended to be confirmed, and every
of them in case the same were now in the actual seazing of his said Royal
Highness, to be held, enjoyed, exercised, and executed by them, the said Earl
of Perth, John Drummond, etc. their Airs and Assigns, Proprietors of the said
Province of East-New-Jersey, for the time, being as fully and amply to all
intents, constructions and proposes, as his said Royal Highness or his Airs
might, could, or ought, to hold enjoy, use, exercise, or execute the same by
force and virtue of the said several and respective before recited Letters
Patents, or either of them, or of any thing in them, or either of them
contained, or otherwise howsoever provided, always, that these presents be
entered with the Auditor General of his said Royal Highness within two months
next after the date hereof. In Witness whereof, the parties abovenamed to these
presents, Indenturs, Interchangablie, have set their Hands and Seals, day and
year first above written,

JAMES.
This contains an absolute Grant and Conveyance of the moiety of New Jersey,
called East New Jersey, unto the Right Honorable James Earl of Perth, John
Drummond, etc. under the yearly rent of Ten Nobles payable on the Feast of St
Michael, in pursuance of a warrant from your Royal Highness, dated the second
of March, 1683.

Geo: Jeffrey.
Sealed and Delivered by his Royal Highness in presence of To: Worden. Will:
Crofts. Jo: Ashtone.




Sir,
BY what is above written. I hope you are sufficiently convinced of the
justness of the Title of the Proprietors, to what is contained in the Patent
granted by the late King of happy Memory, to his Royal Brother James Duke of
York, now Our Most Gracious Sovereign: And now conveyed by him as you see, as
also that by the constitution of the Government, these who subject themselves
thereto may rationally propose comfortable and peaceable life, without any just
ground of Fears of any incroachment upon their properties or liberties, even in
matters of Opinion when the Proprietors are so far by their own concessions,
from exempting themselves from being subject to the Law, that they declare
themselves liable thereto, as the meanest Inhabitants are, by one of the
fundamental Constitutions; It remains to give you als good ground to believe
the above written description of the place, to be consonant to truth, and I
shall offer you no other proof of this then what sufficiently convinced my
self, that there can hardly be any cheat in the affair, to wit, the perusal of
the following Letters from that place: which I have been at great pains to
collect for my own satisfaction in the particular. Yea, I have been so much
upon my guard that I might not be imposed upon in this, that I have my self
seen the principals of many of them, when you consider they come from several
hands, at several times from People of Different persuasions, and yet not the
least contradiction to be observed, amongst them all; and that the account
given therein to the General Advantage of the Country, is homelogat by
several Gentlemen and Merchants, in this city, who to my self have Declared,
they have been eye witnesses to the truth of the most material Passages in
these accounts, narrated to the advantage of the place, I hope you will, find
your self oblidged to rest Satisfied therewith.

An Account of the settled Towns, and most part of the Plantations, or Tract of
Land, taken up in the Province of East-New Jersey, beginning at the outermost
Southerly parts toward the Sea; So going up Northerly on Hudsons River to its
outmost extent; This was the Condition of the Province Anno 1680. Given under
the hand of Captain Nicolas, Sacretary for the Duke in New York.
Shrewsbery, A Town in that Province, lies without Sandy-point, and has the
farthest plantation to the Southward; Its Situate on the side of a River; not
far from its entrance, and extends up into the Land; a little distant from the
said River, about eight mylles, near unto Colonel Morice, his Iron Mill and
Plantation.

There is within its Jurisdiction Colonel Morice his Manor being of (...)
thousand Acres, wherein are his Iron Mills, his Mannours and diverse other
buildings, for his Servants and dependants there, together with 60. or 70.
Negres about the Mill and Husbandries in that Plantation.

There are diverse out-plantations, accounted to belong to the Jurisdictions of
the Town, some in necks of Land by the Sea side, others within Lands, and
toward Midletoun bounds, and others on the northside of the River, below
Colonel Morice, his Iron mills; The computation of Acres taken up by the Town
may be 10000 Acres, and what is taken up by Colonel Morice, and the other
Out-plantation 20000. Acres, the number of the Families in Town are so, and of
Inhabitants Men Women, and Children 400.

Midletoun, is nixt 10. or 12. myls over Land, Northward from Colonel Morice
Iron Mills, being 9. or 10: Miles up from the entrance of that River, that
which is property, the Town may consist of 100: Families, and of Inhabitants
500: and of Acres taken up for the Town 10000: and for the several
Out-Plantations 20000.

This was the second place settled in, till Nichols time, 1664. but there are
many considerable Plantations within the Jurisdiction of that Town, viz.
Captain John Broun and others that first settled, who removed out of the Town
and settled greater plantations abroad Richard Hartshorn has a Plantation,
with considerable Land belonging to it, part within, and part without Sandy
Hook, which with a part of Coney Island, and Long Island opposite to it, makes
the entrance into the Bay that goes up to Now-York, and also to the Lands of
East-New-Jersey; the Town is above 5: miles from the entrance of the Creek or
River that goes up to it from the Bay.

There was a Plantation one the Norths side of the Creek at its entrance first
settled by Nicolas Davis, having a large tract of Land belonging to it, of 2.
or 3000. Acres, since divided to deverse, besides several Out-plantations, and
there is a great Deall of waist Land, and other Improveable betwixt this said
Piscattaway, for about 20. miles, There was a court of Sessions held twice or
thrice a year, for these two Towns, and their Jurisdictions.

Thirdly. Piscattaway, Lies next 25. or 26. miles from Midletoun, Irs up
Rariton River 5. or 6. miles westward in, and there is about half mile within
Land, The entrance into Rariton River is at the bottom of the Southren bay,
and opposite to the Southermost point of Staten Islands the Northwest point of
the entrance is called Amboy point, where is a fair tract of Land formerlie
reserved by the proprietor for his own use.

There are several Plantations all along on the North side of the River as you
go up to the Town, and some on the South Side, among which are considerable
belonging to one Thomas Lauernce a baker at New York, his wife son, about 3000.
Acres.

Up higher on Rariton River near the falls which are about 3. miles over Land,
there are several Plantations a good big vassel laden may go up to; the
falls, and so may above it for several miles in the River; At the falls its
foordable for horses and other cattle, unl^s in great Floods when men may go
over(...) boats and Canows; and horses will swim over, though the River be a
good breadth.

About the falls, there are several tract o^ Lands some upon on side some on
the other si^ the River, viz: a place called by the In^ans Rachahova-Wallaby,
Captain John Palmer of Staten Islands, Mr. Thom^ Coddrington, Mr. White; and
Company Merchant at New York, in part settled there on 6. or 7000. Acres.

M. John Robison, Mr. Samuel, Edsall, and Company of New York, on 6. or 7000.
Acres.

Captain Palmer, Mr. White Captain Corsen, and Company on 5. or 6000. Acres.

There is some other Land taken up by Milstoun River, which comes into Rariton
River, and is near the middle bounds between the two Province of East and
West-Jersey, you pass Milstoun River to go over Land from Piscataway to
Meltinsed in Island in Delaware River, which is near Burlingtoun.

The Town Consists of about 80: Families, and of about 400. Inhabitants, and of
Acres about the Town about 10000: and for the out-Plantatations 30000.

Woodbridge is over Land from Piscattaway about 7. or. 8 miles it lies up a
River, the entrance whereof is about 5: or 6: miles to the North of Amboy-Point
the side ebbing, and flowing betwixt the Main Land of New Jersey and Staten
Island on the Westside, as it does on the East Side of the said Island and
Long Island.

On the South side of the entrance into the River or Creek, Mr. Delapairs
Surveyour General has a neat Plantation, and he has several tracts of Land
in the Province: There are other Plantations on the South side of the River, or
Creek, within Land and diverse on the Northside, lying along the water side,
opposite to Staten Island until you come to a Creek or River that divydes
their bounds from these of Elezabeth Town, the mouth of it being 8. or 9. miles
from Woodbridge.

There are several Plantations up the Southside of the Creek to the Road that
goes along from Woodbridge to the Town, and passes over that River, it being
foordable over the Plantation on the north side, Sailing to Elizabeth Town, Its
reckoned from one Town to the other ahout 15. or 16. miles: over-Land, but its
more by water.

This Town pretends to have more privileges them any other Town in the
province, and has a Charter of Corporation, It has a Court house and a prison
built on their charge; It consists of about 120 Families, and 600. Inhabitants;
The Acres taken up by the Town, may be about 10000. and for the Out-plantations
about 20000.

Elizabeth Town is the first new place that was settled, 1664. by virtue of a
patent from Mr Nicolas to Captain John Baker, before the Lord Barclay, and Sir
George Cartwrights Tittle was known; This Town lies up 3. miles within a
Creek, the entrance whereof is almost opposite to the North-west-end of Staten
Islands.

There are several Out-plantations on the North side of the River, which
devides the hounds between this Town and Woodbridge, particularly where the
roads pass over, to which place is about 7: or 8: miles.

There are other plantations at the point or entrance of the Creek on the North
side if it, commonly called Governor Cartwrights point, where there is another
ferme, between the proprietor and him, Its but a narrow passage there over to
the Meadows of Staten Island, then on Northward there are other Plantations
fronting to the Bay that lies to the North part of Staten Island, beside some
other within Land from the Town to New York bounds.

There is in this Town a house, orcheards and ferm within the Town in
partnership between the Proprietor and Governor, Philip Cartwright it being
one of the first house built there, and has all along been the residence of
the Governor, until of late he has finished his New-house.

The Town is built on both sides of the Creek, and Consists of 150. Families,
and of 700. Inhabitants, The Acres taken up by the Town are computed to be
10000. and for the Out-Plantations 30000.

Newark alias Millfoord, is a Town distant to the Northward over Land from
Elizabeth Town about 6: or: 7: miles.

It lies on a River called Newark River, which emptieth it self into the Bay
about 4: or 5: miles down opposite to the Town, on the North side of the River
lies a great tract of Land belonging to Mr. Kings-Land and Captain Sanfoord,
the quittrents whereof is purchased.

There is another great tract of Land taken up higher in the River by Captain
Berrie, who has disposed of a part of it; There are several Plantations settled
there; Its said he has about 10000. Acres there, farther up the water is an
Island of about 1000. Acres, belonging to Mr. Christopher Hoogland of Newark,
if it be not an Island, it is tied by a very narrow slip of Land to the
Continent.

Above that again is a greater tract of Land above 8. or 9000. Acres, purchased
by Lease of the Governor, according to the Concessions, by Captain Jacques
Cartelayne, and partners, Who have begun some settlement.

All these tracts of Land are within the Jurisdiction of Newark.

In this Town has been a Court of Session, held between this and Elizabeth
Town; It is the most compact Town in the Province, and consists of about 100:
Families, and of about 500. Inhabitants; The Acres taken up by the Town may be
about 10000: And for the Out-plantations, over and above beside Mr. Kings Land,
and Captain Sanfoords, 40000: Acres.

At the bottom of the Bay upon over- prok-Creek-side near Hackinsack River,
There is a River settled by several Valleys having a brave mill belonging to
it, they have taken up a brave piece of Land, into their plantations, for the
which Mr. Nicolas of New York has a patent, but gave Leave to their setlement
at the request of Governor Cartwright, on promise of as much more in a better
place.

Near unto Snoke-hill is a brave Plantation on a piece of Land almost an Island
containing 1000: or 1200. Acres, belonging to Mr. Penhorn a Merchant at
New York, and one Edward Eickbe, Its well improven and Stockt, Mr. Penhorn
paid for his half 500: lib.

There are other Plantations upon Hackinsak River, which goes a great way up
the Country almost North-West, there are other also on the East Side of
another Creek or River at Hackinsak River.

There is a large neck or Tract of Land, for which one Mrs. Sarah Kirk-stead,
of New York has a Patent, given here by on old Indian Sachem, in recompense
for her Interpreting the Indian Language into Dutch, as there was occasion,
there are some little Families thereon.

Between 2: or: 3: miles up there is a great Plantation settled by Captain John
Berrie, where he now Lives, there is a good house thereon, and a good quantity
of Land cleared and Improved by 20. Negers or more, he has about 2000. Acres
of Land there.

There is another Plantation adjoining, which belongs to his son in Law, Mr.
Michell Smith, who has about 1500: or 2000: Acres, who by 16: or more Negres,
has improved a good quantity of that Land.

And there is another Plantation more near to Captain Berrie, belonging to Mr.
Baker, who came from the Barbados, and bought the Land from Captain Berry,
being about 7: or 800: Acres part of which he has Improved by 7: or 8: Negres.

On the West Side of the Creek opposite to Captain Berry, there are also other
Plantations, but none other more Northerly; up above these Plantations on that
side of the neck of Land that is betwein Hudsons-River and it, the neck of Land
is in breadth from Captain Berries now Plantations on the Westside where he
lives over to his old Plantations, to the East at Hudions-River-side, about 3:
miles, which distance, severs to Constables-Hook upward of 10 miles.

To go back to the South part of Berghenneck that is opposite to Staten
Issand, where is but a narrow passage of water, which ebbs and Flows between
the said Island and Berghen point, called Constable-Hook.

There is a considerable Plantation on that side of Constable-Hook, Extending
in Land above a mile over from the Bay, on the East Side of the neck that leads
to New York, to that on the west that goes to Hakinsak and Snokehill, the neck
running up between both from the South to the North of Hudsons-River to the
outmost extent of their bounds.

There belongs to that Plantation about 12: or 1500: Acres, and its well stockt
and improved; it was Settled first by Samuel Edfall in Colonel Nicholls time,
and by him sold 3: years ago for 600: lib.

There are other small Plantations along that neck to the East, between it, and
a Little village of 20. Families, called by the Indians. (...) of Penelipe,
(...) then further one to another cottadge, there are more, where Lawrence the
Draper lives a Dutchman, there may be 16: or 18 Families, then one to George
Umpane, which is over against New York, where there is about 40. Families,
within which, about the meddle of the neck, which is here about 3: miles over
stands the Town of Berghen, which gives name to that neck, then again Northward
to the water side going up Hudsons-River, there lies out a point of Land,
wherein is a Plantation, and a water belonging to a Merchant in New York.

Southward there is a small Village about 5: or 6: Families, which is commonly
called the Dukes Ferme, and harh always paid a small annualrent to the
Governor of New York, who first granted it out for two lives, but leased out
now for some years, yet is under the Jurisdiction of New Jersey for Government;
further up is a good Plantation in a neck of Land almost a Island, called
Hobuk, It did belong to a Dutch Merchant, who formerly in the Indian war, had
his Wife, Children and Servants Murdered by the Indians and his house, cattle,
and Stock destroyed by them; Its now settled again, and a mill erected there, by
one dwelling at New York.

Up Northward along the river side are other Lands near to Mr. William
Laurance, which is 6. or 7. miles further opposite thereto, there is a
Plantation of Mr. Edsall, and above that Captain Beinfields Plantation, both
without Tennents, this last is almost opposite to the northwest and Manhattas
Island on the south part is New York town, and Fort; there are other small
Plantations up the River to Havercham, near the High-lands, between which the
River leads up to Lepus and Albany.

Here are the outmost extent of the Northren bounds of East-Jersey as always
computed.

There was here taken up a great Tract of Land by Governor Philip Cartwright
for himself, and another for an Campyne, and Company; Its supposed to be little
Improven yet, some Plantations are said to be there, under the Jurisdiction of
this Town of Berghen are all the Plantanions on both sides of the Neck, to its
outmost extent, as also these at Hakinsak: Here is a Town Court held by Select
Men, or Overseers, who use to be 4. or more as they please to choose annually,
to try small causes, as in all the rest of the Towns, and two Courts of
Sessions in the year, from which if the Cause exceed 20. lib. they may appeal
to the Governor, and Council, and Court of Deputies in their Assembly, who
meet once a year. The Town is compact and has been fortified against the
Indians; There are not above 70. Families in it. The Acres taken up by the
Town, may be about 10000. and for the Out-plantations 50000. and the number of
Inbabitants are computed to be 350. but many more abroad. The greatest part of
the Inhabitants which are in this Jurisdiction are Dutch, of which somo have
settled here, upwards of 40. years ago.

Patents have been given out by the Governor and Council, for the greatest
part of the Land here discribed, all Lands Patented, are to pay the quitrents,
whither improven or not; what is set forth here, relating to New-East-Jersey is
only Computation of the Neighbors of that Collony; not declaring every thing
to be just as he has written, but sets it down as a good part to his own
knowledge, the rest guessed at, and is to the best of his remembrance
particularly about the quantity of Acres and number of Inhabitants, Acres,
Shrewsberry town and Plantation. 30000 Midleton and Plantation. 30000.
Piscattaway and out Plantations. 40000. Woodbridge and out Plantations. 30000.
Elizabethtown and Plantations. 40000. Newark and out Plantations. 50000.
Berghen and out Plantations. 60000. in all 280000.

Acres, Shreusberry Families 080. Midletoun. 100. Woodbridge. 120. Elizabeth.
150. Piscattaway. 080. Newark. 100. Berghen. 070. in all 700. Families.

And reckoning 5. to all Families, the old Inhabitants in the several Towns
estimate to be 3500. Persons.

These besides the out Plantations that cannot be so well guessed at, for
Families or Persons, as the Towns.

I desire Sir, you may here stop a little, and consider the Incouragment to be
had from the above written Information, which will by any understanding Person
be judged of very great import, you come not to a place altogether void of
Inhabitants; But on the contrar to a Country, where at your first landing you
have houses, which can accommodat you with all necessars whatsoever: If you
look back with me to the great trouble these were redacted to, who first went
to that place of the World, who were necessitat to carry over with them,
Horses, Cows, Sheep, Hoggs, etc. Yea, all sorts of provisions, you will
certainly acknowledge that it is a very easy business now, in comparison of
what it was then, when so soon as you come to land, you have houses to afford
you good and comfortable accommodation, till you make provision for one of your
own; when you have some way accommodat your self with Lodging, you may from all
hands provide your self with Horses, Cows, Sheep, Hoggs, etc. all sorts of
Poultry, all sorts of Seed for sowing, this consideration does in my
apprehension, make the Design far more easy, then would appear at first to any
who would be necessitat to lay before his eyes great difficulties to be
rancountered, when come from Ships, lodging is wanting upon the shore, no other
Victuals are in readiness but what is brought along from the place they came
from, none of these other accommodations to be furnished, but what is brought a
great way off: Sir, you will be oblidged to say we have even upon this one
consideration, a great advantage of our Contrymen lately settled at
Port Royal in Carolina, to mention nothing else in this place.

But now let us return to the perusal of several Letters from that place, and I
desire you to mark narrowly if you observe the least contradiction in any
matterial point, contained in any of them, or if you do not find the above
written Description quadrat in the least particular with the said Letters.

A Letter from Thomas Rudyard Deputy Governor of New-East-Jersey, to a Friend
at London, dated at East-Jersey the 30th. of the 3d. Month called May, 1683.
Dear B. G.
TO be as particular in my return, were but thy due, yet I cannot promise so
much, However I may give thee some general account of the Province, and of our
satisfaction with our present Lot, the short time I have experienced this.

But to give thee also, as thou desires a Character of Pensalvania and
West-Jersey; that will be a task I must be excused to undertake, least I give
offense, or at least bring me under censure as partial: Were I not concerned in
any of the Provinces I might satisfy thy curiosity: But being chiefly
interested in this, I Will be very cautious meddling with my Neighbors more then
here, one with another, so I may use my freedom with my Neighbors which they
take not ill, but writ that they may take otherwise; They lie so near
adjacent, that they may be said in a sense, to be but one Country; And what is
said for one in General may serve for all: I have been at Burlingtoun, and at
Pensilvania, as far as Philadelphia, which lies about 20, miles below
Burlingtoun: That journey by Land gave me some view of all the Provinces, and
made me now considerably to estimate this of East-Jersey; having some
Conveniences esteemed be me, which the others are not so plentifully furnished
withal, viz. fresh and salt Meadows, which now are very valuable and no man
here will take up a Tract of Land without them; being the support of their
flocks in Winter, which other parts must supply be store, and taking more care
for English Grass; But know where salt Marisshes are not; there is no
Muskettos, and that manner of Land, the more health, and this was often
answered me, when I have been making comparisons; I must tell thee, their
Character in Print by all that reads it, here is said to be modest, and much
more might have been said in its Commendation. We have one thing more
particular to us, which the other want also: which is vast Oysters banks, which
is Constant fresh Victuals during the winter to English as well as Indians; of
these there are many all along our Coasts from that Sea as high as against New
York, whence they come to fetch them, so we are supplied with salt fish at our
doors, or within half a tides passage, and fresh Fish in abundance in every
little brook, as Perch, Trout, Else, etc. which we catch at our doors.
Provisions here are very plentiful, and people generally well stockt with
Cattle: New York and Burlingtoun has hitherto been their Market, Few or no
Trading-Men being here in this Province, I believe it has been very unhappily
heretofore under an ill managed Government, and most of the people who are
such, who have been invited from the adjacent Collonies by that goodness of its
Soill, and convenient Situation, at Amboy we are now building some small
houses of 30. foot long, and 18. foot breadth, fitting to entertain Workmen,
and such who will go and build larger, the stones lie exceeding well and good
up that Rariton River a Tides passage, and Oyster-shells upon the point to make
lyme withal, which will wonderfully accommodat us in building good houses
cheap, warm for Winter, cool for Summer, and durable, covering for houses are
Shingles, Oak, Chestnut and Cedar, we have plentiful here of all, the last
endures a man's age if he live to be old; There is 5. or 6. Sawmills going up
here this Spring, two at work already, which abates the price of boords half in
half, and all other timber for building, for although timber coast nothing; yet
workmanship by hand was London price, or near upon, or sometimes more, which
these Mills abate; we buy Oak and Chestnut boords no cheaper then last year; My
habitation with Samuel Groom is at Elizabeth Town, and here we came first, it
lies on a fresh small river, with the tide, Ships of 30. or 40. Tuns come
before our doors, throughout this Town is good English grass and (bears) a very
good burden; we cannot call our habitation solitary, for what with the
publict employ I have little less company at my house daily then I had in
George Yeard, although not so many pass by my doors. The people are general a
sober professing people, Wise in their Generation, Courtious in their
Behavior, and Respectful to us in Office among them. As for the Temperature of
the Air, it is wonderfully situated to the Humors of Mankind, the wind and
weather rarely holding in one point, or one kind for ten days together: It is
a rare thing for a Vessel to be wind-bound for a week together, the wind seldom
holding in a point more then 48. hours, and in a short time we have weet and
dry, warm and cold weather, which changes we often desire in England and look
for before they come; Yet this Variation creats not cold, nor have we the tenth
part of the cold as we have in England; I never had any since I came, and in
the midst of Winter, and Frosts could endure it with less clothes then in
England, for generally I go with that same Clothes I use to wear in Summer with
you, but warm clothes hurt not. I bless the LORD, I never had better health nor
my Family, my Daughters are very well improved in that respect, and tell me,
they would not change their place for George Yeard, nor would I; People here
are generally settled, where the tide reaches, and althoughs this is good Land
and well Timbered and plentifully supplied with Salt-Marish, yet there is much
better Land up higher on the River, where they may go up with small boats,
where many now are settling, there is extraordinary Land, fresh Meadows
overflowed in the Winter time, that produces multitudes of Winter Corns, and
its believed will end are 20, 30, or 50, years flowing without intromission,
and not decay; such Land there is at Sops on Hudsons River, which has born
Winter Corn about 20. years without help, and is as good as at first, and
better. William Penn took a view of the Land this last month, when here, and
said, he had never seen such before in his life: All the English Merchants, and
many of the Dutch have taken, and are desirous to take up Plantations with us.
Our Country here called Berghen is almost Dutchmen, at a town called Newark 7.
or 8. miles hence is made great quantities of Syder, exceeding any we can have
from New England, or Rood-Island, or Long Island; I hope to make 20. or 30.
Barrels out of our Orchard next year, as they have done who had it before me,
for that, it must be as providence ordered: Upon our view and survey of
Amboy-point we find extraordinary well situate for a great Town or City,
beyound expectation, at low water round about the point are Oysters; There are
Oysters of two kinds, small as English, and others two or three morsells,
exceeding good for roasting and stewing; The people say our Oysters are good
and in season all Summer; The first of the third Month I eat of them at Amboy
very good; The point is good lively Land, 10. some places 20. foot above the
water mark, About it are several Coves with small Coasts may lay up Vessels as
in a deck, besides great Ships of any burden, may all ride before the town
Land-loked against all winds: There Rariton-River runs up, or rather down 50
(far larger,) some say 100. mylles for small boats. I saw several vines upon
the point, which produces, as they say, good grapes in their Season, this
Country is very full of them, but being no present mother of profit, few
regard them more then to pick them as they lay in their way when they are ripe.
We have store of Clamms esteemed much better then Oysters; one Festivals the
Indians feast with them, there are Shallops, but in no great plenty. Fish we
have great store, as our relation set forth, but they are very good when
caught. (as the proverb is) I have several Barrels by me now, which are good
for our Table, and for Sale. I brought a Sea-Net over with me which may turn to
good account. Sea-Nets are good Merchandise here, mine cost me about 4. or 5.
lib. and can have 20. lib. for it if I would sell it now; I may writ of many
such matters in our Province, which may invite persons here, but so am resolved
to conclude, knowing that in probability, there is not an Industrious man, but
by GODS blessing may not only have a comfortable, but plentiful supply of all
things necessary for this life, with the salutation of my true affection to
all, etc. I rest thy affectionat friend,

Tho. Rudyard.

A Letter from Samuel Groom Surveyour General in East-New-Jersey, dated at
East-Jersey, the 11th. of August, 1683.
Friends, and Fellow-Proprietors.
SInce my last I have now sounded the Channel from Amboy to Sandyhook, and
finds it to be a broad and bold Channel in no place less then 3. fathom at
high water, in ordinary tides 4, 5, or 6, fathom, except in one short place,
Rariton River is a good River, and has a good tide of flood, overpowering the
freshes about 30: miles above Amboy, after its flood, the tide has no force
against the Freshes, which comes out of several branches of Rariton, and joins
in one, 40. or 50. miles above Amboy, I have spent a considerable time in
making discovery, I have not as yet had times to lay out much land for you,
only about 17. or 18. thousand Acres in one tract, good upland near Elizabeth
Town; I have now seen the tract of Land against (or nigh Amboy point formerly
laid out by Vanquillian; it is on the West Side of a Creek called Chingeroces,
about eight thousand Acres. And I intend shortly to lay as much or twice as
much more to it; but first we must talk with the Natives about that, and other
tracts of Land they are not yet paid for; The last day of this month is
appointed to treat with several Indians to buy several exceeding good tracts
nigh the head of Rariton.

The tenth of the next Month is also appointed to treat with other Indians, to
buy other tracts of choice Meadowing, and Vp-land that lies about 12. or
thirteen miles up into the Country, which I have seen; and when we have
accomplished these two things, we shall he able to lay out for you much land;
and when I have been up in the Country toward and at Barnagate, and agreed
with the Indians thereabout, for such land as we may see occasion to purchase
(presently) in order to a setlement there; for here are many both of
New England, New York, and some parts of this Province, stands ready to sit
down in that part of the Country, not only for the sake of the good Up land
and Meadows, which report says, is much thereabouts; but also for the sake of
the Whale Trade, and other fishing trade, which is like to be there shortly.
New England Men, and others were a^ tampering with the Indians to have
purchased there, before and since we came, but now they are out of hopes of
coming in at that door; so now they make their Addresses to us, and would have
us to purchase, and let them come in our Tennents, otherwise as we may agree.
I intend to attempt these things, this fall I have not been much on the South
side of Rariton, only upon some upland at several places, and upon the tract
of 8. thousand 3. hundredth and 20. Acres of yours aforementioned; and also on
the Meadowing that lies on the southside of Rariton above Amboy, a year or two
since, purchased of the Indians in the name of Dam Cartwright, though it was
never intended for her, nor for any Proprietor, but as it fell out, they
quarrelled about disposing and sharing thereof, so it is now without
controversy yours: Now know that Rariton River is accommodate on both sides
with salt and fresh meadows, salt as far as the salt sea water flows or
predominats, and fresh above as the River of Thames. We have about 3000. Acres
of meadowing butting on the river, I hope it will never hurt Amboy town,
besides report says, that the upland next adjoining to this meadowing,
beginning over against Amboy, and so up 10, or 12, miles to a River that
stricks out of Rariton south, and is called South River, is but mean land.

It may be well if you would agree to take each one a 24th part of Lands as we
lay them out whither it be more or less, or else take 500. Acres Lots, and let
these Lots be cast when 24. times 500 Acres is laid out, and where we can make
greater Lots we may; we have now got up three houses at Amboy, and three more
ready to be set up, but workmen are scarce, and many of them base; the best
will work but when they can spare time out of their plantations, (if no help
comes it will be long are Amboy be built, as London is) housing will bring a
Trade to that place, the Indians comes thither to get Fish, Foul, Oysters,
Clams, Mussels, etc. (as people go to market for things they want) and these
Indians brings at Seasons great quantities of skins down Rariton, so by Amboy
and to New York, where they have a continual supply of things they want.

Well here is a brave Country, the ground very fruitful, and wonderful
inclinable to English grass, as Claver, etc. It Predominats over the more wild
grass, very little barren, much dry up-land and good meadow, some phenny,
swampy land, and small running brooks and rivers throughout all the parts of
the Country I have been, and these phenny and swampy Land hears great burdens
of grass; in short, the land is four times better then I expected, we must
needs be out some money at present to purchase lands of the Indians, but that
will be soon got in with profit, as people come to Inhabit and take up Land,
and pay as always they have done their part of purchase from the Indians; Here
is great talk of the braveries of the place and land, Barnagate I intend to see
shortly, after the season is fititng, to go by land and water to it, I intend
to go by water in a Sloop, to see how convenient its by water, and from thence
come by Land, so then I shall tell you more; Ye must expect to be at charges
for doing these and such other things I purpose shortly to writ to, and demand
in all places of the Quitrents, and Arriers, they generally say, they will pay
Captain Berry his two or three hundredth pounds behinds in arriers, as is said
because his caice differs from others a little, I Will (GOD permitting) begin
with them first of all about his rent, etc. and either have rent or land, what
you write concerning building and repairing shall be ohserved, I wish I were
freely rid of all the goods I have of yours, and my own at 28. per cent.
Excepting such as are for the Indian Trade, These part of America, are
commodated with English goods; Nevertheless when I pay Workmen and Laborers, I
pay them goods rated cent per cent; New York money, but then I must pay them 2.
or 3. silver, and part paction, which I procure with goods as well as I can.

The houses at Amboy are 30. foot long and 16. foot wide, 10. foot betwixt
joint and joint, a double Chimney made with Timber, and clay as the manner of
this Country is to build, will in about 50. lib. a house, this pay procured
here, for 25. in goods the first coast, I shall make you no return this year,
seeing we are about purchasing and surveying all, which will run out money in
this place, where Mint are so scarce to be had on such accounts, I must as well
as I can turn your goods into money, provision and goods for Indians, I have
laid out Amboy into 150. Lots, and have sent home a draught of it,

your S. G.

Abstract of a Letter from Gavin Laurie Deputy Governor of East Jersey, to the
Proprietors at London, dated from Elizabeth Town the 2. of March, 1684.
I Took up several days with Country men and others, to view the Ground and
Water, at last I pitched upon a place where a Ship of 300. Tun may ride safely
within a plank length of the Shore at low water, and joining thereto is a piece
of marish ground, about 12. perch broad, and 20. perch long, and high land on
each side like our Keys by London Bridge; this may be easy cut quit round for
small Vessels to come to the Key, and lie safe round this Island, I set out
Lots, 1. Acre a piece, viz. 4. pole at the Key, and 40. pole backward, from
thence along the river, near half a mile I laid out the like lotts very
pleasant for situation where they can see the ships coming in the Bays of
Sandy-Hook; for near 20 miles the Ships may ride alongs by the Town as safe as
at London, just at the point by the Town; Rariton-River runs up the Country a
great way, there boats of 40 tun may go, and the River, by the Town goes to
New York, Hudsons-River Long Island, Staten Island, and so to New England;
there is no place in all England for Convenience and pleasant situation; There
are 60 Lotts upon the River, and 40 backward between these and the River, and
these backward have a highway 100 foot broad, where I have laid out a place for
a market, with cross Streets from the River to the Market where the Town-houses
are to be built; when this was done I laid out 400 Acres to be divided in 48
parts, viz. 36 to each Proprietor, and those who have Lotts in the Town, I
grant them half Lotts in this to pay for the Lotts in the Town, 20 pound or if
a half Lot of 36 Acres 40 pounds; I laid 400 Acres to ly until the
Proprietors agree to devyd it as people comes over; There is 16 Lotts taken up
by the Scottish Proprietors, and 8 Lotts by the Proprietors that are here; There
are 20 Lotts taken up in the Town by other People; I engadge all to build a
house of 30 foot long, and 18 broad, and 18 foot high to the raising, to be
finished within a year, To pay for laying out 40 shil: a Lot, and 4 d per
Annum, Quit-Rent there are several begun already to build, I have laid out
between 40 and 50 Acres for the Governors house. The high way and wharfe
between the Hooks and the River a 100 foot broad; And to ^eave a raw of trees
along upon the River before the houses for shade and shalter exceeding
pleasant: I have agreed for two houses of like demensions, to be built for the
Proprietors; and also a house for the Governor of 6 foot long, and 18 foot
broad And if the quit rents come in, I intend 3 or 4 houses more for the
Proprietors, I can easily let them this work took me up 5 weeks After I had
finished this work I set the people to work, Scottish and English, about 50
persons, some preparing, for building, other on clearing ground to get Corn
sown, this spring, then came in a Boar privately to Elizabeth Town the 12th.
past next morning; I went to New York to visit the Governor, stayed there two
or three days; He was very kind and promised a fair correspondency, so I did
not publish my Commission until this day before the Council; They have been
kind and courteous: Now is the time to send over people for settling these.
There is 30000 Acres of Land in several places belonging to Proprietors
formerly taken up by Cartwright, so here is land enough. The Scots and William
Dorkwrans people coming now and settling, advance the Province more then it
has been advanced these ten years. Therefore Proprietors send over some
Families and Servants; I shall presently set them out Land, and it well
presently bring them in considerable profit in a few years here wants; nothing
but people; There is not a poor body in all the Province, nor that wants; Here
is abundance of Provision, Pork and Beef. At 2 d per pound, Fish and Fowl
plenty; Oysters I think would serve all England, Wheat 4. shil. Ster. per.
Bushel, Indian Wheat 2. ss. 6. d. per busshell; It is exceeding good food
every way, and 2. or 300. fold increass; Sider good and plenty for 1. d. per
Quart; Good drink that is made of water and Molasses stands in about 2. ss.
per. Barrel wholesome like our 8. ss: Beer in England, Good Venision plenty
brought, us in at 18. d. the quarter, Eggs at 3. d. per Dozon; all things very
plenty, Land very good as ever I see; Wines, Walnuts, Peaches, Straw-berries
and many other things plenty in the woods; The Proprietors have 150. or 200.
Acres 3. miles from the town upon Rariton River, salt Marsh where I intend to
let the people of Amboy cut grass for hay to their Cattle in Winter, until we
otherwise order it, by Lots to them; I reckon there is laid out for the Town
Governors house, and public high ways, near or about 200. Acres, so there
rests 1800. Acres, I laid 400. Acres as I said the rest to ly in common until
divided; I have put two houses in repair upon the River called the Point, 2. m:
from Elizabeth Town, have let one of them with 10. Acres of Pasture ground, and
10. Acres of Woody ground for 7. years at 26: lib. per annum; the man to clear
the ten Acres of Woody ground, and make it fit for Pleuching or Pasture; I
intend to let the other also with some land, all the houses were like to drop
down, all the land lying wothout fence, and an barn quit falen down, and
destroyed, another without any cover; And that other next to the house where I
dwell all to pieces, and all the fences and outhouses is down, but repairsd
before I came; I am setting up a Ferry-Boat at Perth, for Men and Horses to go
and come to Burlingtown, Pensalvania, and New York; Also I am treating with one
to set up a house midway to Burlingtown, to entertain Travellors, and a
Ferry-Boat to go to New York, all which is for promotting Perth, that being the
center; also you should give me power to set out a Line between the Governor
of New York and us; he calls on me for it, because several Plantations on the
River are settled, and we know not yet what side they will fall to; I cannot at
present mention all particulars, which you must supply by some general clauses
or words, for it is not possible for you to understand what is for the good of
the Province as I do, that am here; and be not sparing to send over people, it
will bring you it again with large profits; for here is a gallant plentiful
Country, and good land; I bave given you a large account of the little time I
have been here; I have none to writ for me; but you must send a Copy of this
to Scotland, and with it your further Instructions to be signed, and send me
forth; I will be bound till it come, I rest your friend, Sic subscribitur,

Gavin Laury.

An Letter from Gavin Laury to a Friend of his at London.
East-Jersey, March 16. 1684. Loving Friend,
I Promised to write to thee when GOD brought me to Jersey, but had not time
till now, I shall give thee a breef, account of the Country, no fiction but
the truth; It is beyond what I expected, It is situate in a good Air, which
makes it healthy; and there is great convenience for traveling from places
throw the Province in Boats, from a small Canoa to Vessels of 30, 40, or 50,
Tun, and in some places 100; In the Bay coming up to Amboy point, where the
Town of Perth is now in building, a Ship of 300. Tun may asily ride closs to
the Shore, within a plank length to the Shore, and the houses of the Town, and
yet the land there, nor other in the Province is not low, Swampy Marish ground
but pretty high ground, rising from the water side at Amboy point, the bank of
the River is 20. foot, in some places 30, and in some 40. foot high; And yet
has many conveniences for landing goods, The soil is generally black in some
places a foot deep, bears great burdens of Corn, and Naturally brings
forth English grass 2. years pleuching, the ground is tender and the ploughing
is very easy, the trees grow generally not thick, but some places 10, in some
15, in some 25, or 30. upon an Acre; This I find generally, but in some
particular places there is 100. upon an Acre, but that is very rare; The trees
are very tale and straight, the general are Oak, Beech, Walnut, Chasnuts, and
Accorns ly thick upon the ground for want of eating, Peaches, Vines,
Strawberries and many other sorts of Fruits grow commonly in the Woods; There
is likewayes Gumtree, Cedar, White-Wood, like our Fir Tree, Walnuts, Chestnuts,
and others lie tick upon the ground; there is great plenty of Oysters, Fish,
Foul, Pork is 2. pennies the pound, Beef, and Venison 1. penny the pound; a
whole fat back at 5. or 6. per Bushel, Indian Corn for 26 per Bushel, Oats,
20. pennies, and Barley 2. shill: per Bushel; We have good brick earth, and
stone for building, at Amboy and elsewhere the Country Farm houses are built
very cheap, A Carpentar with a man's own Servants builds the house, they have
all materials for nothing, except Nails; their Chimneys are of stones, they
make their own Ploughs and Carts for the most part, only the Iron work is very
dear; The poorer sort set up a house of two or three Rooms themselves after
this manner, The walls are of cloven Timber about 8. or 10. Inches broad, like
planks set on end to the ground; and the other nailed to the raising which they
plaster within; they build a Barn after the same manner, and these cost not
above 5. lib. a piece, and then to w^rk they go. 2. or 3. men in one year will
clear 50. Acres, in some places 60. and in some more; They sow Corn the first
year, and afterward maintain themselves, and the increase of Corn, Cows,
Horses, Hogs and Sheep, comes to the Landlord; several Merchants of New York,
have left their several Plantations there to come to East-Jer-sey; 2. or 3.
join together be 12, 15, or 20. Servants and one Overseer, which costs them
nothing for the first year, except some Shoes, Stockings and Shirts; I have
been to see these Plantations, and find they make a great increase by them,
maintains their Families at New York with all provisions; sell a great deal
yearly, and for Servants our English people are far better Husbandmen then the
New England men, the Servants work not so much by a third as they do in
England, and I think feed much better, for they have Beef, Pork, Baccon,
Pudding, Milk, Butter, and good Beer; and Cider for drink: When they are out of
their time, they have land for themselves; and generally turn Farmours for
themselves; Servants wages is not under 2: shill: a day besides Victuals; and
at Amboy point 2: shill: 6: pen: per day, at Amboy we have one setting up to
make Malt, but we want a Brewar, I wish thou would send over some to set up a
Brewhouse and a Bakehouse to bake Bread and Biscuit, for a Bisket-maker we must
have to vend our meat to the Plantations, send over some Husband Men and
Country Fellows that Plough, Sow, Reap, Thresh and look after Cattle; A
Carpentar or two, and a Smith for Ploughs and Horse, and a Cowper, which we
want very much; If thou will send a dozon of Servants, most of them Country
men, I will set thee out a gallant Plantation of 500. or 1000. Acres upon a
River side; but thou must send over some goods to stock it withal, I desire
thee to encourage some of our Friends, especially the Proprietors to send over
some servants to stock some Land, And when they have cleared it, if they have a
mind to let it, here are tennents to take it, and if they will sell it, here
are also purchasers; there is one man since I came here sold his Plantation for
1500. lib. the whole was 1600. or 1800. Acres, whereof only 120. Acres were
cleared, upon which he had a house, Garden and Orchyard, and Barn planted; I
know several men who let cleared Land at 6. shil 8. pennies and at 10. shil.
the Acre yearlie rent, which is a good encouragement for sending over servants
to plant; I write not this as idle story, but as things realy and truly are; I
have sent for servants my self to setle a farm for if the Proprietors will not
do so, I see not what they can exect. The Scots have taken a right course, They
have sent over many servants, and are likewayes sending more; They have
likewayes sent over many poor Families, and given them a small stock, and these
Families some for 7. some for 10 years give the half of their increase to the
Landlord, except the milk, which the tennent has to himself, I have set them
out land, and they are at work, I believe they will have 40. Acres cleared this
Spring; and this Summer I am to set them out more, so that in a short time
they will have a great increass coming in, this will raise the price of the
Land here; And is the reason that several from New York bounds come to me, to
take up Land, for they believe now this Province will be improven; And our Land
is beeter then theirs; so that every Proprietors sending over 10. people will
be a great advantage to himself, encourage others to take up Land and bring all
the division that has been here to an end, for these men seeing that they shall
be balanced are already more complyant then they were, Now I have laid these
things before thee, and desire thee to impart them to some of the Proprietors,
and other friends that they may consider of the same, I am thy Loving friend;
Sic subscribtur,

Gavin Laury.

A Letter from Gavin Laury to the Scots Proprietors of the same date.
KNowing you do expect from us an account of this Country, we have for your
encouragement, and for the encouragement of all our Country Men who may be
inclinable to come into this Country, given you this breef and true account of
it, according as we have seen and are credibly informed, for having seen
little, yet save the Winter Season, we must writ what is to be seen in Summer,
upon Information which we have just ground to believe to be true, because what
we have seen alread in it (notwithstanding of all that we heard of it before we
came) surpass our expectation in many things; the Air in this Country is very
wholesome, and though it alter suddenly sometimes being one day hot and another
cold, yet people are not so subject to catch cold, or be distempered by it as
in our Country of England; the land lies for the most part pretty high, but on
the River and Creek sides are many Meadows which lie low, of which the Country
people getts their Hay, whereby their stocks are maintained in the Winter
Season, Provisions here are pentifull and cheap; There is Beef, Pork, Venision,
Mutton, Foul and Fish, abundance to be had at easy rates, and for drink they
have good Beer, and Cider, and these that are desirous may have Wine of several
sorts, and other kinds of strong Liquor, so that we see little wanting here
that a man can desire; and we are here sure that a sober and industrious People
might make this a rich Country, and enrich themselves in it, especially poor
people who are hard put to it to gain bread at home; notwithstanding of the
excessive Labor, for we see that people here want nothing, and yet there
labor is very saml; they work not so hard by one half as the Husband men or
Fermors in our Country; and many of these who have settled here upwards of
sixteen years, have lived upon the product of the Land; They cleared the first
two years after they came (and cleared none since) which produced not only Corn
to maintain their own Families, but to sell every year, and the increase of
their Bestial whereof they have good store of several Sorts, Cows, Oxen,
Horses, Sheep, and Swine, yields them other provisions and to sell; besides,
yet there be some more Industrious among them who have continued clearing and
Improving Land, and these have got Estates, and would not sell their
Plantations for several hundred pounds, we have late up a little way on the
Rariton River, but could not go so far as we intended being prevented by Rainy
weather, but so far as we went was very rich land, and yet that above it is
said to be richer, a great deal of it is naturally clear of wood; And which is
not so, is easily cleared, the trees being but small and a good distance from
one another, so that the Land yet untaken up so far as we can understand, is
easier to clear then that which is taken up; the Towns that are already seated,
being seated in woodiest places, the Merchants in New York both Dutch and
English have many of them taken up Land and settled Plantations in this
Country, and several from that Collony are desiring to come and take up land
among us, though they might have land in their own Collony without paying
Quittrents; The wood here is not so hard to clear as many think, they do not
pull it up by the Roots, but them about a foot or more from the ground; and one
man may cut down many in a day, four of our men the first day they began, cut
down seventy the best Trees they could find fit for building; there are not
many of great Trees, but straight and tale, and there be of many sorts, Oak,
Walnut, Chestnut, Cedar, Popler, Gumtrees, Firrs, Pines, Birth and Beech, and
other sorts which we remember not at present; there are many good Orchards of
Fruit trees, and they make abundance of good Cider, especially at one Town
called New-wark, which is esteemed at New York and other places where it is
sold, beyond any that comes from New England; there are Peaches, and Vines grow
wild about the River sides, which in Season bears good Fruit, and Grapes, and
there are Strawberries over all the Woods and many other kind of goods and
Fruits, and at Amboy point and several other places there is abundance of brave
Oysters: There will be many houses built there quickly, for many have taken up
lots and all that have taken are obliged to built within a year; there is good
encouragment for Tradsmen to come over, such as Carpentars, Massons and
Brick-layers, for they build not only of Wood, but also of Stone and Brick, yet
most of Country Houses are built of Wood, only Trees split and se^ up in end
on the Ground, and Coverings to their Houses are mostly Shingles made of Oak,
Chestnut and Cedar wood, which makes a very neat Covering, yet there are some
Houses covered after the Dutch manner with pantikles; the Towns are all settled
upon Rivers, where Vessels of 30, or 40, Tuns may come up to their doors, and
the out plantations generally upon some Brooks or Rivelets which are as plenty
here as in our own Country, and curious clear water, and in many places are
good Spring walls; but in the Towns every man for the most part have a well
diggd by his own hand: Among all the towns that are Settled here, there is none
lies so convenient for trade as New-Perth, for Ships of great burden may come
up closs to the houses, and may come up any time in the Winter; There came a
Ship of 300. tuns in there this winter, in the hardest frost we had, and lay
hard by the town, so near that she was tied to a tree: The Land here; brings
forth most sorts of English grain, and great increase, Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats
and others sorts of grain, such as Indian Corn, which is very good and
wholesome kind of Grain; and also Buck-Wheat, and those Corns are to be had at
easy rates, either for money or for goods, and those that have not m^ney or
goods may have abundance for their work.

We shall now answer so far as we are capable, your Quarries sent over to us.

To the first, we cannot positively answer to give an account of the whole
length and breadth of the Province, But we are informed that it is a great
deal broader then ye expected, for these that have traveled from the extent
of our bounds on Hudsons-River straight over to the Delawar-River, say it is
100. miles or upwards; we shall know that certainly after a while, for the Line
betwixt us and New York is to be run straight over to Delaware-River, about 3.
weeks hence, and after that the Line betwixt us and West-Jersey, After which we
shall be able to give a true account of the bounds of that Province.

2ly. When the bounds is so exactly laid out we can the easier guess at the
Number of Acres, and by that time may be able to give an account what number of
Acres is already taken up, but there is no fear of want of Land.

3ly. The quantity of Meadow ground we cannot determine, having traveled as
yet but little in the Province, but the way we have traveled, there is meadow
abundance, both on the water sides and on the up Land.

4ly. There is also other good ground in some places great quantities free of
wood, which is fit either for Corn or Grass, and the ground all over brings
forth good English grass naturaly after it is ploughed.

5ly. There are also Commons upon the Country, but what quantity we cannot
tell, there is little keept in them save wild horses, which the people take up
when they have occasion; There is also Land fit for pasturage for Sheep, and
there is their Sheep in the Country; but what number the ablest planters have
we know not, but some we see have good flocks.

6ly. An exact Mapp of the Country is not yet drawn nor can you quickly expect
it, for it will tak up a great deal of time, charge and pains to do it.

7ly. There are also hills up in the Country, but how much ground they take up
we know not, they are said to be stony and covered with wood, and beyond them
is said to be excellent land.

8ly. To the Eight we cannot answer as yet.

9ly, There be People of several sorts of Religion, but few very Zealous; The
People being mostly New England men, do mostly incline to their way, and in
every Town there is a meeting house where they worship publicly every Week;
They have no public Law in the Country for mantaining public Teachers; but
the Towns that have them makes way within themselves to maintain them; We know
none that has a settled Preacher that follows no other Employment, save one
Town New-wark.

10ly. The method of building their houses is mentioned already.

11ly. There are not many Out Plantations that are not within the bounds of
some Town; Yet there be some, and these are the richest, what number are there
we know not, some have great quantities of Land and abundance cleared.

12ly. The richest Planters have not above 8. or 10. Servants, they will have
some of them 1 Dozon of Cowes, yea some 20. or 30. 8. or 10. Oxen, horse more
then they know themselves, for they keep breading Mears, and keep no more
horses at home then they have occasion to work; The rest they let run in the
woo^ both Winter and Summer, and take them as they have occasion to use them;
Swine they have in great flocks in the wood, and Sheep in flocks also, but they
let them not run in the woods for fear of being destroyed by wolves; Their
profit arises from the Improvement of their Land, and Increase of their
Bestial.

13ly. There will be in most of the Towns already settled at least 100 Houses,
but they are not built so regular as the Towns in our Country, so that we
cannot compear them with any Town we know in Scotland; every house in the Town
has a Lot of 4. Acres lying to it; so that every one building upon his own
Lot makes the town Irregular and scattered; There streets are laid out too
large, and the Sheep in the Towns are mostly mantained in them; They are so
large that they need not trouble to pave them.

14ly. Betwixt Sandy-Hook, and Little Egg harbor lies 2. Towns Midletoun and
Shrewsbery, there is no Land taken up that way but what is in the bounds of
these two Towns; what kind of land it is, we know not, having never traveled
that way, Bornogate or Burning-Holl is said to be a very good place for
fishing, and there is some desiring to take up land there, who inform us that
it is good Land, and abundance of Meadow lying to it.

15ly. There are no Fishermen that follows only that trade, save some that
salt Whales upon the Coa^ts, and other Fishes, there is abundance to be had
every where through the Country in all the Rivers, and the People commonly
fish with sives or long netts, and will catch with a sive 1. sometimes 2.
barrels a day, of good fish, which they salt up mostly for their own use, and
to sell to others.

16ly. There is no Ships belonging to this Province particularly, or built
here, save one which Samuel Groom built here the last Summer, which stands yet
in the Stocks (a stop being put to it by his death;) there is convenience
enough to build Ships, the Ships in this part trade mostly to the
West-Indian Islands, and some to New found-Land, where the Provisions of this
Country vends.

17ly. There is land here in several places, after it is cleared and brought
into a farm set out for Rent^, as in out Country at 5.8. and 10. shil. per
Acre. According to the goodness and situation of the said Land, and those that
will be at charge to clear land may get tennents to take upon these terms; But
whither it will turn to good account or not because little experienced as yet
with the Charge of clearing of Land. I will not positivly inform.

18ly. There is several places of the Country fit for mills, and several both
Corn and Saw mills already set up, and good encouragment to set up more.

19ly. The Acres are here reckoned according to the English Account; There is
16 foot goes to the Rude, and 20. Rude long and 8. Rude broad, makes an Acre;
One English butt of Wheat which is 8 English Gallons or Scots Quarts, commonly
sows an Acres 2. bushells of Barlay also an Acre, and 2. bushells of Oats an
Acre, and half Acre; English peck which is 4. English quarts or Scots Shopens,
of Indian Corn plants one Acre.

20. There are but few Indian-Natives, in this Country; Their strength is
inconsiderable, they live in the Woods, and have small towns in some places far
up in the Country; They plant a little Indian Corn, shoots Deer, and other
wild Beasts and Fowls for their food; They have Kings among themselves to
Govern them; for Religion, they have none at all, they do not refuse to sell
Land at occasion.

The prices of Grain and other Provisions here at present,

Indian Corn, 2. ss. 6. d. the Bushel, Wheat 4 shill: Rye, 3. shill: Oats, 1.
ss. 8. d. the Bushel, Beef, 1 d. Pork 2. d. Venison 1 d. Mutton 3 d. the pound,
this English Measure and Weight; But mark these things being valued in this
Country money, there is a fifth part difference betwixt it and Sterling money,
So that Wheat being valued here at 4. ss. the Bushel, is but 3 ss. 3. d.
Sterling, and so of the rest proportionally.

Here you have an Account of things as far as we are capable to give you at
present, with which we hope you will be satisfied, while further opportunity
and better experience give us occasion to writ more; And so we rest your
Friends and will wishers to all our Country Men.

Sic subscribitur, David Barclay. Arthur Forbes. Gavin Laurie.

Elizabeth Town in East-Jersey, the 29. of the first month called March, 1684.
This I have heard read, do also subscrive to the truth there is, and so rests,
G. L.

For the Scots Proprietors of East-Jersey.



A Letter, from George Mackenzie Merchant in Edinburgh, to Mr. George Alexander
Advocat there.
Elizabeth-Town Sept. 1. 1684. Mr. Alexander,
I Doubt not but you expect here a particular account of the province of
New Jersey, but that I thought needless, The person David Barclay whom this
comes along with, being more able to give you that satisfaction, as whose
interest oblidgeth him to a more narrow observation of its natural advantages,
and whose place being one of the Council, gives a larger liberty and occasion
to inspect the concerns of this Province; But in general its a healthful,
pleasant fruitful Country, in many places of a most Luxurious Soil, rewarding
the labor of the Countryman sufficiently, its well watered with many fair and
pleasant Rivers and Creeks, stored with several sorts of fish, and most of the
Rivulets convenient for mills, whereof there are several both for sowing of
wood and grinding of Corn. They raise great store of Hogs and Cattle; and fowls
they have in abundance; The Country for ten or fifteen miles up from the River
and Sea is generally plain; farther up Mountains, besides the Towns mentioned
in the public paper since Governor Lawries arrival, there is laid out at
Amboy-point 1000. Acres for the City of Perth divided into 96. Lotts, 9 Acres
to a Lot, the Remainders is for the streets, Market place, Governors house,
and other public conveniences. How large the Country is, is a question hard
to resolve, and how much bought by the Proprietors (if any) David Bar^lay can
satisfy you, The inhabitants are English, with a few Scots, French, and Dutch
of sufficient number, to defend themselves against any prejudice may be offered
them by the Inhabitants. That fancy of a Common Improvement will not take, but
whoever expects profi^e from their Interests here, must Imp^ove them a part, I
have sold some of your Gloves a^ 2 shil: and 6 pen: 3 shil: 4: pen. a pair,
being what I c^uld get for them; the money five and a half part less then
Inglish, and shall make an account thereof at meeting, Present my service to all
Friends.

I am Your very humble Servant, Sic scribitur, George Mackenzie

A Double of a Letter from New-Perth, da^ed the 1 of the seventh Month, 1684.
From John Reid, who was Gardner to the Lord Advocat, to a Friend at Edinburgh.
Seeing it has pl^sead God to bring me and mine safe unto this part, I took
upon my self as oblidged to writ something according to my promise of this
Country; indeed I must sa^ its a brave place, but I have nor had time to take
such observations as I would, being so ingadged to attend my other business;
Here is no ou^ward want, especially of provisions, and if people were
industruos they might have clothes also within themselves; by the report ^f
all, its the best of all ^he Neighboring Collonies, it is very wholesome,
pleasant, and a fertill-land, there are also some barren land, viz. whit Sandy
land, full of Pin trees, it lies betwixt South-River, and Barngate on
Neverssink, (albiet there be also much good land in that precinct) yet its a
good place for raising a stock of cattle, providing they have large room to run
in, for cattle finds g^od food there in winter, when none is in the best land,
and therefore do the inhabitants provide little hay in winter. The soil of the
country is generally a red marle ear^h, with a surface of blak mould (nor does
it appear that realy it is to their eyes; who cannot penetrat beyond the
surface) full fraughted with grass, pleasant herbs, and flowers, and in many
places little or no wood, but most places full of large timber, as walnut,
especially oak, there be some places here and there in the Woods, they call
swamps, whick is low Ground, amidst or betwixt rising ground full of bushes,
which holds water in winter, tho most of them be dry in summer, but these being
cleared, and some of them that needs being drained, are the richest land; here
are great conveniences of Bay, Sounds, Rivers, Creeks, Brooks, and Springs,
all over the Province; but one of the best things is the large quantities of
brave Meadows, both falt and fresh, which makes the people here able to supply
their Neighbors as they do, throw the abundance of their cattle. I know one
Planter who has a hundred of cattle, not above three years settled, and no
wonder for some of the grass is als high as my head; Its pity to see so much
good land as I have been over in this province lying wast, and greater pity to
see so much good and convenient land taken, and not improven.

As soon as any of the land here comes to be cultivated, it over-runs with
small Claver-grass, by the pasturage and dunging of cattle, and so supplants
the natural grass and herbs, notwithstanding of their quick and strong
growth, Fruit trees also prosper well here; Newark made about a thousand
barrel of sider last year (a barrel is 8 Scots gallons) this is like that of
Woodbridge; who made 500 barrels of pork in one year, before the law was made
against the swins trespasses.

Here they sow most Indian corn, and Wheat, some Rye, Barley, Oats, Indian corn
the first year that they break up or plough, the second they sow Whea^, because
the spontaneous grouth of the weeds is done away by howing the Indean corn, as
we do cabboge; here is one planter makes account, That he has about three
thousand bushels of wheat reapt this year; I suppose he has above a hundred
acres of it, but I do not make these instances as so many precedents.

I know nothing wanting here, except that good Tradsmen, and good Husbandmen,
and Laborers are scarce; a Labourer may have a bushel of Corn per day, when
he is a little acquainted with the work of the country, but Tradsmen much more,
Smiths, Carpenters, Masons, Weavers, Tailors, Shoemakers, are very acceptable;
any who comes let them bring some clothes, and their proper tools with them, as
used in England, and provide butter, biscuit, wine, and especially beer and ale,
for their Sea-voyage, besides the ships allowance, and they need not fear when
they come here, albiet they have no more, yet they will be the better if they
have something, either in money or Scots linning, and stuffs to buy a little
provision at first, to set them up a house, and buy a cow or two; and tho a man
be rich, I would not advise him to bring many servants, at least not to keep
many at first, until he see about him, and know what he is doing.

I Cannot tell what goods are best to bring, David Barclay can tell better; But
he who brings money, may expect 15. d. For the English; shil: some may bring a
Little of the best Wheat for a change of seed, and some barley, and Oats, for
the same use; also a Little Scots field pise, there being none such here, bring
also some great clower seed.

There are great store of Garding herbs here, I have not had time to inquire
unto them all, nether to send some of the many pleasant (tho to me unknown
plants of this Country, to James Sutherland Physic Gardener at Edinburgh, but
tell him, I will not forget him, when opportunities offers.

I had forgot to writ of Ambo, or New-Perth, therefore I add, that it is one of
the best places in America, by the report of all Travelers, for a town of
trade; for my part, I never saw any so conveniently seated; this with my love,
and my Wifs to all friends, and acquaintances,

I Rest thy friend, John Reid.

David Mudies Letter to his Wife.
New-Perth. the 12. December. 16^4. My heart,
I Hope this shall find you and your Children in Good-health, and I wish in as
much satisfaction as I and our Children are here, far beyond my expectation,
and others my well-wishers, who are with you, my last to you was upon my
arrival here, dated the 8th of November, and at that time I could give you but
a small account of my Judgment anent it, it would take a great deal of time
to inform you of every thing, as it truly is; But to be short, I have
traveled through a part of it, and it is far larger than ever I heard it
reported in Scotland: I dare say, above a third more ground, and there is
abundance of brave Rivers through ^t all, ^ better then ever I did see in any
place, brave Meadows al^^^st all the River sides: and lands above the Mead^w
ground, abundance of Fresh water Brooks, and Springs, plenty of Fishes in all
the Rivers, in the Summer time, and that very good Fishes such as they preserve
for Victual in the W^nter, and in very few days they use to take more then they
make us^ of in Winter; as for wild Meat there is of all sorts; Cows, sheep and
Oxen as large as in England, and abundantly cheap, considering their goodness,
Corns and all Sorts of Fruit in great abundance, and no less then they are
called in Scotland. Mo^^y within this three years is become pretty plentiful,
Servants dear and scarce, I have taken up sex Acres of Land in New-Perth, which
pleases me exceeding well, in regard it is good Land, and f^^ ^^r building of a
City, and Persons of Good Fortune a^e come from New York, and other places in
the Country, and are very busy building; and I a^^ begun to build a house, and
have near dug the ground, which is very hard, it being under a great part of
it Oker, which is hard to digg, and the least deepness is eight foot: I have my
two Wrights Squaring of Timber for it, and I resolve to have it a good Handsome
House, six Rooms off a floor, with a Study, two stories high above the Sellers,
and the Garret above; And I doubt nor if the Frost bide away, but I shall have
the Sellers finished, and the gests laid above it, against the letter end of
this month; for the Land that lies to the house, I resolve to fence in two
Acres of it for an Orchard. and an Yeard, and to have hat done before the
middle of February, and to have it planted with fruit trees; for I find a man
in three years will have more Fruit in such in Orchard then he kn^ws how to
make use of.

And about the middle of February, according as the Weather is, I resolved to
go out where I have taken up my Land, which is upon a River, called the
South-River, which is an exceeding pleasant River, and place, there goes only
with me ^here Mr David Violent. I can go from New-^erth ^o it in a Boat, in two
hours and a half, let the wind blow as it will, and come ba^k again in as much
time; I wish I had as many Servants here as I could make use of. Any man that
is ^rugal, and has 300. lib. Sterling in Stock, to come over here, and bring
over 7. or 8. g^od Servants with him, I could assure him in 3. years time he
should make a stock better then 1000. if not 1500. lib. if he bestow his money
right in Scotland, and take advice to bring all things here which is necessary
for him to have in this Country. I am uncertain of the time I will be at Home,
but I resolve you shall come over with me again, and ye will both think and
say, when ye see the Country, that ye wish it had been done twenty years ago.
I thought it not fit to trouble my friends and relations; since I could not
write short Letters to them, but any of them that desires to know the condition
of this Country, ye may show them this Letter, since there is no secret in it,
you will find by William Burnets Letter, that he desires some of his Sons to
come over, and John Geddis writs for some of his Brethren; the which Letters
cause deliver them carefully, and get an answer that if they be to come over,
ye may speak for their passage timely; he tells some of them are good Wrights;
which is all at present, but keep a good heart to your self, and take care of
your Children, and I hope to see you with more Comfort then we parted, and I am
your ever loving Husband while I breath,

David Mudie.

James Johnston of Spotswoods Letter to his Brother, John Johnston Drougest in
Edinburgh.
East-Jersey the 12th. of December, 1684. Loving Brother,
I Have taken up a part of my Land, 9. miles from Amboy, and 4. miles from
Piscataway, and as far from the nearest part of Rariton, on a Brook side, where
there are exceeding great plains without any Timber, there is excellent Gunning
for Dear and Turkies, of which there is great plenty, and easily shot. But I
resolve to see a place called Bernagate, which is 60. or 70. miles from this,
on the Southermost place of the Province, where there is a good River and
Harbor, the best Fishing and Gunning in any place in America 30. or 40. miles
from any Plantation. The Indians here are nothing to be feared, the Place being
as peaceable as any where else; I had occasion to travel through Long Island.
and Stallen Island, and for many miles found as many towns and plantations in
the way, as in any so much Land in Louthean, there are no Bears nor Ravinous
Beasts but Wolves, which are nothing to be feared, neither are the Country
People afraid to be among them all night, in so much as I oft-times going
wrong, and lying out all night, and hearing their yells about me, and telling
that I was afraid of them, the Country People laughed at it; neither are the
Snakes any thing to be noticed, for nothing can come near them, but they give
warning with the rattling of their tail, so that People may either kill them, or
go by them as they please. Oxen are so well taught that they go sometimes in a
Plough, or Cart, without Horse, or without a Gade-man; Horses and Cattle are as
cheap as in Scotland, considering their goodness and the difference of the
Money; All sorts of Scots goods sells well here, ye will be advised with the
next Occasion, what goods sells best in this place. I have great reason to
thank GOD, that I am in a place which abundantly answers any thing I expected;
The Air is healthful, and the Soil fruitful; the Indian Corn yields commonly 2.
or 3. hundred fold, Oats 20. fold, as I am informed; the Indian Corn is an
excellent grain, I have eat it and likes it very well in Pottage and Bread;
there are several reasonable good towns in this Province, most of them has
more then eighty Families; there is no poor persons here, but all are half idle
in respect of what they work with you. Flax twice heckled, sold at 9. d. per
pound, Wool is very cheap, only work is dear; the Liquor we most use is Sider;
we have great store of Fruit. In many places untaken up there are many plains
and not a tree; I have never since last parting had any sickness to keep me
from one Diet, for which I render thanks to GOD. The Indians here make it their
trade to kill Venision, and sell it to us: for a small matter, I will have my
Family served with Flesh all Winter; one of their Sashiams, (which is their
King) came to the Governor when I came first here, desiring he might be
suffered to trade amongst us, and not to be beat out of our houses, when they
were drunk, but only that we might bind them, and permit them to cut timber,
and some such things: At New-Perth, we have a good Stationers Shop of Books,
the land is no where difficult to clear, albeit trees be 100. foot long and 3.
or 4. foot over; I would heartily wish and persuade any to come over that
intends to live well, plentifuily and pleasantly: Neither is there any
Tradesman or Servant that could come wrong to this place, and I could wish my
best friends no better but in the same place with me; the old Inhabitants are a
most careless and infrugall People, their profession are most part Protestants,
few Quakers, some Anabaptists, it is most desired there may be some Ministers
sent us over, they would have considerable Benefices, and good Estates; and
since it would be a matter of great Piety, I hope ye will be isntrumental to
advise some over to us, the place is abundantly healthful, as any else; there
are a great difference betwixt the people here, who are Strong and Vigorous,
and the people more Southerly in Mariland, we have great store of Venision
which is sometimes as fat as Pork; one good Buck is sold at 5. shil. and by the
Indian at 2. shil. Oats are sold at 18. pence the Bushel; all sorts of Fish is
here exceeding plentiful, the poorest Persons ea^s no Meat that is Salt,
except Pork; in Summer, they live much on Milk. I would no more value the Sea
coming through if I had occasion, then ye would riding of of 20. miles; let me
be rememberd to all friends, to Patrick Fortune who most carefuly dissuaded me
from this Voyage; which I do not repent, but would as carefully persuade
others, who study their own good; what I most earnestly desire of you, for the
encouragment of this Plantation, is, you would be Instrumental to send us over
some Ministers, who I dare engadge shall afterward ever be thankful, and I
oblidge to be your ever affectionate Broher,

James Johnston.

Amboy; or New-Perth in America, 9. of November, 1684. Dear Brother.
HAving accidently met with the Bearer, had not time to give you any particular
account of this Country, only assure you, that it is beyond (not only) all our
expectations, but all that ever you have heard spoken of it, we (praised be
GOD) all of us arrived safely without the loss of any on^ Pa^^^ger; scacely any
of them was ever sick, only we had much troubles coming from Mariland by land,
our Skipper having for his own advantadge put in first at the Capes of
Virginia; but we have had a brave Prospect of the Country, and all the way as
well as in this place where now we are, we found plenty of Corn, and all Kinds
of Fruit, with Fish, Venision and wild Fowls, in such abundance, that a Deer
may be had for 2. shilling Country money, and Turkies for 6. pence, which will
be at least as big as any 2. Turkies in Scotland, and are realy Turkies only
blacker then tame Turkies that you have seen; I shall give you full
satisfaction with the next occasion, pray you fail not to writ to me, when you
meet with any, otherwise you disoblidge him who is ever yours,

D. M'kgregor.
Written to his Brother Munivard, in Scotland.



Patrick Falkconers Letter to Maurice Trent.
Elizabeth Town in East-Jersey, the 28th. of October, 1684. Sir,
MY last was dated the 22. Current, from Philadelphia, at which time I could
give you but a small account of the Country; and as yet its but a small
account, I can give by reason that I have had but a little time here as yet; I
have traveled on Foot more then a 100. miles in East and West Jersey, and
Pensilvania; I have also Traveled in Maryland, I cannot but say it is a good
Coun^^^y, but its possessed with a Debauched, Idle, Leasie People, all that
they Labor for is only as much Bread as serves them for one Season, and als
much Tobacco as may furnish them with Clothes, I believe it is the worst
improved country in the world; for the Indian wheat is that they trust to, and
if that fail them they may expect to starve. I find Pensilvania and the two
Jerseyes are the places which set themselves out most for Planting of Corn; As
for the Jersies I need not insist in commending of them, for David Barclay and
Arthur Forbes who had a longer stay here than I have had, will give you a more
all account; for I intend to write no more than I am able to make good. I may
say, that it is a pleasant Country, I did never see more pleasant Meadows, and
Grass, then I have seen in both the Jersies, I have seen plains of good Hay
consisting of about 30. Acres of ground, hardly one Tree to be seen upon the
whole spot. And there are several places so; I can say, its a well watered
Country, and good waters, and if they were desirous, they might have very good
Quarrie here both for Stone of any sort, and Limestone likewise; but so long
as Timber is so plenty, they will not be at the pains to seek after Stone;
there are some houses in the Country built with stone, but very few. Having
fallen in here, the end of the year, I cannot be capable to give an account
what may be the product of the Country, but I hear that all sorts of Grain
has very good Increase, I see the Country abounds with Apples, Quinches,
Peatches, Walnuts, and Chasnuts, and Strawberries in great abundance,
wild-Wine-Grapes are plentiful, wild-Fowl of all sorts, a great number of
Deer, Turckie-Fowls-wild, in great abundance and very bigg, I have seen these
things in great plenty: I hope ye will excuse me, because I am not capable to
give an ampler account of the Country, for I have not been two days in one
place, I will tell you this is a good Country, for men who resolves to be
Laborious; any who comes here they must resolve to work hard for the first two
or three years, till they get a little Ground cleared, for this must be looked
on as a wood-Countrey, tho I must confess the woods are not so thick as people
expects; and there are several places in the Country where there is little or
no Wood; People are generally curious to have their Land near Navigable Rivers,
but when they are better acquaint, they will find that the farther back the
better is the Land, there are abundance of Fish and Oysters here, this is not
a Country for idle people but such as will be at pains, they need not doubt
but to get Bread here in plenty, so I wish it be the Lords will that we may
have a happy meeting again, his will be done, I wish you may be protected by
the Lord, this from,

Your affectionate Friend, and humble, Servants Patrick Falconer.

Abstract of a Letter writ by Peter Watson (who went over a Servant with David
Barclay, in the year 1683.) to John Watson Messenger in Selkirk.
New-Perth,, the 20th of. August, 1684. Cusing,
I Could never write to you before now, because I was never rightly settled, and
am not yet fully settled, but I am from among the rest of the Servants, one
James Reid and I and our Families are together, set out to a Farm on Amboy; we
are to have some Land laid out to us, and we are Stocked with two Mares, four
Cowes, two Sows, two Oxen; my Wise and I and the Child Richard are very well in
health, and has been so ever since we came out of Scotland: Now as for this
Country, it is a very good Country; indeed poor men such as my self, may live
better here then in Scotland if they will but work, a man can have Corn and
Cattle or any other Goods for his work, and he can sell these good to some
hands for money, it is not for a man that has a Family to come bound four
years, but young men, who have no trouble, they will do better to come and
serve four years here then to serve in Scotland, for they are not so hard
wrought as in Scotland, and when the four years are out, they can gain
abundance to work to other men; or if they desire to setle upon Land of their
own, they can have it reasonably Cheap, the hardest work that is here, is
clearing of the Ground, and felling of Trees, and the like; the first year is
the worst, till they be accustomed with the work of the Country, my Neighbor
and I did clear from the middle of February till the midst of May, five Acres
of Land, and have it planted with Indian Corn, and Indian Beans, and Tobacco
for our own smoking; a man who lives here needs go no where to buy any things,
here he can have Corn and Cattle, and every thing that is necessar for man's
use, if he be Industrious, only the thing that is dearest here, is Clothing,
for there are but few Sheep to this Country, but there are store of all other
Beasts, such as Horse; and Cows, and Hoggs, there is here good Fishing, good
hunting of Deer; and other kind of wild Beasts; The Country is very healthie
as I have seen yet, it is cold in the Winter like unto Scotland; But fra once
the Summer breaks up, it is hotter then it is in Scotland; There are here very
good Religious People, they go under the name of Independants, but are must
like to the Prisbyterians, only they will not receive every one to their
Society, we have great need of Good and Faithful Ministers; And I wish to God,
that there would come some over here, they can live as well, and have as much
as in Scotland, and more then many gets; we have none within all this Province
of East-Jersey, except one who is Preacher in Newwark; there were one or two
Preachers more in the Province; but they are dead; And now the people they meet
together every Sabbath day, and Reads and Prays, and sings Psalms in their
Meeting Houses: this Country is very well settled with People, most part of
the first Settlers came out of New England, very kind and loving people, kinder
than in Scotland or England. And for the Indian Natives, they are not
troublesome any way to any of us, if we do them no harm, but are a very kind
and loving people; the men does nothing but hunts, and the women they plant
Corn, and works at home; they come and trades among the Christians with Skins
or Venison, or Corn; or Pork; And in the Summer time, they and their Wives come
down the Rivers, in their Cannoas, which they make themselves of a piece of a
great tree, like a little Boat, and rhere they Fish and take Oysters. This
Country is a very pleasant Country with Rivers and Creiks to fish in; Only it
is full of Wood, such as Oak and Walnut-tree, Chestnut, Poplar, and Cedar; The
only thing we want here is good People; I wish that all the poor Friends I or
my Wife has were here: As for my Brother, if he have a mind to come. Brother
if you have but as much in the World as would transport you hither and your
Family, I would desire you earnestly to come, and bring my Sister with you; if
you have as much as will transport you, sell all and come, tho you had not a
penny after your passage were paid, you need not fear if you have a mind to
work; I was as little brought up with work as any man, yet blessed be GOD, I
can work now as my Neighbors, and lives very contentedly with my Wife better
then ever we did in Scotland; show my Mother in Law tha^ my Wife and I would be
very well pleased, if she would come over, there are as old Women as she com^
here out of old England; there was one came along with us elder then she, if
she will come, she shall live with her Daughter and me, as easy, and as well
as ever she did live in Scotland; and I do know that was well enough; my Wife
and I are well at present, as you could wish, GOD be blessed; I can say no
more, but my love to my Brother, and his wife, and all Friends,

I rest your loving Cusin, Peter Watson.

A Letter write by John Campbel to John Dobie.
New-Perth, 8th of November, 1684. B. John,
I Wrote a line from Philadelphia to you, as we were coming hither, your Cusin
James Dobbie the bearer is in such haste, that I cannot write what I would say;
but is short, we are come here to a good wholesome Country, in which with
little industry a man may have a comfortable life; there is good Wheat and
Oats growing here, and Indian Corn, which our Servants likes very well; There
is Fish and Fowl abundance, and of Cows and Horse; they labor wi h Horse and
Oxen; There is Deer through all the Country, and Turkies which some of our
Servants has killed a part of already; There is Pertrages and Quails very rife,
that my wife yesterday morning saw about 20. of them walking before the door
like Chikens. I shall say no more till I see farther, for I am with others
going to the Country on Monday to see for the Country lotts; for I have taken
up the Towns already, and cut down the trees of two Acres of ground with six
men in three days, My service to all Friends, I am

Your most assured Friend, John Campbel.

A Letter from Thomas Fullerton Brother to the Lord of Kinnaber, to his
Brother in Law Doctor Gordon in Montross.
Elizabeth-Town, 4. January, 1685. Dear Brother,
BY my last about a Month since I dated from Amboy, you understand that we
came to Sandy-Hook, 18. weeks after we sailed from Montrofe, we were 9. weeks
at Sea from Killebeg in Ireland, we had many cross winds, what other accidents
we met with by the way were worth the telling, but not the writting; blessed be
God we all kept our healths very well, only one Boy fell over board; what you
expect, and I design by this, is a breef, but true account, of the Country. The
first land we discovered was About the middle of Long Island, it appeared at
first like trees, growing out of the Sea, Toward night we Anchored in
Sandy-Hooke; The land is low and level, that is the reason we were within 8.
or 10. mile thereof, before we saw it; the country appears all over Woodie; I
landed on a sandie-bank and closs by the flood march, where grew Bays,
sassafax and several pretty shrubs I knew not; The Woods consists of several
kinds of Oaks, Chestnut, Hickacy, Walnut, Poplar, and Beetch, Cedars grow on
swamps, and barrens Firrs and Pines only on barrens; The ground generally is 2.
or 3. inches deep of black dung as it were, below that is reedish mould, what
you heard of the product of the Indian Corn, viz. 100. or 200. fold, of 20 or
30 fold, Inglish wheat, of the abundance of dears and wild horse, and several
turkies and of the great plenty of fishes are all true; There is very much
Cider here. In 12. or 14. years you may make 100. barrells from your own
planting, the best fleshes of all kinds ever I did see are here, tho this in
respect of what you have heard, be generally tautollogie; yet I found my self
oblidged to writ it, because I am witness to the truth thereof, without
Hyperbole.

Notwithstanding of all this, its very troublesome expensive to settle a
plantation here, and when it is done, I cannot promise you a man will grow
verry rich; but he needs want nothing, and it is not every one will agree with
the solitude of the Woods, these who can, and resolve to lead an countty life,
cannot do better then come hither; a merchant who will come over and set up
store in the country, for a year will make cent per cent; of several
commodities with which I do allow none to be acquainted but commerads. I wish
I had some money of my stock so employed, and sent safely here, Johnstouns of
spoiswood, and I have taken up upon a river, 6, or 8. miles in Amboy, your
Brother Thomas and Robert, are here also, servants are not easily entertained
here, I designed to have shot als many squirles as would have furred a coa^ for
you, but I am otherwise taken up; I have omitted to tell you that the weather
here is constantly clear, the sun rises and setts free of clouds; I have
obseved none to have the cough in this country tho I have frequently line in
the woods; abundance of fire is an excellent counter charm. Now brother as to
your own coming over, it will be time to invite you, when I have a good house,
and inter^ainment to treat you with unbought; for you must not feel any of the
inconveniences I have met with; we are all well, I pray God, this may find you
also; present my service to all friends, Male or Femal; this letter will serve
that, present my service to my Grandmother; upon Christmas I drank her
good-health in Rhumb Madera, and Fial Wine; If I can be frugall, I may be soon
rich here; by my next I hope to ensure 60, or 70. lib: to the person, for we
want a minister, this from,

Your Affectionat Brotner Tho: Fullertoun.

A Letter from the same hand to the Lord of Brotherstoun in the Mairns, of the
same date.
Kind Comerad,
YOu were pleased so kindly to concern your self with my welfare when I was by
you (and I find that absence augments true friendship) that I am oblidged to
acquaint you with my present fortune, which I hope shall be far better then
what I could expect, by so much stock in Scotland. This place is not altogether
bowrish; for at New York you may have railing and Gallanting enough, the
inhabitants are generally great spenders. Dear Brothertoun writ to me, and give
me an account of affairs, for I assure you, neither Governor nor Council will
meddle with yours to me, nor mine to you; by my next I will writ to Cl^nie, and
John Johnstoun; in the mean time present my service to them, I am in haste to
end writing, tho ever being,

Your Oblidged Commerad and humble servant, Tho: Fullertoun

Abstract of a Letter from Robert Hardy, Merchant in Aberdeen, to his Son John
Hardy Merchant there, dated from Elizabeth-Town, the 8. of December, 1684.
Loving Son,
I Have writ two Letters already to you at our arrival, an other showing the
death of your Brother William, and something of the country; but knows not if
they be come to your hands, and now having this occasion, know that I am in
good health, and your Brother Alexander, praised be God, know that I intend to
reside here, and should wish that I had all my childring with me, but your
conveniencie cannot permit, neith^r am I able to transport them as yet; however
I desire you to acquaint your sister Elspeth that I desire her to come over if
possible, with her first conveniencie; I in^end before her coming to have a new
house in New-Perth, and a Plantation near by it; if I had got an good account
of that Little cargo I sent over; I would have lived upon it here, als well as
upon 100 lib. Sterling in Scotland; But I have got an bad account of it; how
ever, I hope to Provide for you all with what is left, if the Lord bless; Show
my brother and brothers in law, that if they would come over with each of them
two Servants, they could have good Land here, at one easy rate, they might
live better then their masters; and with less trouble, if they took but half
the pains; They take in Scotland; for the Land is an brave and plentiful Land;
Show Andrew and David Hardies that if they can but pay their Passage and come
to me, I shall make them to live in better condition then ever formerly; I
doubt not but some of our neighbors will come over, to bring Servants here,
who will give you an true account how, I and others can live here; believ^ me,
this is an brave Land, and any who will be Industrous, may live very
comfortably here; He who comes first will have the best choice, and most
profitable as for idle-men who will neither work nor trade, need never come
here, for there are none idle here, I wish you all a blising from God, and so
rests,

Your affiectionat father Robert Hardy.

A Letter from James Johnston of Spotswood, to his brother John Johnston, dated
the 13. of February, 1685. from Piscatta way, in East-New-Jersey.
Dear Brother,
THese are to remember my kindest affection to you, my Mother, and all friends,
we have kept our healths hither to exceeding well, Have endured an short hut
very cold witner, now the Weather has been for some time bygone exceeding
good, was an Bear-seed season with you; I have been throw several or most
places of this Country, of late; But am not yet resolved where my first
Husbandry shall be; the Land is exceeding good, which is yet to take up, much
better then what is inhabited; only not so convenient; the difficulty of
clearing many places is no ways considerable; I find Land where Several
hundred Plughes may be presently set a work, I take all pains I can to be
conveniently settled, and the Governor refuses us nothing we desire; I stand in
need of 40. pound, value of good, and some Servants; hoping to have Corn for
them, and others who come over; I could wish your self were here, we could live
competently and quietly; but I doubt how affairs may premit; I wish any Land I
had were sold, that you might he furthered; present my love and service to my
Mother* and Sister whom I hope to see here; I wish you would send over some
Ministers, one or more to us I am,

Your affectionat and ever, mindful Brother, James Johnston.

NOw Sir, does not the perusal of their Letters, obliege you to believe there is
no deceit in the above written description of the place, seeing you find the
same Homollogat by so many different persons; the Hollograph of most of them
have been perused by many persons in this City, and are to be seen by any
inquisitive thereanent at Captain Hamiltouns Lodging at the Sign of the Ship,
for their more satisfaction of the truth thereof.

But tho you appear to be convinced, that East-Jersey is in it self a very
desirable place, and consequently upon several considerations a very proper
seat for a Collony; From this yet I have ground to conjecture from some tacit
hints and insinuations in yours, that because West-Jersey, Pensilvania, and in
a special manner Carolina, are more southerly, therefore you think there is
some ground to believe they may have the advantage of the Soil, seeing you
oblidge me to tell you freely my opinion in this affair, I will be plain with
you; the two first lying, the one upon the one side of the River of Delawar,
the other upon the other side thereof, may have in themselves other advantages;
but I cannot be so blind, when I notice the Mapp, as not to discover too
palpable an inconveniencie to be past over; wherewith both the said Countries
are much straightened; to wit. the Town of Newcastle lying upon the mouth of the
River, which does so absolutely command the River, that whosoever is master
thereof, may if they please, lay what imposition they think fit upon both the
said Countries; seeing if any difference should fall betwixt the Town of
Newcastle, and the Possessors, or Inhabitants of these two Provinces, they may
make themselves very quickly Masters of them, by imposing what conditions they
think fit upon them; seeing no. Ship can either conveniently go up or down the
said River of Delawar, but by allowance of any Fort, built upon the said Town
of Newcastle: Whatever opinion others may have of this as a matter of no great
import, I have these sentiments of the apparent inconveniences thereof, as
after perceiving it never to be any more so much concerned, as to make farther
inquiry after these places seeing in my apprehension, no advantage to be
proposed there could compense that so visible convenience.

As for Carolina, I confess it is nothing strange that any person who has read
Ogibies description thereof in his America and Wilsons in his Treatise
thereanent; Judge it in a manner a Terrestiral Paradise, but notwithstanding of
all this, err you pass any judgment upon my choising rather East-Jersey, then
Carolina for the seat of a Collony from this, allow me to give my Reasons why I
do prefer the one to the other.

We lie here in 56. Degrees of Northren Latitude, Jersey in 41. Carolina in 31.
it is very obvious to any understanding person, that our removal to 41. is
more probably contributive for our health, then to 31, being ten degrees
hotter; and consequently more dangerous, what ever opinion others may have of
this, I judge it a matter of no small consequence, health being very much
preferrable to all other things whatsoever.

But further, our access to East-Jersey is very patent, no apparent obstruction
in the way, whereas the coast of Carolina is the most dangerous in all America,
there being a bank of sand lying all along the same for 200. Leags and upwards,
so that the entry to any part thereof is altogether hazardous, we have too sad
a proof of the truth of this, by the Shipwreck of the James of Air, upon that
bank this last Harvest, in which were lost upwards of 60. people.

Experience also teaches that the Clymate of Jersey, is far move suitable to
our Constitutions, then that of Carolina; You find in all the Letters come from
Jersey, this one particular specially marked, That it is a very healthful Air;
no complaints of sickness there, whereas in the few Letters from our Country
men settled in Carolina; You have an account of the death of the greatest part
who went hence to that place.

There is one further consideration oblidging me altogether, to close my Ears
and Eyes against Carolina; whatever specious pretenses may fly abroad in
favors thereof, and be received by such who are not concerned, to enquire
further, then to hearsay, and that is the consideration of the model of their
Government, then which nothing can be more discouraging to any having the sense
of a rational Man, or Spirit of a Gentleman. The Offices of Honor and Trust,
such, as Chancellor, Thesaurer, Admiral, Secretar, etc. are all Heretably
annexed to the Proprietors; by the constitution of their Government, so that
let a Gentleman deserve never so well, however eminent his parts may be, he
must in the first place purchase a property, err he can attain to any of these
places of Trust, or Honor; whereas if you have so much Money as to make this
purchase, you may then come to these preferments though you were the arrentest
Block head in nature! Money here makes you capable of Preferment, which neither
Virtue, Merit, nor parts can do! Can there be a greater discouragement to any
person of Spirit or Honor, than to go subject himself to a Government where he
sees himself debarred of any Trust or Preferment, how ever deserving he may be?
unless he has money in a manner to buy it with. Both in this Kingdom and our
Neighbor Nations, we see mean Persons have by their Parts and Merit raised
themselves to places of the highest Preferments in the Kingdoms, and have
discharged that Trust conferred upon them with Honor and Applause; So that
when I have this consideration before my Eyes, I must conclude any who subjects
themselves to that model of Government, are either ignorant of the
Constitutions thereof, or of very mean Spirits, to settle themselves in a place
where Virtue nor Merit can neither raise them, nor their Posterity!

Let me add another Ground of my dissatisfaction with the Model of that
Government, and you may judge whether the same be reasonable or not; There are
eight Proprietors by their Constitutions, it appears clear to me, that they are
so many Sovereigns, seeing by one express Article of their Fundamental
Constitutions, it is declared, That the Proprietors are no waves subject to
Law, in so far as to be censured by any Judicatur there; So that be their
Actings never so Illegal, or unjust; if any these eight Proprietors should
commit Murders, or Rapes, or any other Act of Oppression, they cannot be
challenged upon account thereof in any Judicatory in Carolina.

These being so matterial Objections, I need not add the apparent hazard of
being next Neighbor to the Spainard, whose interest it is to ruin any settling
at Port Royal; how little probability there is, that any going at first from
this can be of sufficient strength to defend themselves against their designs,
that in case of any assault from that airth; their nixt and only neighbor,
Charles-toun, could not give that help, which were requisite in such an exigent,
either against the Spainards their nixt neighbors, at St. Augustines Fort, or
the Natives, if they should become quarrelsome Neighbors; But from the complext
consideration of all together, I must divest my self of my reason, or I judge
Carolina a proper seat to settle my self in.

But tho you be oblidged to grant, that East-Jersey, may be the most desirable
spott of ground upon the continent of America for such a design, upon the above
written considerations; yet I do apprehend you may incline to think that
Tobago, St. Luce, St. Vincent, or some of these Islands were yet more proper as
affoording at first view greater ground of expecting suitable returns to the
apparent expense and hazards of such a undertaking; witness the great riches of
Barbados, by the improvement of a Trade, from that place all Europe over.

In answer to this, I must confess, Sir, that there may be greater improvements
of such Islands as to trade, when they do come to that length of improvement,
as to produce Suggars, Cotton, Indigo, etc. But let me also tell you, there is
a certain prospect of far greater and more imminent hazards in settling there,
then in East-Jersey. It is certainly obvious to the meanest capacities what
hardships these must be oblidged to lay their count to meet with who would
interprise such a design, not only from the wants thy might be exposed to throw
lake of necessar supplies, wherewith they cannot expect the conveniencie of
being furnished. but from other hazards and difficulties. It is not small stock
could set such a desing on foot, neither can it be expected that such who would
ingadge in such undertaking from this place could in many years attain to that
strength, which were necessarily requisite for defending themselves even
against the Piracy of a Buccanier or two, far less against the invasions or
assaults of foreign States and Princes.

As for my own part I must confess, I am not very anxious of great Riches, as
the result of this undertaking, but to carry my Wife and Children with me; I am
bound the best I can to look to their Accommodation; when I land in East-Jersey
there are Lodgings, and all other necessars to be had for money, till by our
own industry in Laboring the Ground, we provide for our selves, which could
not be expected in one of these Islands; If I have a Country no worse than the
South of France, with these Conveniences above narrated, I desire no richer
Soil; though greater expectations might be had of the result of such a design
of settling in one of these Islands, as to Profit and Gain, when once come the
length of a good Trade.

But besides this, our Country People which will be the strength of any
Collony, to go from this place, knows very well how to labor the Ground, for
producing all sorts of Grains, after what fashion, to breed abundance of all
sorts of Bestial, in both which, will the great riches of Jersey consist; But
it cannot he expected, that they know how to improve these Islands, for Suggar,
Cotton, Indigo, etc. and this being altogether out of their road, we should
thus be altogether deprived of the assistance we may rationally expect from
them, by proposing to settle in a place where the Nigro Slaves could do more
service, and be far more useful than the most laborious* and judicious of our
Country People.

As for the ordinar Objection against settling in Jersey, upon account of the
inconveniences may arise from having a Governor of Principles alleged
inconsistent with the standing of any Society; upon this one head mentioning no
other, that a man who professes, he judges it unlawful to draw his sword to
defend himself against a Na ive, if he were coming to cut his throat, can never
be so careful in providing such certain and speedy remedies for preventing any
hazard that way, as are absolutely requisite for the security of these who
settle there, both against any Designs of the Natives or Foreign Invasions.
This is very easily answered, that there being several very substantial
Citizens of London concerned in this Plantation, who are not of this Principle,
who have laid out considerable sums on this Design, as I am oblidged to know
by the account I have from one of them, with whom I have some correspondence;
who tells me, he himself has laid out 1800. pound; It cannot rationally be
supposed that they will be so unconcerned, as not to follow such measures as
may secure what interest they have there; Methods are already laid down, which
I know will satisfy you in this particular, that as to defense against any
such inconveniences; East Jersey will be as effectually secured as any of the
Neighboring Plantations.

As for any other Apprehensions you or others may have upon this head, I shall
only say, what ever Mr. Barclays Principles may be, he is a Gentleman known to
be abundantly qualified to advance the interest of that Collony, else the Trust
thereof had not been devolved upon him by the Proprietors, who are Men more
knowing in their own Affairs, then to have made an escape in so matterial a
point; they are Men abundantly sharpsighted to remark his Actions, and
accordingly as they find them for the interest of the place, to continue him in
that Trust or not; And you may be assured, he understands himself so well, as
to behave himself in that station so as becomes a Gentleman, concerned in his
own Credit and Interest, seeing upon the least malversation, he is als well
^vable to censure of the Law, as the meanest Inhabitant. Which consideration
abundantly secures any reasonable Man against the Apprehensions of any
inconveniencie from his being Governor, tho his inclinations prompted him to
act upon a selfish design, to the prejudice of the general interest of that
Province, I persuade my self, he is more a Gentleman, than ever to be guilty of
any thing that is base, or unbecoming a Gentleman.

It is now more then time to bid you farewell, having nothing further to add,
hoping from what is here said, you will rest satisfied, that in prosecuting
this design, I do act upon solid foundations, let the result be what it will; I
hope you are convinced I have not proceeded indeliberatly therein; I am not so
foolish as to propose no difficulties to my self to be rancountered,
notwithstanding all the encouragements above written, I am too well acquainted
with all the Spanish, French, Dutch, Portugues, and English undertakings of
this nature, and their staits and difficulties they have been trysted with in
prosecuting thereof, to think I have any ground to expect to be altogether
exeemed from all the inconveniences they met with; as to this I cast my self
altogether upon the divine Providence, being convinced, I am in my duty; if you
please to take a share, it would be not a little encouraging to me, you see
that we have some Gentlemen of our Country settled already there; so that I am
hopeful we may have there a very agreeable society if your affairs cannot
allow, your good wishes are expected by,

Sir, Yours, etc. G. S.

Sir, Since the conclusion above written, several other Letters are come to my
hand which I had not formerly seen, most of them of a later date; I resolved to
add them to the rest for your further Confirmation.
A Letter for Mr. Robert Paterson Principal of Marishal College, in the City
of New Aberdeen, in Scotland.
Woodbridge, in East-Jersey, in America, March the 7th. 1685. Sir,
I Hope you have heard of our Voyage and safe Arrival here, I thought it my
duty to present my dutiful respects to you and all Friends at Aberdeen, and to
acquaint you of mine own and all their welfares who came over the last year,,
all which intends to settle in the Country, except (...) who has spent all his
means already foolishly on drink, and is returning home for more; you have
David Barclay and Arthur Forbes to inform you of this Country; when I have
seen it through all the Seasons of the year as they did, I shall then give you
my opinion, if you be desirous; only in short, what I have seen I may write,
that it pleases me better then Virginia, Maryland, Pensilvania, or West-Jersey,
that it is pleasant to mine eyes, and I find it healthful to my body; I am not
troubled here (blessed be GOD) with defl^ctions, head-aikes, and coughs, as at
Edinburgh; that the land is furnished with all conveniences ^f Nature, such as
Wood, Grass, M^adow, and abundance of fresh Water Springs, Brooks and Rivers,
and plenty of Deer, Turkies, Geess and Dukes; many tender H^rbs, Fruits, and
Trees grow naturally here that will not grow in Scotland at all; these things
are so notoriously known, that it is superfluity to write them, and no
unbyassed person will deny them, or speak ill of the land: There is about a
duzon of 14. houses in New-Perth, and the half of those built since we came,
several others are building presently, and many others have taken Lotts to
build; Mr. Mudie is building a stone house, and has an Horse Mill ready to set
up; Governor Rudyeard intends another Stone house this Summer; The Governors
house, and the public Courthouse are abuilding; It is the best situate for a
City of any yet I have seen, or for ought I can learn of any yet known in
America. There is great encouragement here for all kind of Tradsmen; I intend
my self to follow mostly Planting and Fishing; Let this remember me to all my
Friends, Relations, Comorads and Acquaintances at Aberdeen; I could not write
to them all, being busied about mine own setlement, and it is now far, spent in
the year, so that I do not expect to do much this year, neither could I settle
sooner, by reason that my bed-cloaths are not yet come from Maryland; and the
land I intend to settle on is not yet purchased from the Indians. I entreat to
hear from you on all occasions, and what remarkable News abroad or at home, and
how the Civilists place is disposed of; my service to your self and bedfellow,
I am,

Sir, Your most affectionat and humble Servant, Charles Gordon.

For Mr. Andrew Irvine Merchant, at his Shop, in the East end of the
Luckenbooths, in Edinburgh, in Scotland.
Amboy in the Province of East-New: Jersey, in America, March, the 5th. 1685.
Dear Andrew,
I Suppose ye have heard of our voyage from my Brother, and Governor Barclay;
I shall only in short tell you that notwithstanding the loss of our masts, we
were only 8. weeks betwixt land and land, and entered the Capes of Virginia the
same day 9. weeks we parted from Aberdeen. We sailed up Chessapeck bay to the
head of Bohemia-River in 2. slowpes, from thence we came to Elizabeth-Town,
partly by Land and partly by Water, the storm being the tail of a Hurricane,
was not universal, for we heard of no Ships which met with it but our selves;
nor the Montrose Ship did not meet with it. There is encouragement for several
trades here, in the first place Planting, for Wheat, Indian Corn; Beef, Pork,
etc. give all ready money in York, and the Neighbor Collonies; Wheat 4.
shillings the bushel, Indian Corn 2. ss. or half a crown, Pork and Beef, etc.
to be had at an ordinary easy rate. And in the second place there may be
Fishing; For the Inhabitants averr they swim so thick in the Creeks and Rivers,
at certain seasons of the year, that they have hailed them out of the waters
with their very hand. In the third place for one to have a Malt-house, a brew
house, and a bake-house, to make Malt, brew beer, and bake biskeet for
Barbados and the Neighbor Collonies, providing he have a ship of his own, and
skill to manage his business, would certainly be a good trad. Lastly for one to
buy up the product of the Country, such as all kinds of grains, Beef, Pork,
etc. and export them to Barbados, and import Rumm and Malasses, would
certainly be a good trade; as likewise change keeping would be a good trad in
Amboy, for the highest design of the old Buckskine Planters (I am just now
drinking to one of them; our Country man who was sent away by Cromvel to
New England, a slave from Dumbar, Living now in Woodbridge, Like a Scots Lord,
wishes his Country men and Native Soil very well, though he never intends to
see it. Pardon this Parenthesis) is to acquit a piece of money to drink in the
change house. This Country, and particularly this Town (shows it to be the
best situated for a city of any there known in America) is but yet in infancy
(it not being above 48. years at most since ever there was a Planter in the
Province; and that occasioned by their changing so many Masters) yet there are
several thousands of People already, and not want of good company, and if ye
please badd too, as in any place of the world; neither are we altogether
destitut of Books and Clergy, for George Keith, (who arrived three weeks since
with others, they were all winter in Borbadoes) has brought Mathematics, and
Benjamin Clark a Library of Books, to sell; so that you may see New Perth
begins to be founded upon Clergy. Show my Cusins, George-Burnet, and Richard
Maitland, that I hope they will not laugh more at me, for saying, ^n Edinburgh,
I would line my house with Cedar-wood, for all houses here are covered with
Cedar; and one just now built in Perth, altogether of Cedar-Wood, it is
reckoned a wood of no value here, except for its lastiness. I intend to follow
Planting my self, and if I had but the small Stock here I have in Scotland,
with some more servants, I would not go home to Aberdeen for a Regencie, as was
proffered me; neither do I intend it however, hoping, to get my own safe over;
we are not troubled here leading our pitts, mucking our Land, and Ploughing 3.
times; one Plouing with 4. or 6. Oxen at first breaking up; and with 2. horse
only thereafter, suffices for all; you may judge whither, that be easier
Husbandry than in Scotland; But I know you are no good Husbandman. But which
of the foresaid trades you will choice, if you will come here you self is more
then I can divine, or will advise you to; I have told you how things are, and
in Gods-Name take your own choice, as I have done. I shall tell you what I
would do, were I in your place, if it shall fall out you do come, I would get
some trusty Comorads, Merchants to join with me, and set up a trade in Perth,
for I think a man's own trade fitts him best; if you have 5000. Merks it is
enough, 4. in goods and one in money, Let none come here destitute of money, it
is of great request here, and gets chape Penyworths, and 25. per cent of
advantage by it; but I do not advise you, for if you should meet with such
trouble and disopoyntments as we have done by being put by our Post, you would
perhapps be discouraged, and give me the blame; all our baggadg is not yet come
from Maryland, and I want yet my bed Clothes, and the Land I intend to settle
on is not yet purchassed from the Indians; for after I have viewed all the
Province such of it as is yet habitable, I have chosen the South branch of
Rariton-River for convenience of Fishing, Fowling, and Meadow, but all the best
Land lies back from the Rivers and the Sea Costs; the further back the better
it is, which necessitates me to go a mile back. In brief what you heard of the
country is all true, so I need not spine out long Discriptions of it; no
unbyassed and indifferent Person will speak ill of the Land, it is both
pleasant and wholesome, and industrous People, after some few years Labor, may
lead a pleasant, easy Life, and want for nothing; And I am of opinion, may
grow rich too, if they take pains for it, and follow Merchandising, and some
are actaually grown rich since they came here, who had nothing before; if any
shall miscredit what I have said, I shall not think my self baffled for that;
but let them live in their opinion and I will live in mine. And if they please
they may do with me as I did with John Skeens Wife, cast my Letters in mine own
teeth, and when they come upon the place, I shall make good what I say, face to
face, as she did to me, and if they come not themselves, they need not trouble
themselves whither it be true or false. The goods fit for this Country are all
kind of household Plenishing, without which and a years provision in
victuals, let none come hither; if they would wish not to be preyed on by the
old Planters. All course cloth such as hodden-grayes, and Playding, course
Stock^ns and Linning, no fine things, for an infant Country, except for a man's
own use; course Bedding and Blankets; Governor Barclay can give you full
information as to this point. The Inconveninencies we have met with are, great
trouble and charges for want of our baggadge; there is likewise trouble and
charges in the first setlement, in carting out ones goods to the woods; fencing
is the chief Difficulty, and if the^e be many great trees the logges most be
drawn off with oxen and the branches burned, the trees are falled equal to a
man's thigh hight, but the roots are no impediments, where is much brush the
roots most be plucked up with grubbing howes; any man may learn Husbandries
here, who was not aquaint with it in Scotland, (Tobacco would grow here as well
as in Maryland, but it is best for European grains; I do not intend, to write
more Letters to Edinburgh with this occasion; being busied about mine own
setlement, therefore I entreat you will remember me to all my friends,
Relations, Comarads, and Acquaintances at Edinburgh; and show them of my
wellfair that I had not my health so well this 7. years bygone, as now (Blessed
be God) and that I am not troubled here with coughs, and head aikes as in
Edinburgh, which is likewise a great motive for me, to stay in this Country. I
entreat to hear from them all, you will not readily miss occasions from London
every Month, to some place in America; And there is ordinarily occasions hither
from the Neighbor Collonies; I have received Letters from the Bissets, and my
Brother, from Mr. Alexander since we came; I entreat to hear particularly from
the Professor of Divinity, and Mathematics, Doctor Pitcairn, Mr. George
Burnet, Richard Maitland, Mr. George Alexander, and any others who shall ask
for me, wishing you and all your concerns well,

I continue, Dear Cusin, Your most affectionate Cusin, and humble Servant,
Charles Gordon.

P stscript by the foresaid hand.
If any pleases to tell me what their scruples are, I shall endeavor to answer
them, if Servants knew what a Country this is for them, and that they may live
like little Lairds here; I think they would not be so Shey as they are to come,
and during their service they are better used then in any place in America I
have seen; you may know my Subscription by the sign I gave you of my Pistoles
misserving in the Boat, or at least when you tell your Mother, you may mind on
me, for you will miss some pints of wine you spent with me, (that Fridays
night, you convoyed me aboard) on the Shore, and in the Ship. If there were a
Caball of Merchants here to export the product of the Country to Barbados,
and the West Indies, and to Import Rumm, Malasses, Suggar and Cotton, etc. it
would do a great deal of good to this Country. I entreat to know what
remarkable Revolutions has happened either abroad or at home since I came away.
Any Merchants who settles here must take Lotts in the Town, and build houses.
Mr. David Mudie is building a stone house, and has already an Horse-mill ready
to set up presently in New-Perth. Adue.

For Mr. James Mudie Merchant in Montrose.
New-Perth, the 9th of March, 1685. Sir,
MY Love ever being remembered to your self, Lady and Children, these are
earnestly entreating you to let my Wife have any little thing she stands in
need of until it shall please the Lord I return; and I shall pay you very
thankfully; I have left Thomas Parson, and resolves to trade this Summer in the
Country, and to come home with your Uncle the nixt Spring. I wish you were
here and your whole Family, for I doubt not but the Country would please you
well; For there is abundance of much better Land here then ever Arbikie was,
and an Earldome to be bought far below in price the vallow, of what such petty
Lairdshipps as Arbikie is sold for in Scotland; without purging of the Lands of
any encumbrances; For I hope to winn as much money this year, as will buy a
better Lairdship then Arbikie; and if ye resolve not to come over, I resolve to
buy Land before I come from this, and title it Arbikie. But I shall be sorry to
take away your title, for if I do, it will be your own fault; and for your
better incouradgement I know you love a Gunn and a Dog, and here ye will have
use for both, For Wild Geese, Turkies, Ducks, and Drake, Partridge, Cunies,
Doves and innumerable more kind of Fowls which I know not their names, are here
to be seen every hour of the day, in flocks above Thousands in Number; And for
your Skieft which you use to Fish with; bring here with you, or one like her,
for I assure you of good employment, and yet ye may catch more Fish in an hour
here, than any Fisher in Montrose in two, excepting Podloes at the shore head.

Sir, take this as no jest from me, for what is here written is a real truth;
but ye may think, it is not my dictating, but the Writter and I have set it
together the best way we can; But yet not so full as I would have had it;
Present my Love to your Sister, Uncle, and all Friends, and I am,

Sir, Your very loving Friend and Cusin, James Mudie.

A Letter from David Mudie, Merchant in Montrose: For James Mudie of Courthill
in Scotland.
New-Perth, the 9th. of March, 1685. Loving Brother,
I Write you a line upon my arivall here, and by my last to my Wife, of the
date the 12. December, I desired her to let you see it, which I hope she has
done if it be come to her hands; I do now understand this Country, better then
I did at that time, and the longer I travel in it I like it the better; for a
frugall man with a small fortune may very soon raise a good Estate, which I
wrote formerly to my Wife, in relation to the Country; I find it most certain
and much better then I wrote; this Winter has been exceeding hard and sharp,
the like not seen by those who have lived 20. or 30. years in it, which has
hindered me of a great deal of work; yet I have cleared three Acres of Ground to
be an Orchard and a Garden, which lies close to the house which I am a
building, which is all of Stone work, with Cellars under the Ground, six Rooms
off a floor, two Stories high, beside the Garrat; and I have two Massons daily
working at it since the first of February; three Wrights working at an Horse
mill, which will be clear against the later end of this Month: And I am told
that the Mill will be worth 100. lib. a year, but I am sure she will be better
then 50. of clear Money, for every Scotsboll of Wheat or Indian Corn pays here
for grinding of it 2. shill: Ster: this house and mill stands me a great deal
of Money, but there is none such in this Country, nor ever was. I resolve to
go out to the Country to the Land which I have taken up, which is upon a place
called the South River, which is 2 hours going from my own house by water; I
mind to settle some of my Servants there against the middle of this Month; I am
provided with six course Horse, Oxen and Swine sufficiently in number, for any
Plantation for the first year; the Land I have settled on, in my Judgment is
extroardinary good; If any Friend or Acquaintance has any inclination to come
over here, I can assure them if they be Frugall men, and have but 300. lib.
Ster: Stock, they may live better then a Gentleman with us of 40. Chalders of
Victual: I cannot now resolve to come home till this time twelve Month, since
Thomas Parson has so much disappointed me, as I have written to my wife; but
against that time, if the LORD preserve me in health, I will come home then;
present my service to Arbikie, and to my Sisters, and to all our Friends; which
will save me a trouble to give them a Line, my love to your wife, and children,
I am,

Your Loving Brother, David Mudie.
Let Arbikie, my Sisters, and the rest of my Friends, see this Letter.



Abstract of a Letter from Robert Fullerron, Brother to the Lord of Kinnaber,
to his Brothers and Sisters, from Amboy, the 6. of November, 1684.
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
By the Mercies of the Most High, we are safe arryved, after a long Demur by
contrary winds, we encountered very hapily at first with Long Island, and the
next day came to an Anchor in New Jersey; The Passengers did all very well,
though we had some very rough gusts, and were very throng in so small a
vesshel, being 130. Souls, besides Sea men, of these 27. were women, 6. or 7.
children only; one man whom I hired in your house, called William Clark
standing carlesly upon the Forcastle tumbled over boards, and drowned tho we
put out our boat and endeavored in vain to save him. This Country pleases us
very well, and appears to be nothing short of our expectation; We were
yesterday ranging about veiwing our Land, where^ ^u shall have account by the
next; (...) Land in general is good, and a^ree^ ^^th the account you have
heard; t^^ I ^ees are no hing so invincible as I did ^magine, being neither so
thick nor so great as we thought. The first plant which I touched was wild
Bays, which row in abundance here, the fruits are gery excellent, such sorts
as I have seen, v^les the best I believe in the world, some I have seen of a
pound weight; Cattle in general are abundantly plentiful, especially Horse
and Oxen, the greatness and fatness of the Oxen will Countervail the Difference
of the price, being about 5. lib. sterling. The Country is not altogether
leavell, as some other Countries here, but has easy rysings, and Valleys; my
new experience cannot give you such an account as you may afterward expect;
but in general the Country may satisfy any rational ingenuous mind; yet I
find there be Novices who knows no happiness save home, with a glass of Wine,
and Comorads in a change House; tho there be no want here of more noble
devertisments as hunting wild Beasts, wild Horses, and Deer; yesterday I did
see several droves of Deer, and wild Horses, as I did ride up in the Country.
The Land which we were veiwing is a large plain, under the blew hills, watered
with two or three little Rivers about 8. or 9. miles from New-Perth, four from
Rariton-River Northward; the land downwards is all taken up by the Quitrenters
of Piscatway, Woodbridge, or Elizabeth Town; there shall be nothing of care
wanting in your affairs, and I do expect the like from you; I hope my Grand
Mother is in health, wish her from me long life, and good health, and assure
her, she wronged the Country in her opinion; present my love to all my
Friends, I am,

Your affectionat Brother, Robert Fullertown.

A Letter from John Forbes Brother to the Lord of Barnla. Directed to Mr.
James Elphingston of Logie Writter to His Majesty's Signet, in Edinburgh, in
Scotland.
From Amboy-point, alias New-Perth, in the Province of East-New Jersey, in
America, March 18. 1685. Honored Sir,
I having the occasion of this Bearer Mr. Drummond, brother to John Drummond
the Factor in Edinburgh, and who came Passenger with me to this place from
Scotland; I could not omit my duty in acquainting you by this line, of our safe
arrival into America; tho being by the Divine Hand of Providence miraculousl^
preserved from the cruelty of the tempestuous Ocean, occasioned by a mighty
storm of wind, (which happened upon the 12. day of September last) and which
blew so tempestuously, that in short, it carried first away our Bolspret, and
afterward our whole three Masts, Flagstaff, and all by the board, before the
Sailers were able to get them cut; it likewise took away the awning above our
quarterdeck, and left not so much as an yard of a rope above our heads, all
which was done in the space of half an hour; We lay thus distressed like a
pitiful Wrack all that night (we having lost our Masts about 12. of the clock
in the day) and two days thereafter at the mercy of the Waves, (which being
like mountains occasioned by the great storm of wind,) without hopes of
recovery, being then above 200. leagues from this land of America, tossing to
and fro, expecting that each wave should overwhelm us; Yet at last it pleased
GOD to turn the storm into a calm; and having preserved all our lower Yairds,
we made all haste and made Jury Masts of them; with the help whereof, (tho very
unsufficient ones, to dryve forward the bulk of so great a Vessel) and of GODS
miraculous Mercy and Providence; Who immediately after we had put our ship in
any mean posture for plying out her Voyage, was pleased to send us such a fair
and moderate gale of wind, as brought us in sight of the Capes of Virginia,
within 15. days after or there abouts, having never ceased for the whole time,
till it brought us thither in safty; So we came within the Capes, and sailed up
that great Navigable Bay, called Chessapeik bay, up through all Virginia up to
Maryland, where we landed at the place where our ship was bound to take in her
Tobacco, for her homeward Loadning. But being this Disabled, and not being able
to ply out her Voyage to this place (where she ought to have landed us, we was
necessitat to travel from thence by Land to this place, being upwards of 200.
English miles, and having left our Goods behind us, which was thereafter to
come about in a Sloup) we was necessitat to stay all Winter in this New and
young City, where we had but very bad Commodation for Lodging, tho we knew of
no want of Victuals of all sorts for money, tho at a considerable dear rate;
This hindered us long from our falling to work about our husbandries, which was
a great loss of time to us. However when our sloup came about, (which did not
hold the half of our goods; So that every man yet wants the half of his goods.
But are daily expecting them by the same Sloup which we fraghted thither back
again. I went out to the Woods to the land we had pitched upon, with several
others of our Counteey men, such as Tho: Gordon, and Mr. Chat: his Brother,
Brothers to the Lord of Straloch, Kinnabers two Sons, Robert and Mr. Thomas
Fullertons, James Johnston of Spotswood, and John Barclay the Governors
Brother, with some others; where we have all pitched near by one another, upon
an piece of excellent land as we suppose; Whereof I judge I have not the worst,
(if not the absolute best piece of land in all that Tract, for we had it all at
our own choising and not by lots, this land lies not on a Navigable River, but
about 5. or 6. miles from Rariton river, which is Navigable up the nearest
place to our Plantations; For the best places of the Rivers are already
inhabited by the old Planters of this Country who have been here some 16. or
18. years ago. There are many places upon Navigable Rivers yet untaken, and
some very near this place also, which is intended to be the Metrapolis of this
Province; But it is generally sandy barren land, and the best land is compute
by all to be in the woods, back some several miles from the Navigable Rivers;
So that we rather choose land for profitablness, then for Conveniences of Towns,
and pleasure allennarly. For there is abundance both of good and barren land
in this Province; So that a man may choose some for pleasure, and some for
profit and Convenience, for I intend to take up about 4. or 500. Acres where I
have now settled; which is on a very pleasant place and good land, and whereof I
have with two hands (not having had time to get many Servants away with me,
having come away upon so short advertisement, and whereof I lost one at
Maryland by sickness; so that now I have but two, and a Woman for dressing our
Victuals and Clothes, till I get more sent me this year) already cleared, or at
least will clear; and have in Corn this year about 8, or 10, Acres of ground;
tho it was pretty thick of stately tale Timber, and that since the 26. of
January, at which time, I went to the Woods. I have 1000. Acres to take up at
this time out of the first Division of 10000. Acres ordained to be laid out to
every Proprietor; I having bought a 10. part, whereof my Brother is half
sharer. I have also taken up 400. Acres of excellent fine land on Rariton
River, about 20. miles above Amboy, whereon I design to set Servants, that I
expect over this ensuing Summer; and so to divide our said parcels, and improve
them for a year or two to the best advantage, and then to sell them off. If I
design to come home, which we can do at good profit. Now for a general
description of this Country, it is a fine place for those who have a good
stock, to lay out upon a stock of Cattle of all sorts, which do greatly
multiply here in a short time, and are sold at great rates, and may soon
increase a stock greatly; or it is a good Country for an Industrious Frugal
Man, that designs to follow Husbandries closlie; providing he bring but some
little stock to stock a Plantation withal; or it is very good for Tradsmen, as
good Carpenters, Smiths, Tailors, etc. who will get large wages a day. But it
is not a Country for idle sluggish People; or those who cannot some times put
too their hands, and encourage their Servants. It is a place that produces many
fine Fruits, and Physic Herbs; The Woods are stored with wild Deers, Conies,
Woulves, Boars, Racouns, some Bavers, and several other Beasts, which have fine
Furrs. There is also abundance of Fowls, and Fish, and Water Fowl for the
killing. The Timber are mostly Oak of all sorts, Walnut, Chestnut, whereof there
are great abundance where I have planted, tho they bescarce so bigg as these
that comes to Scotland, yet large as pleasant. Strawberries grow very thick
upon the ground amongst the Trees; so that some places of the Woods are in
Summer as it were covered with a red cloth. As I am certainly informed, Fruit
Trees advance at a great rate in this place, for a Man may have an Orchard
within a few years after the Planting, that may yield him a great quantity of
Cydar, which is the chiefest of their drink in this Province, even amongst the
meanest of the Planters; So that this Country if well improved, may make a
fine place; for Nature has been defficient in nothing to it, either for
pleasure or fruitfulness of the Soil; So that a man being once settled two or
three years in it, and having Corn, Cattle, and all things necessary for the
use of man within himself. And the trouble and hardship of his first settling
by his hand; He may live as Comfortably here as in any place of the World;
Providing he could dispense with the want of his Friends and Relations, and the
satisfacti^n of their Company, which is the loss I most regrate in this place;
And thus having given yon a short description of the place, I cannot but in the
next place, much regrate my misfortune, in not seeing you, and taking your
advise before I came to this place; But my Resolution was so sudden, by the
encouragement I received from the Chief Governor, and some of the Proprietors
at Aberdeen; and having come in only to see my Sister with my Brother; and by
the many Gentlemen that were going along in the ship, that I was induced to go
along without so much as taking my leave of any of my Friends, save only these
that were then in Town; So that I came of resolution only to see the place, and
to settle only if I fand convenience. And having thus abruptly come away, when
I came here, I designed not to return till I took some trial of the Country,
that at my return I might be the more able to give an true account thereof. I
am not as yet of any determined resolution as to my staying for altogether as
yet; but I resolved to stay this year, till I see what the ground produces; and
to see how my endeavors take effect; and GOD willing, be that time, I may in
some measure be resolved what to do, for then the greatest hardship will be
over my head; and by that time I will have up an pretty good house, which is
near already framed; whereas hitherto I have dwelt for the most part here in a
Wigwam, (as we call them here) accounting all our hardship in the beginning but
short, in expectation of good success in the end. But however I may be resolved
hereafter, I intend GOD willing, life and health serving to come home a start
within this year or two, and see all my Friends; and apollogize the best manner
I can, for my abrupt departure. Now having thus in some measure discharged a
part of my dutyfull respects toward you by this line, in letting you know of
my welfare and present condition; Earnestly desiring ye will favor me with a
return by the first occasion; wherein I shall be glade to hear of your welfare,
of your kind Ladies and Children (To whom and others my nearest Friends and
Relations, and Comarads, I desire the favor to be Kindly remembered, begging
pardon for this trouble, and your patience to peruse this, when your leisure
can permit; and afterward to communicate it to my Uncle, Calder-hall and his
Lady, or to my Cusins Harie Lockhart, or George Ersken, if they call for it; I
not having time at present to write to them at length, as I have in haste done
to you; I shall forbear to give you further trouble at present; entreating you
to remember me kindly to your Worthy and Oblidging Lady, and fine Children, and
shall only subscrive my self, as I sincerly am, and shall continue,

Sir, Your most affectionat Cusin, and oblidged Servant, while John Forbes.

A Leter from Thomas Fullertoun, to his Brother the Lord of Kinnaber, dated
from his new possession, in the plains of new Caesaria; January 7. 1685.
Dear Brother,
YOu have above a transcript, containing the principal Contents of an abrupt
Letter, sent you three or four days after our arrival; since that time we have
possessed our Selves in the above mentioned plain 11. miles from New-Perth,
four from Rariton Northward; And 12. from Elizabeth-Town; we have the honor to
be the first Inland planters in this part of America, for the former Settlement
have been by the River-sides, which are all possessed by the Quit-renters; the
which I would have grudged at, had I not found the goodness of the Land,
upwards will countervaill the trouble of transportation to the water; As to the
number and nature of these Quit-renters, they are about 2. or 300. Families,
some civil and Discreet, others rude and Malcontent with the late Purchassers.
and need some thing of austerity to make them Complaisant; We have at present
sharp frosts, and a good deall of Snow, three days of vitrefying frost, this
winter, had not its match for cold these 16. years by gone, as the Inhabitants
do inform us. Against this extreme we have a good Defense of Fire, and felling
of Trees, and might live warm enough, were we not forced to travel for recruit
of Provisions. I reckon the winter to consist only of nights, for the Suns
appearance by day moderateth the cold, and melts the Frost; I do not find the
cold here to cause obstructions or coughs; the Air is ever transsparent; we
have singular good stomachs, which if it continue as they say, it will require
a fertile Country when peopled; the water or temper of the Air keeps men's
bellies moderatly looss; I cannot find it necessar to give any particular
account of this Country with its product, because ye have had already many, and
some very ingenuous of this nature; besides I have not yet proof of all the
seasons of the year; we have the Deer to walk the round nightly about our
Lodge; this morning I shot a large Heart, and followed his bloody tract in the
snow, above two miles before he dyed; I believe the fatest Deer in the world
are here; we have made choice of your land next adjacent to mine, and have
placed your Servants there, where they will settle if we find convenient, when
the snow is away; this is all at present from,

Your affectionat Brother, Robert Fullertoun.

Another Letter from the same hand, dated the 10. of March 1685.
Dear Brother,
BEfore the dispatch of the abovewritten, of the date of this Instant, so that
they may both go together; the Winter is now past, and we are providing ground
for the seed, the Fields being bare, we can better distinguish where is good
land; we have chosen our chief Plantation and yours two miles further up in the
Country, closs under the blew Mountains, where you may reckon you have an
Estate of 40. Chalders of Victual, with no more Wood thereon then your self
would desire and it might yield no less yearly presently, if it were all
plenished after a little pains to root out the brush; that which wants Wood
is open plain with short bushes, which we cut at the roots with a how; I wish
the adjacent bounds were purchassed, and possessed by our friends, who have any
design this way; for it is excellent land, the mould in the Province is
General, is either like that I possessed at the Northwater, or more marly or
clay; but all of it has 3, 4, or five inches of black rotten mould uppermost,
I have not much more to trouble you with, but my respects and love to all
Friends; if my Uncle or any other Friends send their Sons here, let them advert
to this Maxim, A Gentleman that is not to work himself, must be well provided
with a Stock, and this must be more or less, as he designs his Estate; I
question not your care in my affairs; neither need you question in your
concerns, the care of,

Your affectionat Brother, Robert Fullertoun.

Abstract of a Letter from Charles Gordon, (Brother to the Lord of Straloch,)
to Doctor John Gordon, Doctor of Medicine at Montrose; dated at Woodbridge, in
East-Jersey, 7. of March, 1685.
Dear Brother,
I Design 100. pound Sterling for goods and servants, if Tradse-men and
Servants knew they were better used here then in any Neighboring Collonie, and
that after their time is expired, they may gain a stock by their work, and live
like some of your Lairds before they dye; they would not so much scrouple to
come hither. There are a number of queries proposed by our Brother Thomas to
the Fullertouns, which I remember you desired me to answer, the most
matteriall of them are answered, by this and my former Letters; I shall
therefore superceed any long description of it, till I see it throw all the
seasons of the year; in short, I see it pleasant, and furnished with all
conveniences of Nature, such as woods, grass, meadow; plenty of Fresh Springs,
Creeks, and Rivers; I find it wholesome, for I am not (blessed be God) troubled
here with Defluction, headakes, and coughs as at Edinburgh, which is a great
inducement for me or any valitudinary man to stay in this Country: People come
from Barbados, to York, and hither for their healths sake; if you design to
come hither your self, you may come as a Planter, or a Merchant, but as a
Doctor of Medicine I cannot advise you; for I can hear of no deseases here to
cure but some Agues, and some cutted legs and fingers; and there are no want of
Empericks for these already; I confess you could do more then any yet in
America, being versed both in Surgery, Pharmacie; for here are abundance of
curious Herbs, Shrubs, and Trees; and no doubt Mediciniall ones for making of
drogs; but there is little or no Employment this way; your Servants are settled
on a pleasant plain beside the Fullertouns on a brook, called The Vine or Ceder
Brooks; from a swamp of Cedars, from whence it Springs, and the multiplicity of
Vines which grow upon it; all your friends and Country men here are in good
health, blessed be GOD; This has been the hardest Winter that was almost since
ever there were English here. The sound betwixt Jersey and Staten-Island was
frozen in January, that carts and horse went upon it; betwixt Martinmas and
Christmas flying shours of snow with clear moderat frosts; in January deep snow
and most bitter frosts, which ever I found, but did no ways affect peoples
bodies; the Air being ordinar clear and serene; about the 20. of January, the
snow went off insensibly; and about 3. weeks in February, it was almost like
Summer in Scotland; the end of February and beginning of March for the most
part rain and wind; Acquaint me the value of sweet-sent-Gumm, which flows from
the wood-Gum-trees of Sassafras, Sassapatella, and such other things as the
Country naturally produces; Be pleased to send me some Medicines for Agues,
and accidental cutts, or sores, in case my self or Servants be overtaken with
them; I hope with the blessing of GOD, here to make a livlihood for my self; I
entreat to hear what remarkable news, and revolutions are either at home with
you, or abroad, and so continues,

Your most affectionat brother, and humble Servant, Charles Gordon.

A Letter from Thomas Gordon Brother to the Lord of Straloch. For Mr. George
Alexander Advocat, in Edinburgh.
From the Cedar-Brook of East-New-Jersey in America, the 16. February, 1685.
Dear Mr. George,
THis is the fifth time I have written to you since I came to America, some of
which I am confident have come safe to your hands; so that I need not now
resume them, for in them I gave you a full account of our danger by Sea, and
travels by Land; and therefore I shall now proceed and begin where I left last,
upon the eighteen day of November I and my Servants came here to the Woods, and
8. days thereafter my Wife and Children came also; I put up a Wigwam in 24.
hours, which served us till we put up a better house, which I made 24. foot
long, and 15. foot wide, containing a Hall and Citchen both in one, and a
Chamber and a Study, which we put up pretty well (with Pallisadoes on the
sides, and Shingles on the roof) against Yuill, on which day we entered home to
it, and have been ever since, and still am clearing ground, and making fencing;
So that I hope to have as much ground, cleared, fenced, ploughed, and planted
with Indian Corn in the beginning of May, (which is the best time for planting
it) as will maintain my Family the next year, if it please GOD to prosper it;
Robert Fullertoun and I are to join for a Plough this Spring, consisting of 4.
Oxen and two Horse, but if the Ground were once broken up, two Oxen and two
Horse, or 4. Oxen alone, will serve; so that the next spring I intend (GOD
willing) to have a Plough of my own alone; I intend to build a better House and
larger, and to make a Kitchen of this I am in; which I will hardly get done
this Summer, because I resolve to build upon my lot at New-Perth; I am settled
here in a very pleasant place, upon the side of a brave plain (almost free of
woods) and near the water side, so that I might yoke a Plough where I please,
were it not for want of Hay to maintain the Cattle which I hope to get helped
the next year, for I have several pieces of Meadow near me. The first Snow we
had was about the midst of November, and went twice away again, and about the
end of the Month it came on, and continued with very great Frost and knee deep
Snow till toward the end of January; And then the Snow dissolved pleasantly
and calmly with the heat and influence of the Sun, and now I judge it as warm
here as it will be with you in May, and much more pleasant, for we are not by
far so much troubled with winds here as ye are in Scotland; the winter was
general very pleasant and calm, although sometimes very vehement frost; I have
spoken with several old Inhabitants here, who assure me they had not seen so
hard a winter as this has been these 16 years bygone; and truly if I never see
much worse I shall be very well pleased with this Country; we have great
abundance of Deer, Turkies, etc. here about us; and as for the wild Beasts, and
Natives (whereof I was greatly affrayed before I came here) I find no danger,
trouble, inconveniency thereby at all; there are abundance of all sorts of
Cattle in this Country to be had at very reasonable rates, I can buy a good
Cow for 4 lib. ster. a good Ox for 5. lib. ster. and a good Horse for 5, or 6.
lib. ster. a Hogg for 20. ss. ster. a Bushel of Wheat for 4. ss. ster. of Rye
3. ss. 6. d. ster. of Indian Corn for 2. ss. 6. d. ster. There are 8. of us
settled here within half a mile, or a mile of another, and about ten miles from
the Town of New-Perth, or Amboy-point, so that I can go and come in a day
either on foot or horseback. viz. Robert and Thomas Fullertouns, James
Johnstoun of Spotswood, John Forbes, John Barclay, Doctor John Gordon his
Servants, Andrew Alexander, and my Self; this is the most of what I can say of
this Country at present, for I intend to write nothing but what I either see
or know to be certainly true, and for my part I am very well pleased with this
retired Country life; and I love this Country very well as yet; although I hear
of some of our Country men who are not, neither can it be expected, that any
Country in the World will please the different humors of all Persons; blessed
be GOD, my self and Wife and Children and servants have been and are still in
good health which GOD continue; be pleased to communicate this to both yours,
and my Friends and Acquaintances, because I have not leisure to writ at great
length to every one; and let these remember me to all others that give
themselves the trouble to inquire for,

Your most humble and and oblidged Servant, Thomas Gordon.

A Letter from David Mudie of the date of the former, to Mr. Alexander Gairns,
one of the Ministers at Edinburgh.
Sir,
I Did write to you a line upon my arrival here, and my last the 12. of
December, directed to John Graham, I desired him to let you see his letter, and
my wifes, which would inform you as fully as I had written to you; since that
time I have traveled throw the Country, and informed my self of the
conditions thereof, which still does the better please me; the winter has been
exceeding hard, and sharp, which has much hindered me of work; yet I have
cleared three acres of ground, to be an Orchard and a Garding, which lies at
the back of my house, which I am building of stone, sex good rooms off a Floor,
Sellers all under the ground, two stories high, and garrets, at which I have
had Massons since the first of February; and I hope will have it fully Finished
this Summer; I have also built an horse-mill, the house is 32. foot wide, 40.
foot long, the great wheel 30 foot Diameter, which I will have fully finished
against the letter end of this Month; it is told me, she may be worth 100.
pound Sterling a year; I am sure she will be better then 50. clear money, this
from,

Sir, Your humble and obedient Servant, David Mudie.

A Letter from Thomas Fullertoun, Brother to the Lord of Kinnaber, to John
Johnstoun Drogust, in Edinburgh, dated the 9. of March, 1685. from East-Jersey.
Loving Commorad,
YOur Brother and I did write to you about three Months ago, wherein we told
you, that we were 9. weeks at sea, after we parted from Killebegs in Ireland,
we were all very well; at Sea only we had more Stomachs then meat, to prevent
which, if you or any other Commorad come this way, it will be prudence to
fortify themselves with good Cheese, Butter, Biscuit, Caks, and Brandie; I
believe you are cloyed with descriptions of the Country; And therefore this in
brief, the reports you hear of it are generally true, some it may be are
Hyperbolick in magnifying its Goodness, but as many are detractive from what it
really deserves; There is abundance of good Land for the improving; Abundance
of Swine and Cattle for the raising, Deers for killing, houses for the
building: But some expect all these without pains. Your brother and I and our
Servants have had good Venison broth once a day, all this winter; to be short,
if a man please to live a Country Life to labor Land, plant Orchards, and
such like; I believe he cannot come to a place that will better answer his
expectations, and when he has a mind to be merry he will get a Punsh-house,
and very good fellows. I hope in a little time I shall want nothing but the
company of the pretty Girls, to all whom, who retain any remembrance of me,
Let my service be remembered, and to all friends; I long exceedingly to hear
from you, but more to see you; we had many difficulties as our entrance, and in
our first endeavors; But when you come, I hope they shall be prevented by,

Your affectionat Commorad, Thomas Fullertoun.

A Letter from James Johnstoun of Spotswood, to Alexander Henderson writter in
Edinburgh; dated the 9. of March, 1685. from his Plantation at the blew Hills
in East-Jersey in America.
Kind Commorad,
THese are to present my best wishes to you, and all Acquaintances, if any
enjoyment could make up the want of your Company, I should not complain here;
what else can contribute to profit or pleasure, being here to be had; neither
is there any thing here to discourage us; Quakers are not numerous; Wolves are
so far from troubling men, that if a man shall lay a Glove upon a Carcass, or
their prey, they will yell, but not come nigh it: You cannot come nigh a
rattle-Snake, but they will rattle with their tail: whereby a man is
advertised either to kill them, or go by them; they frequently charm Squirrels,
or other little Beasts of the tops of the Trees unto their mouth, and that
without touching them with their teeth; which if they did, they would poison
themselves. There is a Flee by the salt Marshes most troublesome in Summer,
but is not in the up-lands; I am mightily well satisfied with my coming over,
neither do I think I could live again in Scotland. In the Summer there is
plenty of Fruits, Peaches, Walnuts, Chestnuts, Strawberries, and another berry
like Currants; Vines as good as any where. I and all who have come over, have
kept our health very well; our food has for the most part been Venison; we got
from the Indians which I like exceeding well. The Indian Corn, Indian Beans,
and Pease, are pleasant Grains; we have very good fishing; present my service
to all Friends, and believe me to be ever,

Sir, Your oblidged Servant, James Johnstoun.

Sir,
I Nothing question but by the perusal of the above written Letters, you are
abundantly satisfied, that East-Jersey as to all things necessar will
accommodat our present design; But if some (Malevolent Persons) who because
they have not the courage nor resolut^ to adventure upon such an undertaking
themselves, do cavil at the design in others, may insinuat that the greatest
part of these Letters being written by Gentlemen; it may be presumed; interest
may oblidge them to represent things otherwise then they are, to the advantage
of the place. This is easily answered, that there are several persons in this
Town, who have been upon the place, who have perused all their Letters, and
declare they find nothing contained therein, that they can contradict; But as
for a further proof thereof, I have thought fit to conclude with a letter from
a Masson, sent over as a Servant, by Captain Hamiltoun, he being a plain
Countryman, it is not very probable he can have any design; I had the Letters
from his said Master; as follows,

A Letter from James Cockburn Masson, Servitour in East-Jersey in America, to
Captain Hamiltoun, at the Ship-tavern in Edinburgh, dated the 12. of March,
1685. to his Uncle James Broun, Shoemaker in Kelso.
UNcle these few Lines do testify that I am well and in good health, blessed
be GOD for it, desiring to hear the like from you, for I am very well in this
land of America; We lake neither wild nor tame to eat; the most part of our
drink is Rumm, Cider, and Beer; such as have these to sell, drives a very good
Trade. I am working at my work daily, in good weather, and have very good
incouragment among the old Planters; if my Sister Katharin incline to come
over, she may have good service here and Francie also; it is better to be bound
some few years then come free except they have a good stock; it is dear living
here the first year or two: The Indians are a harmless People and very kind to
us, they are not a harie People as was said to us in Scotland; a Shoemaker
would live very well here, if he bring any store of Leather with him, the Shoes
are five or six shillings a pair; there is nothing discourages us more then
want of Ministers here; but now they have agreed about their Stipends, there is
one to be placed in New-Perth, Piscattaway, Woodbridge, and Elizabeth Town,
they have a mind to bring them from Scotland; Uncle I hope you will let me know
of your welfare; and how the Town is repaired again, and so I rest your Nephew
until death, John Cockburn

Another from the same hand to George Fae Masson in Kelso, from New-Perth in
America, the 20. of March, 1685.
Cusin,
THese are to show you that I am in good health blessed be GOD for it, wishing
to hear the like from you; We had a long Voyage, but we came very well to our
Harbor in this place of America, within a stone-cast of my Masters Lot; it is
upon the very Harbor; this Town is situate betwixt two great Rivers, the one
called Rariton, the other Hudsons; It is a very pleasant Country and good for
all Tradsmen; You was angry with me for coming away, but I repent nothing of it
my self, for I have abundance of Employment; I am at the building of a great
stone house in New-Perth, with another Scots-man. They build most with Timber,
but are beginning to build with stone; there is as good stone in this Country
as in Scotland, if they were at the pains to find it out; there are not many of
our Trade in this Province; Any who has a mind to come here will get good
wages, these who have a mind to come here will do far better then in Scotland.
I have no more desire to my Native-Countrey then I had never been in it; they
had better be bound some years with a good Master, then come over frree, for it
is dear living at first here. The Natives of this land are a harmless People,
they do wrong no to no man, they are very kind to us: tell my sister if she
please to come over, she may have good service here; Remember me to all
Friends, and Comorads in Kelso, and so I rest your Cusing, while I live,

John Cockburn.

A Brief ADVERTISEMENT, Concerning East-New-Jersey, in AMERICA
THat whereas it has upon solid grounds been by very Judicious Men, judged as
well the advantage of the Nation in general, as of the particular Undertakers,
to have an Interest in some of the America Plantation; and that in Order to the
Promoting this Design: There went in July last, 1684. a Vessel from Leith, with
160. Passengers, or thereby; another from Montross with 130. to
East-New-Jersey, in which two Vessels were some Gentlemen and Merchants, of
very good Repute; the account of their safe Arrival in eight weeks after their
parting from Aberdeen, and their several Opinions of that Country, all
agreeing anent the Fertility, pleasantness, and Wholesomness thereof, as being
stored with all things necessar for the comfortable Accommodation and Life of
Man, being compared with former Relations of that Country, and both confirmed
as Truth, by several Gentlemen Merchants at present in Edinburgh, who have been
there: The consideration of this, as of the reasonable constitution of the
Government; the Model whereof has been fully perused, and found satisfactory,
has engaged many to pitch upon this Province of East-New-Jers^^, as the most
proper s^^t for a Collony of this Nation; The same being a Climat agreeable to
our Constitutions, and a place fit for Trade; and of great Security, being as
it were, the Center of the English Plantations, and a place affording in
plenty, all desirable Accommodations.

And seeing the Approbation of these in Authority is absolutely requisite, for
countenancing and encouraging such a Design, without which, it cannot be
expected, that any such Attempt can be made effectual; Mr. George Scot of
Pitlochie, resolving to settle his Family in that place, has procured the
following Pass,

By the Right Honorable Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, etc.
These are Permitting, and allowing Mr. George Scot of Pitlochie, with his
Lady, Children, and Family; and such other Persons as he shall engage to pass
from this Kingdom, either by Sea or Land, to any of His Majesty's Foreign
Plantations, providing such persons to be transported by him, be not declared
Traitors, Rebels, Fugitives; and that without any Let, Impediment, or
Molestation, from any person whatsoever; they always behaving themselves
peaceably, and according to Law.

Given at Edinburgh the first of January, 1685. PERTH, Cancel.

For all Magistrates, Officers, and Soldiers within the Kingdom of Scotland,
whom these do or may concern.
By the perusual of the foresaid Pass, it will appear that such who intend to
be concerned with the said Mr. George Scot, in prosecuting this Design, are
hereby included as well as himself, they being qualified according to the
contents thereof,

And for his further encouragement, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council
have been pleased by an Act, to condescend, That such as are under Bond, to
compear before them when called, shall have up their said respective Bonds,
upon their going with him, Whereby they are secured from the Apprehension of
any Process to be in their absence, intented against them upon that head,

Whereas there are several people in this Kingdom, who upon account of their
not going that length, in conformity required of them, by the Law do live very
uneasy; Who beside the other agreeable Accommodations of that place may there
freely enjoy their own principles, without hazard or the least trouble; seeing
there are Ministers of their own persuasion going along with the said Mr.
George Scot, who by the fundamental Constitutions of that Country, are allowed
the free Exercise of their Ministry, such as Mr Archibald Riddel brother to sir
John Riddel of Riddel, Mr. Thomas Paterson late Minister of Borthwick, and
several other Ministers. It is hereby signified to all who desire this Voyage,
That the Henry and Francis of Newcastle, a Ship of 350. Tun, and 20. great
Guns; Richard Hutton Master, is fraighted for the Transportation of these
Families, and will take in Passengers and Goods at Leith, and Passangers at
Montross, and Aberdeen, and Kirkwa in Orkney, and set sail thence for
East-New-Jersey, against the 20. day of July, GOD willing. It being resolved by
these concerned in the frieght of the Vessel, to Accomodate such Passengers as
may conveniently done, without crouding themselves, and their Families; the
inconveniences of which they are fully resolved to avoid; as what is certainly
very troublesome in such a Voyage. Such therefore who desires to go Passangers
in this Vessel, may apply in time; between and the 12. of May, to Mr. George
Scot of Pitlochie, at his Lodging in Baillie Robisons land, and at John
Johnstoun Drogist at the sign of the Unicorn in Edinburgh, to Mr. John Gordon^
Colinston Doctor of Physic, at his ^^dging in Montross; to James Armor
younger Merchant in Glasgow; To Heugh Broun, or James Nisbet Merchant in
Irvine; To Bail^ie Boyd in Kilmarnock; To Bailly M^ kenen; or Ralph Holland
Merchant in Air; To Bailly Burt in Stirling; To Bailly James Gordon in
Kirkcudbright; William Corbet Apothecary in Dumfries; Hery Elphingston
Collector of His Majesty's Customs^s. in Aberdeen; whereby th^^ may have their
passage secured upon Rea^onabl^ Conditions in the said Vessel; And accounts of
the Propositions to be made to them, in Order to the promoting effectually of
that design, seeing after the number condesended upon, as to be carried without
Crowd in the said Ship; there will be no more admitted there; and so such as
incline to go the Voyage, may loss their passage in the said Vessel, delaying
to secure their place in time.

FINIS.

