A PROCLAMATION For apprehending James Duke of Buccleugh, and other Traitorous
Conspirators against the life of the King, and his Royal Highness, and for
subversion of the Government.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally specially Constitute, Greeting:
Whereas there has been lately Discovered in Our other Kingdom of England, a
most Traitorous and Damnable Conspiracy, for compassing the Death and
Destruction of Our Royal Person, and of Our Dearest and only Brother, James
Duke of Albany and York, Our Commissioner for this Our Ancient Kingdom, and for
Subversion of Our Government and Kingdoms; And forasmuch as We have received
Information upon Oath, that James Duke of Buccleugh and Monmouth, and Ford Lord
Gray of Wark, Sir Thomas Armestrong Knight, Mr. Robert Ferguson, a Phantical
Preacher, and notorious Traitor, a Native of this Our Kingdom, now an Indweller
in England, Colonel John Rumsay, Richard Rumbold Maltster, Richard Nelthorp
Esquire, Edward Wade Gentleman, Richard Goodenough Gentleman, Captain Walecoat,
William Thompson, James Burtone, and William Hone Joiner, Subjects of that Our
Kingdom of England, with diverse other Wicked and Desperate Persons, have most
Traitorously Conspired together for this effect, and for that end have had
several Treasonable Consultations, to provide Arms, to Levy Men, and to make an
Insurrection in Our Kingdom of England: And we understanding that the said
Conspirators are fled, and have left their Habitations to avoid the Justice of
Our Laws, and the Punishment due to such a Horrid and Execrable Treason; And
the considering that the said James Duke of Buccleugh, and some other of the
forenamed Conspirators, may retire unto, and lurk in this Our Ancient Kingdom;
Do therefore with Advice of Our Privy Council, Require and Command the said
James Duke of Bucclugh and Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armestrong, Mr.
Robert Ferguson, Colonel John Rumsay, Richard Rumbold, Richard Nelthorp,
Edward Wade, Richard Goodenough, Captain Walecoat, William Thompson, James
Burtone, and William Hone, if they or any of them have retired unto, or shall
come into this Kingdom, forthwith to render themselves to some of Our Privy
Council, Sheriffs Stewarts, or other Judges and Magistrates, that they may be
Tried, and proceeded against according to Law. And We Command and Charge all
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, and all
other Judges and Magistrates, and the Officers of Our forces, and all Our
Subjects what somever, to make diligent search and inquiry after the said
Conspirators and Traitors, in all places where they may be suspected to lurk or
abscond, and if they shall happen to apprehend any of them, or if any of these
Conspirators shall Render themselves, We strictly Charge them to commit the
Person, or Persons to apprehended to sure Prison, and presently to inform Our
Privy Council of their being apprehended; And for this end, We with Advice
foresaid, Do hereby Require and Command all Our foresaids Judges, Officers and
Subjects, to inquire and search, if these Conspirators, or any other of Our
English Subjects, have lately come, or shall come into this Our Kingdom, and to
cause them to be immediately seized and and secured, till they be Examined; and
Our Privy Council informed concerning them; Certifying all such Persons, as
after this Our Proclamation, shall directly or indirectly Conceal, Resset,
Harbor, or Maintain the said Traitorous Conspirators. Or any of them, or
shall either contrive or connive at any Means, whereby they, or any of them may
Escape from being taken, and presented to Justice or shall not give due and
timeous information, and advertisement to Our Privy Council, or Our other
Judges and Magistrates, concerning their lurking Places, Conceallers,
Harbourers, Ressetteers, Intercommuners, or Connivers, that they shall be
proceeded against as being Art and Part in, and Abetters of this Execrable
Conspiracy and Treason, according to the uttermost severity of Law: And We
Declare, that whosoever shall Discover the foresaids Conspirators or any of
them, and shall cause them, or any of them to be Taken and Apprehended, and
brought in to any of our Judges, or Officers foresaids, shall have a Reward of
five hundred pounds Sterling, for each of the four Persons first named in this
Our Proclamation, and of one hundred Pounds sterling for each of the other
Persons therein mentioned, to be paid to him or them, in Recompense of so good
and acceptable Service. And for the more effectual Prosecution hereof, We
hereby Require and Command all Our Sheriffs, Baillies of Regallities, and
Stewarts of Stewarties, on the East, West, and middle Marches, of this Our
Kingdom, and within the Shires of Argile, Air, Dumbarton, and Inverness, as
also all Collectors and their Deputs, Customers and Waters, immediately upon
fight hereof, not only to inquire for, but to seize the Persons of any
Englishman who has come into this Kingdom, from, and since the twentieth day
of June last, or who shall hereafter come into the same before the first of
August next, who cannot give a good account of themselves or their Affairs, who
are to Require Concurrence of all Our Leidges, in the Execution hereof, and
they are to give the same as they will be answerable at their highest peril: As
also, We strictly Require Our Vice Admiral, and all in Office under him, and
all Sheriffs, Baillies, Stewarts, Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, and
all Customers, Surveyers and Waiters, and all Our other Subjects, to Search all
Ships and Vessels, which shall come upon the Coasts of this Kingdom, or Isles
belonging thereto, and to seize all such Persons. Strangers or Natives, who
shall not make it appear by clear Evidence, that they are come upon the account
of Trade allanerly, and to acquaint Our Privy Council from time to time, that
they may receive their funder thereanent: As likewife, to search all such
Vessels or Ships for Arms, Ammunition, and other Warlike Provisions, and for
Treasonable or Seditious Papers or Letters, and where any such is found, to
secure the Ships, Men and Goods, till Our Council be made acquainted therewith,
and their Commands known thereanent. And further, We Prohibit all Masters of
Ships to set Sail with their Ships, from any Port of this Kingdom, before they
first give in upon Oath, a List of all their Seamen, and other Passengers, to
the ordinar Magistrates, or Customers timously, at least 48. hours at the Ports
before they Sail, under the pain of Confiscation of the Ship and Goods, of such
Masters as shall Transport any other, then such as are mentioned in the said
List, or any of any other Name, then as they are designed in the said List,
besides what other punishment Our Council shall think fit to inflict; and if
any of these contained in these Lists appear to be suspicious Persons, the
ordinar Magistrate upon the place, or Customers, Collectors, their Deputs,
Surveyors and Waiters, are hereby Commanded to secure such Persons, and to
inform the Magistrates of the Burghs, or the Sheriffs of the Shire, within
which the said Ships shall happen to be. And that Our Will and Pleasure herein
may be published and made known to all Our good and loving Subjects. Our Will
is, and We charge you straightly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and several Market Crosses of
the Head Burghs of this Our Kingdom, and other places needful, and thereat, in
our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the
Premises, that exact Obedience may be given thereto, and none may pretend
Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the fourth day of July, One thousand six
hundred eighty and three: And of Our Reign, the thirtieth fifth year. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the KING.
EDINBV;RGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno. DOM. 1683. Reprinted at London, by George Croom, in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's Castle, 1683.


