A PROCLAMATION For Calling out the Heretors, and others in the Shires of Perth
and Forfar, and others beyond the Water of Tay.
At Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of July, one thousand six hundred and eighty
nineyears.
WHereas his Grace the Lord high Commissioner, and the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, are sufficiently Informed, That there are some numbers of Irish
Papists and others, Shipped at Craig-Fergus, in three Men of War, and that they
have past the Mule of Kintire, and Sailed betwixt Isla and Jura, and are
probably before this time Landed in some place of the Isles, or Highlands,
about Innerlochie; Therefore the Lord high Commissioner, and the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, Have thought sit, in His Majes:ties Name and
Authority, to Certify the Liedges anent the Invasion, and Descent of these
Barbarous and Bloody People, who will certainly join with the Viscount of
Dundee, and other Rebels that are in Arms with him; And Do Require the Leidges,
That none of them take in hand to Correspond with, Reset, Supply, or any ways
Assist these Rebels and Papists, but on the contrary, all Sheriffs, Baillies of
Regalities, or Bailliaries, Stewarts, and all other Magistrates whatsomever
within the Sheriffdom of Perth and Forfar, and all others upon the North side
of the Water of Tay, are hereby expressly Required and Commanded, to attend
General-major Mccay, Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Forces in this present
Expedition, for Reducing of these Rebels and Invaders, and that they Receive
and Obey his Orders from time to time, either in Conveening the Heretors and
other Inhabitants of the Respective Shires in Arms to His Majesty's Host, at
what times or places he shall think sit to Appoint; or in furnishing
Provisions, Baggage-Horses, and what else may be necessary for His Majesty's
Service in this Expedition, as they shall be advertised by the said
General-major Mccay, or his Order: Requiring likewayes the Heretors and
Inhabitants of the several Shires to obey punctually the Orders, that shall be
given to them by the respective Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies and Magistrates, to
the Effect foresaid: And his Grace the Lord high Commissioner, and Lords of
Privy Council Do Certify, That if any of the Magistrates or Inhabitants of
these Shires of Perth, Forfar, and others beyond Tay, shall be negligent or
refractory in Conveening in Arms, when required in manner foresaid, or giving
their assistance for the maintenance of His Majesty's Troops, furnishing of
Horses, or the carrying and transporting of their Ammunition, Provision, and
Baggage at this time, when the Country is Invaded by Barbarous Papists, joined
with Intestine Rebels, that they shall be proceeded against to the outmost
extremity of Law. And Ordain these Presents to be Published at the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and at the Mercat-Crosses of Perth, Forfar, and other
Mercat-Crosses needful beyond the Water of Tay. Extracted by me

GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of His Majesty's
Privy Council, Anno Dom. 1689.


