A PROCLAMATION Ordering the whole Militia benorth the River of Forth, to be in
readiness with fifteen days Provision, when called out, etc.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as severals of the Inhabitants of the Western and Southern Shires,
of this Our ancient Kingdom, notwithstanding of the great Peace, Tranquillity
and Plenty, wherewith GOD has blessed them, under Our Royal Government, the
Justice, and Equity of Our Administrations, and of Our great care of preserving
the Protestant Religion, in its Truth and Purity; Have at several times; and on
several occasions, not only moved Sedition, and run into many irregular, and
illegal Tumults, but likewise, having casten off all Fe^r of GOD, all Duty to
Us, all Affection to their native Country, and all Regard to the Laws, Divine
and Humane, did, at diverse times, rise in open Rebellion, and to that height of
Boldness and Impiety, that they have, by Open Force, Attackt Our Armies,
Disclaimed Our Royal Authority, Excommunicate Our Sacred Person, and did as far
as in them (...) throw these happy Nations into the Miseries of War and Ruin;
by so much the more dreadful then former Rebellions, that these who carried on
the recent Seditions, have far outdone all others, in demonstrating, the
Villainies of their Principles, by their Practices; and have at length come to
these hights of Wickedness, the Blasphemy, Treason, Assassination, Murders and
Robberies are owned by them, as the highest Principles of their Religion, and
the best practice of their Morals; And albeit GOD in his great Mercy has
blessed Our Government with such Success, that both by the force of Our Arms,
and the regular Procedors of Our Judges, their Attempts have been on all
occasions Defeat, and many of their persons brought to condign punishment: Yet
so far has their Execrable Principles transported them, that neither these
Judgments of GOD, the severity of Our Laws, the steddiness of Our Justice, nor
the many reiterated Acts of Our unparalelled Clemency, prevailed so far as to
bring them to Duty: But on the contrary, as they were obdure^, to their utter
destruction, severals of them do continue to own publicly their Hellish
Principles, and upon all opportunities, to practice their Abominable Murders
and Assassinations upon our good Subjects: And finding likewise, to Our great
regrate, that People guilty of such Principles, and Practices, are not only not
pursued by the Inhabitant of the Shires where they appear, but to the
astonishment of all good men, are Concealed, Harbored, Entertained and
Comforted, contrary to what Law and Duty required of all Our Subjects; and
which being so dangerous to Religion, Government, the public Peace, the Lives
and Fortunes of Our People, that it is not consistent with Our Justice or
Honor, not to use the utmost Remedies against so inveterat and pernicious
Mischiefs. And We having resolved to employ Our Royal Power to these ends, by
these Methods and Procedurs, which has been formerly used by Our Royal
Predecessors, on all such occasions, Do therefore by this Our Royal
Proclamation, Command and Charge all the Officers of Our Militia, both Horse
and Foot, benorth the River of Forth to put themselves, and all under their
Command, in present readiness, with fifteen days provision, well Armed, and
sitted for Our Service, to march whither We, or those Commissionated by Us,
shall direct them, on six days Warning. And that all Commissioners of Excise
supply, and Militia give all speedy and possible Concurrance, for promoting
this Our Service, as they will be answerable at their highest peril. And
ordains these Presents to be Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and
all Other Market Crosses of the Shires of this Kingdom, and to be Read by the
several Ministers from their respective Pulpits, immediately after Divine
Service in all their Churches upon a Sabbath day, that all persons concerned
may have notice thereof; The which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and
severally, Our full Power, by this Our Letters, delivering them by you, duly
execute, and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty and second day of July, One
thousand six hundred and eighty four. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and six
Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1684.


