A FAITHFUL ACCOUNT OF THE SICKNESS, DEATH, and BURIAL OF Capt. William Bedlow,
Who Dyed August the 20th. and was Buried August the 22 d.1680. With many other
Circumstances thereunto Relating. Taken from the Testimony of his Wife, and
many other of his Friends who constantly attended him in his Sickness.
In a Letter from an Intelligent Person in Bristol, to his Friend in London.
SIR, Bristol Aug. 23. 1680.
MY Obligations to your self, and desire of securing Truth from the Out: rages
of ill men, especially when the Public is concerned, have prevailed with me to
give you a short Account of the Sickness and Death of Captain Bedlow. On Monday
the 9th. day of this Instant, he came very ill from London, having the
Headache, and an extreme Looseness most part of that day, the next day after he
came home, he was seized with a most violent Vomiting and Looseness; Physicians
were sent for, who attended him two or three days; but his Distemper
increasing, on Thursday two other Physicians were joined in Consultation about
him; his disease still grew upon him, and he being very apprehensive that it
would issue in his Death, and understanding that the Lord Chief Justice North
would be here to hold the Assizes the 16th instant, expressed a very great
desire to speak with his Lordship for discharging of his Conscience, in
deposing some what which he had not before disclosed; with which his Lordship
being made acquainted, was pleased that night at his request to go to him;
before whom he did by many repeated Asseverations, upon the words of a dying
man, declare, That in all the great business of the P^ot he spoke nothing
against any person upon Oath, or otherwise by way of Accusation but what was
true; and only complained that he had been two timorous, and rather lessened
his Evidence in some particulars.

After some short time the company were desired to withdraw; and none being
left with him but the Lord Chief Justice, Capt. Bedlow's Wife, and the Judges
Clerk; My Lord gave the said Mr. Bedlow his Oath, and his Clerk took a pretty
long Deposition in Writing, the contents whereof are yet secret; only thus far
we know he made Oath, that whatsoever he had declared to the King and Council,
and the Secret Committee, and at the several Trials upon Oath, were all true,
upon the word of a dying man. He told the Judge he expected no Crown of
Martyrdom for Lying as the Papists did, but what he said was sincerely true, as
he was shortly to appear before the Great Jehovah, the maker of all flesh,
where he should stand with a clear Conscience as to all matters of the Plot,
wherein he had given Evidence He said moreover to the Judge: My Lord! some will
not believe the Plot, or pretend it at least.! My Lord I speak the more because
I know not but that I may dye this night: He very often said to my Lord Chief
Justice with great earnestness, My Lord! I pity the King! I pity the King! His
Life is in danger! they will poison or Cut Him off! they are going toward it!
they are Carrying on the Plot! the Papists will kill Him! When my Lord was
going away, he called him back again, took him by the hand, and begged him to
present his most humble Duty to the King, and to tell him he was His most Loyal
and Dutiful Subject, and to beseech him to take care of Himself.

Tuesday the 17th of August toward the Evening, he appeared worse then he had
been all his sickness before; some about him asked him several Questions about
his Deposition; he replied, He was a very weak man, and would talk no more of
Temporal things.

Wednesday night he had a severe Fit, through the violence of which, be spoke
not for the space of 14 hours, or there about. Thursday in the evening his
speech returned to him, and he took some refreshment, and asked those about him
what day of the Month it was? and what hour of the Day, exactly? One standing
by, asked him if he were satisfied in his Conscience as to what he had sworn
and acted in the public business he had been involed in? His Answer was, That
as he hoped for Salvation, all that he had Sworn about the Plot was just and
true, and that he had rather omitted, than augmented any thing he had given in
Evidence. This he spoke the night before he dyed, and after he had been in a
Trance several hours.

Friday the 20th of August Instant, his Speech failed him again, and returned
no more; and about Two of the Clock that afternoon he expired.

Yesterday being Sunday, after he had been publicly exposed in
Merchant-Taylors Hall, in this City, to the vi^w of all spectators; his Corpse
was carried thence about Six of the Clock in the Evening, and buried in the
Mayors Chapel, called the Gaunts: the Funeral was attended with a very
numerous Company of Citizens, both Men and Women. Mr. Mayor, and others of the
best Quality being present, several Gentlemen of the Council, and others
bearing up the Pall. The Church was hung with black. Mr. Palmer, a Reverend and
Learned Divine of this City, Preached an excellent Sermon at his Funeral, on
Romans 14 v. 12, 13. So then every one of us shall give an account of himself to
God, Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that
no man put a stombling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. The
were Escutcheons fixed to the Hearse, with this Inscription black Letters in a
Field-Argent: Testimonium quod vivens Exhibuit
Moriens constanter Obfirmava!


Thus you have a plain and just Relation of the Death and Buria^ of Captain
William Bedlow. The loss of so considerable an Evidence to the King and Kingdom
is greatly to be deplored: But if you revolve seriously upon the manner of his
Death: and his exact temper and deportment through the whole series of his
sickness, you will find reason to believe, that Sampson like he has Triumphed
even in Death, over the Popish Conspirators, and been as formidable in his sick
bed, as formerly in the Courts of Justice; the strong Asseverations he left
behind him in vindication of his Evidence, has raised it to the highest
Reputation. It seems to me, as if Providence found it necessary in this
stubborn and unbelieving age, to use extraordinary methods to evince the World
of the truth of the Bloody and Hellish Plot. And therefore to the clear and
uncontrollable Evidence tha^ has been given viva voce, and by Original Letters
under the Conspirators own hands, God has now superadded one Argument more to
convince us, by making one of the Witnesses seal the discover with his last
breath, and dye, giving repeated Evidence against th^^ Plot. I am,

SIR, Your humble Servant, T. S.

Reprinted.


