The Sincere Popish Convert: Or, a brief Account of the REASONS WHICH Induced a
Person who was some Years since seduced to the ROMISH CHVRCH, to relinquish Her
Communion, and return into the Bosom of the Church of England. WHEREIN THE Holy
Scriptures Are clearly proved to contain all things which are necessary to be
Believed and Practiced by Christians, in order to their Salvation; and are
justly Vindicated from those odious Imputations, which the Papists profanely
cast upon them. WITH An Epistle to the Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet,
Dean of St. Paul's.

I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth,

Act. 26.9. He is not joined to the Church, who is departed from the Gospel.

S. Cypr. de Lapsis. LONDON: Printed by J. Grover, and are to be sold by Norman
Nelson at Gray's- Inn-gate. 1681.

TO THE Right Reverend and Honorable HENRY LORD BISHOP of LONDON, Dean of His
Majesty's Chapel, and one of his most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Have some Years since met with a Prophecy (and many talk of such things at
this Time) which may yield a little Comfort in this Day of our Visitation. The
Original it self I have not seen: but it is taken out of Telesphorus de
Tribulat. and thus cited by Dr. John White: Antichristus non poterit subjugare
Venetias, nec Parisios, nec Civitatem Regalem Angliae.

The Memorable Baffle that the Venetians gave to Paul the Fifth; the frequent
Picqueering of the Sorbon with the same See, may in part Justify: But the
Wonderful Preservations, both Ancient and Modern, of this Kingdom and
Metropolis, from the Restless Attempts of many of that Faction, will, I hope,
Evince its Probability.

How Instrumental your Lordship has been toward that Security and Happiness
we yet Enjoy, how Indefatigable your Pains, how Undaunted your Courage in the
most Critical Conjunctures, is with Gratitude and Applause proclaimed to the
World, not only by your own Large and Numerous Flock, but by the Loud
Acclamations of the Whole Nation. And though I never was so fortunate as to be
an Eyewitness of those Heroic Virtues which daily Influence Your Charge,
rendering You so Amiable to the Churches Friends, and at the same time so
Formidable to her Enemies: yet that Universal Character which is every where
given of You, engages me to look on you as no less than a Person in whom
Concentre those Requisites, which some Critics in Morality (how justly I
dispute not) have exacted to make up a Complete Christian. They are these: The
Orthodox Faith and Loyalty of a true English Protestant; the Zeal and Good
Works of a Roman Catholic; the Gracious Words and Painful Preaching of a
Puritan. And all these Inculcated by your Life, as well as Injunctions on your
most Learned and Religious Clergy.

But I must remember my self at the Judges Bar, and not at the Heralds Office;
and that this Paper attends You as a Petition, and not as a Panegyric. Your
most Gracious Approbation of my Desires (intimated to you by the Reverend Dean
of St. Paul's) Invites the one; as Your undoubted Worth and Honor Extorts the
other.

Vouchsafe then, my Lord, to Accept into the Arms of your Noble Charity what is
penned purely with a Spirit of Charity. They are such Reflections as Reclaimed
my self, and may, with Gods blessing, contribute to the Reducing of some
others, as unwarily misled as I was.

To which purpose, I endeavor Brevity and Perspicuity: designing this
Discourse for the Vulgar, (the Learned have richer Mines to recurr to) and
therefore waving that Accurateness of Method and Expression, which Your
Lordships Judicious Eye may expect; but neither my Intent, the present
Affliction I lie under, the unsettledness of my Affairs, nor Absence from my
Books (all which afford not that Tranquillum Scribentis and otia) will admit.

However, when all Athens was Busy and in Motion, the Cynick for Company would
needs roll about his Tub. And, if so obscure a Person as my self, intrude into
the Crowd of those Many Able Contenders for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, which daily almost appear upon the Stage; I have St. Augustines Advice
for my Apology. De Trinit. l. 3. c. 3. In places infected with Heresy, all men
should write, that have any faculty therein, though it were the same thing in
other words: that all sorts of People, among many Books, might light upon some;
and the Enemy in all places might find one or other to encounter him.

Besides, I thought this the best Expedient, Publicly to testify my Sincere
Reunion to that Church in which I received my Baptism and Education; and how
faithfully I am, and resolve by Gods Grace to continue,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant T. S.

AN EPISTLE From a Late Roman Catholic To the Very Reverend Dr. EDWARD
STILLINGFLEET Dean of St. Paul's, etc.
Very Reverend and Honored Sir,
THough I am not altogether Ignorant of your Person, yet my chief Acquaintance
is with those Learned Works of Yours, (the best Representative) wherewith you
have enriched this Age, obliged the Church of England, and (I speak it
experimentally) given the greatest Satisfaction to ingenious Minds, that sober
and unaffected Reason (I do not mean such stuff as Mr. White's and Mr.
Serjeant's Demonstrations) can possibly perform.

And thus, Sir, I have been your most intimate Friend and Servant these seven
or eight years.

All which space I have been a very attentive Spectator of your famous
Encounters, and to my Comfort seen single Truth and modest Reason combat with
whole Troops of Old, Subtle, Confident, Choleric, and I may add, Malicious
Adversaries, And I hope I shall have Cause to bless God to all Eternity, and
thank you for so Glorious a Sight. But before I return my full Acknowledgments
to you, I must crave Leave to give you a Short but True Narrative: only be
pleased not to believe it (as you style Mr. Cressey's) a Legend of my self.

I had my Education in one of the chiefest Free-Schooles in London, under the
Care of a very able Instructor, and by him was fitted for the University. But
about a year before my advancing thither, it happened that an ancient Gentleman
came frequently to divert himself in a Walk that was near the School, and so
took Occasion to discourse with diverse of the Lads: I being the Head of the
School at that time, he pretended a particular Complacency (though I know not
why) in my self. He never conferred about any Point in Religion, but still
entertained me with speaking Latin, which he did very fluently and politely:
and his constant Discourse was about the rare Method of Education used beyond
Sea, the great Number of their Students, the Diligence of their Tutors, the
Exactness of their Discipline, and much more to the like Effect. What this
Conversation would have produced at last, I know not. But the chief Master of
the School perceiving me often with him, at last forbad me his Company, and
told me he shrewdly suspected the Gentleman to be a Jesuit. And I remember he
instanced in some particular sly ways those Persons used to Entice and Spirit
away Youths, whom they judged fit for their Employment.

So this Correspondence broke off, and I never had more to do with him. However
I must confess that much of his Discourse did recoil upon my Childish Fancy a
long time after. And though within a short while I went to Cambridge, viz. in
the year 1658. yet my mind was not quiet: and those stupendous Distractions
both of Church and State that immediately followed, did infinitely add to my
Perplexity.

Then happened his Majesty's happy Restoration: which being as it were a year
of Jubilee, no wonder if the younger sort of the University did take the
Benefit of the Indulgence: I mean Indulgere Genio, and use some Liberties,
which at other times the strictness of an Academical Life would not have
permitted. Here likewise I acknowledge I swam with the Stream, and did not so
seriously mind those Affairs I was designed for by my Friends, and so fell into
those Inconveniences, which, not long after my having proceeded Bachelor of
Art, induced me to leave the University.

Coming up to London I light into the Company of an ancient Acquaintance, and
among other Discourses we at last fell upon Religion. The Gentlewoman adjured
me by no small Considerations to advise well what I fixed upon, and likewise
to recurr to some able Person of her Persuasion, which was that of the
Roman Catholics.

Hereupon I was introduced to one of the most Grave, Subtle, and Acute Fathers
then in the Nation (one whose Works I perceive you are not wholly a Stranger
to,) I mean F. Fran. a S. Clara: with whose winning discourse I was extremely
taken, and to whose extraordinary Civilities I must always account my self
extraordinarily obliged.

You cannot be long in Suspense concerning the Issue of this Interview. He who
had triumphed over so many Persons of Honor and Quality, Clergy and Laity,
(witness among the rest, Dr. G. Bishop of Gloucester) might easily baffle such
a young Stripling as my self, and soon dazzle my Eyes with the glittering
Pretenses of Infallibility, Antiquity, Unity, Universality, Succession,
Councils, Fathers, Saints, Miracles, Religious Orders, etc. These, with the
Example of several learned men, Converts of our own Nation, as Dr. Baily, Vane,
Carrier, Cressey, Walsingham, Montague, Crashaw, with many others yet living
and therefore nameless, were, I then thought, too great a Cloud of Witnesses
for my single Wit either to oppose or so much as question.

And now, Sir, you may easily guess what became of me. For about nine or ten
years I was wholly immured up, forced to comply with and swallow every thing;
durst not propose any Scruples for fear of being suspected Heretically
inclined, And thus I continued till the latter end of the year 1671. At which
time, by Gods great Mercy I got some respite to reflect upon what I had done in
revolting from the Church of England, and engaging with one, the ignorance of
whose Proselytes is often made Use of for something more than bare Devotion.

Since that Time, I take God to witness, I have most impartially surveyed all
the several Writers I could procure on both sides; but especially your own
Books, Dr. Tillotson's, and Dr. Lloyd's. (To both whom, I beseech you, in my
name to tender my most humble Thanks for that Great Satisfaction I have reaped
by their Writings, especially The Rule of Faith.) And, I assure you, I found
the Infallible Principles so shaken by those Solid and Learned Treatises, and
my self so intrigued by my own Experience of the Juggling Practices of some
Persons most cried up for Perfection, that neither Father Bellarmine (for as
you well observe, amidst that great boast that is made of Fathers, He is the
Great Father with most of our Neoterick Controvertists) nor Dr. T. G. nor Mr.
Cressey, nor Mr. Sergeant himself, who speaks nothing but Scientifical Oracles,
could Unblunder my thoughts: (that I may not wholly forsake the Rhetoric of my
old Friends.)

And this has been the true state of my Soul for several years, just like S.
James's (...), unconstant in his ways. For, what with the Terror of that
Theological Scarecrow, Schism, on the one hand; with the Flattery of an
acknowledged possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church on the other (though
the Dean of Canterbury's Sermon on that Subject has now perfectly cleared me)
I was still detained in a Communion with that Church, which I conceived to hold
all the Fundamentals of Christianity. To which (to acknowledge something of
Humane frailty) I may add the Advantages I enjoyed, and the Damages I should
unavoidably incurr, by quitting a Party, whose Inveterate and Implacable Malice
toward a Deserter, though upon the strongest Convictions of Conscience, is
sufficiently known, and particularly taken notice of by the aforementioned
Reverend and Learned Author, in his Discourse on that of the Gospel, There is
joy in Heaven over one Sinner, etc. and I my self have already begun to
experiense from some, from whom I neither expected nor deserved it. To omit
that Innate Reluctance, well nigh in All, of Recanting a Committed Error.
Though these were but Diffieulties of the Second Rate.

Yet at last those Desperate Practices whereof many of that Party stand
suspected, and some indicted, made me resolve to break through all Obstacles,
and publicly declare my Detestation of their Actions, by Renouncing their
Communion, and Protesting against those Principles and Doctrines (as is evident
in the most General Council of Lateran, and others, seconded by the undeniable
Practice of many Popes, in Actual Deposing of Princes, and Disposing of
Kingdoms) which, it is to be feared, had but too much Influence on such
Traitorous Designs.

This Tenent of a Foreign Power, either Direct in Spirituals, or Indirect in
Temporals, is most manifestly inconsistent with the Peace and Safety of our
English Nation; and till it be Renounced or Disabled, we shall never be free
from Jealousies and Fears.

There is another Point of as Fatal Consequence to Common Conversation, as the
former to the Public Government, and that is the Trick of Equivocation, or
Refined Art of Lying. I will not say it is a Doctrine of the Roman Church; but
I know it to be both the Doctrine and Practice of a Leading Party in that
Church; and never, as I ever yet heard of, was it yet Censured by the Church it
self; no more than the Deposing Doctrine, and other such like Hellish Maxims
have been disowned.

Of this Latter I had a famous Instance not long since: A known Jesuit being
apprehended in a Neighboring Town, upon the Interrogatories put to him by the
Magistrate, he denied himself to be a Priest, protested he was a Married man,
had Wife and Children. And all this was salved by that pitiful Evasion (you
know the shift of the Crucifix in the Sleeve used at China) That his Breviary
was his Wife, and his Penitents his Spiritual Children. This was a very great
Scandal to all that heard of it, both Protestants and Romanists; and for my own
part, I was so Concerned in it, that I writ expressly to my old Learned Friend
F. Fran. a S. Clara, to be satisfied. Who, quite contrary to my Expectation
(and which has much diminished the Esteem I had for him) gave we this Answer
in Writing; That he had done nothing amiss, nor misbeseeming an Honest man. Nay
then, thought I, the Good Lord open our Eyes! And, to deal plainly with you,
from that very Moment I have been very much unsatisfied, whether the Roman
Principles be safe to Dye in: much less to Ruin Estates, and Dye for.

Thus, Sir, being very timorous of diverting your many Weighty Employments, I
have given you a Clear, Faithful, and Succinct Account of my self. And so now,
Laqueus contritus est, etc. The Snare is broken, and we are escaped. My
remaining Business is, as speedily as I can procure it, to be received into the
Bosom of my ancient Mother the Church of England, whom with unfeigned
Contrition of heart, I acknowledge to have forsaken before I throughtly
understood: and purpose, by Gods help, to Evidence to the World, that I have
far more Considerable Motives to return, than I had to Wander. And though I
shall not make such a noise as Those who have Published Exomologeses,
Challenges, etc. yet I hope I shall make it appear, that the Change I now make,
is done upon the maturest Deliberation, backed by the most earnest Imploring of
the Divine Assistance.

About five years since, it was my hap, at the Instance of a Person of Quality,
who had Considerable Sums to Dispose of, to publish a Small Tract entitled,
The Case of Interest, or Usury, as to the Common Practice, examined in a Letter
to the same Person. It is the only Piece I ever yet penned: and I mention it,
that if you please you may perceive, that I always proceeded upon Principles
of Honesty, Conscience, and Moderation; and even then had an Honorable Regard
for the Church of England. But, Good Lord! what Outcries were then made against
it by the Jesuitical Party, who looked on it as purposely written to affront
their Trade! what Excommunications threatened by others! So you may easily
foresee what I am to expect, when I disingage my self of the Promise I just now
made you. But a Good God, a Good Cause, and a Good Conscience, will, I question
not, carry me through all.

It is no small Comfort to me, when I think how that Vast Wit, Mr.
Chilling-worth, could not escape those very Snares that I have been entangled
with. And I presume it may serve as an Apology for the Slips and Failings of my
Weak Intellectuals, when such a Great Master of Reason as He, was for a time
led Captive. Yet at last, he most happily Discovered and Proved The Protestant
Religion a Safe way to Salvation.

Those whom I forsake have a Tradition (as indeed they have too many) That none
ever Retire from their Communion, but they presently become depraved in their
Morals. (If they mean the Jesuits Morals, it is no great Matter) I have no
ways to Confute them fully, but as Diogenes did Zeno, by Walking: viz. with a
Conscience void of Offense both toward God and Man. And if they shall, after
their Charitable Method, think to bespatter me for any thing past; I have such
Public, Authentic and Late Testimonies under Hand and Seal from the Chief
among them, of my Comportment (though I will not disown the Allayes of Common
Frailties and Imperfections) that shall be able to Silence the most Impudent
Calumny.

But I fear I have already trespassed upon your Patience; and I must referr
what else I had to propose, till such time I am so happy (and truly till then,
I shall neither be happy nor satisfied) as to see you. Many Doubts I have to
Object, fitter to be committed to a Ghostly Father's Ear, than to Paper: and
many Particulars there are, wherein I may perhaps gratify your own Curiosity.
But, having been so long a Romanist, and being still a Reputed one, I should he
loath that Disobedience to Royal Proclamations (however they have been slighted
by some) should be the first fruits of my Conversion. And therefore I must
patiently attend that good hour, when I may satisfy both my Obedience and my
Inclinations together.

In your Conference with Sir P. T. and Mr. Coleman (that Wretched man, who, had
he meddled with nothing but what he then pretended himself so desirous to be
resolved in, had never come to that sad Catastrophe) you express so much
Candor, Meekness, Christian Zeal and Charity for Satisfying those Dissenters,
who in reality did nothing but shuffle with you; that it emboldens me to
Address a Request to you (besides my Thanks, which most Cordially I do by these
Presents.) viz. That because I apprehend Danger from some of those I
relinquish, having already tasted a little of their kindness that way; and
because I would not long remain in an Vnfix'd, Neutral posture; you would be
pleased to procure leave that I might come up to London, where I may attend
you, and both Give and Receive all desired Satisfaction possible. I know you so
Eminent, that you may procure a License. This would Complete my Felicity: and
as for your own Reward, besides the Complacency you take in the very
Performance of such Charitable Offices, I can but referr you to that of St.
James, cap. and v. ult. Brethren, if any of you do err from the Truth, and one
Convert him: Let him know, that he who converteth a Sinner from the Error of
his ways, shall save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins.

There is one Cavil I must needs remove, and it is this: How chances this
Change just now? why in this present Conjuncture? It is to be suspected you act
more out of Fear than Conscience. This Surmise I insinuated before, and partly
adverted to it But more particularly I have these things to offer in Reply:

I might, ad hominem, put the Objectors in Mind how Dr. Vane, Mr. Cressey, and
others forsook the Church of England, when it was in a very low, persecuted
Condition: and were not ashamed in their Writings to intimate as much. For one
of the Motives of their withdrawing was, that She never had been well grounded,
and therefore God seemed to forsake her, and Lopt off her Head: with much more
to the same Purpose; as is particularly to be seen in Dr. Bailey's End to
Controversy. But I scorn such Disingenuous, Mean-spirited Principles. And I
desire that they would withal consider that the Church of England was then
reduced to those Exigences for her constant and never blemished Loyalty.
Whereas diverse of themselves now stand charged with something else besides
Idolatry and Phanaticisme.

But to answer for once and all; I confess I do it out of Fear; not of any
temporal Incommodity; for that might several other ways be avoided: but of
having Fellowship with any of those horrid Works of Darkness, whereof many of
its Professors, and the Religion it self are accused. And this may serve for my
old Friends.

Now as for your self and all other candid disinterested Persons, I know it
will be satisfactory to put you in mind, that to impute my Proceedings to the
frowning of the Times on that Party, is Fallacia non Causae pro Causa: a
Mistake of the Adjunct or Circumstance of Time, for the Principal Motive. The
Conversion of a Sinner is the Work of Omnipotence; who as he is most free in
all his Actions ad Extra; so especially in the reclaiming of a strayed Sheep.
He is no ways tied up to the Circumstances of Whom, How, Where or When. Nescit
tarda Molimina Spiritus Sancti Gratia, says S. Bernard. And if he were
graciously pleased more effectually to touch my Heart now, than at any other
time (and times of Affliction are his especial Seasons. Afflictio dat
Intellectum. Cum Occideret eos etc.) I know no other Account can be given of it
than that of our B. Savior, Even so Father, for so it seemed Good in thy
Sight. Nay I have before demonstrated that these Thoughts have been long
hovering in my Mind, though perhaps they had not been altogether so suddenly
declared, but out of a deep Resentment of the Dangers of any further neglecting
the Divine Call: and a seasonable Desire to Testify to the World my perfect
Abhorrence of such desperate Practices and Principles, which I am convinced are
pernicious both to Public Polity and Civil Society. And I hope none can
reasonably be angry, that I have gained more Experience now I am thirty six
years old, than I had when I was but twenty.

These are the Principal Matters I thought worth your Knowledge at present,
wherein I protest before God and Man, that I have no other Design but the Quiet
of my Conscience, and the Salvation of my Soul. And when I have given a public
Tolerable Account of this Affair, I will take my leave of this Noble Science of
Controversy (as Mr. Sergeant calls it) having always been more addicted to
Ascetick Theology; and sit down with Divine Anselm's Resolution, Quid restat
per Totam Vitam meam, nisi ut Defleam Totam Vitam meam? Crosses and Afflictions
are no more than I expect and deserve, having hitherto been so little
acquainted with them. The Wise man has read my Doom to me, Fili, accedens ad
servitutem Dei, praepara Animum tuum ad Tentationem.

As for the sincerity of my Resolutions, I can but Appeal to that Great
Searcher of Hearts and Tryer of Reins. And though some Folk talk of
Dispensations from Rome for the taking All Oaths, and Complying with All
Externals: and no meaner a Person than the Author of the Difference between the
Church and Court of Rome, out of Archbishop Spotswood's History, mentions some
such like thing practiced in Scotland: yet, with submission to the Learned
Author, I conceive there is no such matter: since the Pope himself could never
be induced to Approve even the single Oath of Allegiance; but expressly
condemned it, and severely prohibited the taking of it, as containing, says
he, diverse Points contrary to Salvation. And moreover, put case any thing of
that nature were in Being; I here solemnly Avow, that I disown all such
Pretended Authority.

One Circumstance, not very Material I confess (but I would not too much swerve
from the Accurate Exactness of Writers of Epistles Apologetical: though Mr.
Cressey observe it in the Beginning, and I in the Conclusion) must not be
forgotten; and thus it is: To you above all Persons living, I have an
Obligation to recurr in Spiritual Concerns; for I am your Parishioner: Holborn
having been the place of my Nativity. I have nothing more, but with all Respect
and Gratitude to assure you I am

Reverend and Honored Sir, Your most obliged and Humble Servant T. S.
December 15. 1678.
Several Weighty CONSIDERATIONS Humbly Recommended To the Serious Perusal of
ALL: especially the Roman Catholics of England.
IT is a very good Rule prescribed by some Spiritual Writers, That in Converse,
we should rather discourse of Things, than Persons. And I intend, as much as
the Matter will permit, to observe it in this subsequent Treatise; carefully
avoiding all personal Reflections, especially upon such as are living; and
shall only bring some Doctrines and Practices to the Test, which, though they
pass for current with many, will yet be found adulterate and contrary to Holy
Scripture, the best Genuine Antiquity, and Right Reason: highly scandalous to
the Christian Religion in General, destructive of Civil Government, fatal to
Humane Society, and very pernicious both to the Spiritual and Temporal Concerns
of the Practisers even in their private Capacity.

In short, I shall very plainly and briefly endeavor to make good two
Assertions: 1. That there is no sufficient Ground for any one to forsake the
Communion of the Church of England, and incorporate with that of Rome. 2. That
there is all Reason imaginable both for such as have been educated in the Roman
Communion, to Reform; and for such as have unwarily engaged with her, to Return.


This was the happy Result of these following Considerations upon my own Heart:
And it shall be my Prayer that they may have the same Blessed Effect in the
impartial Perusers of them.

The sacred Oracles of the Holy Scriptures deservedly Command our first Inquiry.

We have Cardinal Bellarmine's own Concession, that in the grand Question of
the Church, the Scripture is better known than the Church. Consequently then,
not only her Authority but her very Being must be subordinate to it. And
therefore in the first place let us see what Sentiments the Church of England
has of these Heavenly Records, and whether Hers, or those of the Roman Church
be more Consonant to Pure Antiquity, Reason, and Holy Writ it self.

All Protestants, and particularly the Church of England, Artic. 6. look upon
the Holy Scriptures to contain all things necessary to Salvation; so that
whatever is not read in them, or cannot be proved from them, is not to be
Imposed on any, to be received as an Article of Faith, or a Necessary Requisite
to Salvation. Whence it appears, that they take Them to be the Only, Complete,
and Adequate Rule both of Faith and Life: sufficiently intelligible and easy
in matters that concern what is simply necessary to make us Good and Happy.

They consequently hold, that since Holy Scripture is the Rule of our Faith, it
must have an exact Proportion to that, whereof it is a Rule. So that Matters of
Faith are not to be extended beyond this Rule, nor can any unwritten Traditions
any way be pretended to appertain to the Substance of Faith.

Moreover, the Rule being the Idea, Model and great Exemplar of what is
regulated by it, it is in order of Nature before the thing so regulated. And if
the word of God be antecedent of Faith it self, it must likewise precede the
Faithful themselves; and if the Faithful, then must it have Pre-eminence before
the Church it self, which is nothing else but the Congregation of the Faithful.
Thus the Church of Rome will evidently fall short of that Prerogative she so
presumptuously arrogates, of being both Before, and Above the Scripture.

Again, a Rule consisting in Indivisibili, as we say, i. e. being of that
Nature that it is not to be enlarged or diminished; how guilty are they who
either make Additions to, or Substractions from it? Both which the Roman Church
practices, as de facto will be manifest in the Sequel of this small Tract.

In Fine they hold the Word of God written, to be that one, infallible, entire
Rule, whereby all men, Learned and Unlearned, may in all necessary and
fundamental Points of Faith and Manners be sufficiently instructed what is to
be embraced for True and Good: That it is a Rule most Certain, Plain,
Universal, Impartial, not addicted to one Side more than another: (which
neither Pope, Conclave nor Council can so much as pretend to) of Power and
Authority able to convince the Consciences of such as use it, and from which
there can be no Appeal. And the only Cause why any miss of the True Faith, is,
because they do not sincerely seek and find out this infallible Rule; or having
found it, will not with an obedient Mind captivate their Understanding, but
have Access to it with Pride, Curiosity, Prejudice, or some other unmortifyed
Lust or Impediment.

More especially the Church of England, besides that high Veneration that she
her self has for these sacred Books, labors to confirm and root the same in
the Hearts of her obedient Children, by her Devout Practice. For, to omit the
Frequent, Laborious and Judicious Preaching and Expounding of them in this
Church; she has so prudently disposed of her public Liturgy, that every day
some Part and Portion of both Testaments is appointed to be read: The whole
Book of Psalms is gone through once a Month, the Old Testament once, and the
New thrice every year; with other most excellent Exercises of Piety; (at which
even the Romanists themselves can take no just Exception; and a very great
Author affirms, that a modern Pope would have approved the whole Service Book,
had his Authority but been acknowledged) which discreet Course cannot but
afford much heavenly Instruction and Consolation to the constant Attenders on
such Blessed Opportunities.

But what says the Church of Rome all this while in this Business? In her
Tridentine Council, Sess. 4. Can. 1. She expressly Decrees, that unwritten
Traditions are of equal Authority with the written Word; that they are to be
received with the same Reverence and Affection. And Cardinal Hosius, who was
one who in the Popes Name presided at that Council, defends that most
Blasphemous Speech of Wolfangus Hermannus, that the Scripture is of no more
Authority than Esop's Fables, but for the Churches and Popes Approbation, lib.
3. de Authorit. Script. The Council of Basil would fain persuade us that the
Churches Acts and Customs must be to us instead of the Scriptures, (Instar
habeant Sacrarum Scripturarum) for that the Scripture and Churches Customs both
require the same Affection and Respect.

Indeed I find the Romish Doctors in nothing more fluent than in degrading and
vilifying the Scriptures. Our Country man, Dr. Stapleton, positively affirms,
that the Church has Authority to put into the Number of Books of Scripture,
and to make Canonical the Writings of Hermes and Constitutions of Clemens (two
famous Counterfeits) and that then they would have the same Authority which
other Books have, canonized by the Apostles themselves. Some call them a Nose
of Wax, to be wrested any way. Cardinal Cusanus blushes not to write that the
Scriptures are fitted to the time, and variously understood; the sense thereof
being one while this, and another while that, according as it pleases the
Church to change her Judgment. Some teach that the Scripture is not simply
necessary, that God gave it not to the People but to the Doctors and Pastors;
and that we must live more according to the Dictates of the Church, than the
Scripture. Eckius, the great Antagonist of Luther, would make us believe that
Christ never gave any Command to his Apostles, to write any thing. Which yet
seems very odd, when such an express Injunction was laid on S. John to write
that mystical Book of the Apocalypse, which certainly is not more conducing to
the Churches Edification than our B. Savior's Sermon on the Mount, and the
many other practical Discourses both of himself and his Disciples. In a word,
the most ingenuous and civil among their Writers think they have paid all due
Respect to Holy writ, when they term it a Dumb Judge, Dead Ink, or Ink shaped
into various Forms and Characters. Notwithstanding which I humbly conceive,
that let an Indifferent Person open the Bible and the Canons of the Council of
Trent together, and he will receive at least as clear and full Satisfaction
from the Bible, as from the other; unless we will impiously deny Almighty God
the Faculty of expressing his holy Will and Pleasure as intelligibly as frail
Men can theirs: or without any show of Reason affirm with a late Divine, that
Religion it self was never fully settled till that upstart Conventicle.

Conformable to the Sentiments are the Practices of that Church, in keeping the
Bible locked up in an Unknown Tongue from the Use of the Vulgar.

Clement the Eighth very strictly orders all Vulgar Translations to be put into
the Index of Prohibited Books. And in Italy and Spain, and wherever the
Inquisition has the least Jurisdiction, the very keeping of them is a Crime no
less than Capital.

It is true, where the Reformation has got any footing, Faculties are
sometimes granted to read a Translation; but clogged with so many Proviso's and
various Cautions, and their Spiritual Guides give so small Encouragement to it,
that it seems rather a Trick to stop the Mouths of their Adversaries, when
they Object the Prohibition of Reading Scripture, than any real Intention of
Promoting so Pious an Exercise among their Devotes. Besides, their other Forms
of Devotion, Rosaries, or saying over the Beads after diverse Methods, our
Ladies Office, Prayers for the Dead, Manuals, the long Litanies of Saints,
hearing of Masses, reading of Legends, etc. are in so great Vogue, and take up
so considerable a Time, that I scarce see how any can be allotted for that
contemned Employment of studying Gods Word: which ought to be the Meditation of
every good Christian Day and Night. Indeed this neglect (to say no worse) of
Holy Scripture is so notorious among, and so peculiar to those of that Way, and
the Ignorance not only of the Laity but of diverse of the Clergy in that kind of
Learning especially, is so gross, that it would be a Work of Supererogation to
attempt the proof of it: Their Doctors generally pretending Translations of
Scripture to be the cause of all Heresies and Phanaticism. Nay, I have met with
one so frantic, that he thinks it was the Devils invention to permit the
people to read the Bible. Martin. Peers. de Tradit. And I remember Thyrraeus de
Daemoniac. c. 21. says, that thence he knew certain Persons to be possessed by
the Devil, because being but Husbandmen they were able to discourse concerning
Scripture.

We will now see what Holy Writ it self, untainted Antiquity, and unprejudiced
Reason allege in this Case: and which side they patronize, the Reformation or
the Church of Rome.

S. Paul gives this Encomium of his Disciple Timothy, 2 Ep. c. 3. v. 15. That
from a Child he had been Conversant in the Holy Scriptures, and tells him they
were able to make him Wise to Salvation (which I hope is Knowledge enough, and
I am sure is a more plain, compendious Path, than the crooked Labyrinths of
uncertain Traditions, forged Decrees, Canons and Fathers.) He further assures
him, that the same Divine Scriptures were profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction to Righteousness; that the Man of God might be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good Work. For my part I know not what
remains then for Tradition and suck like Trash to perform, since the Word of
God alone can so complete us. Solomon, Prove. 2.9. assures us that Gods Law
alone will make a man understand Righteousness, and Judgment, and Equity, and
Every good Work. The Prophet Esa. c. 8.20. refers us to try all things by the
Law and Testimony: and that we must conclude those to have no light, who speak
not according to that Word. Our B. Savior Luke 10.26. When a Lawyer inquired
of him what he should do to inherit Eternal Life: bids him have recourse to
what was written in the Law, and asked him how he read there. S. Luke writ his
Gospel to Theophilus a Lay Person. Luke 1.4. to the end he might certainly know
those things wherein he had been instructed. S. John writ his, as he himself
testifies, c. 20. v. 31. that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God, and that believing we might have Life through him. Abraham sends
Dives his Brethren to Moses and the Prophets, rather than to Visions,
Apparitions, and private Revelations: which yet are so much pretended to and
boasted of in the Roman Church. Christ himself submitted the Trial both of his
Doctrine and Miracles to the Censure of the Scriptures. John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me. Thoughts are free, and I am
apt to think that some will take the Liberty to judge it a little unreasonable,
that our B. Savior should so readily stand to the Verdict of Moses and the
Prophets; and yet his pretended Vicar should scorn to submit to the Censure of
Christ and his Apostles; but defy both their Doctrines and Practices with so
many Non Obstante's, as appears by their new modeled Creed at this day: wherein
Pius the fourth has coined twelve new Articles of Faith, to show his single
Power equivalent to that of all the Apostles in General, who did but every one
contribute his single Article to that ancient Symbol bearing their Name.

S. Paul's Auditors the Bereans are highly commended for searching the
Scriptures daily, to examine whether the Doctrine they heard were true or no.
Act. 17.11. In Sum, the old Law was severely enjoined to the Reading and
Meditation both of Prince, Priest and People; men, Women and Children, as is
obvious to observe all along the Style thereof. And the Jews were so versed in
it, as to be able to reckon up the Number of the Words, nay Letters contained
therein. And the new Law excludes none, either from that Common Salvation it
holds forth, or the means to attain it, which is the Doctrine of the Gospel.
The Epistles are directed to Persons of all sorts and both Sexes. In fine, the
whole Economy both of the Old and New Testament is so diametrically opposite
to the Practice of the Roman Church in this Point, that it is but too too
palpable that the three Main Pillars of Popery, are to keep the Prince in awe,
the Priest in Honor, and the People in Ignorance.

Antiquity is so luxuriant in this point, that it will be a greater Difficulty
to select than to accumulate. Famous is that Speech of Constantine the great to
the Fathers in the Nicene Council, recorded by Theodor. Histor. l. 1. c. 7. and
this Saying among the rest is very remarkable: We have the teaching of the Holy
Ghost written: for the Evangelical and Apostolical Books and the old Prophets
do evidently teach us the things that are needful to be known concerning God.
Wherefore laying aside all Contention let us out of the Divinely Inspired
Scripture, take the Resolution of those things we seek for. Tertullian contr.
Hermog. in plain terms calls the Scripture The Rule of Faith. St. Chrysostom
Hom. 13. in 2 ad Cor. styles it, A most Excellent Rule and Exact Balance to
try All things by. St. August. in l. 2. de Nupt. and Concup. c. 33. speaks
thus: This Controversy depending between us requires a Judge: let Christ
therefore judge, and let the Apostle Paul judge with him: because Christ speaks
in his Apostle. But most Memorable is that Passage of Optatus contr. Parmen. l.
5. where he thus presses the Donatist: We are (says he) to enquire out some to
be Judges between us in these Controversies: The Christians cannot, because
both sides cannot yield them: and by part-taking the Truth will be hindered: the
Judge must be had from without our selves. If a Pagan, he knows not the
Mysteries of Christianity: if a Jew, he is an Enemy to Baptism: therefore on
Earth no judgment concerning this matter can be found. The Judge must be had
from Heaven. But to what end should we knock at Heaven, when here we have one
in the Gospel? Quotations might be Infinite, but I Supersede.

Nor did the Ancient Fathers only think this themselves, but by their frequent
Translations of the Scripture, and vehement Exhortations to the People to read
them so translated, they endeavored to beget the same awful Respect to Gods
Holy Word in the Minds of all. Vlphilas, a Bishop of the Goths, turned the
Scripture into that Barbarous Language, as Socrates witnesses. Methodius into
the Sclavonian. S. Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Johan. makes mention of Syrian,
Egyptian, Indian, Persian and Ethiopian Translations. Theodoret de Curand.
Graec. Affect. assures us the Bible was turned into all Languages used in the
World, Greek, Latin, Armenian, Scythian, Sarmatian, etc. And we have at this
day diverse Fragments of them remaining. Venerable Bede shows the same of our
own Country.

To speak plain: I know no Topic the Fathers are more Copious upon, than in
calling upon the People to get Bibles, to read them, to examine what they hear
by them, and severely inveighing against the Negligence of such as did not:
According to the Apostles Advice even to the Laity, Colos. 3.16. Let the Word
of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another.

Theodoret, before cited, gives this Account of his Times. You shall every
where see these Points of our Faith to be known and understood, not only by
such as are Teachers in the Church, but by Smiths, Weavers, and all kinds of
Artificers: yea, all our Women, not only such as are Booklearned, but also by
them who get their Living by the Needle, Maid servants and Waiting-women: and
not Citizens only, but Husbandmen are very skilful in these things. You may
hear among us Ditchers and Neatherds discoursing of the Trinity and the
Creation.

And that the Laity were thus familiar with the Bible, may evidently be made
out, in that Nectarius, of a Judge, was made Bishop of Constantinople; St.
Ambrose, of a Secular Deputy, Bishop of Milan; Gregory the Father of Nazianzen,
of a Layman was made a Bishop: Origin from a Child was Learned in the
Scriptures, and to the great Joy of his Father Leonides, a Holy Martyr, often
questioned with him concerning the meaning of difficult places. Macrina, St.
Basil's Nurse, taught him the Scriptures when he was very young: and Gorgonia,
the Sister of St. Gregory Nazianzen, was rarely well experienced in them.

I will wind up this Argument with declaring what was St. Jerome's mind in so
Weighty a Business. He, besides his Writing to diverse Women, as Eustochium,
Salvina, Celantia, etc. commending their Labors in the Scriptures, and
encouraging that study: speaking of the Noble Roman Lady Paula, in the Epitaph
he made upon her, he extolls her for imposing a daily task of reading the
Scriptures, on her Companions and Maids. But more signally in an Epistle to
Leta, he gives her these Directions for the Education of her little Daughter.
Let the Child be deaf in hearing of light Musical Aires; but cause her every
day to render a task of the Flowers of Holy Scripture. Let her not be sought
for in the press of secular People, but in the Closet of the Scriptures, asking
Counsel of the Prophets and Apostles concerning Spiritual Nuptials. Let her
first learn the Psalter, and with those Heavenly Songs wean her self from light
Sonnets. Then let her be taught to Govern her Life out of Solomon's Proverbs,
and repair to Job for Examples of Virtue and Patience, Let her then come to the
Evangelists, and never lay those Books out of her hands. With these she must
join the Acts of the Apostles, etc, But let her be cautious in Apocryphal
Books, and if she read them, let her understand, that they are not those
Author's, whose Names they carry; and that many things faulty are mixed with
them; and it is no small Wisdom to sind Gold among Dross.

To which excellent Advice, let me only subjoyn what I find scattered up and
down in S. Augustine; viz. To read plain Passages first, and heartily to
practice what we understand; and as for obscure Places, Prophecies, Genealogies
and Mysteries, whereof we shall never be demanded an Account at the Day of
Judgment, let us leave it to the Divine Pleasure, either to reveal them to us,
or reserve them still Concealed: since our Savior told his own Disciples that
it was not for them to know the Times and Seasons: but plainly informed them,
that he who did his Will should know of his Doctrine, whether he spoke from God
or from himself. The same Father acquaints us with the admirable Commixture of
Plainness and Obscurity in the Holy Scripture: that hereby Wanton Wits are
wholsomely curbed, Weak Wits cherished, and Great Wits delighted: and that
nothing of highest Importance is so perplexedly delivered in one Place, but it
is as plainly set down in another.

I have enlarged a little more than I intended on this Theme, because I am
verily persuaded, that if the Sober, Judicious Roman Catholics of this Nation
would be induced but for Trial sake a while to intermit some of those Dry,
Insipid Devotions, which take up so much of their Time; and exchange them for a
Pious, Humble conversing with God's Word; they would soon be out of Conceit
with what they are now so fond of; and discover the sandy Foundation of many of
their Principles: and perhaps at last become of that good Abbots mind who was
Uncle to Archbishop Whitgift, and was often heard to complain, that their
Religion must needs at last fail, because he found no ground for it in Gods
Word.

Having considered hitherto the great Rule of our Faith and Life, we will now
descend to that Article of our Creed which makes such a noise in the World, I
mean the Holy Catholic Church: which, omitting the various Acceptations of the
Word Church,, as to our present Purpose, is nothing else but a Company of
People united in the Profession of the True Faith of Christ, and due Use of the
Sacraments.

I am not ignorant that the Papists would fain foist in another Requisite, to
wit, Under the Obedience of the Bishop of Rame, the only Vicar of Christ upon
Earth. But to omit many other Absurdities, I shall only instance at present in
two: that hereby they exclude Universality, which they put down as an Essential
Note of the True Church; and Charity, which I am sure is a certain Badg of
Christ's true Disciples. For by this very Clause, they very ridiculously
obtrude less than a fourth part for the Whole; and by excommunicating all the
rest from the Pale of the Church, as much as in them lies, very mercifully
Doom greater, more ancient and better Churches than themselves to everlasting
flames.

To make this good, we will take our Measures by the Judicious Observation of
Sir Edwyn Sands, who in his Survey of Europe, assures us that the Greek Church
in Number exceeds any other: and the Protestants in Multitude and extent of
Territory fall very little short of those that are under the Papal Yoke. So
that here we have two four Parts. To which add all the Oriental Christians, and
those in the Vast Empire of Prester John, or the Abyssines, who are all out of
the Roman Communion; and questionless we shall find another fourth Part. And
thus we have three to one, even in the point of Universality.

I will put this out of all dispute by a particular Induction.

In Asia we have Multitudes of Christians who have nothing to do with the Pope.
Those of Palestine are subject to the Patriarch of Jerusalem: the Syrians,
under him of Antioch: the Armenians and Georgians have their own Patriarchs.
The Circassians, and those of the lesser Asia, are under him of Constantinople:
The Jacobites and the Christians of St. Thomas have also their peculiar
Patriarchs.

In Africa, where we find any steps of Christianity, the Egyptians and Cophtes
are under the Patriarch of Alexandria; the Ethiopians or Abyssines, which are
innumerable, are under their own Governors Ecclesiastical.

In Europe, the Greeks submit to the Patriarch of Constantinople. The spacious
Empire of the Russians has a Patriarch at Mosco. The Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, Denmark, Swedeland, and the far greatest part of the
United Netherlands, Switzerland, Germany and Hungaria, are subject to Bishops
and Church Officers of their own, without any dependence upon Him at Rome. Even
in Bohemia, Poland, France, Transylvania, some Countries of Italy there are
multitudes of Reformed Churches, which have nothing to do with the Popes
Jurisdiction. And thus that Large Universality of Power that the Old Gentleman
at Rome brags of, is at last shrunk away into Spain, part of France, Italy and
Poland, some of the Cantons of Switzerland, some of the Low Countries and
Germany. And here you have a Map of the Papal Universality.

They boast indeed much of their New Acquisitions in the Indies: but (not to
Examine by what Right they Invaded those Countries) after such a brutish manner
were those Conversions made, driving the poor Natives to Baptism, like Herds
of Beasts to Watering, that their own Writers blush at Recording it. And when
all comes to all, it will appear, that they Butchered more than they Baptized.
Bartholomaeus Casa, a Bishop that lived in those Countries, and Acosta the
Jesuit, are sufficient Witnesses in this matter.

And since We are entered upon this much cried up Universality of the Roman
Church, it will not be amiss to glance a little at those other Claims and
Pretensions whereby she would Impose her self on the World, for the Only,
Immaculate Spouse of our Blessed Savior.

Antiquity is much talked of, and it is a kind of Universality in regard of
Time, as that before mentioned, was of Place and Persons. But how groundlesly
the Roman Church appropriates and ingrosses it to her self, is too apparent
from the Novel Tridentine Constitutions and Articles. And besides, it can be no
Discriminating Note, in as much as it is applicable to things profane as well
as Sacred; even to Paganism it self; and to Heresies (many of which are as
Ancient as the first Century) as well as to Orthodox Doctrine. And if we come
down to Practice, we shall find it far more feasible to discover the True
Church here or there at present, than to discern where it was in the constant
Series of many Ages. History being one of the most obscure, intricate, tedious
and fallacious Principles, in this case, whereon we can possibly proceed. Nor
could any particular Church or the Catholic Church it self at the Beginning
lay any Claim to the Title of being ancient. Besides, the Characteristical of
Truth is not so much to be Antiqua, Old, as Prima, from the Beginning, from
Christ and his Apostles: and such Antiquity the Church of England is very
willing to be tried by in every one of her Articles. So that here are two
Conditions deficient, Soli and Semper: Antiquity belongs not only to the True
Church, nor is it always competible to it.

To this is reducible their Duration or Continuance, but this is rejected in
the same manner as their Antiquity is: to which it is so near allied.

And here by the way we have a most Satisfactory Reply to that thredbare
Demand, Where was your Religion before Luther? I will not at present use his
Answer, though very good; That it was in the Bible, where theirs never was. Nor
will I demand where theirs was before the late Assembly at Trent, some years
after Luther? But I say it was by wonderful Providence preserved all along down
from the Apostles days to ours, and so will be to the Consummation of the
World. So we need not turn over all the Immense Volumes of Antiquity to give in
a Catalogue of visible Professors of the Reformation, (and yet this may and
has been sufficiently done) but our only Task is to prove our Religion the
same which was taught by the Blessed Jesus and his Apostles; which can only be
done by appealing to the Sacred Records of the Gospel: and as for the
Professors, we have his Promise that he will preserve a Select Company (though
sometimes living in a corrupt visible Church, as Wheat among Tares, or the
seven thousand in Elisha's time that had not bowed their Knees to Baal. 1 Kings
19.18.) to his second Coming; though he has not told us where to find them in
every year. And therefore such as go about to demonstrate that such Professors
were not in Being, do but attempt to enervate our Saviors Promise, and render
themselves and Christianity equally ridiculous.

The Multitude Extent, and Variety of their own Professors is indeed Matter of
great Ostentation; and it has in part been adverted to in the Business of
Universality. But in Truth it is so far from being a certain Argument of the
Truth of their Church, that it rather concludes the Contrary. Fear not little
Flock, says our Savior; and strive to enter in at the Straight Gate. What
shall we think of that time S. Jerome speaks of, Cum ingemuit Orbis and
Mirabatur se factum Arianum? when, as Vincentius Lyrinensis speaks, in a manner
all the Latin Bishops partly by Force and partly by Fraud, were deluded into
Arianisme? It is indeed a Note of Antichrist. Revel. 17. That the Whore shall
sit upon many Waters; which Waters are People, and Nations and Tongues.

As for the Name Catholic, so often objected, we know that Names have little
Weight with wise men; that there were some Heretics who called themselves
Apostolical Men; that S. John in his Apocalypse tells us there were such as had
a Name to live, but were dead; and that Bellarmine himself acknowledges, that
if one only Province should retain the True Faith, yet might it be called
Catholic.

The Succession of Bishops from the Apostles times, is another very plausible
Topic, on which they much Descant: and I confess it bore great Sway with me
for a long time, especially as to the Validity of Holy Orders. Yet upon Mature
Deliberation I found more of Pomp than real Solidity in this Pageant: though
our Ears are continually filled with Clamor about it. For neither does it
agree only with the true Church, since themselves acknowledge it among the
Greeks, (as in the Patriarchates of Constantinople and Alexandria: the former
whereof derives from S. Mark, the other down successively from S. Andrew to
this day:) nor, if you will credit S. Ambrose de poenit. l. 1. c. 6. is
Succession of Persons so much to be heeded as Succession of Doctrine; Non habent
haereditatem Petri, qui fidem Petri non habent. Wherefore if the present Roman
Church want the Life and Soul of True Apostolical Succession, to wit,
Apostolical Doctrine, a mere local and titular Succession is little worth.

But the Mischief is, that the visible Succession of Bishops in that Sea, is
not so Glorious and Uninterrupted as is pretended. And this is notorious in all
Monuments of History and Antiquity, that it has been foully stained by
Simoniacal and Violent Entries upon the Popedom; by Schismatical Intrusions,
and by a perfect Alteration of the very Form and Substance of Election
appointed by the Apostles, and practiced in the primitive Church. For either S.
Peter named his Successor, or he was chosen by the Clergy alone, or else by the
Clergy and People, and then confirmed by the Emperor. But now he is chosen by
a pack of Cardinals, a sort of Clergy altogether unheard of in primitive Ages,
all created by Popes themselves, some in Favor to their Kindred, others in
Faction, and to curry Kindness with some Christian Princes, especially those of
France, and the House of Austria, who always have their Creatures very busy
in the Conclave; most of them as fit for Clergymen as S. Peter was for a
Courtier, as my Lord of Hereford speaks in his Legacy; a Spruce, Delicate,
Effeminate Clergy: (and the World talks far worse things of them) very fit
persons for the Choice of S. Peter's infallible Successor.

The truth is, this boasted succession is so weak a support to the Roman Cause,
that their most confident Champions could never so much as pretend the very
shadow of Divine Authority for it. Alphonsus a Castro and others very frankly
acknowledge it is not De fide, a matter of Faith, that this or that, or the
present Pope is S. Peter's Successor. But of this more by and by. Nor is there
the least agreement in Ecclesiastical History concerning the Immediate
Successor of S. Peter. Some put Linus next, some Clemens, some Cletus. And it
is a most miserable Shift that Bellarmin is put to, and below his great Wit, to
affirm the business may be thus Composed; That S. Peter left his Episcopal Seat
to Clement: but Clement, when S. Peter was dead, out of his Humility would not
ascend the Chair, as long as Linus and Cletus were living, who had been the
Coadjut rs of S. Peter in his Episcopal Function: so Linus succeeded S. Peter,
Cletus to Linus, and Clemens to Cletus. But if S. Peter left his Chair to
Clement, how comes this Apostolical constitution to be abolished, and why do
not the Popes now design their Successors, but leave a matter of so high
Consequence to the factious Canvassing of the Haughty Ambitious Cardinals? How
durst Clement refuse the Charge; entrusted to him by so great an Apostle, and
that only out of a Compliment?

A Man that duly ponders this Circumstance, might very well conclude it to be a
most remarkable Providence of God, and intended for the humbling of that proud
Church, that when they come to make good their claim to that Exorbitant,
unlimited Authority they at this day Exercise in the Christian World, they
should stumble at the very Threshold, as we say, and fail in the very first
name of their Vaunted Catalogue. In a word, all things here are dark and in a
Riddle, and afford not sufficient matter even to ground an Implicit Faith upon.

But what shall we think of those long and frequent Vacations in that See for
some years together? and Schisms for 30 nay 70 years? Which was a long Vacation
indeed; for it is Bellarmin's Rule, An uncertain Pope is accounted for none at
all. Nay many and great Authors have put a Woman into the Succession; many of
their Bishops have been Heretics, and this makes another Interruption: even
Occult Heresy rendering the Pope, ipso facto, none.

Let Cardinal Baronius, a Man of undoubted Authority with them, serve instead
of a thousand Witnesses. He, treating of the year of our Lord, 912, thus
represents the wretched, deformed Face of that Church How filthy a time was it
when Whores bare all the sway at Rome? At their pleasure Sees were changed,
Bishoprics disposed of, and which is most horrible and scarce to be uttered,
their Gallants were thrust into the Seat of Peter. We find no where any mention
of Clergy choosing or giving Consent; all Canons were put to silence, the
Pontifical Decrees were choked, Ancient Traditions proscribed, and all Sacred
Rites extinguished. Thus had Lust gotten every thing into its own hand.

Where did this Uninterrupted Succession sleep all this While? Well near 200
years together, says the same Annalist, did these monstrous abuses continue.
Certainly if Discontinuance of Time, or Illegal Entry can mar a succession,
this of the Romish Church is sufficiently spoiled. Benedict the 9th was a Boy
of 10 years old. John the 13th. a Hectoring Lad not above 18. John the 11th.
was set up by that Infamous Strumpet Theodora: and her Daughter Marozia by
force of Arms deposed him. John the 12th. was Bastard to Sergius by Marezia,
and was violently intruded into the Popedom by his Mother.

It is not so much the wickedness of these Popes Lives, as the manner of their
Creation, that we urge to invalidate the Succession. Above 50 Popes were thus
installed successively for those 200 years: besides many other occasions,
frequently occurring in History, wherein this applauded Succession has been
very notably disturbed.

To which if we adjoin the 30 Schisms, wherein 2 and 3 Popes have been set up
in opposition to one another; the matter will be out of all Controversy. One
of these Schisms, viz. that between Clement and Urban lasted for 70 years, till
the Duke of Savoy was Elected Pope by the Council of Basil, to put a period to
that fatal Tragedy. And many of these Competitors had such Learned Advocates
and Patrons, that Bellarmin cannot assign which was the true Pope. -- pudet
haec opprobria vobis -- Et dici potuisse et non potuisse refelli.

Their Unity is no less bragged of, than their Universality and Succession; and
with as little Justice; for Unity without Truth and sincere Charity is but a
Conspiracy or Confederation. I find Revel. 17.13. that in the Kingdom of
Antichrist, they are of one mind, and make War with the Lamb. And the Devils
themselves in the possessed person could unite into a Legion. And if we a
little better consider this pretended Roman Unity, it will soon be discovered
to be purely slavish and enforced: an Unity of Fear more than of Affection; a
product of the Inquisition rather than of Charity. Bellarmin seems to intimate
as much; They cannot think otherwise, says he, because they have subjugated
their sense to the sense of another; meaning the Pope.

Nor yet is this their Unity, let the Quality of it be what it will, so
complete as they would make us believe. How do the Jansenists and Jesuits at
this day hug one another? The large Order of the Dominicans look upon the
Jesuits as no better then Semi-Pelagians in the Doctrine of Grace and Free
Will: and the Jesuits to requite them call them Calvinists. The Seculars and
Regulars how Unanimous they are, appears by their continual Clashing. And those
who are thoroughly acquainted with their Customs, may easily perceive that there
are as many Sects and Factions in point of Opinion, as there are Religious
Orders in that Church; and in point of Charity and Affection as many parties as
there are Religious Houses. But as for that real Unity, which according to
Dominic. Bannes, in 2.2. q. 1. a. 10. consists in having one God and Christ for
our King, in being governed by the same Holy Law, in having the same Faith,
Hope and Charity, the same Heavenly Example, one worship in Spirit and in
Truth, one Communion or Communication of the Members; which is the Unity of
that Church which includes all the Faithful from the beginning of the World to
the end, etc. In short, such an Unity as the Holy Scriptures require, in being
derived from one beginning, which is the Holy Ghost, who as one Soul quickens
and moves all the Parts: in having one Head which is Jesus Christ: and in being
but one Body, partaking the same Doctrine, Sacraments and Worship of God: This
Unity by God's Grace all true Protestants breath after, as may apparently be
evinced by the Harmony of their Confessions; although in points of smaller
importance there may be some little differences: and most of their Dissentions
are rather Verbal then Real.

As to the Sanctity of that Church, let but the Lives of the Roman Bishops be
perused, written by their own Authors (a noysomer Sink and Kennel of
Abomination can never be raked up in all Antiquity: some Atheists, some
Conjurers, some Adulterers, Murderers, Incestuous, Sodomites, Simoniacks, and
what not?) the manners and conversation of their Clergy, Religious Men and
women, so heinously taxed and inveighed against by those Famous Writers of
their own side, S. Bernard, Nic. Clemangis, Alvar, Pelagius, Claud. Espencaeus,
etc. and at least they will have little cause so boldly to challenge, and
appropriate it to themselves above all their Neighbors. These things are
sufficiently known to any that have viewed their Doctors, or conversed even
with their Modern practices: (though themselves are very much amended since the
Reformation.) But I love not to tell stories out of the School, and I promised
at first to refrain from personal Reflections. There are Books enough on this
Subject, and the World talks sufficiently loud of it.

If all the precedent Prerogatives signify nothing, at last we must be
overborn by whole Legions of Innumerable Miracles that are obtruded upon our
Credit. But so spurious, so ridiculous, so impious many of them, that the more
modest and discreet among themselves dare not own them. Their best Writers
affirm, That Miracles are not necessary for the Being of a Church, but only
for the Begetting of a new Faith, or an Extraordinary Mission.

Nay I may add not for an Extraordinary Mission neither; as we may see in many
of the Prophets of the Old Testament, of whose Miracles not one word is
mentioned. Nor are they at all to be expected from or by the Protestants, who
neither profess a new Faith nor an Extraordinary Mission. The Miracles of our
Savior, his Apostles and the first Age of the Church, are sufficient Seals to
the Doctrine they own. And as for those so importunately urged by the
Romanists, they are but too often convinced to be mere juggles, contrivances
for filthy Lucre, Sleights to uphold some gainful Doctrine, or to advance the
reputation of some particular place or Religious Order, done in a Corner; of a
far different Nature from those of our B. Savior, and rather of the same stamp
with those the Apostle speaks of. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. belonging to him, who comes
with all Power and Signs and Lying Wonders: and Revel. 13.13. who does great
Wonders, so that he makes fire come down from Heaven on Earth in the Sight of
Men. A man that duly ponders the most palpable Cheats and Impostures of this
kind dailypractised in the Church of Rome for these By-Respects, would almost
be of Mr. Chilling-worth's mind, that it cannot be sufficiently made out, that
ever so much as a Lame Horse was cured by way of Miracle in confirmation of any
Popish Tenet.

Some insist much on the Outward Prosperity. Pomp, Splendor and Magnificence
of their Church. To this the Wise Man has given an answer, Eccles. 9.1. Our
Works are in the hand of God, and no man knows either Love or Hatred by all
that is before him. Nay, our Savior puts it down as a Mark of the false
Church. Joh. 16.20. Verily I say unto you, that you shall weep and lament, but
the World shall rejoice.

It remains then, that the only Certain and Evident marks of a True
Apostolical Church are, The Sincere Preaching of God's Word, and a Due
Administration of the Sacraments. To which may be annexed Ecclesiastical
Discipline; but this is reducible to the other two. These are All that the Holy
Scriptures afford us. Matthew. 28.19. Go and Teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to
chserve all things whatever I have commanded you. Act. 2.42. And they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in Breaking of Bread,
and Prayers.

Having thus surveyed the Roman Church in general, it will hardly be thought
Good Manners, if we neglect his Holiness the Pope in particular, or as some are
pleased to flatter him, The Church Virtual. For what ever stir and bustle they
make about the Church their Mother, the plain English of their meaning is
nothing but the Pope their Father.

It is the express Doctrine of S. Thomas Aquinas (and his Doctrine in that Church
is little less than Canonized) 2.2. q. 1. a. 10. that the making of a true
Creed belongs to the Pope; as all other things do which belong to the Whole
Church: and that the Whole Authority of the Universal Church abides in him.
2.2. q. 12. a. 2. Thus as they take all Authority and Sufficiency from the
Scripture and give it to the Church, so all the Church's Authority they
attribute to the Pope. Gregorius de Valentia, one of the Learned Jesuits,
tells us plainly, That by the Church they mean Its Head; that is to say, the
Roman Bishop, in whom resides the full Authority of the Church, when he pleases
to Determine matters of Faith, whether he does it with a Council or without.
Bellarmine teaches, that the Pope himself without any Council may decree
matters of Faith. Bannes affirms, that the Authority of the Universal Church,
the Authority of a Council, and the Authority of the Pope, are one and the same
thing. The Canon Law in Sext. Extrav. Johan. 22. c. Cum inter. in Gloss. speaks
thus, It is Heresy to think Our Lord God the Pope may not Decree as he does.
And Distinct. 19. in Canon. His Rescripts and Decretal Epistles are Canonical
Scripture.

All which passages clearly convince us what is the meaning of those perpetual
Braggs of the Catholic Church.

His Holiness must excuse me, if, being no Courtier, I address not my self to
him in the phrase of the Roman Inscription to Paul the V. yet to be seen in
that City; saluting him as a Vice-God, and the Stout Assertor of the Pontifical
Omnipotency: or as the Gloss of the Canon Law in their last and best Editions,
viz. the Roman, 1580, and Parisian, 1612. Our Lord God the Pope. Waving
therefore these Ceremonies, I shall summarily consider his Authority, both what
he pretends to, and what it really is.

And here starts forth a material Difficulty, even at our first setting out:
namely, Whether S. Peter, whence all this Power and Sovereignty is pretended,
were himself Bishop of Rome, or were indeed ever at Rome? I will not Deny
either, because I know many of the Ancients plead for both. But the Point being
only grounded on Humane Authority (for Divine Authority seems rather to
contradict it) i. e. Ecclesiastical History; and the Differences among the
Reporters being so Many and so Considerable, both in Chronology and diverse
other Weighty Circumstances; and the Probabilities that are produced against it
being not altogether Contemptible, I hope a Man may be excused from being a
Damned Hererick, if he do not believe it to be a Fundamental Article of Faith (
The Article of the Standing or Falling Church, says a Modern Famous
Controvertist) and consequently has a Meaner Esteem for all that prodigious
Train of Positions, which are thence deduced.

These following Inducements make it at least Doubtful whether S. Peter ever
was Bishop of Rome, or was ever there.

For his ever having been at Rome, we do not much stand upon it. But the
Reasons and Testimonies brought out of Humane Histories (which only mention
it) are so uncertain and involved with such difficulties, as may make any Man
deservedly question it. Vellenus has published several Demonstrations that he
was never there. And those Authorities of the Fathers that are alleged for it
are so Various, that the Learned Romanists cannot reconcile them. Marsilius
Patavinus in his Defens. Pacis, part. 2. c. 16. says, By Scripture it cannot
be made out, either that S. Peter was Bishop of Rome, or that he was ever there
at all: and when he considers the Ecclesiastical Historians that affirm it, he
does it so, that it is evident he does not believe them. It is true, S. Peter
in his 1. Ep. c. 5.13. writes as from Babylon; but that Babylon was in Assyria.
For though in the Apocalyptical Visions, Rome is designed by Babylon; yet in a
plain Epistolary Salutation there was no reason at all for such a Trope. Nor
does S. Paul or S. Luke, who make frequent mention of Rom, ever call it Babylon.

There is indeed an Old Chair at Rome, pretended to be S. Peter's, and on
certain days it is shown to the people; as likewise a Sepulcher, and certain
parts of his Body, as Relics. But the Juggling and Imposture with Relics and
such like Trumpery is so well known, that the World has long since lessened
her Credit to such Monuments. Nor has it been the lowest part of Rome's Policy
for many Ages with Feigned Miracles, Counterfeit Relics, and Forged Records
and Legends to raise in the Vulgar an Opinion of her Holiness, and so maintain
her Grandeur. But we have been too long on this Impertinency.

Whether He was ever Bishop of Rome, deserves our stricter Examination. Holy
Writ seems not silent here, as in the former Case, but fully Opposite.

S. Peter and S. Paul by the Instinct of the Holy Ghost made an Accord that S.
Peter should Preach to the Jews, and S. Paul to the Gentiles. Whereupon in the
Sacred Text S. Peter's peculiar Title is, The Apostle of the Circumcision: and
Consequent to his Charge we see, that he wrote his Epistles to the scattered
Jews: neither did he direct any to, or date any from Rome. So that it is
incredible he should be Bishop or Resident there for 25 years. Whereas S. Paul
was the Great Doctor and Apostle of the Gentiles, and both writ to the Romans,
and taught and was imprisoned at Rome for several Years, as is evident from
Scripture. Again, the Authors of this Story (the first whereof were probably
Papias and Dionysius, the one too Credulous and Erroneous, the other a
Counterfeit) are wholly at a loss in declaring when S. Peter came to Rome, how
long he sat there, when he dyed, and who were his Successors. And the most
tolerable Account that is given by the best Writers, How S. Peter, the 5th Year
after Christ's Passion, went to Antioch, and there fixed his Episcopal See for
7 years, thence removed to Rome, and there continued 25 Years; is no ways
coherent with what is related of S. Peter, Galat. 1. and 2. Act. 12. and 15.
From which places it is manifest, that S Peter's most usual Abode was at
Jerusalem, at least till the 18th year after Christ's death, and the 17th of S.
Paul's Conversion. Nor is it likely that S. Peter settled his Chair at Antioch
so long, since Galat. 2. we read only of his passing by there; and that he was
so far from behaving himself as their Bishop, that he seems to have understood
little of the Affairs of that Church, till S. Paul had rightly informed him.

In the 16. to the Romans St. Paul salutes very many by name, yet takes not the
least notice of S. Peter, nor gives them the least account where he was, or how
he did: which seems something odd, if S. Peter had then been their Sovereign
Pastor. And when S. Paul was himself at Rome, and writ diverse Epistles in the
Reign of Nero (at which time Bellarmin would have S. Peter to have been at
Rome) though he make mention of many others of inferior rank, yet not one
syllable of S. Peter. Nay he generally denies that there was any such present
with him. Colos. 4.11. And 2 Timothy 4.16. he grievously complains that at his
first Answer, when he appeared before Nero, All men forsook him. And when S.
Paul came first to Rome, the Jews there, who were S. Peter's peculiar charge,
seemed to know nothing of the Gospel. Act. 28. Thus S. Peter must be Bishop of
Rome 25 years, and yet never be at Rome, when ever the Scripture mentions the
Roman Church: And S. Paul could never find him there, though he is reported to
be Martyred there at the same time with him.

We see then upon how tottering a Foundation this mighty Fabric depends: I
mean, how justly Questionable the Papal Monarchy is, even in matter of Fact,
and to its very An sit. But perhaps it may plead better for it self in point of
Right and Equity.

We will briefly here inquire into two things. 1. What Authority S. Peter had.
2. What Authority the Pope pretends to derive from him, and how justly.

That our Lord and Savior never intended such an Absolute, Arbitrary,
Sovereign, Monarchical Government in his Church, as the Pope at this day
exercises both over Clergy and Layity, is as evident in the Gospel as any Truth
there contained. Matthew. 20.25. You know, says Christ, that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, etc. But it shall not be so among you:
Whesoever will be great among you, let him be your servant. And the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.11. reckoning up the whole Sacred Economy, Ministry and Government of
the Church, lets not fall one word concerning a Visiole Monarch: He gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pasters and Teachers; for the
Perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. And when he
recommends Unity, by reason of one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Faith, one
Baptism, one Lord, there is no mention at all of any Pontifical Monarch.

In all the New Testament there is not any one called the Head of the Church,
but only our Blessed Savior. Ephesians. 1.22. God has put all things under his
feet, and given him to be Head over all things to his Church. And chap. 4. 15.
Grow up to him in all things, who is the Head, even Christ. Colos. 1.18. He is
the Head of the Body, the Church. Wherefore they are highly injurious to our
Savior who set up any other.

Nor do Protestant Princes take themselves to be Heads of their own particular
Churches, in any other sense than the good Kings of Israel and Juda were; to
defend the Orthodox Religion, and maintain good Order and Discipline in the
Church; and take cognizance of abuses crept in among any persons Ecclesiastical
or Civil, and reform what they find amiss, according to the Canon of the
Scripture, by the advice of their Chief Clergy. And not as the Papists
impertinently object concerning Q. Elizabeth, that she had assumed power to
preach, administer the Sacraments, etc.

And all this, as I said before, is the undoubted Right of Soveraigh Princes in
their own Territories, and was practiced by the Good Princes under the Old Law,
with great Commendation and Reward. It was likewise promised to the New, That
Kings should be Nursing Father's, and Queens Nursing Mothers to the Church.

In fine, that Paternal Wisdom and Providence of God, which so plentifully
revealed to us All matters of importance for our own private Good, for the
Being or Well being of his Church; (and certainly this great pretended
Jurisdiction must be of that Nature) that the most Curious Inquirer can desire
nothing more; and which did under the Mosaical Dispensation so exactly describe
the Condition and Power of the High Priest, even to the minute Circumstances of
his Garments; so that none could be so stupid among the Jews, but if he read
the Books of Mises, he might sufficiently understand that there was a High
Priest constituted, and what Authority he had; would certainly have left us
some intimation of the like Regiment under the Gospel, had there been any such
matter to be expected. Whereas on the contrary we cannot there find so much as
the Name or Title of any such Dignity, nor of any Seat appointed for his
Residence; no singular Office is assigned to him above others, no Ensigns of
Sovereignty are recorded, whereby He might be distinguished from others, no
manner of Succession is provided for; nor is there the least practice or
exercise of such a singular Absolute Power so much as hinted at in the whole
New Testament. And therefore we may justly conclude it to be an upstart
Usurpation, and no Authority of Divine Institution.

There are but two passages in Scripture that with any tolerable show can be
made use of, to countenance this Supremacy that is so much urged to be
conferred on S. Peter, and intayled on his Successors. The one, wherein it
seems to be promised; the other, wherein they say it was actually bestowed.

The first is that famous place, the Achilles of the Roman Cause. Matthew. 16.17,
18. Thou art Peter and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound in
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven.
These words which they think so plain and obvious, do yet contain two Metaphors
of a Rock and the Keys; and I cannot find in any other part of Scripture that
they are explained in the Romanists sense, Simply and without a Metaphor. I am
sure they were not so easy to the Apostles themselves, nor did they understand
thereby any principality intended for S. Peter; as appears by sundry
contentions among them, after these words were spoken, who should be the
Chiefest.

Nor can the Ancient Fathers, Good men, discover any such Energy or Prerogative
in them for S. Peter, or the Pope. For our Savior does not plainly and
literally affirm that he will build his Church upon S. Peter, but upon the Rock
which he confessed: (...), upon this Rock: not (...), upon this Peter. Non
dictum est illi, Tu es Petra, sed Tu es Petrus: Petra autem erat Christus. It
was not said to him, Thou art the Rock, but Thou art Peter: for the Rock was
Christ: says S. Augustine, Retract. l. c. 21. The same Father in his 124 Tract.
on S. Joh. and Ser. 13. de Ver. Dom. thus paraphrases this Text: Upon this Rock
which thou have confessed; upon this Rock which thou have acknowledged,
(saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God) will I build my Church:
that is, upon my self, the Son of the Living God will I build my Church: I will
build Thee upon Me, not Me upon Thee. For the Rock was Christ, whereon Peter
himself was built. I am punctual in citing this Great Doctor and Father of the
Church, because the Romanists give out that they desire to stand to the alone
Judgment of this Learned Father.

The Holy Martyr S. Cyprian could not apprehend any such Intrigue in these
words. l. de Unit. Eccles. The rest of the Apostles, says he, were the same
that Peter was, being endowed with an equal share both of Honor and Power.

Nor S. Ambrose, Sermon. 66. S. Peter and Paul were eminent among the Apostles,
and it is doubtful which is to he preferred before the other.

S. Hillary. l. 6. de Trin. S. Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Matthew. Eusebius. Emissen.
Greg. the Great. V. Beda. Haymo, the Gloss of Gratian, Lyra, and a multitude of
others, understand the Text of S. Matthew, as S. Augustine does. Cardinal
Cusanus l. 2. c. 13. Concord. Cath. is very positive, that nothing was here
said to S. Peter, but what was said to the rest of the Apostles And the words
of Sixtus Senensis, a very Learned Pontifician, Biblioth. l. 6. are worth our
notice. We believe and acknowledge with a sure faith, that Christ is the first
and Chief Foundation of the Whole Ecclesiastical Edifice: But we also affirm
that upon this Foundation there are other Rocks laid, namely Peter and the
rest of the Apostles, whom John in the Apocalypse names the Twelve Foundations
of the Heavenly Jerusalem.

In sum, I find three Interpretations of these words among the Ancients: viz.
That Christ is the Rock: That the Confession, Faith and Doctrine of Christ is
the Rock; and that S. Peter himself as an Apostle, is Metonymically a partial
Rock. All which meanings agree very well together, but nothing favor the
Supremacy that the Romanists desire.

Nor do the Protestants deny S. Peter a Primacy of Authority and Spiritual
Jurisdiction over the Church as an Apostle: or in respect of his Fellow
Apostles a Primacy of Order, Calling, Graces, Gifts, Courage, etc. or that he
was a Ministerial Rock. But since the Rock and the Keys signify the same
thing, to wit, the power of Binding and Loosing; which Matthew. 18.18. is
expressly promised to all the Apostles; and the same words, of Binding and
Loosing are there used, which were before to S. Peter: and after the
Resurrection, John 20.21. the same power was amply bestowed on all the Apostles
equally, and their Successors: He breathed on his Disciples, saying: As my
Father sent me, even so send I you; Receive you the Holy Ghost, Whose sins you
retain they are retained, and whose sins you remit they are remitted; so that
no man's Jurisdiction came from Peter to him, but every one had it alike and
equally from our Savior, who sent him: and since S. Paul assures us Ephesians.
2.20. That we are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles (in general) and
Prophets: Jesus Christ himself being the Chief Cornerstone: and S. Anselm well
comments on S. Matthew. 16. This power was not given alone to Peter, but as Peter
answered one for all, so in Peter he gave this Power to all: This Text will not
evince S. Peter to have been Constituted the Universal Monarch of Christ's
Church: Nor in the whole Series of Divine History do we meet with any
Monarch-like Action of his Recorded.

But on the contrary, we read that He was sent as a Messenger by the rest of
the Apostles, Act. 8.14. That he gave the Right Hand to S. Paul and Barnabas.
Galat. 2.9. That he was accused to the other Disciples, pleaded his cause
before them, and submitted to their Judgment. Acts. 11.1. etc. And that S. Paul
withstood him to his face, finding that he walked not uprightly according to
the truth of the Gospel. Galat. 2.11, 14.

Thus far they think this Sovereignty was only promised. In S. Joh. 21.17.
where Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep: they teach that this power was
absolutely delivered and confirmed.

But neither was this charge so laid on S. Peter, that the rest were excluded.
For they grant that no more was here Given, than what was Promised, Matthew. 16.
where the Keys are mentioned. Now we have evidently proved that all the
Apostles were equal in the power of the Keys; and that those words concern S.
Peter no more than the other Disciples.

In Scripture phrase the word, Feed, when it is accommodated to Ecclesiastical
Functions, is the same as to Teach. They shall Feed them with knowledge and
understanding, says the Prophet Jeremy. And then we shall find the same
Command and Commission given to all the Apostles. Matthew. 28.19. Go and Teach
all Nations, etc. Besides, since All the Apostles had before been sent as
Shepherds to Feed the Flock. Matthew. 9.36. and 10.6. and were afterward
furnished with more full Instructions, and Abilities to the same end, Matthew.
28. John 20. which they executed most diligently and Courageously, as appears
by their Acts and Epistles; no man can reasonably deny but that pasce Oves,
Feed my sheep, belonged to them as well as to S. Peter: and they themselves
gave the same Duty in Charge to other Pastors. Act. 20.28. Take heed to your
selves and to all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers,
to Feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. Neither
would S. Peter ingross this privilege to himself, but communicated it to
others. 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the Flock of God that is among you. S. Cyprian de
Unit. Eccles. speaks home They are all Pastors, but the Flock is one, which by
one consent is fed by all the Apostles. And S. Chrysostom l. 2. de Sacerdotio,
Our Savior at that time intended to teach both Peter and Us, how dear his
Church is to him, etc.

This is a True, Short and Plain Account of S. Peter's Authority; both what was
given him by our Savior, and what was exercised by himself. But, alas, this is
too scant for his pretended Successor, as we shall now manifest.

And I shall be a little more exact in this Seasonable Argument because that I
know many of our English Roman Catholics will not believe that this Vast,
Unlimited Power is owned by their Church; but is only the product of the
Flattery of private Doctors, and the Pope's particular Parasites.

I will only mention how the Usurpings, Innovations and Encroachments of the
Roman Bishops have been constantly opposed by the Greatest part of Christendom
in all Ages.

In the first General Council of Nice, he was confined to his own particular
District; as the Patriarch of Alexandria and others were to theirs. In the
first General Councils of Constantinople and Ephesus, the Provinces of the
World were distinguished, and the Patriarchs restrained to their own Circuits;
and He of Constantinople is by name made Equal to Him of Rome in all
Ecclesiastical Matters. He of Rome had indeed the Chief Honor; but that
consisted not in Jurisdiction, but in sitting in the first place, and such like
Titles.

The Council of Chalcedon confirms the same Decrees, and adds withal, Our
Fathers gave the Privileges to the Seat of Elder Rome; because that City had
the Empire: and the 150 Bishops assembled at the Council of Constantinople
moved with the same reason, gave the same Privilege to the most Sacred Throne
of New Rome: thinking it reasonable, that the City which is honored with the
Empire and Senate, should also have Equal Privileges with Elder Rome, and in
Ecclesiastical Matters be advanced alike with her. Another Council at
Constantinople Enacted the same. But the Council of Carthage, Anno 418.
consisting of 217 Bishops, is most Worthy of our Remark.

In this Council, when Sozymus Bishop of Rome claimed a Right to receive
Appeals from all parts of the World, and pretended a Canon of the Nicene
Council that should give it him: the Bishops strongly debated the Matter, and
having searched the Original Copies of the Nicene Council, whereby the Untruth
of his Claim was discovered, they wrote sharply to him, not to meddle any more
with their Provinces, nor admit into his Fellowship such as they had
Excommunicated. Telling him he had nothing to do in their Causes, either to
bring them to Rome, or to send Legates to hear them at home: and that this
pretense of his was expressly against the Nicene Council.

The Evidence of this Great Testimony stands to this day unanswerable by the
Roman Party. It is abundantly known how Pope Stephen was slighted by S.
Cyprian; and Victor by the Bishops of the East. But this is an Innnite Theme,
and I must not forget my promised Brevity.

I shall only Request the Gentlemen of the Roman Catholic Persuasion,
seriously to lay to heart what Trivial Grounds this Grand Article of their
Church, the Pope's Supremacy, even in Ecclesiastical Affairs, is founded upon;
and to consider how many Difficulties must be cleared to make it a probable
Tale. 1. That S. Peter was Bishop of Rome. 2. That he dyed at Rome by the
special Command of Christ. 3. That he dyed Invested with such a Supremacy, as
is now Exercised in that Church. 4. That his so dying there is sufficient
(without a new Revelation from God) to make the Succession of the Bishop of
Rome of Divine Authority.

We shall now take a View of that Grand Machine of the Pope's power over
Temporal Princes, and make it most evident, that it is an Article and Doctrine
of the Roman Church; and being so, that this alone were a sufficient Motive to
forsake her Communion since She Teaches, Justifies and strictly Commands (even
under the penalty of being accounted no Christians) Treason and Rebellion. The
present Lord Bishop of Lincoln has written a Learned and Satisfactory Treatise
on this Subject, and I find his Lordship very faithful in his Citations.
Wherefore I may be the more sparing.

However, because I heartily desire, that Honored, Pious and Loyal Persons may
not unwarily engage their Liberties, Estates and Lives for the Maintenance of
so Extravagant and Tyrannical a Power, which has in all Ages caused so many
dismal Tragedies in the Christian World, and is in it self Fatal and
Destructive to all Civil Government, I shall briefly treat of this Matter, to
undeceive others: especially since I was herein miserably seduced my self, till
I had Maturely and Exactly Examined the whole Business.

I shall begin with General Councils, whose Decrees if they will not admit, I
confess I as yet understand not what the Doctrine of the Roman Church is, nor do
I know where to find it.

The Third Council of Lateran, c. 27. after it had Condemned and Excommunicated
many Heretics, (and you must know that All Protestants are both accounted so,
and as such, are once every year solemnly accursed by His Holiness in Person on
Maundy Thursday:) It Absolves All that had sworn Fidelity or Homage to them,
from those Oaths (and we know who they are, to whom Fidelity and Homage,
strictly speaking, is due:) and they are required in Order to the Remission of
their Sins, to fight against them. And those who dye doing Penance in that
manner, may undoubtedly expect Indulgence for their Sins, with Eternal Rewards.
Then by the Authority of S. Peter and Paul, the Council remits to all who shall
rise and fight against them, two years penance:

Here a General Council uses all its Industry to poison people with Rebellious
Doctrine, and calls Treason, Doing of Penance. Not long after, Pope Celestin,
Predecessor to Innocent the Third, with more than Luciferian Arrogance, sets
the Crown on the Head of the Emperor Henry the 6th with his two feet, and then
kicks it off again. And the fact is produced by no meaner a Person than
Cardinal Baronius, to show that it is in the Pope's power to Give and Take away
Empires. But to as much purpose as He produced that Text, Rise Peter, Kill and
Eat; to incense Paul the 5th against the Venetians.

The second Evidence shall be the Fourth Great, and, as they call it, Most
General Council of Lateran, wherein were assembled 1200 of one sort or other.
These, C. 3. make a Decree, That the Aid of Secular Princes should be required
for the Rooting out of Heretics (i. e, All that are not of the Roman
Communion) and that when the Temporal Lord, required and admonished by the
Church, shall neglect to purge his Territory from Heretical Wickedness. He
shall be Excommunicated by the Metropolitan and his Suffragans. And if he
persist in neglecting to give satisfaction for the space of a year, let him be
signified to the Pope, that he from thenceforth may pronounce his Subjects
discharged from their Obedience, and expose his Territory to be seized on by
Catholics, who having exterminated the Heretics, shall possess it without
Contradiction, and preserve it in the Purity of the Faith. So as no Injury be
done to the Right of the Supreme Lord, where there is such; provided He do not
any ways oppose himself. And the Law is to take place in them who have no
Superior Lord. -- Which Last Clause perfectly comprehends Sovereign Princes,
and so anticipates that Reply which some make, That the Decree was only made
for Feudatory and Subordinate Princes.

And whereas some few deny it to be a General Council, and that it made any
Canons; it is a most Impudent Cavil. For both the Council and Canons have been
and are Universally received by the Roman Church: the Council as General, and
Approved so by Innocent the III. and the Canons as Authentic. All their
Writers concerning Councils put this down among the General ones, and commonly
call it the Great General Council of Lateran: and Joverius says, he cannot see
with what face a Man dare deny it. They always put it among those Councils that
are Approved by the Church: for you must know that some are Reprobated, some
are partly Approbated and partly Reprobated. Their Canon Law so esteems of it.
The Council of Constance puts it among those General Councils, to the
Observation whereof the Popes were to swear at their Installment. The Council
of Trent, which I hope none will boggle at, Sess 24. C. 5. in express terms
calls it a General Council, and Confirms one of its Canons. To which I may add,
because it concerns us, a Synod at Oxford, where this Council was received for
England. And though some Princes that were deposed out of the Pope's mere Spite
and Malice, got some Advocates to write for them, and Synods of Bishops to
Protest against the Pope's Proceedings: yet in the case of Pretended Heresy,
(which nearly touches Protestant Princes) not one Writer or Bishop appears in
Vindication of the Temporal Power. A shrewd Sign that this Deposing Heretical
Magistrates, is in General the Romish Doctrine.

The General Council of Lions is next. It was summoned by Innocent the 4th,
against the Emperor Frederick the 2d. Here the Pope having consulted with the
Council, Declares the Emperor deprived by God of his Dominions: and thereupon
they Actually Depose him, and Absolve All from their Oaths of Fidelity to him:
strictly charging All persons to acknowledge him no more for Emperor, and
denouncing All that did otherwise, Excommunicated Ipso facto. So we have
another whole General Council concurring with the Pope in asserting this
Deposing Power, and with Candles burning in their hands, thundering out
Sentence against the poor Emperor.

In the Council of Constance, Sess. 19. we often meet with this Clause, That
All Breakers of their Privileges, whether Emperors, Kings, or any other
Degree, were thereby Ipso facto subjected to the Banns, Punishments and
Censures in the Council of Lateran: and Sess. 17. in the Pass they gave to the
King of Arragon, they decree, That whatsoever Person, either King, Cardinal,
etc. hinder him in his Journey, he is Ipso facto deprived of all Honor,
Dignity, Office or Benefice, whether Ecclesiastical or Secular.

It is true, with much Importunity and Danger, Gerson procured a Decree in this
Council, that No Subject should Murder his Prince. But that Practice was only
condemned in such as did it, without waiting the Sentence of any Judge
whatsoever. So that if Sentence be past by the Spiritual Judge, notwithstanding
this Decree, a Prince may be Assassinated. But there is a further Mystery in
it. For a King once declared to be no more such, i. e. being Deposed, He then
becomes a Rebel and an Usurper, according to their Principles, and then it is
lawful to kill him.

The Council of Siena confirms all the former Decrees made against Heretics;
and the Favorers of Heresy are declared liable to all Pains and Censures of
Heretics: and consequently to the Greatest of them, viz Deposition.

The Council at Basil ratifies the Decree of Constance, by which, Emperors and
Kings, that presumed to hinder any from coming to the Council, are subjected to
Excommunication, Interdicts, and other Punishments Spiritual and Temporal.

Finally, the Council of Trent, though the world was then much changed, and
they durst not trample on Crowned Heads as formerly, yet they would still be
nibling at this sweet Morsel, as near as they could, and still endeavored,
though covertly, to continue the Claim to this Deposing Authority. For in the
Decree against Duels, Sess. 25. c. 19. they declare, If any Emperors and
Kings, etc. did assign a field for a Combat, they did thereby lose their Right
to that place, and the City, Castle, or other places about it.

If Councils then, as surely they are, be fit deliverers of the Churches sense,
we have here no less than seven General Councils to prove this to be the
Church's Doctrine. For my own part, I can see no ways they can extricate
themselves, but either by Confessing their Church has erred, or by obstinately
going on in a most wretched Justification of such Damnable Tenants and
Practices.

There is nothing more to do in this business, but by way of surplusage to give
a General Touch at these following particulars.

By the Book of the Sacred Ceremonies (which is Authentic and of great Esteem
with the Church of Rome) the Emperor as soon as he sees the Pope, must
bare-headed, how, till his knee touch the Ground, and worship the Pope: coming
nearer he must bow again, and when he comes to the Pope he must bow a third
Time, and devoutly kiss the Pope's Toe. The same book informs us that the Pope
never gives any Reverence to any Mortal, either by rising up, or uncovering or
bowing his head. That the Emperor must hold the Pope's stirrup till he gets on
horseback and then lead the Horse for some paces. And some mean spirited
Emperors have de facto performed these slavish offices.

The Emperor must swear Fealty to the Pope, and be his Hector to maintain all
his Rights and Honors. That horrid Extravagant of Boniface. VIII. makes it
absolutely necessary to Salvation, that all Christians be subject to the Pope;
who has both the Swords, and Judges all Men, and is Judged of None. And the
Gloss upon that Extravagant dares to say our Savior had not done discreetly,
unless he had left such a Vicar behind him.

Bzovius an approved and applauded Author in that Communion, tells us the Pope
is Monarch of All Christians, Supreme over All Mortals, there lies no Appeal
from him, He is the great Arbitrator of the World.

Isiodorus Mosconius, Vicar General to the Archbishop of Bononia, and a great
Lawyer, terms the Pope the Universal Judge, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and
says that God's Tribunal and the Pope's are one and the same, that they have
the same Consistory, and therefore all other powers are his Subjects, that the
Pope is judged of none but God, not of the Emperor, Kings, Clergy or Laity.

Pope Innocent the Third, Extra. de Major. gives this description of the Papal
power, that it is as much greater than the Imperial, as the Sun is than the
Moon. And the Gloss says that is 47 times greater: but the note in the Margin
puts 57 times: nay there is an Author that adds 7744 times. This Decretal of
Innocent the III. and the forecited Extravagant of Boniface VIII. are both put
into the body of the Canon Law.

It would be endless to enumerate the Romish Authors that defend this
prodigious power of deposing Kings. Bellarmin, Suarez, Sa, Mariana, maintain
and prove this Doctrine. Nor do I know one Jesuit that teaches the contrary.
And it is very well worth our notice what an odd kind of answer Mr. Fisher gave
to King James, who demanded of him what he thought Subjects ought to do in the
case of the Pope's deposing a Prince? The Jesuit gives this sly return: I will
pray for Peace and Tranquillity between both Parties; I will exhort all to do
good offices conducing thereto, and will rather dye than any ways be accessory
to your Majesty's death. And no more could be got from him but this
Compliment. But else where he told the King more plainly, that he disclaimed
any singular opinion of his own, or more than the Definitions of Councils and
Consent of Divines did force him to hold. And what those are, we have pretty
well discovered.

The Canonists, Casuists and Schoolmen are Generally, if not Universally, of
this opinion, some teach that it is evident to all, that Emperors are to be
Deprived and Deposed by the Pope, not only for things pertaining to Faith, but
for Manners. Others, that the Secular Power is subject to the Spiritual, and
that it is no Usurpation, if the Spiritual judge the Secular: and that the Pope
has Supreme Power over Christian Kings and Princes and may Correct, Depose and
put others in their places: that he may deprive a King of Royal Dignity for
Heresy, Schism or any intolerable Crime, Negligence or Lazyness; if in great
matters be break his Oath, or oppress the Church, and several other Cases: and
that the Pope himself is sole Judge both of the Crime and of the Condemnation.
And Bzovius de Pontifice, Romans c. 46. p. 611. gives us a Catalogue of above 30
Kings and Princes who have de facto been Deposed, or by Anathema's damned by
the Pope. They count them Martyrs that dye for the maintaining this Power;
which cannot be unless they Esteem it an Article of Faith. And we have a late
Instance of F. Paul Magdalen, alias Henry Heath, a Learned and in his way
Pious, Franciscan, who was put to death by the Long Parliament about the year
1643. Who just before his Execution being desired to give his Judgment of the
Oath of Allegiance (which chiefly concerns our present purpose) declared it
absolutely unlawful, and that he would as soon lay down his Life for the
Refusal of it, as for any Article of the Roman Belief.

Eman. Sa is not ashamed to publish that if a Clergy Man rebel against his
King it is no Treasen, because Clergy men are not the Kings Subjects. Aphorism.
Confess. verbo Clericus. Others, (though I will not say this is so generally
taught) that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. And if my Memory fail not,
the Famous Navar has written a whole Tract in Defense of Equivocation and
Mental Reservation, and takes upon him the Defense of the Noble Society of
Jesus, as he calls them, for Universally teaching it: and to my knowledge
practicing it.

It were very Easy to collect these Corollaries out of the Canon Law, and the
Decretal of Boniface the VIII. That Emperors and Kings are the Popes Subjects;
that they may be Deposed for Heresy and any great Sin: that the Pope has
power over the whole World in Spirituals and Temporals, and that he has this
Temporal power in a more worthy, Superior and perfect manner than Temporal
Princes: that Statutes made by Lay Men do not bind the Clergy: that it is
necessary to Salvation to be subject to the Pope, and he who affirms the
contrary is no Christian; without any hope or possibility of Salvation. A most
Pious and Charitable Rhapsody of Canonical Theology!

Now you must understand that this Canon Law is approved, received and obeyed
in that Church, as The Rule of Justice in All their Courts and Consistories. In
this we further learn, that the Holy Church by her frequent Authority, absolves
Subjects from their Oaths to Superiors; and it exemplifies in Pope Zachary, who
deposed the King of France, not so much for his Iniquity as for his
Unprofitableness. And Cardinal Turrecremata in his Comment on this Canon proves
that Subjects, if they have the Popes Consent may Depose their Kings.

The Bulls of many Popes against the Princes both of our own and other Nations,
are too well known, and may at any time be seen in the Roman Bullary.

To draw to a Conclusion in this Odious Matter. Our Country Man Creswell the
Jesuit in his Philopater. sect. 2. affirms, That it is the Opinion of All
Catholics, that Subjects are bound to Depose an Heretical King: that they are
obliged by the Law of God, by the most strict bonds of Conscience and utmost
peril of their Souls to do this. Bellarmine de Romans Pontif. l. 5. c. 7. assures
us, it is the Consent of All Roman Catholics, that Heretical Princes, May and
Ought to be Deprived of their Dominions. And the English Cardinal Allen,
speaking how S. Thomas defended this Position, and how Cardinal Tolet expounds
him, adds these words of his own (in his Answer to the Book of English Justice)
Thus does this Notable School-man write: Neither do we know any Catholic
Divine of any Age to say the contrary.

If now, the Testimonies of their Own most eminent Writers, their established
Laws and Canons, their Authentic Papal Bulls and Decretal Constitutions, the
Decrees and Canons of their own General Councils (the confessed Representatives
of their whole Church) seconded by Actual Deposing of Emperors etc. be not
undeniable Evidence that this Seditious, Desperate and Pernicious Doctrine, is
the Doctrine of the Roman Church; I must humbly crave Pardon for my Ignorance
in their Faith, and must so far disown my self from ever having Embraced, that
I never understood their Doctrine, and consequently never was a Roman Catholic.

But how Repugnant are these Positions to the Doctrine and Example of our
Humble, Meek Jesus and his Apostles? Learn of me for I am Meek and Lowly. The
Son of man came not to be Ministered to, but to Minister. My Kingdom is not of
this World. Man, who made me a Judge or Divider over you? Luke 12.14. If I your
Lord and Master have washed your feet, etc. Render to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's. And He himself paid Tribute to Caesar, and made S. Peter do so
too. He submitted to the Power and Jurisdiction of Pilate, who was Caesar's
Deputy. And this not quia deerant Vires, because he wanted power to resist
called for more than 12 Legions of Angels. Nay so far was He from granting the
Two Swords, so much boasted of, to S. Peter, that he severely checks him for
making Use of one. And the Two Princes of the Apostles, as they are styled, S.
Peter and Paul, were perfectly of their Master's temper in this point. The
former would not permit a Common Centurion to fall down at his feet, Act.
10.25. and his Doctrine was far different from his Successors at Rome, 1 Pet.
2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: Whether
it be to the King, as Supreme. etc. Fear God, Honor the King. S. Paul preaches
the very same. Romans 13 1. etc. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers,
etc. For he bears not the Sword in vain. Wherefore you must needs be subject
not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake. And in matter of Jurisdiction he
expressly Appeals to the Judgment Seat of Nero the Emperor.

And till the Mystery of Iniquity had gained Head, the Roman Popes themselves
spoke in a different Dialect from what they now use. We were in hopes, says
Pope Leo, Ep. 44. to the Emperor Marcianus, that your Clemency would have
condescended so far as to have deferred the Council; but since You resolve it
should be kept, I have sent thither Paschasine. Pope Stephen speaks thus to
another Emperor, Has not the Roman Church sent her Legates to the Council when
you Commanded it? We offer these things to your Piety, says Pope Hadrian to the
Emperor Basilius, with all Humility, and veluti praesentes Genibus Advoluti,
as if we were present before you on our Knees.

Having thus as briefly as the matter would permit, dispatched what was chiefly
in my Design of penning this Discourse, and what had the greatest Influence on
the satisfying my own mind, I shall make much shorter work with what follows.

General Councils, when truly so, are highly venerated by Protestants, and the
Four first, so much honored by S. Gregory the Great, are better observed by
the Church of England, than by that of Rome. Nor are we so severe as S. Gregory
Nazian. Ep. 42. ad Procop. Who professes he had never seen any good or Happy
Issue of any of them: but looked on them as the Increase rather than Remedy of
the Church's Evils. Which Censure is certainly true of those Conventions which
have been for diverse Ages last past. No, we desire nothing more than a Free,
General Council to conclude differences in Religion: and are most ready to
submit to the Determinations of it, and yield the same Authority to it, which
the Ancient Church in the days of Constantine the Great, Theodosius, etc. and
which S. Augustine did.

And that we may not be slandered as being our own Judges, We only desire it
may be Qualified according to Cardinal Cusanus his Doctrine. Concord, Cath. l.
2. Where he declares that a Complete General Council consists of All the
Patriarchs and Principal Governors of the Universal Church. That a Council
kept by the Roman Bishop, and those only who are subject to him, excluding
others, is but a particular Council. That a General Council may be celebrated,
though the Pope refuse to concur by his Presence and Consent. That All that
meet in Councils, ought to have free Liberty, orderly to declare and Determine
Matters in question. That whatever must oblige as Divine, ought to be confirmed
by the Authority of Holy Scripture. That no Councils are Legitimate, where
private Respects are managed, under pretext of Faith and Religion. That the
Roman Bishop has not that power, which many flatterers attribute to him: viz.
That he alone is to Determine, and Others only to Consult and Advise. That a
General Council is Superior to the rest of the Patriarchs, and also to the
Roman Bishop. That a General Council may be deficient, and that de facto
Councils lawfully assembled have erred.

And since they have failed, and have contradicted one another; as appears in
the Second Council of Nice, and that of Constance among many others; the one
Decreeing the Worship of Images, the other prohibiting Communion in both Kinds;
against the express words of Scripture; the Councils of Lateran in Deposing
Kings: the Council of Frankfort opposite to that of Nice in the Business of
Images: the Council of Florence against those of Basil and Constance, in the
point of the Pope's Superiority over a Council; It is certain that Councils are
to be Regulated and Examined by God's Word, and to be Received or Rejected as
Conformable to, or Disagreeing from that. And for this we have the Authority of
the Great S. Augustine, contra Maxim. Arian. l. 3. c. 14. Nec ego Nicenum, etc.
Neither ought I to produce the Nicen, nor Thou the Ariminum Council, as having
already prejudged or absolutely Determined the Cause, beyond all Appeal. For I
am not bound up by the Authority of this, nor Thou by the Decree of that; but
let us regard the Authority of the Holy Scripture; witnesses not partial or
appropriated to either party, but common to both. A speech worthy the Gravity,
Learning, and Piety of S. Augustine.

As for the Councils of the Later Centuries, they neither have been General,
nor has either their Assembling or Proceeding been Lawful; and they have most
Industriously thwarted the Canons of the most Pure and Ancient Councils.

Their Assembling has not been Legal, in that the Modern Popes have Usurped
the whole Right and Authority of Convocating Councils contrary to the Primitive
Custom and Practice of the Church. The first Nicene Council was called by
Constantine the Great; the first Constantinopolitan, which is the second
General Council, by Theodosius; that of Ephesus, by Theodosius Junior; that of
Chalcedon, by Martianus; the fifth, by Justinian, etc. All which are such
evident Proofs, that the Cardinals, Cusanus, Jacobatius, and Zabarella confess,
that in the first Ages of the Church, the Right of Calling Councils belonged to
the Emperor.

Nor are Their Proceedings any better. For the Popes admit no Assessours or
Judges in Councils, but their own Faction, Men beforehand enslaved by a Solemn
Oath (which all Bishops of that Communion take at their Confecration) to
maintain the Regalia Petri, all the Usurpations of that See. The Pope is the
only Authentic Judge in All matters, Approving and Refusing whatever He
pleases.

Their own Histories afford us Examples enough to confirm this. I shall
instance but in the Sleights and Wiles of the Late so much cried up
Trent-Council. Wherein, to make sure work, on the Pope's side there were more
Italian Bishops than of all the World beside. And most ridiculously to dazzle
the eyes of the and Others as if they were Greek Prelates. Some had the Titles
of Archbishops, who had neither Church nor Diocese; as Vpsalensis and
Armachanus, who were Created on purpose to fill up the Number. And when the
Pope on a certain Occasion wanted Voices to sway the cause, He sent a fresh
supply of 40 Bishops newly made. And this was part of that Leigerdemain, which
an Eminent French Bishop, Claud. Espenc. one of those who sat in the Council,
calls the Great Helena which of late Ruled All at Trent. in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1.

All the Oriental and Greek Patriarchs and Bishops were Excluded: None out of
England, Scotland, Ireland, Danemark, Swedland; few out of France and Spain;
fewer out of Germany it self, were admitted. When the Protestants required
Audience, they could not be hearkened to, upon any tolerable terms. It was long
before they could get a Safe Conduct; and when it was procured, it was clogged
with this Clause, That it should belong to none, but such as would Repent and
Return to the Bosom of the Roman Church. This Partiality and Juggling when the
Princes of Europe saw, they sent their Protestations against the Council, as
being Insufficient to Reform Religion.

In Trying and Deciding Controversies, they adhered more to Tradition than
Scripture: and passed nothing till the Pope with his Consistory had seen it at
home, and approved it; and then he transmitted it to his Legates. So that, as
One said, the Holy Ghost was continually posted in Cloakbags between Rome and
Trent. (Though, by the way, their own Doctors teach that the Assistance of the
Holy Ghost is a personal Privilege and cannot be Delegated.) While the Divines
were formally Disputing at Trent, the Pope was as busy in Engrossing Canons at
Rome, and sending them to the Council to be published. Thus they proceeded,
sometimes by a wrong Rule, sometimes by none at all. In the 4th Session they
Decree, That none should give any other Exposition of Scripture, than such as
might agree with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. And yet this very Doctrine
was the Thing questioned, and the Scriptures were to have been the Touchstone
to try it by.

Take this whole Affair in the Words of Andraeas Dudithius, a Bishop in the
Roman Church, and an Eminent Member of this Council. He thus writes in an
Epistle to the Emperor Maximilian the 2d, What good could be done in that
Council, where voices were taken by Number, and not by Weight? The Pope was
able to set an 100 of his against every one of ours; and if an 100 were not
sufficient, he could on a sudden have created a thousand to succor those that
were ready to faint. We might every day see hungry and needy Bishops, and those
for the most part Beardless Youngsters, come in Flocks to Trent, hired to give
their Voice according to the Pope's humor: unlearned indeed and foolish but of
good Use to him for their Audaciousness and Impudency The Holy Ghost had
nothing to do with that Conventicle. All things were carried by Humane Policy,
which was wholly employed in Maintaining the Immoderate, and indeed most
Shameless Lordship and Domineering of the Pope. From thence were Answers waited
for, as from the Oracles of Delphos or Dodona. From thence the Holy Ghost, who,
as they brag, was President of their Council, was sent shut up in Carriers
Budgets, who (a thing worthy to be laughed at) when the Waters were up, as it
falls out many times, was fain to stay till they were down again, before he
could repair to the Council. By this means it came to pass, that the Spirit was
not carried on the Waters, as in Genesis, but along besides the Waters, etc.

Nothing is more talked of than the Infallibility of the Church of Rome: and
this I know to be a most tempting Bait to get Proselytes; especially amidst
those Many Dissentions in the Christian World at this Day. But because this
Pretext has been utterly destroyed by the Lord Falkland, Mr. Chillingworth,
and other most Learned Pens, I will only Recommend this Single Consideration to
All Judicious Roman Catholics, who would not be chouced out of their Wits,
Estates and Liberties by a Gang of Ecclesiastical Mountebanks, viz. That this
Huge, Swelling Prerogative of Infallibility is so Senseless a Thing, so
Ungrounded, that no Romanist according to his own Principles, can have so much
as a probable Moral Assurance of that wherein he thinks himself Infallible. And
unless every one in particular be Infallible, it is to little purpose to boast
of an Infallible Judge. For a Man may as well mistake the Meaning of his
Sentence, as the Sentence of one who proceeds only upon prudent Moral
Assurance: and we see that thousands do err in the Intepretation of those
acknowledged Infallible Oracles, the Holy Scriptures.

The Consideration I recommend is this. That after All the Stir that is made
about Infallibility, the Learnedest amongst them knows not where to meet with
it; nor in what cases it is annexed to that Chair, in what it forsakes it.
Some, as the Jesuits generally, will have it in the Pope: but then whether with
his Cardinals, or by Himself is controverted very briskly. Others will have it
in a General Council: and this Opinion is backed by no less Authority than the
Councils of Basil and Constance. But then the Church has been very long
without it, and possibly may never enjoy it by means of a General Council to
the End of the World. That wherein they fix it with most plausibility is both
the Pope and a Council together. But even here we are at a great many losses.
For as to the Pope, no man can be assured of his being a true Pope; considering
the various defects that may render him otherwise; as a fundamental Error in
his Election, Simoniacal Induction, the female Sex, Want of true Baptism and
Holy Orders, both which depend upon the Intention and Validity of those, from
whom he receives them; and theirs upon the like Qualifications in their
Predecessors, etc. Occult Heresy and Many others. And then as to a Council,
which consists chiefly of Bishops (tho the Popes, for some ends best known to
themselves have now packed in Cardinals, Abbots, Generals of Orders, etc.
besides that, the Validity of a Council depends upon the uncertainty of the
Pope's being truly Qualified; the very same Difficulties occur in every
particular Member, as did in respect of the Pope himself. The like uncertainty
appears in every Sacrament administered in that Church, some whereof are
absolutely necessary, both Necessitate Medii and Praecepti. v. g. in Baptism,
Absolution, Consecration of the Host, which if it be not duly performed,
Idolatry is committed by the People in adoring it, even by their own
Concessions. Azorius the Jesuit, Enchirid. c. 8. openly proclaims, That it is a
more tolerable Error in them who worship Golden and Silver Statutes, as the
Gentiles did their Gods; nay, a piece of red Cloth on the top of a Spear, as
the Laplanders are reported to do, than in those who adore a piece of Bread.

And now I would fain know of a Lay-Roman-Catholick, what is become of his
Infallibility, where it is, and to what purpose it serves him? No where is it
to be found, as I know of, but in the bold Assertion of every pragmatical
Confessor, Who bids you be sure to look to your Faith; (who are the Solifidians
now?) to believe as the Church believes, and then all is safe; for the breach
of the Ten Commandments, there are Merits and Indulgences enough in the Church,
which being mixed with a little Attrition and Confession will do the work.
Though in the mean while He himself can neither tell where this Infallible
Church is, nor what she certainly believes.

Methinks S. Paul spoke as much like a Prophet as an Apostle: as if he foresaw
the Haughtiness of the Members of that Church to which he wrote. And therefore
to curb them and banish from their Minds all such vain conceits of
Infallibility, he tells the Church of Rome she stood on no firmer grounds than
her Neighbors. His words are these, worthy to be had in everlasting
Remembrance by All Roman Catholics. Romans 11.18, 19, Boast not against the
Branches, etc. Well: because of unbelief they were broken off; and Thou
stand by Faith. Be not highminded, but fear. For if God spared not the
natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not Thee. Behold therefore the
Goodness and Severity of God: on them which fell, Severity, but toward Thee,
Goodness; if Thou continue in his Goodness: otherwise Thou also shall be cut
off. Which words need rather your Practice than my Paraphrase.

How much Safer and more Satisfactory is it to rely on the Holy Scriptures
themselves; which by all Sides are acknowledged Infallible? For as much as they
were divinely Inspired by that great Infallible Truth, which neither can be
deceived, nor deceive his Creatures; which can make you wise enough to
Salvation, and who has promised to every humble Petitioner, and devout
Practiser, a sufficient Competency of Knowledge, in what is necessary for his
present Condition and Eternal Happiness.

Now all this you will find abundantly provided for in the Doctrine and
Constitutions of the Church of England.

Here is the Word of God faithfully Translated, and exactly, as far as the
Idiomes of Languages will permit, compared with the Originals: and All those
Books received, of whose Authority there was never any doubt made in the
Church. Some others called Apocryphal, are read indeed; but as Ruffinus in
Exposit. Symboli, speaks, non ad Fidem firmandam sed ad Mores Instruendos: Not
for confirming Faith, but for direction of Manners. And they are excluded from
the Canon upon very weighty Reasons. For that they were never committed as of
Divine Authority to the Jews: to whom the Oracles of God were entrusted, Romans
3.2. Nor are they to be found in the Hebrew Canon, They are never found cited
by Christ or his Apostles: and in some places they contain things manifestly
false, contradictory both to themselves and the other Genuine Prophetical
Writers.

You have here the three Creeds, the Apostles, that of the Nicene Council, and
that of S. Athanasius: together with the four first General Councils, which
represent to us the Sincere Scheme of Apostolical, Primitive Doctrine and
Discipline.

You have here good works Recommended, Preached and Practiced, as the Fruits of
Faith and Evidences of our Justification: and though not as Expiatory for our
Sins, yet as in Obedience to the Divine commands, and as a Sacrifice acceptable
to God. And even in this Degenerate Age of Christianity it might be made to
appear, that as many Acts and Monuments of Real Charity have been exhibited
since the Reformation, as were in many Ages before. But for those Works of
Supererrogation, as they are called, whereby we are presumed to perform more
than is our Duty, this Church worthily disowns them, as savouring of too much
Pride and self Conceitedness in us, who at the best are but unprofitable
Servants.

You have here a just and Competent Authority allowed to the Church, of
appointing Decent Rites and Ceremonies, and of determining Controversies in
Religion: provided she decide nothing Repugnant to the Holy Scripture. And the
Apostles themselves challenged no more, Witness S. Paul: Be ye followers of me
as I am of Christ.

You have here a Lawful Call to and Succession in the Ministerial Function (and
this Succession, if need were, may be shown to be more Sincere and less
Interrupted than that in the Roman Church.) As likewise those Three most
Ancient degrees of Bishops, Priests and Deacons: and the manner of their
Ordination most conformable to God's Word and Primitive Constitutions and
Practice.

You have here all the Divine Services and Administration of the Sacraments,
performed in the known Vulgar Tongue of the Country, to the Edification of the
People, and according to Divine Precept. On which Subject S. Paul has written
a whole Chapter, 1 Cor. 14. no ways reconcilable to the Practice of the Roman
Church: which herein is confessed to disagree with Antiquity, by the most
Learned of our Adversaries, and many of them wish that the Custom were
abolished. Nor does their Common Plea avail; that God understands any Language:
for many parts of their Service are addressed to the People, and not to God: as
the Instructions out of the Epistles and Gospels, Orate Fratres, etc. and many
Occurrencies in the Administration of the Sacraments.

Here you will find the two great Sacraments of the New Law, Baptism and the
Sacred Eucharist. The first never so much as questioned by our Adversaries as
to its Validity. And the other Administered in the due Matter and Form of Divine
Institution; and that entirely, without committing that Grand Sacrilege of
taking away the Cup from the Layity. And if the Church of England Embrace all
that is Really conveyed to us in those High Mysteries, viz. The Application of
those Ineffable Benefits and Advantages of the Sacred Body and Blood of Christ;
it is as much as every Good Christian can desire, and enough, if duly received,
to make him Happy.

And as for that Wonderful Doctrine of Transubstantiation, we have the Romanists
own Acknowledgment, that it was not believed in that Church till the Council of
Lateran, which likewise Decreed the Deposing of Kings: and I am sure the Church
of England has Scripture, Antiquity, Reason, and the concurring Testimony of
all our Senses, when she acknowledges a Real Presence to the True Believer,
without Annihilating the Substance of the Elements.

I am sure our Blessed Savior at the Institution calls the whole Action a
Commemoration: and in the Consecration of the Cup he most apparently uses a
double Figure; both in the Cup, used for what is in it, and the Testament, for
what is conveyed by it. He himself calls it the Fruit of the Vine. And S. Paul,
1 Cor. 11.26.27, 28. in 3 verses together expressly calls it Bread even after
the Consecration; Whoever shall eat this Bread, etc. As often as ye eat this
Bread, etc. Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of this Bread.

And whereas our Savior says This is my Body: to omit the multitude of
Authorities that might be produced, let the great S. Augustine speak the sense
of All Antiquity: Christ did not stick to say This is my Body, when he gave the
Sign of his Body, in Psalm. 98. and de Doctrine. Christian. l. 3. c. 10. he lays
down this notable Rule; If you find a Commandment that forbids a Crime, or
injoins any good Action, then its sense is not Figurative: but it is otherwise
when it seems to command a Crime and prohibit a good Action. Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you, says
Christ. That word seems to command a Crime: it is therefore a Figure; which
bids us Communicate in the passion of our Lord, and call into our Memories with
sweetness and benefit, that his Flesh has been wounded and nailed on the Cross
for us.

Thus does S. Augustine teach. And indeed nothing is more frequent in Holy Writ,
than such manner of Speech: This is the Lord's Passover. I am the true Vine,
etc. But to examine this business fully, would require a just Volume, and it is
already done by very able Pens.

The 5 other Sacraments in use in the Roman Church, are solemnly used by the
Church of England, though not under that notion: excepting the Ceremony of
Anointing, which was a Miraculous gift of Healing peculiar to the Apostles.

In the Church of England you may enjoy the true use and Advantage of
Confession and Absolution, in a far more serious and less suspicious manner
than in the Roman Church. And as for Absolution, even the Form of it is as full
and Complete as theirs. I will set it down here, as it is found in the Service
for the Visitation of the Sick. -- Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power
to his Church, to Absolve all Sinners, who truly Repent and Believe in him, of
his Great Mercy forgive thee thy offenses: And by his Authority committed to
me, I absolve thee from all thy Sins; in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Her Churches are decently kept and adorned, (at least it is her desire they
should be so) though not crowded with Images: the Historical use of which she
rejects not: but the Adoration of them she worthily esteems most Dangerous and
Detestable. And truly for my own part, I think that Dr. Stillingfleet, now the
Reverend Dean of S. Paul's, has little less than Demonstrated it to be
Idolatry. Let any but impartially examine the general practice of the Church of
Rome, especially on Good Friday in creeping to the Cross: and he will find an
undeniable proof of their Adoring Images. The Priest by degrees uncovers the
Crucifix, lifts it upto be Adored with these words, Ecce Lignum Crucis, etc.
Behold the Wood of the Cross, come let us Adore it. Then first he himself, then
all that are present, with three Prostrations of the Body, even to the Kissing
of the very Earth, approach to it, and with all Reverence Imaginable Adore it.

The Worship and Invocation of Saints and Angels, is here looked upon as at
least very Dangerous, and not having any President in the Old or New Testament.
S. Paul has imparted his mind to us in this matter. Coloss. 2.18. Let no man
beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen.

The Doctrines of Merit, Indulgences, Purgatory, etc. are presumptuous at best,
and full of Abuses, contrived more for the Priests profit than the Penitents
comfort. All which considered, together with the small grounds for the belief
of them, they are worthily disowned by the Church of England. Nor was
Bellarmin, when out of the heat of School Disputes, of a Different Judgment, l.
5. de Justif. c. 7. Propter incertitudinem, etc. By reason of the Uncertainty
of our own Justice and the Danger of Vain Glory; Tutissimum est, etc. It is the
safest course to repose all our Confidence in the alone Mercy and Benignity of
God.

In short, you will find that the Church of England in her Reformation, which
was most Regular, and by the Supreme Authority of the Whole Nation, retains all
the Essentials of Christianity, and only Rectified such things as She found,
and the whole World complained, were some Ridiculous, some Impious; Others
Sensual and Cruel.

Such are the Innumerable Crossings, Repetitions of Names, Kissings of the Pax
and Images, Offering up of Incense and Candles, Impertinent Pilgrimages, etc.
and a Thousand the like absurdities.

Such as teach men to put their Confidence in Blessed Beads and Medals,
Counterfeit Relics, Confraternities, Sodalities; to trust to Mundayes Prayers
for the Dead, and our Lady's Litanies: and Ascribe to pieces of Wax called
Agnus Dei's, Divine power and Efficacy, even as much as is due only to the
Precious Blood of the Son of God. Nor is this the belief and practice only of
a few Old Wives: but the Authentic Book of the Sacred Ceremonies of the Roman
Church, tells us how Urban V. sent three Agnus Dei's to the Greek Emperor, with
most Blasphemous Rythmes annexed concerning their Virtue. Amongst others this
is Verbatim set down, -- Peccatum frangit ut Christi sanguis et angit -- that
it Destroys Sin as the Blood of Christ does.

And this was not the Practice of one Fantastical Pope alone, but according to
the foresaid Book, l. 1. Every Pope in blessing these Agnus Dei's uses this
Prayer. That it would please thee, O God, to bless these things, which we
purpose to pour into this Vessel of Water prepared for thy Name: so as by the
Worship and Honor of them, we thy Servants may have our heinous offenses done
away, the blemishes of our Sins wiped off, and thereby we may obtain pardon,
etc.

No Meaner a Person than the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas Aquinas, attributes the
same Virtue of taking away Venial Sins, to Holy Water. And likewise 3. qu. 25.
a. 3. in c. most Orthodoxly defends, That Stocks and Stones, I mean Images, are
to be worshipped with Latria, the same Honor that is due to the Creator.
Suarez and Vasquez teach the same.

To Conclude this Discourse. In the Church of England You will meet with all
that is Good and Warrantable in the Church of Rome; what ever is Necessary to
Salvation: and that by the Confession of the Learnedest Romans. Let Bellarmin
speak for all. l. 4. de Verbo Dei. c. 11. The Apostles themselves never used to
Preach openly to the people (much less propounded as Articles of Faith) other
things than the Articles of the Apostles Creed, the Ten Commandments, and some
few of the Sacraments: because, says he, These are simply Necessary and
Profitable for All Men: the Rest besides are Such, as that a Man may be Saved
without them.

This made Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalatto, even at his Return to
Rome, to acknowledge the English Church to be a True Apostolical Church. And
Father Fulgentio the Venetian, Companion to Father Paul, the Famous Compiler of
the History of the Council of Trent, had a most High value and Tender Respect
for this Church, as having in it all the Requisites for Faith, Manners and
Discipline. And that Incomparable Man, Hugo Grotius, had so Venerable an
Affection for her, above all other Reformed Churches, that he told our
Ambassador in France, That he Intended after his Return from Swedland, whither
he was designed Ambassador from the States General, to transport himself with
his whole Family hither, on purpose to dye in the Bosom of the English Church.
In such Repute is She even with Foreigners.

And to speak one word to the Roman Catholics of England even in their own
Language. By their own Concessions, the Church of England is safer to
Communicate with than that of Rome.

For, To Believe only what is in the Scripture, is as much as is necessary, as
Bellarmin Confesses. To worship God without an Image, is acknowledged by all
both safe and acceptable. To pray immediately to God, and use the Lord's
Prayer, without Repeating so many Ave Maria's; to perform the best works we
can, and not stand on the point of Merit, etc. and so of the other matters in
Controversy, is by both Sides granted secure: Whereas the other Things in
debate, are strongly disputed by very Learned and Pious Men. Now what would a
Man require more than what all acknowledge to be in the Church of England: viz.
Means effectually conducing and sufficient to Believe Well, to Pray Well, to
Live Well, and to Dye Well.

It remains only, that the Truly Devout and Loyal Persons in our Nation that
are of the Roman Persuasion, will but vouchsafe to take the Courage and Pains
following Our Blessed Savior's Advice, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures; and
S. Paul's, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things. 2 Cor. 13.5. And examine your
selves whether you be in the Faith.

A POSTSCRIPT To the Roman Catholics of my Acquaintance.
Ever Honored and still Respected Friends,
HAving thus fairly and ingenuously unbosomed to you the very thoughts of my
Heart, I beseech You not to take with the Left Hand what I offer with the
Right. Many of You I know to be Truly Virtuous, Noble and Loyal: to Many I have
most Endearing Obligations; and I think none can contradict me if I affirm,
That my Converse among You was repaid with Love and Esteem: and I take Heaven
and Earth to witness, that I still value you as tenderly as I do my own Soul.
God only knows how many Throes and Struglings I had to part with those, whom
I so Earnestly affected. But Truth (at least as it seems to me) is Great, and
will prevail. My Request to You All is, That You would not let us break in
point of Charity, though our Opinions are not altogether Coincident: That You
would, for the removing any scruples that may arise, believe me, as I shall
answer at the Last Tribunal, That I was not only Sincere but Zealous, while I
remained among You: and that whatever I performed, was with the perfect
Intention of, and Compliance with the Roman Church; and as Validly done as any
Actions of that nature are capable of admitting. Lastly, I desire for God's,
Religion's, and Your own sake, that we may refrain from All Contumelious
Reflections on one another.

In that Long Converse and Great Familiarity I had with you, it is impossible,
but Failings and Imperfections must be discovered on both sides. Let All be
concealed Under the Mantle of that Charity, which hides a multitude of Sins:
still think of me as you ever found, One that sought not Yours, but You: an
honest, plain downright meaning Person. And as for my present Proceedings
Leave me to stand or fall to that Great Judge, to whose, and his Church's
Censure, I with the most profound Obedience Submit, whatever I Write or Do.

And Once more I recommend to your most impartial and serious Consideration
this Important Quaery: Whether it be not Sufficient Ground to withdraw from the
Communion of a Church, when She is convinced publicly to Teach, Practice and
Command Treason and Rebellion to its Members? Sicut Repurari cupiunt and Haberi
Fideles, (as the Lateran Council Thunders it out) as they desire to be
Accounted and Treated as Christians.

As to the Traitorous and Monstrous Plot now in Question; What Mr. Oats and Mr.
Bedlow, with the rest of the Informers Evidences are, I know not nor am I much
Inquisitive. His Sacred Majesty, and his Great Council are Judges of that. But
of this I am as sure as I can be of any humane Transaction, That the Roman
Church Teaches and Commands such Practices; That they have been frequently put
in Execution abroad and especially at Home: And that consequent to such
Doctrines, Mr. Coleman by his own Confession, and Letters which he did not
deny, was very Busy in attempting to Dissolve the Parliament, and in procuring
Assistance from the French King, by the interposition of Monsieur le Chese the
Jesuit, who was that King's Confessor: (to use his own words) To Carry on the
Mighty Work in their hands, no less than the Conversion of Three Kingdoms, and
the Utter Subduing of a Pestilential Heresy, which has Domineered over a
great part of this Northern World a long time; and that there never was such
hopes of success since the days of their Q. Mary, as now in These days, -- And
I am sure, that a most Worthy Justice of Peace was Barbarously Murdered, who
took the Examinations upon that occasion; and that many other Insolent Actions
were committed by that Party. Nor can it be any satisfaction to the Nation for
well-minded Persons to say they Disclaim and Detest such Actions; unless they
Renounce the Principles, and Disown the Authority which have promoted and still
are ready to prompt men to such Desperate Practices. God Almighty grant Us All
his Grace to Consider in This Our Day the Things that Belong to Our Peace,
before they be Hid from Our Eyes. Amen.

FINIS.

