C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent the Sumptuary Act, 1684.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch as We, with advice and consent of Our Estates of Parliament, have
taken special care to restrain the expensive vanity of wearing Clothes, and
the exorbitant ^^pences at Baptisms, Marriages, and Burials; and particularly
by the twelith and fourteenth Acts of O^r c^^rent Parliament, The wearing of
all Flour'd, Stripped, Figured, Chequered, printed or painted Silk Stuffs, or
Ribbans, are ^^presly discharged to be worn by any of Our Subjects within this
Kingdom of what degree or quality soever, in manner, and under (...)
Certifications contained in the said twelfth Act. And whereas the said
fourteenth Act of Our said current Parliament, Entitled, ActRestraining the
exorbitant Expenses of Marriages, Baptisms, Burials, and penny Weddings, the
same is regulate in the way and manner th^^in prescribed; yet several Women,
even in Our Capital City of Edinburgh, and elsewhere throughout this Our
Kingdom, have presum^d to go abroad with Clothes made of the said prohibited
Stuffs, upon pretext that they are only Night-Gowns, ^ndresses, or Mant^^^
whereas all manner of wearing of the said Stuffs is expressly prohibited and
discharged, under the penalty of five hundred Merks o^ Money, toties quoties,
by and attour the Confiscation of the said Clothes. As also, several persons
to elude the Law in downright mockery, and contempt of the same, have presumed
to wear and make use of long black Mandel-Coats (which are indeed more
expensive to Our Lieges then the Clocks formerly worn at Burials and other
occasions, upon the death of their Relations) albeit the wearing of Mourning
Clocks be by the said fourteenth Act discharged, under the penalty of one
hundred pounds Scots; As also, several persons have lately run to that hight of
extravagancy, as to cause cover the Coffins of Persons to be Buried, with fine
black Cloth and Fringes, of purpose to elude the intent of the said Act of
Parliament, made for restraining the exorbitant Expenses of Burials, etc. And
diverse persons have presumed, since the date of the said Act, to make penny
Weddings, where great confluence of Our Subjects have resorted, which is a most
extravagant expense to Our Lieges; albeit by the said fourteenth Act, The
Master of the House, where the said penny Weddings are kept, either within
Burgh or Subu^bs, or within two miles of the same are ordainted to be Fined in
the sum of five hundred merks. For preventing of which abuses, and putting the
said Laws strictly in Execution; We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge all Our Subjects within
this Our Kingdom, of whatsomever degree or quality, to wear, and go abroad with
any of the said prohibit Stuffs, either in Gowns, Man^ois, Undresses,
Night-gowns, or any other manner of wearing whatsomever. As likewise D^
Prohibit and Discharge all wearing of the said long black Mandel Coats at
Burials, or any other occasions: and more especially, discharges all Merchants,
Tailors, or others, to Set, or Let out the said long Coats for Hire, and that
under the pain contained in the said fourteenth Act of Our current Parliament,
to be inflicted on these who shall Hire or Let the same, as well as the
Wearers. And prohibit and discharge any person whatsoever to make use of any
Coffins for their Friends or Relations covered with Silk, Cloa^h, Stuffs,
Baizes or F^^^ges; or whereupon there is any Carving, or Mullering, or Brass
or Iron Work thereupon for Ornament, allowinog only so much as shall be for
necessary use: Discharging all Carpenters and others, of making such Coffins,
or any to make use of them, under the penalty of an hundred pound Scots, toties
quoties: As also, Discharges the said penny Weddings, under the foresaid
penalty, contained in the said Act of Parliament. And do hereby strictly
Require and Command all Our Judges and Magistrates in Burgh and Landward,
respective, to call and conveen before them, the Contraveeners of the foresaids
Laws and Acts respective, and to inflict on them the Penalties contained
therein, after the Form and Tenor thereon and of this Our Proclamation, in all
points, under the Penalty of being called and pursued before Our Privy Council,
for their neglect And to the effect Our Pleasure in the Premises may be made
known; Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent,
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edi^burgh, and remanent
Market Crosses in the head Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other
places needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation,
make publication of the Premises, that all persons concerned may have notice
thereof and give obedience (...) to, as they will be answerable The which to
do. We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full power, by their Our
L^^ters, delivering them by you, duly execute, and indorsed again to the
Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty fourth day of April, One
thousand six hundred eighty and four. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and sixth
Year. 1684. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti.
Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1684.


