
Edinburgh, August 22. 1689.
WHEREAS by an Act of Council, of the sirth of this I^stant, in Pursuance of an
Act of the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, of the thirteenth of April
last, the Parochioners and Hearers of such Ministers as have neglected and
slighted the Reading of the Proclamation therein mentioned, and the Praying for
King William and Queen Marry, are invited and allowed to Cite such Ministers
before the Privy Council, which Act of Council grants Warrant for Citing and
Adducing Ministers; And forasmuch as the Design of the said Act, is, that such
Ministers who have Disobeyed the said Act of the Meeting of the Estates, may
conform thereto by a Legal Sentence be Deprived; Therefore that the said Act of
the Meeting of the Estates, and the Act of Council pursua^t thereof, may attain
there intended Design, and Effect with the greater Expedition, and least
Expenses to the Leidges, The Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, in Their
Majesty's flame and Authority. Do invite and allow, not only the Parochioners
and hearers of such Ministers as have Disobeyed; but also the heretors of these
Parochins, and the Sheriffs or their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs
Respective, and the Members of this Current Parliament, within there Respective
Bounds, to cause Cite such Ministers before the Privy Council, and hereby
grants Warrant to Messengers at Arms, for Citing them, and such Witnesses as
are necessary, they delivering a Copy of these Presents, either in Print or in
Writ, Signed by their hand, to each Minister that shall be Cited by them to any
Tuesday or Thursday, six days after the Citation, for all on this side the
River Tay, and fifteen days for all beyond the said River, That such Ministers
who have not given Obedience to the said Act of the Meeting of the Estates, may
be a Legal Sentence be Deprived according thereto; and Appoints the Returns of
these Executions to be Enrolled by the Clerk of Privy Council, and Called
before the Lords at their respective days of Compearance; Declaring that these
Present are but prejudice of any Citations already given, or to be given,
either upon the former Act of Council, or upon Warrands from the Council Board.
And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published by the Officers of
Prive Council at the Mercat-Crosse of Edinburgh, that none may pretend
Ignorance.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of His Majesty's
Privy Council, Anno Dom. 1689.


