A PROCLAMATION, Discharging Silk Lace, white Lace and Point to be imported or
worn upon Apparel.
CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We, out of Our Princely care for the Wealth and Flourishing of
this Our Kingdom, By the twelfth Act of Our present current Parliament, did
give, and grant several privileges, liberties, and immunities to such of Our
good Subjects, as would erect, and set up Manufactories for their
encouragement, and made a stop to the import of diverse expensive, and
superfluous commodities, expressed in the said Act: which had exceedingly
exhausted the money of this Kingdom; and hightned the exchange to foreign
places, which is now much fallen: and did discharge the wearing of the said
prohibited goods, and commodities within this Kingdom, after the first of Apryl
next, under the penalties, and certifications contained in the said Act of
Parliament. And whereas the prefixed day discharging the wearing of the said
prohibited commodities, is now approaching: We have thought fit, with advice of
Our Privy Council, hereby to publish, and declare Our firm resolution, for
putting the said Act of Parliament to due and punctual execution. And do
strictly require and charge all Judges, Magistrates and others, to whom the
execution of the said Act is committed, to be careful to see the same put to
due and vigorous execution: and to exact and uplift the penalties from the
contraveeners, without any favor, or defalcation: as they will be answerable
in their several Offices and Trusts: And We being informed that to evacuat, and
elude the foresaid Act, and to bring Our Subjects to greater expenses; Some
Merchants have taken upon them to import Silk Laces, White Laces, and Point
Laces, of great value: Do therefore, with advice foresaid, hereby discharge all
Merchants, or other Persons of what quality soever, to import, into this
Kingdom; or any person to wear any Apparel, or Clothes upon which there is any
Silk Lace, White Lace of thread, or Point, after the first day of Apryl next,
under the penalty of five hundred merks Scots, toties quoties, by and attour
Confiscation of the Clothes, upon which any of the said prohibited Laces, or
Point shall be found, excepting always forth hereof, the having, and wearing
of White Lace of thread, or Point upon Rufles, Cravats, Bands, Handkirchiss,
and night Linens only, but upon no other Clothes, or Linens; and allowing
Servants to wear their Masters or Mistrisses old Clothes. And to show how much,
We are resolved to discourage all new expensive inventions to disappoint the
said Act, when they shall occur, We discharge a new Invention called
Gratigning, or Scratching Silk Stuffs that shall be worn in Clothes, under the
said penalty: As also We discharge all Noblemen, Gentlemen, or others, to have
upon their Liveries any Lace made of Silk, after the said day, under the
penalty foresaid. And ordains all Sheriffs, Stewarts, and other Judges, and
Magistrates, to whom the execution of the late Act of Parliament anent Apparel
is (...) cause put this Act in execution in the ^^ty and manner prescribed by
the said Act of Parliament: as they will be answerable. The which to do, We
commit to you conjunctly and severally, Our full power, by these Our Letters,
delivering them, by you duly execute, and indorsat again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of March, One thousand
six hundred and eighty two, and of Our Reign the thretty fourth year. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilij. PAT. MENZIES, Cl. Sti. Concilij.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1682.


