THE HORRID SIN OF Man-Catching.

The SECOND PART.

Or Further Discoveries and Arguments to prove, That there is no
PROTESTANT-PLOT; And that the Design of Casting a Plot upon them, by the
Suborned Man-Catchers, was Antecedent to the first Discovery of the POPISH-PLOT.

Together with some further Discoveries concerning M. BOOTH.

Humbly Dedicated to the Right Honorable, the EARL of SHAFTSBVRY.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones, 1681.

To the Right Honorable, ANTHONY, EARL of SHAFTSBURY.
My Lord,
SO Ancient is the Custom of Dedicating Books to Persons of the greatest Worth
and Eminence, whose shining Virtues display themselves with so much Illustrions
Beauty, that like the radiant Beams of the Sun, they forceably Attract the
Admiring Eyes of all Men, and create in them a Desire of having their Names
found in the Frontisepiece of their Books; that we find it practiced even by
some of the Inspired Penmen of the Sacred Scriptures; for St. Luke Dedicates
his History of the Life and Actions of our Blessed Savior, and that of the
Acts of the Apostles, to the most Excellent Theophilus.

Your Lordship being one of those few that have adventured to stem the Stream,
and presumed to be Virtuous, when to be Wicked and Debauched is in Fashion; And
that dare to be Loyal, when to be so, is the way to be accounted Disloyal, and
that dare Oppose the Ambitious Designs of a Malicious and Bloody Party;
Together with your Lordship's having Suffered so deeply by these Shams, is all
the Apology I shall make for presuming to lay these Lines at your Lordship's
Feet.

The Malice of your Enemies shall serve as a File to set off the Glory and
Luster of your Lordship's Loyalty, and your Name shall Live when theirs is
Dead, and shine in Splendor, when theirs, like a Blaze, is gone out in a
Snuff, the remembrance of your Name shall be as the smell of a pleasant Field,
or the delightful fragrancy which comes from a Garden of Flowers, when the
remembrance of theirs shall be nauseous and offensive.

As the mighty Artaxerxes accepted a Cup of Water from the hand of a Peasant,
so your Lordship will show how great a Master you are in the Art of
Condescension, by Accepting these poor Endeavors of, my Lord,

Your Lordship's most Humble and Devoted Servant, T. S.

THE HORRID SIN OF Man-Catching. The SECOND PART.
IN such a shamming Age as this is, wherein shamming is become a Trade or
Science, and the Workmen so Ingenious, that no sooner is one Sham discovered
but a new one is contrived to sham that, so that for these last three years
there has been nothing but sham upon sham, or rather one continued sham in
several disguises; it will not be amiss to Collect and gather together all
those several Shams which have been carried on by the Papists since the Plot,
wherein they have had a double aim; the first, to stifle the Noise of their own
Plot; the second, to sham one upon the Protestants; thereby hoping to destroy a
considerable number of those by their second, which they missed the destroying
by their first Plot.

The first Sham we find took air, was immediately upon the first discovery of
the Plot, by Mr. Everard, whereby they so ordered the matter, that his
discovery was rewarded with the Tower, whither the Sham follows him, and he is
solicited to lay a Plot upon the Protestants; even so early was the Design laid
to carry a Plot upon the Protestants. Sir John Robinson told him, those stories
he had discovered, concerning the Plot, were but trifles, and starting-holes
from the only point he had to urge against him. That unless he would confess
other Matters against the Duke of Monmouth, he would Rack him the next day, and
afterward hang him.

The next Sham wherein they endeavored to lay not only a Plot to Destroy the
King; but (that which I cannot Write without horror) the real Murder of the
best of Kings, our present Sovereign, whom God long preserve, upon the
Presbyterians, was their procuring some to swear against one Clapool, that he
should say, he would Kill the King; whereby they got him secured in the Tower,
that so if God had permitted that which he has graciously prevented, viz. the
Murder of our dread Sovereign, they had presently laid it on the Presbyterians;
for say they, there is one in the Tower that threatened it.

The third Sham was as they would have the rest, if they could, a bloody one,
viz. The Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, which was done immediately upon the
discovery of the Plot, by Dr. Oats, and then a cursed Report spread abroad by
those Murderers, that he had Murdered himself, wherein they had a double
Design; first to stifle the further Prosecution and Discovery of the Hellish
Popish Plot, first by taking out of his Pocket, when they Murdered him, the
Depositions of Dr. Oats. Secondly, By an infallible preventing his being a
Witness against Coleman, at his Trial; who, had as some say, discovered such
things to him, which they found means to prevent his discovering to any other,
by promising to procure him a Pardon. Thirdly, By discouraging all Justices of
the Peace and other Magistrates from daring to meddle with it any more, for
fear of undergoing the like fate. Their second Design in this Murder, was, by
the cunning contrivance of it, to insinuate, that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey had
been an Ill man, and had Conspired, with other Protestants, to Forge a Plot
against the Papists, and hired Dr. Oats, to Swear it, thereby the better to
bring about some cursed Contrivance of their own; but being dogged and haunted
by the horror of a guilty Conscience, for unjustly laying such Horrid Crimes to
the Charge of the poor innocent Roman Catholics, was forced to become his own
Executioner.

The fourth Sham was their endeavor to prevail with Captain Bury and Alderman
Brook, to Swear the Plot upon the Protestants, for which purpose, they were to
draw up in Writing what they would have them Swear, and promised 500 l. for
their Reward. Now although these great Offers were not embraced by these men,
yet since they efcap'd so well without Punishment, they resolved to offer them
to all with whom they had the least hopes to prevail, until some or other would
adventure to purchase this Gold at the price of Blood.

The fifth Sham, was my Lord Treasurer's taking Bedloe into his Closet, and by
great Offers, tempting him to withdraw his Evidence concerning the Popish Plot.

The sixth Sham, was that great Attempt of Reading to Corrupt Mr. Bedloe, by
the offer of an Estate, to relinquish his Testimony as to the Lords in the
Tower.

The seventh Sham, was that Traitorous Libel, called the Compendium, contrived
by the Jesuits, to sham the Plot, by relating the Circumstances of the Trials
with so much brevity and partiality, that they leave out the most material
things upon which the strength of the Evidence lay.

The eighth Sham, was a Libel, called, The History of the Plot, by Roger
L'Estrange, together with his further Discovery, wherein he labors hard at it,
to shuffle in something in proof of the pretended Presbyterian Plot, and to
stifle the Popish Plot, by pretending to a further Discovery of it.

The ninth Sham, was the sending abroad whole Regiments of Pamphlets (for you
must know a great part of their shamming Talent lies in Pamphletting) of diverse
natures, some seeming to clash one against another, and some to rail against
the Papists and Popish Plotters, but yet all ingeniously fixed by the subtle
contrivers to serve the great Design of shamming the Popish, and insinuating a
Presbyterian Plot.

The tenth was that of Knox, Lane, and Osborn, being a subtle Contrivance,
managed by the joint consent of the Lords in the Tower, as appears by Mr.
Dangerfeild's Narrative, wherein they were to prove, 1. A Contrivance between
Mr. Bedloe and Dr. Oats, to Charge the Earl of Danby with Treason; 2. To
Charge Dr. Oats with Sodomy; in both which they endeavored to stifle the
Plot; first by charging both Oats and Bedloe with Perjury in swearing falsely
against the Lord Treasurer; and so, by consequence, all they had Sworn against
others was false too. 2. If they failed in this, yet if they could prove the
Sodomy, they would thereby render him such a profligate Wretch, that his
Testimony was not to be credited.

The eleventh Sham, was that commonly called the Meal-Tub Plot, which because
it seems to be the very same Sham with that which is now on foot, and is so
hugged by some, only the persons who Act this Trage-Comedy, some of them are
changed, but the Master Contrivers and the Design of the Play is the same;
therefore I shall be the longer upon it.

About the later end of March, 1679. One Mrs. White, a Prisoner in Newgate, and
one who had been Convicted, was released out of Prison, by Mrs. Cellier, after
which she came several times to visit Mr. Dangerfeild, then likewise a Prisoner
there, whereby she learned, that he was a Roman Catholic; and Mrs. Cellier
inquiring of her about the Prisoners in Newgate, if it were not possible to
find out a man of Courage amongst them, and one who would reform? upon which
she gave such a high Character of Mr. Dangerfeild, that she immediately,
supposing him a man fit for their purpose, gives him a visit, and after some
short discourse of Newgate-Affairs, acquainted him, that she had a Business of
great Concern for him to do, which if he would undertake, she would procure his
Liberty, and a great Reward; in a word, she would make his Fortune; which he
undertaking, she got him discharged. The first thing they employ him about, was
to find out some way to Invalidate the Testimony of Mr. Bedloe, by the means of
one Stroude, a Prisoner in the King's Bench (as he was likewise, for he was no
sooner out of Newgate, but he was Arrested and carried to the Counter for Debt,
whence he was removed to the Kings Bench;) but this not succeeding, to their
wish, they got him out, however he was in the Gallery at Powis-house, by the
Lady Powis, thanked and praised for his diligence about Stroud's business;
promising upon her Honor, that she would for his faithfulness make his
Fortune, provided he would undertake the Management of other Business she had
to do; he promising he would, she gave him a long and strict Charge; first, to
be steadfast in the Principles of his Religion: secondly, to go once a Week to
Mr. Monson, to Confession, which he promised to do; this was about the 6th. of
June, 1679. and because all things were not ready, and they were loath to lose
time, they employed him for the present in getting out five or six Priests,
that lay in the Gate House; two or three whereof he got out: then he carried a
Letter from the Countess of Powis to the Earl of Castlemain; upon the receiving
and perusing this Letter, my Lord received him very kindly, promising to make
his Fortune, if he would use his endeavors to support the Catholic Cause, as
he should be directed. Then his Lordship writ a Letter to the Countess, in
Answer to that which he brought from her, which he sent by him, and he
delivered it to the Countess, who calling Mrs. Cellier to her, opened it, and
read it in Mr. Dangerfeild's presence; the Contents whereof was to this purpose:

Madam, Just now I received yours, and will meet you at the Tower, to Morrow,
at Ten a Clock: but this Fellow I like well, and though he be no Scholar, yet
he may serve to Instruct the Youths, according as he shall be directed; and in
so doing, I shall be eased of much suspicion, etc.

By the Youths, you must understand the St. Omer's Witnesses, who were lodged
at Mrs. Cellier's House, and were Instructed once in two days by Castlemain,
all the time of their being in Town; yet some of them wanted their Lessons at
the time of the Trial of the five Jesuits at the Old Bailey, and therefore were
again Instructed; yet blockheads that they were, they did not acquit themselves
so well as was hoped they would. Then the Countess advised Mr. Dangerfeild to
burn all Papers whatsoever, after he had perused them; which he did, even to
the very last, otherwise he had been able to have proved all he charges them
with, by their own handwriting. Shortly after this, Mr. Dangerfeild suspecting
that Mrs. Cellier's Maid took more notice of Affairs than was necessary, he
told the Countess, he did not like her; so the Countess advised Mrs. Cellier,
to turn her away, and take a Boy in her room, who would be more convevenient
for carrying Letters; which was presently done. Then the Countess of Powis sent
him with a Letter, to one Mrs. Jane, (as she called him) at one Mr. Webs, at
Peterley in Buckinghamshire, and confer with her about some weighty Business;
this Mr. Web was himself present when the Countess put him upon going, and
advised him, lest the cause of his going should be discovered, to bring his
Son-in-law with him when he came back; saying, he had designed to send him to
France long since, and that this would not only be a good Excuse for him, but
very convenient for his Journey also: then the Countess did order one of the
Grooms, to hire a Horse for him, not that her Ladyship wanted Horses, but lest
it should be known that she sent him, and so he should be discovered; then Mr.
Web advised him to put the Packet he was to carry into the Saddle-skirts, that
so if he were taken, the Horse being a Hackney, he might come off, by denying
the thing. When he came to Peterley, he delivered the Letter to Mrs. Web from
her husband; which as soon as she had read, she desired him to follow her,
which he did through diverse Rooms, and up and down several pair of Stairs, till
she brought him into a Chamber, where she bid him sit down, saying, she would
presently send the Lady to him, but instead of a Woman, she sent in a Man, (a
Popish Priest) who after greeting, acquainted him, that for the security of his
person these dangerous times, he was forced to retire there, and use the Name
of Mrs. Jane: then he told him, he must presently Confess, and receive the
Sacrament, to be true to the Cause. He told him he had been drinking on the
Road, and was not in a condition, and prayed it might be deferred till the
Morrow: but, he told him, that must not be; he was well enough, and must do it
then, for he was to be gone early in the Morning, which when he had done, he
took his leave, till the Morrow. When being ready to come away, Mrs. Web
carried him to Mrs. Jane's Chamber, and left them together. Then he told Mr.
Dangerfeild, he had sat up all Night to Answer those Letters; and that he
would now consider by what Method to proceed in the Plot against the
Presbyterians, and that the groundwork of the whole thing was among those
Papers, which he was to bring to London. When he came to London, the Countess,
and Mrs. Cellier, told him, they were under great fear, lest the Papers should
have been discovered, and when he had delivered the Papers to the Countess, she
opened and overlooked them all, but took one, and read it to him, which was to
this effect: (viz.) Good store of Pamphlets must be writ, and spread about the
Town against the Presbyterians; persons must be employed to go to
Coffee-Houses, and rail against the Presbyterians, and if they meet with any
that offer to contend, matter of Treason, or some such thing may easily be laid
to their charge, to have them secured; but there must be many persons employed
in this work, and it will be great prudence, not to let them know one another,
and to let none of them know more than his own part: he blamed them likewise,
for letting Mr. Dangerfield know so much as he did: but, said he, I have bound
him fast enough; and besides that, I have a better opinion of him than I had of
the other (meaning Gifford the Priest.) These are the People that must do the
work, and you let them lie in Prisons and starve; which makes me wonder at your
great negligence in so considerable an Affair, etc. The rest were concealed
from him, and presently sent to the Lords in the Tower, and afterward to Mr.
Nevel, to peruse and alter, as he thought fit; for he was the chief Penman,
and did all that sort of drudgery for a long time, till Mr. Dangerfeild
relieved him; first, by Transcribing diverse Papers after him: secondly, by
setting up for himself, in scribbling of Pamphlets, to further the Cause. By
this time the Trial of the five Jesuits came on, and Mr. Dangerfeild not having
time, as was designed, to Instruct the Witnesses, the Lord Castlemain continued
in that employment himself, and gave to some, who had short Memories,
Breviates, or Lessons; others he advised with, sometimes at his own Lodgings,
other times at Powis-house, and sometimes at Mrs. Cellier's; this was as common
among the Youth's, as going to School, and sometimes when they had been
scanning over their Parts, and mistook, they would presently cry, Oh, I am out,
I must go to my Lord Castlemain, to be Instructed again. Then was Mr.
Dangerfeild ordered to Attend on the Lord Castlemain at the Sessions held at
the Old-Bayly, the 13th. and 14th. of June; and the said Lord desired him to
take care of the Youths, and keep them together, lest the Rabble, out of
inveterate hatred should offer them any Injury. Then he was ordered to get into
Court, and take Notes of the Trials; and when the Trials were over, the Lady
Powis read them, and then sent him to her Lord, to the Tower, to whom he showed
the little imperfect Remarks he had taken: his Lordship seemed to like them
well; and, to encourage him to be Industrious in other Business, commended him
highly for this, and gave him far better encouragement than ever he had from
his Lady, or any body else, and promised, upon his Honor, to make his Fortune,
if he would be ruled. Then the Lord Powis sent him to the Lord Bellasis, and
the other three Lords, to show them his Notes, or rather himself; he showed
them to all those Lords; and they all desired, they might be Printed, and gave
Money toward it; one a Guinea, another Fifty Shillings, one half a Guinea,
another Fifteen or Sixteen Shillings: when he returned to my Lord Powis, he
told him what the other Lords had done, then he also contributed to it, and
told him, the Lord Castlemain should do the like; at the same time he told him,
that some had been employed by them, to take the whole Trials, which was to be
Printed by one Turner, a Popish Bookseller in Holborn, and ordered him, to
carry his Notes to be compared with his, and one entire Relation to be composed
of the whole, which was the Compendium. The Lord Arundel, laying his hand upon
his head, promised he should be well rewarded for all his diligence; and the
Lord Powis asked, Whether he had a faculty of writing abusively, and like a
Satyrist; and was Master of such a Style as would look well in Print? for, says
he, he, that Sot Nevel, is so very delatory, it is not to be endured; therefore
if you dare undertake the Writing some sound Pamphlets, it might be of great
use. To which he answered, He would do his best. Then the Lord Powis told him,
Mrs. Cellier should be allowed Ten Shillings per Week, to diet him, and his
Lordship would allow him Three Pound per Week for his Expenses in Business; and
whatever more should happen, he should put it in a Bill, and send it to his
Lordship, and it should be forthwith paid; all which was done as long as he
served them. About the 18th. of June, the Countess sent him with a Letter to
the Lady Tukes Lodgings, in Scotlandyard; who was pleased to say, She liked him
very well, and gave him two Guinea's; and demanded, If he durst undertake a
desperate Enterprise? he said, Yes. Then she Wrote a Letter to the Countess,
and gave it him, to carry to her. Then they employed him to get Knox and Lane
out of Prison; which he found hard to do, but in the mean time he got Pen, Ink,
and Paper, to be conveyed to them, upon which Lane writ a Letter to this
purpose:

I will die before I will Comply with that Villain Oats; and if any good
People will work my liberty, I will do the Catholics the greatest Service
imaginable, by Discovering what I know of Oats. This is from the bottom of my
heart, and what I will die with. So help me God.

When the Countess read this Letter, she was transported with Joy, saying, Has
God given us this unexpected help? well, we will use it to the best Advantage.
And the pious Countess was the greater part of that day on her knees, to render
Thanks to God for this new strength she supposed God had been pleased to bless
their Cause with. (Oh horrid Prophanness, to make God the Author of Perjury!)
About the 14th. of July he was sent for by their Lordships to the Tower, where
he received Orders to send Lane out of the way. Soon after this the Lords
ordered him, by Mrs. Cellier to go to a Coffee-house; accordingly he went every
Night to Farr's Coffee-house, to insinuate, that the Earl of Danby was privy to
the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey; that he took part with the Presbyterians,
and was confederate with them, to ruin the Roman Catholics; and such like
stuff. Then the Lady Powis sent him a great number of Pamphlets; among which
was the Danby Reflections; and ordered he should disperse them into all parts;
which he did; some into the Country, to the Gentry there; others to little
petty Coffee-houses about Town, and some he dropped in the Streets, and in all
Houses, where he could, so that he had like to have dropped into Newgate again,
for doing such a Trick in an Eminent Citizen's house, which made him more
cautious. Then the Lord Powis ordered him to attend on Dormer, a reputed
Priest, and one that Writ Pamphlets, and frequented Coffee-houses, to insinuate
a Presbyterian Plot. His Lordship also ordered him to Converse with one Turner,
his Lordship's Priest, Mr. Munson, Mr. Kemesh, and Nevel, and to follow their
Directions in all things; then Nevel sent him diverse Papers, Pamphlets, and
Letters, to Transcribe; among which were 40 Lists of Names, each List
containing about 800 Names; at another time he received from Nevel 27 Letters,
most of them written with Nevel's own hand, to Transcribe with all speed, and
at the same time Nevel sent as many more to the Tower, by Mrs. Ayry. Some of
them Mr. Dangerfeild had to Transcribe were as follows:

Letter I.
Sir, London.
Our Business goes on very well, and I hope yours does the same in the Country:
I am Informed that Commissions will speedily be Issued out: and it is said,
there is some alteration among our people.


The second Letter;

Gentlemen,
My heart is good, but the body is not of strength enough to do you service;
but I doubt not but my Prayers, for your good success, may be as serviceable
and prevalent as my person, were it again in its prime, etc.


To such like purposes were the rest.

Mr. Dowdwel and Mrs. Ayry used to carry such Papers and Letters as concerned
the Design, to the Gate House, and other Prisons about Town, to have the Advice
of, and Consent of the Priests and Roman Catholics there; the Lord Powis (as
Mrs. Cellier told Mr. Dangerfeild) refused to meddle in the thing, unless it
were generally approved of, as it was soon after; for all that either saw or
heard of it, agreed in opinion, that it was a very sound Contrivance. And
persons were to be employed to carry these Letters and other Papers into all
parts of England, and some way or other found to lodge them in the houses of
such as were the most eminent of the Presbyterian Party: Then others were to
obtain Warrants upon other pretenses, to search their Houses, and get the
Persons committed, in whose Houses they were found: this they hoped would
occasion so much confusion throughout the Nation, that at least every one would
be glad to save himself, and the Papists come off upon the same terms, as
others did. The next time Mr. Dangerfeild went to the Tower, my Lord Powis told
him that one Mr. Doyley had seen or heard of him the last time he was with his
Lordship, and had said, in the hearing of one of his Lordship's Servants, That
if ever he should see him there again, he would have him secured; wherefore his
Lordship advised him to come no more there, but return to Powis-house, and be
careful of his business. Then he commanded him to go to Mr. Turner, his
Lordship's Priest, and take Directions how to Write to Mr. Holder at Brussels,
he being his R. H. Auditor: the Letters contained, an Account of the whole
Design, and were Writ by the Countesses own hand, most earnestly desiring his
good advice, as being unwilling to do any thing without it, therefore prayed
his speedy Answer. This Packet was made up by Mr. Turner, and Superscribed by
Mr. Dangerfeild, by Turner's directions; For Mr. Tho. Holder, at Monsieur
Keneydays, Secretary to the English Resident in Brussels. In one of which
Letters, they desired Mr. Holder, to employ some ingenious person there, to Cut
and Ingrave the Impressions of diverse Coats of Arms; the Patterns whereof had
been taken in Wax, and were sent over enclosed in the same Letters, being
fastened with other Wax to the Margent of it. Some time after, the Countess
having received an Answer to this Packet, showed Mr. Dangerfeild a Letter to
this purpose:

If you had taken this course sooner, much Innocent Blood might have been
saved; but I doubt it is now too late; I fear the St. Omer 's Witnesses being so
baffled, as I hear they were, has much blasted our Design; but yet, to my
power, I will assist, and do advise you to go on.

Letters to the same purpose came at the same time to Mrs. Cellier, which she
showed to Mr. Dangerfeild, highly applauding this Gentleman, for his great Wit
and Courage, saying, If it had not been for him the Lords in the Tower had not
been now alive. Then my Lord Powis, notwithstanding his advising Mr.
Dangerfeild to come there no more, sent for him, to come thither to him
forthwith, but disguised; and when he came there, he found my Lord Arundel with
my Lord Powis; and after much other Discourse, my Lord Arundel demanded of him,
If he would do any thing to make his Fortune? he answered, Yes; (although he
thought he had done enough to do that already) well then, Will you venture to
Kill the King, for a good Reward? At that Mr. Dangerfeild being amazed, his
Countenance changing, he replied, My Lord, I suppose your Lordship is but in
jest. No, said he, I am in earnest; and repeated his Question: he answered,
That to serve them, he was willing to be the death of any man whatsoever, but
the King and his Royal Highness: but still he pressed it the third time; then
Mr. Dangerfeild apprehending his Life in danger, if he should absolutely refuse
it, desired time to consider of it. Then my Lord Powis, who was present all the
time, said, No, no, my Lord Arundel does this only to try you: -- And pray, my
Lord Arundel, said he, What is it worth, what would you give him for doing it?
It Is worth, said the Lord Arundel, 2000 l. No more, said my Lord Powis? Pish,
away; If he will kill my Lord Shaftsbury, he shall have 500 l. Mr. Dangerfeild
inquired, Why they desired my Lord Shaftsbury's life, and how it might be
obtained? they both replied, it was easy to be done; for, said the Lord Powis,
my Man Wood was there two nights since, upon pretense of an Errand; but his
business was, to view the House, and observe what convenience there was for
making an Escape, after the Fact done; that Wood found the thing so feasible,
that after he came back, he said, he was very sorry he was not provided to have
done it then; and the reason, said he, why we would be glad to have him out of
the way, is, because we take for granted, if we were rid of him, (as they were
of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey,) we should find it no hard matter, to bear down all
the rest of our Opposers; with much persuasion he promised to undertake the
Murder of the Earl of Shaftsbury; upon which my Lord Powis gave him Ten
Guinea's in earnest. The next day Mr. Dangerfeild went to wait on my Lord
Castlemain, who being Writing the Compendium, rose up in a hasty posture, and
casting an angry look upon Mr. Dangerfeild, said, Why were you so unwilling to
do that which you were taken out of Prison for; my Lord being in this passion,
he presently went down stairs, and returned to Mrs. Cellier, who advised him to
go to Mr. Sharp, the Priest at Wild-house; (for then his Kettle had more need
of scouring than ever) the next Morning he went, and Confessed, and received
the Sacrament; which when he had done, he offered to come away, but Sharp, who
it seems had been informed of his refusing to kill the King, would not suffer
him to depart so, but told him he ought to do Penance, for refusing to serve
God in what the Scripture taught him was his Duty: he desired to know, whether
the Scriptures taught him any such thing, as to kill the King? he answered
(like a Jesuit) Yes, if he were first Excommunicated and Condemned by the
Church, and that if he hoped to escape Damnation for his refusal, he must
undergo the Penance he then enjoined him. After this he was sent to wait on
Gadbury, who with an angry Countenance said, I admire at your Ingratitude, that
when you could not propose to your self any possible way of getting out of
Prison, had not the Charity of good People relieved you, that you should refuse
to kill the King; nay when you might have done it too without any manner of
danger, as I find by Calculating your Nativity. After this Mr. Dangerfeild made
two Attempts on my Lord Shaftsbury's life, but was disappointed in both. His
next Employment was to lodge those Treasonable Papers he had to get
Transcribed, in Col. Mansel's Chamber. Now I shall first prove, that this was
really a Plot of the Papists, and not a contrivance of Dangerfeild's. Secondly,
I shall prove it to be the very same with that wherewith my Lord Shaftsbury, my
Lord Howard and others are now Charged, only some Circumstances of time, place
and persons changed; and this I shall do by comparing one with the other. First,
That it was a Popish Contrivance is plain, if you consider Mrs. Cellier's
getting him first out of Newgate, then turned over from the Counter to the
King's Bench, then Compounding his Debts of 700 l. and getting him out thence,
all which came to a large sum of Money, and therefore was not parted with for
nothing; all this she acknowledges her self in that scurrilous Pamphlet of
here is, called, Malice defeated. Secondly, It appears from the whole Contrivance
of it, being found in her house, hid in her Meal-Tub, which she acknowledged
before the Council. Thirdly, It appears by their getting his Nativity
Calculated by Gadbury, which Celliers and Gadbury both acknowledged. Fourthly,
It appears by the great familiarity between my Lady Powis and him, she
acknowledging she had seen him several times, and that once he told her of some
Treasonable Papers hid at Westminster, and that the Secretary refused to grant
him a Warrant to search for them, unless he would make Affidavit; and that he
was then advised to make use of the Custom-house Officers to search for them.
Fifthly, It appears by his frequent visiting the Lords in the Tower, as appears
by Mr. Dayly's taking notice of it, together with several other Circumstances
to confirm it. Sixthly, It appears by Mr. Matthew Hopkinson's acknowledging he
Subscribed a List of Names, and a Letter, for Mr. Dangerfeild. Seventhly. It
appears by the Deposition of William Woodman, that he had known Mr. Dangerfeild
at Powis-house about two Months, and that he had seen him and Mrs. Cellier
Write together very often; That he carried a Packet of Letters from Mr.
Dangerfeild, and Mrs. Cellier, to the Lady Powis, and that her Ladyship opened
the Packet, and read some of them, and gave some of them to him the said
Woodman, to carry to Nevill in the King's Bench; and that he carried Letters
diverse times between Mrs. Cellier, Mr. Dangerfeild, and Nevill. Eighthly, It
appears by Mr. Dangerfeild's being introduced to the Lord Peterborough, by Mrs.
Cellier, in order to the making a discovery of this pretended Plot, and by him
to the Duke of York, and by the Duke to the King. Ninthly, It appears by the
Lord Peterborough's acknowledging, that Mrs. Cellier desired him to get a
Warrant to search for these Papers, saying, That if he would do so, all would
be discovered, and that she desired this Warrant might be obtained without the
King's knowledge. Tenthly, It appears by the Examination of Anne Blake, Servant
to Cellier, who Deposed upon Oath, before the Council, That her Mistress gave
her two Parcels of Papers, desiring her to lay them up where they might not be
discovered, and that accordingly she laid one Parcel behind the Pewter in the
Kitchen, and hid the other in the Tub of Meal. Lastly, It appears as plain as
the Sun, by Mrs. Celliers sending to him, after his being sent to Newgate, 20
Shillings in Silver and a Guinea, and two Books of Account, telling him, by her
Maid, That her Life was in his hands, and therefore desired him to follow her
Directions in a little Note she sent him, which was this: I have said, you were
taken into my House, to get in bad Debts. They Will bring me to L. S. They will
ask me, Who encouraged me to go to him? I will say, You did: It cannot worst
you. And in another little Paper thus: I never change.

And yet behold their Impudence, she, before the Council, denied all this; but
when the Notes were shown her, she acknowledged it. Now, if they will be so
impudent, as to deny that which they knew could be proved against them by their
own handwriting, much more obstinately may they deny those things which they
very well knew, the Papers that concerned them, were burned by Mr. Dangerfeild,
according to their Directions. Secondly, I shall prove, That the Meal-Tub Plot
is the very same with this wherewith my Lord Shaftsbury, Howard, and others are
now charged with, which will appear, if you compare one with the other. First,
The forerunner or Forlorn-hope of that, was a numerous company of scurrilous
Pamphlets, to prepare the way, by insinuating, That there were some great
Designs among the Presbyterians, to disturb the Government, which was in a
little time discovered to be a Popish Brat, and by the good Providence of God
was delivered before its time. Just so it was in this Plot, a numerous company
of Pamphlets were dispersed about, to insinuate some great Designs among the
Presbyterians, to overthrow the Government, such as Heraclitus, the Observator,
Thompson's Intelligence, Ashinton's blasphemous Pamphlet, called The
Presbyterian Creed and Paternoster, with abundance more. Secondly, It appears
by their employing the same persons to disperse these Pamphlets, as were
employed to disperse the former, viz. Thompson, Hindmarsh, etc. Thirdly, It
appears to be the same Plot, because the same persons are charged to be in the
one as were charged to be in the other, as you will find, if you look into the
List in Dangerfeild's Narrative. Fourthly, It Is the same Plot, as will appear
by the Nature and frame of it, which is exactly like the other, for they were
then charged with a Design, to raise an Army to overthrow the Government, and
reduce it to a Commonwealth; so they are charged now with the same thing, only
that pretended Plot was said to be upon His Majesty's being sick at Windsor,
and this upon the occasion of his Majesty's going to Oxford to Meet the
Parliament. Fifthly It appears to be forged in the same Shop, because it was
generally reported among the Papists, a Week before my Lord Shaftsbury was
apprehended, that he would be taken up; nay, they had the impudence to Boast of
it to some Protestants; For one Mr. Pulford, a Merchant, being at the House of
a Papist, a Week before my Lord was taken up, and having some Discourse about
the Plot, they said, It would shortly appear to be a Presbyterian Plot, and my
Lord Shaftsbury would speedily be taken up for it. And one Mrs. Care, in the
Strand, said a Week before he was taken up, That my Lord Shaftsbury would
shortly be taken up.

The next Sham-Plot is that of Price, and Tasborough; first to take off the
Evidence of Mr. Dugdale, by promising him great Rewards and to procure him a
Pardon for those pretended Crimes wherewith he was falsely to accuse himself, in
swearing falsely against the Papists. Secondly, When they found he delaied them,
and feared it was like to fare with them, as it did with Redding, they thought
to be beforehand with him, and complain, that it was unjust, that the poor
innocent Roman Catholics should suffer so hardly, by the Evidence of such
Wretches, as would turn like a Door upon its Hinges, forward and backward, and
for a Sum of Money, would deny what they had sworn, and run away when they had
done: but Mr. Dugdale foreseeing this, acquainted several sufficient persons,
from time to time, with the whole Intreague, who attesting it before the
Council, the Sham came to nothing, and they were justly rewarded for their
contrivance.

The next Sham was Cellier's Pamphlet, called Malice defeated; whereby she
endeavored (after she got her Discharge, contrary to her own expectation, when
she said her Life was in Mr. Dangerfeild's hand, and this by an Ignoramus which
we never heard of in Heraclitus, the Observator, or Thompson's Intelligence)
endeavored to persuade the World, that there was nothing but Malice in her
Charge, or in the Popish Plot, but a mere Contrivance.

Another of their Shams was their sending several persons to the Houses of
several Nonconformists in this City, to beg their Charitable Contribution,
toward the Maintenance of Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, pretending the King's
Allowance was too little, but they were every where rejected; and it is well
they were, for otherwise, it is not to be doubted, but the Presbyterians Good
Works would have been brought to prove them Evil Doers.

Their next Sham was, their perverting Mr. Blood, and prevailing with him to
send a Treasonable Letter to Dr. Oats, and then ordering some to Search and
Rummage the Doctor's Papers, hoping to find it there, and so to have proved him
a Confederate with the Presbyterians: but the wary Doctor, considering how many
Trepans and Tricks the Papists used to ruin him, wisely dispatched it away
immediately to Sir Joseph Williamson, then Secretary of State and a Member of
the long Parliament then sitting; which Letter Sir Joseph Williamson afterward
produced in Council. And when all this failed, then their next Sham was to send
one Lewis to the Earl of Shaftsbury, to desire his Lordship would please to
send by him to Dr. Oats some Directions of his own handwriting, how to manage
himself; but my Lord wisely sent this Decoy away with a flat Denial, well
knowing, that malicious men may rack and stretch innocent words, till they make
them speak a quite contrary thing.

Their next Sham was the prevailing with Simson Tongue, to Swear that his
Father, Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, with some persons of quality, contrived the
Popish Plot; for young Tongue frequenting the House of Mrs. Lane, about June,
1680. a Woman, that owed Dr. Oats a good turn for the Justice done upon her
Son, John Lane, upon the Doctor's account: She, with a Popish Woman that lay in
her house, by many Entreaties, and great Promises, persuaded him to Swear, that
his Father, Oats, and Bedloe, with some others, contrived the Plot, and
finding those great Offers had wrought some good Inclinations in him, they send
for one Captain Ely, who came and conferred with him about it, and the next day
they had a second Meeting about it, and then Simson shows him a Paper, the
purport whereof was, to invalidate the Evidence of Dr. Oats, and that he and
his Father had contrived the Popish Plot. This Writing being under Tongue's own
hand, was deposited in Ely's hands, who assured Tongue, he would carry it to
his Majesty. But this being but a single Cord, was not strong enough, wherefore
they resolve to twist it, by finding out a second Witness. To this purpose they
make an Essay upon one Mrs. Fitzgerald, a person at that time very low, both
in Body and Purse, and therefore, as they thought, the more likely to be
Suborned, wherefore Ely sent her a very loving Letter, Forty Shillings in
Money, and great Promises of an able Physician, and other Kindnesses for the
future, but without the least intimation of what Design he had upon her. But
presently after Simson is sent to treat with her, and he promises her God knows
what, if she would but Swear. In a short time he gives her a second Visit, and
brings with him Captain Ely, and one Choqueux, a Chyrurgion, and a French
Papist, who was her Doctor, and very careful of her in her sickness. They would
have her Swear, there was no Plot, but what Dr. Tongue, Oats, and Bedloe, had
made out of their own heads; she told them, she knew nothing of that matter:
Yes, quoth Simson, you do, and I have told the King of it at Windsor, and he is
very desirous to see you; and since you are so weak, that you cannot go to him,
he will come to you somewhere hereabout, in a disguise. But she answered, It Is
a folly to bring the King to me, for I know him not, and for that reason, if I
had any thing to say, I would not be Trepan'd to discover it. When all this
would not do, they endeavored to Suborn one Isaac Cooper, to Swear it, who if
they could have gotten him to Swear, would have been the more credited, because
he was Dr. Tongue's Clerk, but he was so honest, that notwithstanding their
large Promises, and noble Treats, he told them he had nothing to declare. This
put them to a stand, but plucking up their Spirits, they resolve that young
Tongue shall reveal the whole business to the King: but now he begins to
boggle, for fear his Father should be hanged, but Ely assured him, they would
procure a Pardon for him. He being easily satisfied with this, the
forementioned Paper was dispatched to his Majesty, enclosed in a Letter,
wherein he promises to make great Discoveries, and earnestly solicites for his
Majesty's Protection. And in another Letter to his Majesty, dated Aug. 8. 1680.
He says, That his Father and Dr. Oats corresponded with my Lord Wharton and
the Earls of Essex and Shaftsbury, and my Lord of Essex, was very forward in
the Irish Plot, and sent several Letters from London concerning it; That these
Lords, the two Doctors conversed with, and had assistance from, while they were
forging the Plot. But unluckily it came at last to the ears of his Uncle,
Captain John Tongue, who sends for his hopeful Kinsman, and laying before him
the wickedness of his Project, Simson falls on his knees, begs his pardon, and
gave him a Recantation under his own hand, wherein was contained an account of
the whole Roguery. And now one would think here should be an end of the Comedy,
and that the Man and his Cause were stranded for ever, so that no Engine could
bring him off those Flats: for if he should be so impudent to prosecute it any
more, his own hand wherewith he had Subscribed his Recantation, would confront
his Evidence. But so desperately hardened are these wretches, that they will
storm all Difficulties, nay Impossibilities, and in spite of Fate pursue their
cursed Resolutions. This Recantation had, it seems, taken air, and flown to his
Majesty's ears, which Simson understanding, Addresses his Majesty with two
Letters, wherein, besides other scandalous Lies against his Uncle, he tells his
Majesty, that his Uncle was very earnest with him, to recant what he had given
in concerning the Plot, and say he was hired to do it by the Papists, but yet
he stood firm to his Tacklings, and did not give his Uncle a Recantation, though
his Uncle pretended he had. Simson after this, willing to get the Reward
promised, applied himself first to Mrs. Cellier, then to trusty Hodge, who
mainly applauded him, saying, he was upon a good Design, praying it might
prosper. But being all brought before, and examined by the Council, so much of
the Roguery was discovered, that Simson was sent to Newgate. And Roger
L'Estrange being willing to discover this Plot to the Nation, and to make the
most of it, Printed a further Discovery of it, in a Dialogue, wherein he very
elaborately proves it to be a Sham of the plaguey Presbyterians, and that it
came out of their bottomless Belly to ensnare poor harmless Hodge, and the
innocent Roman Catholics.

But by the way observe, that my Lord Shaftsbury was in this, as well as in all
other of their Shams; And therefore I do Challenge those that have any thing to
say against the Legality of the Grand Juries Proceeding, to produce something
that looks like reason, why the Jury should believe my Lord Shaftsbury to be
more Guilty of this Plot, than he was of those which were to have been Sworn
against him by Mr. Dangerfeild, Simson Tongue, and others, since the only
difference that appears between them is, that they had the hap to be discovered
before they were come to maturity, and this was not.

The next Sham we shall take notice of shall be that of Booth and Bains, as you
find it in Wilkinson's Information. Captain Henry Wilkinson, being by his good
Service and bad Fortune, reduced to a low condition, and being now a Prisoner
in the King's Bench Prison, one Mr. Bains, upon October. 8. 1681. came to him, and
after many Expressions of kindness, told him, That he must needs know much of
the Earl of Sbaftsbury's Designs against the King, and would do well to
discover it to him; and he would help him to a Pardon, and a considerable
Reward. But the Captain told him, he knew nothing against my Lord: Bains leaves
him. But on the 11th of October, comes one Mr. Booth, who told him, if he would
discover what he knew of the Earl of Shaftsbury's Designs to set up a
Commonwealth, he should have 500 l. per Annum settled on him and his Heirs, or
(if he liked that better) 1000 l. in ready Money; but the Captain refused that
great Bribe, and returned the same Answer as he had done to Bains. But when
they had broke the Ice, they would not be so put off, but the next day they set
upon him again, and to great Promises, add great Treats; and when this failed,
like the first Seducer, they set upon his Wife, entreating her to persuade her
Husband; but when this and many other Contrivances would not bring him to their
Bow, they had him up to the King and Council, where Booth Swore High Treason
against him, That he was to be Captain of a Troop of Horse of Fifty, in this
new Service against his Majesty, and he the said Booth was Listed under him.

This John Booth is one that has been Condemned for Clipping and Coining,
besides Murder; and about this time that he pretends he was Listed under
Captain Wilkinson, it is very plain, that he was busying himself about things
of a different nature, not much for his credit; for being about that time to go
with Captain Wilkinson to Carolina, and being unwilling to go empty, he comes
to one Mr. Halford, a Mercer, with a pretended Letter from the Lady Ogle, to
Buy her several Rich flowered Silks, and other Rich Things, to the value of
between Two and Three Hundred Pounds, and to sweeten him the more, brings Mr.
Halford's Brother with him, and tells him, that for his Brother's sake he had a
great kindness for him, and had rather he should take his Money than another
man, and told him, that he expected shortly to be Steward to the Duke of
Norfolk, and that then he would do him great Kindnesses. Mr. Halford replied,
Sir, I have not all these Goods you speak of, but if you please, I will get
them for you. Pray do, says Booth; accordingly the Goods were gotten: and at
the time appointed, he came to look on them, and liked them well: But, Sir,
said Mr. Halford, these Goods comes to a great deal of Money, and I am but a
young Beginner, and therefore cannot Trust so much at once; but if you will
have them, and Pay me ready Money for them, you shall have them Cheaper than you
will Buy them any where else. Sir, said he, I will come and Pay you ready Money
for them, but never came near him again.

After the same manner he went to Mr. John Ridgies, an Upholster, for several
Rich Goods, but he also refusing to Trust him, he heard no more of his Chapman.
Now it is more than probable, that the missing this Booty, he thought to get of
Mr. Halford, and Mr. Ridgies, and it is like of some others, was the occasion
that he went not aboard according to his promise, to Captain Wilkinson, for he
thought it a vain thing, to go to Carolina, being thus unhappily disappointed
of his Cargo.

After this, being in great distress for a New Suit, he goes to a Tailor in
Field-lane, and desired him to make him a Suit, which he did, and carried it
home to his Lodging, he lodging then at Bains's, the Suit was tried on, and it
pleased him wonderful well, Ay and 'twas mighty Cheap; But, said Booth, I am
very sorry that I am disappointed of Money I was to have received yesterday, so
that I cannot Pay you; but, pray Sir, be pleased to call within a day or two,
and your Money shall be ready for you: but when he called for his Money, there
was no such Man, as Booth, Lodged there: and the poor man was really
disappointed of his Money; but at last he is informed, that he might speak with
his Son, at a Chamber in the Temple, whither he goes, and with some difficulty,
gets to the speech of young Booth, who told him, That truly he was ashamed to
see him, because his Father had been disappointed of Money, so that he could
not Pay him; but, to tell you the truth, continued he, my Father is in the
Country (although he was at that time a Prisoner in Mr. Weaver's House in the
Rules) and since he went down, he did send up 5 l. for you, but a Friend of
mine, being in great distress for Money, I lent it him, but you shall be sure
to have your Money very speedily, which was all the satisfaction he could get.

But those great Attempts, since the discovery of the Plot, to cast a Plot on
the Presbyterians, were not the first, but it begun much sooner, viz. in the
Year 1661. as we have an Account of it by Captain Yarranton: It was after this
manner. There were several Letters forged, and delivered by Sir John P -- to
one Richard N -- his Neighbor, to carry to one Cole of Martly, about four
Miles from Worcester, who according to Directions, delivered a Packet of
Letters to one Churne of Witchinford; which Packet of Letters was carried by
Cole and Churne unto Sir John P -- (from whom it first came.) And before him
Churne makes Affidavit, That going early in the Morning to his Labor, he
struck his Bill upon a Hedge, to cut a Thorn, and by and by, on the other side
of the Hedge, he espied a Scotch-Pedlar, putting up Letters hastily into his
Pack, and being affrighted (as he supposed) he left that Packet behind in the
Ditch, and went down a Lane leading to Col. John Birch his House.

This Oath being made, and the Packet delivered, and opened, it presently
appeared, that there was a Conspiracy on foot to stir up a Rebellion in the
Kingdom, and to raise an Army for that purpose; and that Captain Andrew
Yarranton was to Command a Party in those Parts; for which purpose there were
several Letters directed to him from some Ministers, and others, particularly
one from Mr. Baxter, intimating, that he had provided a considerable body of
Men well Armed, which would be in readiness against the time appointed. Another
from Mr. Sparry, the then Minister of Martly, intimating that he had ordered
him 500 l. which was lodged in a Friend's hand, and should be ready for him
whenever he sent for it, (but yet the person in whose hands it was, is not
named.) Several other Letters and Treasonable Papers were pretended to be in
that Packet; upon which the Militia of that County was raised, and the City of
Worcester was that Night filled with Horse and Foot, and the next Morning, by
Two of the Clock, an Officer with a Troop were sent to apprehend Mr. Yarranton,
and bring him to Worcester, and the same day some Scores more were apprehended
and sent to several places of confinement; but after Ten days the Sham began to
appear, so that the Trained Bands would continue no longer: And upon their
departure the Deputy Lieutenants discharged all the Prisoners, except Dr.
Jackson, Mr. Sparry, the two Oslands, Capt. Wells, and Yarranton, who were
ordered to be kept close Prisoners in several Chambers of the George Inn, and
the Trained Bands being gone home, the Clergy provided about 60 Foot-Souldiers,
which they Armed and Paid, to Guard the Criminals that remained in Custody;
this was commonly called the Clergy Band, and whilst they continued in Guard,
one Roger Waldern, a poor Old Man, came to Worcester, to enquire after the
Welfare of Mr. Henry Osland, his Minister, and speaking with one of those
Soldiers, the Soldier liberally charged Mr. Osland with being a Traitor, a
Rebel, and a Plotter against the Government: He replied, Mr. Osland was an
honest and peaceable man, and he could never believe him to be guilty of
Plotting against the Government. Upon this the Church-militant-man laid hold of
him in great wrath, and carried him to the Court of Guard, where he was tied
Neck and Heels together, and Charged with having a hand in this pretended
Presbyterian Plot, threatened with severe Usage, unless he would make a
Confession: all this the Old Man bore with patience, answering never a word,
which so enraged this man in Authority, who Commanded the Guard, that he
commanded lighted Matches to be put between his Fingers, and burnt them to the
very Bone, thereby to force from him a Confession of a Presbyterian Plot. And
at the same time this Sham was carried on in several other Counties. For there
came one Evening to the House of Mr Martin, Town-Clark of Oxford, a Stranger
with a Letter, who had no sooner delivered it, but he withdrew, and went his
way; when Mr. Martin had opened and read the Letter, he prudently carried it
immediately to the Mayor, for had he delayed it a day or two, it might have
been found upon him, and then Oxford might have been as full of Plotters and
Prisoners as Worcester was. The Copy of this Memorable Letter is here inserted,
word for word.

Mr. Martin,
I Pray you warn all these Men, to be all in their Arms, upon Wednesday next,
in the Night; you know already where they must meet. There will come into
Oxford Two Hundred Men, all in their Arms: you know who does Command them. Dr.
Greenwood has sent to Mr. Combs the Barber, to get his Party of Scholars ready
that Night; and I have sent to Mr. Hickman, to get his Men ready at the same
time; and Dr. Owen has sent to Mr. Fogge, to get his Men ready at the same
time; and Dr. Gawen has sent to Mr. Duke, the Barber, to get his Men ready at
the same time; and I have sent to Mr. Cornish, to get his Men ready at the same
time; and I have sent to Mr. Connaught, to get his Men ready; and all the
Scholars are to meet in Dr. Rogers Garden: And I pray send the Blunderbusses
thither, for I intend to be there my self. And I pray give the Bearer hereof
Five Pound out of the Stock: And I pray you remember me to the Six Men unnam'd.
Five Counties are to rise that Night, without fail: I need Write no more to
you. The Word is, God is the Word; and I pray tell them all so.


In this Letter there was enclosed a List of the Men's Names he was to warn,
which were an Hundred and Ten in all. But by his prudent carrying this Letter
and List of Names to the Mayor, he spoiled the well laid Design, and it came to
nothing in that County. And so it did at Worcester, for the person who was
employed to carry the Packet of Sham-Letters from Sir J. P. to one Cole of
Martly, acquaints his Brother, how he came by the said Packet: His Brother,
immediately upon this Discovery, repairs to Mrs. Yarranton and informs her of
it. She goes to Worcester, and, with some difficulty, got a Letter delivered to
her Husband, wherein she related the whole Matter. Mr. Yarranton being thus let
into the knowledge of this malicious Design, ordered Six Actions, to be
immediately entered against some of those persons that brought him to Prison.
At last he was brought before the Lord Lieutenant, and six of his Deputies; Mr.
Yarranton desired the doors might be set open, for his Witnesses to come in. He
prayed also, that he might have Pen, Ink, and Paper, and he would Write down
the whole Matter, for Words might be wrested to other Intents than they are
spoken. This was a while debated, but being so reasonable, it could not be
denied. But no sooner did Mr. Yarranton begin to Write, but the Lord
Lieutenant, and Sir J. P. lest the Room, and went down the back stairs, and
after them followed all the Deputy Lieutenants, except Esquire Holt, who told Mr.
Yarranton, That he was sorry with all his heart, to see such things practiced
to the disturbance of honest Men, and the dishonor of the Government. Then Mr.
Yarranton demanded, of the Marshal what he had now to say to him further? He
answered, All he had to say, was, to request, That he would not trouble him,
for holding him so long in restraint, for as much as he was a Poor Man, and had
many Children, and did only follow the Orders of his Superiors: Mr. Yarranton
told him, he did freely forgive him. Now although this Sham did not answer the
desire and expectation of the Contrivers in reference to the particular persons
that were accused, yet it did in general. For by this means they possess the
King and Parliament, that it was absolutely necessary to make some severe Law
against this restless sort of men, who not contented with the King's gracious
Pardon, were always Plotting to disturb the Government. And therefore when the
Parliament met on the 20th. of November, 1661. the King makes a Speech wherein
are these words:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am sorry to find that the general Temper and Affections of the Nation are
not so well composed, as I hoped they would have been, after so signal
Blessings of God Almighty upon us all, and after so great Indulgence and
Condescensions from me toward all Interests, there are many wicked Instruments
still as active as ever, who labor night and day to disturb the Public Peace,
and to make all people Jealous of each other. It will be worthy of your Care
and Vigilance, to provide proper Remedies for Diseases of that kind; and if you
find new Diseases, you must study new Remedies. Let us not be discouraged; if
we help one another, we shall, with God's blessing, master all our
Dissiculties. (And a little further,) You will find, whoever does not love me,
does not you; and they who have no reverence for you, have little kindness for
me.

From which last passage, we may conclude, That they are none of the King's
Friends; nor are they of his mind, who in Word or Writing, do cast Contempt on
Parliaments.

I shall conclude this brief Discourse, with my hearty Desire and Prayer to
God, That he would please to Bless the King, and preserve him from all his real
Enemies, let them be called by what Name, or go under what Disguises soever,
and grant him a long, happy, and a quiet Reign. And in order hereunto, blast,
and confound the Pope and all his Adherents in England, as well Masqueraded, as
open and professed Papists. Amen.

FINIS.

