THE Christian Life, From its BEGINNING, TO ITS CONSUMMATION In GLORY; TOGETHER
WITH The several Means and Instruments of Christianity conducing thereunto;
WITH Directions for private Devotion AND Forms of PRAYER Fitted to the several
States of Christians.

By JOHN SCOTT, Rector of Saint Peter Poor, London.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1681.



To the Right Honorable AND Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of
LONDON, And one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
THAT I presume to lay these Papers at your Lordships feet, is not because I
imagine they deserve, but because I am Conscious they need so great a Patronage.
Not but that were the Discourses they contain as great and meritorious as their
Argument, they might safely shelter themselves under their own Deserts, and
challenge Homage instead of begging Protection; but though I have done my best
Endeavor to treat this great Theme suitably to its own native Majesty, yet I
am very sensible it has not escaped the too common Fate of all such sublime
and excellent Subjects, which is, to be foul'd and sullyed by coarse handling.
But my lot falling in this unhappy Age, wherein the best Church and Religion in
the World are in such apparent Danger of being Crucified, like their blessed
Author, between those two Thieves (and both, alas, impenitent ones)
Superstition and Enthusiasm, I thought my self obliged not to sit still as an
unconcerned Spectator of the Tragedy, but in my little Sphere, and according to
my poor Ability, to endeavor its Prevention: And considering that the most
effectual Means the Romanists have used to subvert this Church, which they so
much envy, and all the Reformations do so much admire and depend on, has been
to divide her own Children from her, and arm them against her, by starting new
Opinions among them, and engaging their Zeal (which was wont to be employed to
better Purposes) in hot Disputes about the Modes and Circumstances of her
Worship; I thought a Discourse of the Christian Life, which is the proper
Sphere of Christian Zeal, might be a good Expedient to take men off from those
dangerous Contentions which were kindled and are fed and blown by such as
design our common Ruin. For sure did our People thoroughly understand what it is
to be Christians indeed, and how much Duty that implies, they could never find
so much Leisure as they do to quarrel and wrangle about Trifles.

This, my Lord, is the sincere Design of what I here present to your Lordship;
and however it may succeed, I have this Satisfaction that I meant well, and
have expressed my Good Will to this poor envied Church, whose truly Primitive
Constitution, pure and undefiled Religion, I shall always admire and reverence;
and whatsoever her Fate may be, I am chained to her Fortunes by my Reason and
Conscience, and shall ever esteem it more eligible to be crushed in pieces by
her Fall, which God avert, than to flourish and Triumph on her Ruins.

But among the many ill Omens that threaten our Church, there is one which
seems to presage its Prosperity; and that is, that such Eminent Stations in it
as your Lordships, are so excellently supplied. For although whether the Part
you are designed for, be to Grace her Triumphs or her Funeral, is known only to
the sovereign Disposer of Events, yet this, my Lord, all that wish well to our
Church conclude, that God bestowed You upon her as a Token of Love. For which
they have sufficient Warrant even from the daily Experience they have of the
Prudence and Vigilance of your Government, the Piety, Integrity and Generosity
of your Temper, of your invincible Loyalty to your Prince, your undaunted Zeal
for the Reformed Religion, and grave and Obliging Deportment toward all you
converse with. I shall trouble your Lordship no farther, but conclude this
Address with that which I am sure is the hearty Prayer of all your honest
Clergy, that the God of Heaven would long continue your Lordship a Blessing to
the Church and to this Diocese, an Honor to your Sacred Order and the Noble
Stock you descend from; and if what I here present prove but so prosperous as
to do some good in the World, and obtain your Lordships Acceptance, it will be
a noble Compensation of this well-meant Endeavor. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Obedient Servant, JOHN SCOTT.

THE PREFACE.
I SHALL not trouble the Reader with a long Apology for the Publication of the
ensuing Treatise, though I might plead (as other Authors do) the Importunity of
Friends, whose Judgments I very much reverence. For, to say the Truth, I do by
no means think that in an Affair of this Nature it is safe or fit for a man to
be overborn by the persuasions of those whose Judgments he has just cause to
suspect may be bribed by their Friendships. And therefore had I not hoped that
in such an Age as this, (wherein through our own Divisions and Debaucheries,
both in Opinion and Practice, and the hellish Contrivances of our Enemies, we
have such a dismal Prospect of things before us) these Papers might be of some
Use to Religion and the Souls of men, I would never have troubled the World
with them; but hoping they might, I have ventured upon that reason to publish
them.

I HAVE for some years been a sorrowful Spectator of the black Cloud that is
gathering over my Native Country, and I must confess have not been without my
share of the Fears and Anxieties of the Age; but being at last quite sick of
looking downwards upon this uncomfortable Scene of things, I had no other way
to relieve my oppressed Thoughts but to raise them above this miserable World,
and entertain them with the Comforts of Religion, and the Hopes of a better
State beyond the Grave; wherein, I thank God, I have found such Rest and
Satisfaction of Mind as rendered my blackest Apprehensions of the ensuing Storm
very tolerable. And now because I would not eat my Morsel alone, and enjoy my
Satisfaction to my self, I have endeavored by this following Treatise of
Heaven, and the Way thither, to break and distribute it among my distressed
Neighbors; that so by carrying their Minds from these dismal Expectations into
the quiet and happy Regions above, and directing their Lives and Actions
thither, I may communicate to them the blessed Art how to live happily in a
distracted World. And methinks, when our present State is so perplexed and
uncertain, we should be more than ordinarily concerned to make sure of
something, and to provide for a future Well-being, that so we may not be
miserable in both Worlds.

As for the Argument I have undertaken, I may without breach of Modesty say, it
is a great and a noble one; it is the Christian Life, which next to the
Angelical approaches nearest to the Life of God. But as for the Management of
it, all that I can say is this, I have employed my best Thoughts and Skill
about it; and if, after this, I have any where wronged or misrepresented it, it
is more my Unhappiness than my Fault. Perhaps it may be thought that in the
first three Chapters I have discoursed more speculatively, than it is fit in a
Book that is designed for common Use and Edification; but it may be when the
Reader has considered the Nature of the Arguments I have there handled, and
how necessarily they fall in with my Design, he will be convinced that 'twas
unavoidable. And yet I doubt not but with a little Diligence and Attention of
mind the plainest Reader may be able to comprehend the main Reason and Evidence
of what I drive at.

IN the first place I thought 'twould be necessary in treating of the Christian
Life, to give some Account of the blessed End it refers to, that so from the
Nature of that, we might be the better able to judge of the Necessity and
Usefulness of those Means which Christianity prescribes in order to it. And
this I have endeavored in the first Chapter; where I have only so far
explained the Nature of the heavenly State and Felicities, as was necessary to
light and conduct us through the ensuing Design.

In the second place I judged it would be no less expedient to give some
general Account of what kinds of Means are necessary to our obtaining this End;
that so we might be convinced how requisite both the principal and instrumental
Parts of the Christian Life are to our everlasting Happiness. And this I have
attempted in the second Chapter; wherein from the Consideration of the vast
Distance there is between the pure and blessed State of Heaven, and this
corrupt and degenerate State of Human Nature, I have endeavored to show that
it is not only necessary for us to practice and acquire those Christian Virtues
in the perfection whereof the heavenly Bliss consists, but that to enable us to
practice, acquire and improve them, there are sundry other instrumental Duties
indispensably necessary; which Duties, as I have there proved, are of no other
Use or Significancy in Religion, than as they are Means of Virtue and Piety.

AND having thus distributed the Means into their proper Kinds and Order, I
have in the third Chapter treated largely of the first Kind, to wit, the
Practice of the Christian Virtues; in which I confess I have neither handled
the particular Virtues in their full Extent and Latitude, nor enforced them
with all their moral Reasons; that being done already to excellent purpose in
those two incomparable Treatises of Holy Living and Dying, and of the whole
Duty of Man. Nor could I have done it without swelling this Discourse, which is
large enough already, into a Volume too large for common Use. And indeed all
that was necessary to my Purpose, was only so far to explain the Nature of each
particular Virtue as that the Reader might thereby understand what is meant by
them; but that which most concerned me in pursuance of my main Design, was to
prove that the Practice of every Virtue is an essential Part of the Christian
Life, and a necessary Means to the blessed End of it. And accordingly, as I
have shown from the express Commands of our Religion our indispensible
Obligation to practice every Virtue; so I have endeavored to show how in the
Practice of it we do naturally grow up to the heavenly State, as, on the
contrary, how in the course of a sinful Life we do by a necessary Efficiency
gradually sink our selves into the State of the Damned. For I have proved at
large, that there is something of Heaven and Hell in the very Nature of each
particular Virtue and Vice, and that in the perfection of these two opposite
Qualities consists the main Happiness and Misery of those two opposite States.
From whence it will necessarily follow, that as in the Practice of the one or
the other we grow more virtuous or vicious, so proportionably we rise up toward
Heaven or sink down toward Hell by a fatal Tendency of Nature. The Truth of
which is not only acknowledged by the generality of Christian Writers, but also
by the best and wisest of the Heathen Philosophers; though this, I think, is
the first Attempt that has been made to derive the Heavenly and the Hellish
States from the nature of the particular Virtues and Vices. I pray God that
what I have said may but engage some more skilful Pen in the Prosecution of
this noble Argument. For I know nothing in the World that can be more effectual
to engage men to be substantially Religious, to take them off from Hypocrisy
and Formality, from all presumptuous Hopes and false Dependencies, than their
being thoroughly convinced of this Truth, that the eternal Happiness or Misery
of Souls is founded in their Virtue or Vice, and that there is as inseparable a
Connection between Grace and Glory, Sin and Hell, as there is between Fire and
Heat, Frost and Cold, or any other necessary Cause and its Effect. For if they
were but thoroughly persuaded of this, they would easily discern what wretched
Nonsense it is, to think of going to Heaven or escaping Hell whilst they
continue in any wilful Course of Disobedience to the Laws of Virtue.

HAVING thus treated at large of the first Sort of Means by which the End of
our Christian Life is to be obtained, I proceed in the fourth Chapter, which is
the largest of all, to give an Account of the second, viz. the Instrumental
Duties of Christianity, which are enjoined us as Means subservient to our
Practice, Acquisition and Improvement of those Heavenly Virtues in the
perfection whereof our Chief Happiness consists. And for the more distinct
handling of these, I have considered men under a Threefold State with respect
to the Christian Life; First, as entering into it; Secondly, as actually
engaged in it; Thirdly, as perfecting and improving themselves by Perseverance
in it; to each of which I have appropriated such of the instrumental Duties as
I conceived did more especially belong to them. It Is true, some of the Duties
here treated of, are not purely instrumental, but of a mixed Nature, such as
Faith, Prayer, actual Dedication of our good Works to God, etc. which are
essential Parts of Divine Worship, and, as such, do belong to those Divine
Virtues the Perfection whereof makes a Principal Part of the everlasting
Happiness of Souls. But here I have considered them only as Means and
Instruments in the Use of which we are to acquire and perfect those Beatifical
Virtues. And of this sort of Means I do not remember any one Particular
recommended in holy Scripture, but what has been here treated of. Upon some
indeed I have insisted much more briefly, than upon others, because I find them
already largely accounted for in other practical Books, and especially in those
two excellent Treatises abovenamed; but of those which they either cursorily
touch, or take no notice at all, I thought my self obliged to give a larger
Account.

FROM the whole I would recommend to the pious Reader the Consideration of the
admirable Structure and Contrivance of the Practical Part of Christianity,
which having proposed to us an End so great and sublime, and so highly worthy
of our most vigorous prosecutions, has also furnished us with such choice and
effectual Means of all sorts to attain it. The consideration of which would be
in itself a great Inducement to me to believe Christianity a Divine Religion,
though I were utterly unacquainted with its External Evidence and Motives of
Credibility. For it can never enter into my Head that such a rare and exquisite
Contrivance to make men good and happy, could ever owe its Original to the mere
invention of a Carpenters Son, and a company of illiterate Fishermen.
Especially considering how far it excels the Moral Precepts even of those
divine Philosophers who believed the future State of a blessed Immortality, and
exerciz'd their best Wit in prescribing Rules to guide and direct men thither.

AND having given this large Account of the instrumental Duties of the
Christian Life, and also enforced the several Divisions of them with proper
Arguments and Motives, I thought fit to add a fifth Chapter, wherein I have
given some Rules for the more profitable reading of this practical Discourse,
and also some general Directions for the Exercise of our private Religion in
all the different States of the Christian Life, together with certain Forms of
private Devotion fitted for each State. In which I have supposed, what I doubt
is a very deplorable Truth, viz. that the Generality of Christians after their
Initiation by Baptism into the Public profession of Christianity, are so
unhappy as to be seduced either through bad Example or Education into a vicious
State of Life; and that consequently from thence they must take their first
start into the through Practice of Christianity. Not that I make the least
doubt, but that there are a great many excellent Christians, who by the
Blessing of God upon their pious Education, have been secured from this
Calamity, and trained up from their Infancy under a prevailing Sense of God and
Religion; and therefore for such as these, as there is no need of that solemn
method of Repentance prescribed in the first Section of the fourth Chapter, so
neither is there of those first penitential Prayers in this fifth Chapter,
which are accomodated to that State. For these persons have long since been
actually engaged in the Christian Life, and, as it is to be supposed, have made
considerable Improvements in it, and therefore as they are only concerned in
the Duties of the second and third States of the Christian Life, so they are
only to use the Prayers which are fitted to those States, which with some
variation of those phrases which suppose the past Course of our Life to have
been vicious, they may easily accommodate to their own Condition. But the
Design of this Discourse is not only to conduct them onwards in their Way who
have already entered upon the Christian Life, but also to reduce those to it,
who have been so unhappy as to wander into vicious Courses; or rather, though
it serves both Purposes, it is wholly designed for the same persons, viz. to
seek and bring back those lost Sheep who have straid from the Paths of
Christian Piety and Virtue, and then to lead them on through all the
intermediate Stages to the happy State of immortal Pleasures at the end of
them. And now if what has been said should, by the Blessing of God, obtain its
designed Effect upon any person, I ask no other Requital for all the Pains it
has cost me, but his earnest Prayers to God for me, that after my best
Endeavors to guide and direct him to Heaven, I may not fall short of it my
self.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
COncerning the Ultimate End of the Christian Life, the Necessity of explaining
what it is, in order to our understanding the Christian Life, Page 1. that
Heaven is the End of it, p. 2.3. etc. that Heaven and Gods Glory are the same
thing, p. 5.6. what kind of Happiness Heaven implies, with a general Account of
the Happiness of Rest and the Happiness of Motion, showing that Heaven includes
both, but consists principally of the latter, p. 7.8. etc. that the Happiness
of a Man consists in the vigorous Motion of his Understanding and Will toward
suitable Objects, p. 11.12. and chiefly in the Knowledge and Choice of God p.
12.13. etc. and also in the Knowledge and Choice of those that are most like
him, p. 21.22. etc. the Glory of the Place, p. 25.26. the Eternity of the
Enjoyment, p. 26.27. two Inferences from the whole, p. 27.28. etc.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Means by which the End of the Christian Life is to be obtained;
that the Means must be more and greater than what was necessary to the first
End of man, viz. the Enjoyment of an earthly Paradise, p. 33.34. etc. that the
great Distance of man from Heaven in his degenerate State creates a Necessity
of many more Means than otherwise would be needful, p. 35.36. etc. two Kinds of
Means necessary to our attainment of Heaven, viz. the Practice of the Virtues
of Christianity, and the Use of the instrumental Duties of Christianity, p.
38.39. etc. that the instrumental Duties of Christianity conduce no farther to
our Happiness than as they are Means of Virtue, proved in four particulars, p.
42.43. etc.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Proximate Means of attaining Heaven, viz. the Practice of the
Christian Virtues; showing what Virtues this kind of Means consists of, and how
much every Virtue contributes to the Happiness of Heaven. A distribution of the
Christian Virtues into Humane, Divine, Social, p. 57.58.

SECT. I.
Concerning the Humane Virtues, showing that from the Constitution of humane
Nature there are five Virtues necessary to its Happiness, p. 59.60. etc. first,
Prudence, p. 62.63. etc. secondly, Moderation, p. 70.71. etc. thirdly,
Fortitude, p. 79.80. etc. fourthly, Temperance, p. 89.90, etc. fifthly,
Humility, p. 97.98, etc.

SECT. II.
Concerning the Divine Virtues, which are comprehended in this first sort of
Means, showing what they are, and how effectually they conduce to our future
Happiness; that from the Relation we stand in to God there arises an Obligation
to six several Virtues, all which are necessary to our Happiness, p. 108.109,
etc. first, Contemplation of his Nature, p. 109.110, etc. secondly, Adoration
of his Perfections, p. 117.118, etc. thirdly, Love, p. 123.124, etc. fourthly,
Imitation, p. 136.137, etc. fifthly, Resignation, p. 147.148, etc. sixthly,
Trust and Dependence, p. 162.163, etc.

SECT. III.
Concerning the Social Virtues which are included in this first sort of Means,
showing that from our Inclination to Society and from the Nature and Condition
of humane Society there arises a necessity of five Virtues to our everlasting
Happiness, p. 175.176, etc. first Charity, p. 178.179, etc. secondly, Justice,
p. 190.191, etc. thirdly, Peaceableness, p. 201.202, etc. fourthly. Modesty,
fifthly, Courtesy, p. 209.210, etc.

SECT. IV.
Containing some Motives and Considerations to persuade men to the Practice of
these Virtues; first, the Suitableness of them to our present State and
Relation, p. 222.223, etc. secondly, the Dignity, of them. p. 226.227, etc.
thirdly, the Freedom and Liberty of them, p. 229.230, etc. fourthly, the
Pleasure of them, p. 234.235, etc. fifthly, the Ease and Repose of them, p.
238.239, etc. sixthly, the absolute Necessity of them, p. 242.243, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Instrumental Duties of the Christian Life, which is the second
sort of Means necessary to our obtaining of Heaven, as they are necessary to
our acquiring and Perfecting the Christian Virtues; in order to the better
Distribution of which Man is considered under a threefold Respect to the
Christian Life; first, as entering into it; secondly, as actually engaged in
it; thirdly, as Growing on to Perfection by Perseverance in it; to one of which
three States these Instrumental Duties of Christianity belong, p. 247.248, etc.

SECT. I.
Containing those Instrumental Duties which are necessary for us in our
Entrance in the Christian life; which are, first Faith, p. 250.251. secondly,
Consideration, p. 254.255, etc. thirdly, a deep and through Conviction of our
need of a Mediator, p. 259.260, etc. fourthly, a deep Sorrow, Shame and Remorse
for our past Iniquities, p. 268.269, etc. fifthly, earnest Prayer for divine
Assistance, p. 271, 272, etc. sixthly, a serious and solemn Resolution of
Amendment, p. 275.276, etc.

SECT. II.
Containing certain Motives to engage men to the Practice of these Duties;
first, the vast Necessity of our entering into the Christian life one time or
other, p. 281.282. secondly, the Great Security and Advantage of our entering
upon it now, p. 284.285, etc. thirdly, the necessary Dependence of the final
Success upon the well-beginning of it, p. 288.289, etc. fourthly, that when
once it is well begun, the main Difficulty of it is over, p. 291.292, etc.

SECT. III.
Containing those Instrumental Duties which are necessary for us when we are
actually engaged in the Christian life, p. 298, etc. in General it is necessary
that we should frequently repeat the Duties of our Entrance, p. 299.300. but
more particularly, first, that we should arm our selves with Patience and
Courage, p. 304.305, etc. secondly, that we should propose to our selves the
best Examples, p. 308.309. thirdly, that we should frequently apply our selves
for Advice and Direction to our Spiritual Guides, p. 216.317, etc. fourthly,
that as often as we can we should actually intend and aim at God in the Course
of our Lives and Actions, p. 323.324, etc. fifthly, that we should possess our
Minds with an awful Apprehension of Gods Presence with and Inspection over us,
p. 333.334, etc. sixthly, that we should frequenty examine and review our own
Actions, p. 343.344, etc. seventhly, that we should be very watchful and
circumspect, p. 348.349, etc. eighthly, that we should be diligent and
industrious in our Particular Callings, p. 353.354, etc. ninthly, that we
should endeavor to keep up a constant Cheerfulness of Spirit in Religion, p.
365.366, etc. tenthly, that we should maintain in our minds a constant Sense
and Expectation of Heaven, p. 372.373, etc. eleventhly, that we should live in
the frequent Use of the public Ordinances and Institutions of our Religion, p.
377.378.

SECT. IV.
Containing certain Motives to animate men against the Difficulties of these
Duties; first, that whatsoever Difficulty there is in them we may thank our
selves for it, p. 388.389. etc. secondly, that in the Course of our Sin there
is a great deal of Difficulty as well as in these Duties, p. 391.392, etc.
Thirdly, that how great soever the Difficulty be, it must be undergon or that
which is much more intolerable, p. 394.395. fourthly, that how difficult soever
they may be, the Grace of God will render them possible to us, if we be not
wanting to our selves, p. 396.397. fifthly, that though they are difficult, yet
they are fairly consistent with all our other necessary Occasions, p. 400.401.
sixthly, that the Difficulty is such as will abate and wear off by degrees, p.
404.405. seventhly, that there is a world of present Peace and Satisfaction
intermingled with the difficulties, p. 407.408. eighthly, that the difficulty
is abundantly compensated by the Reward of them, p. 411.412.

SECT. V,
Containing those Instrumental Duties which are necessary for us in order to
our improving toward Perfection by Perseverance in the Christian life; which
are first, that while we stand we should not be over-confident of our selves,
but keep a Jealous eye upon the Weakness and Inconstancy of our own natures, p.
417.418. secondly, that if at any time we wilfully fall we should immediately
arise again by Repentance, p. 420.421. thirdly, that for the future we should
endeavor to withdraw our Affections from the Temptations of the world, and
especially from those which were the Occasion of our Fall, p. 424.425.
fourthly, that we should curiously search into the smaller Defects and
Indecencies of our Nature, in order to our timely correcting and reforming
them, p. 429.430, etc. fifthly, that we should, as far as lawfully we can, live
in the Communion of the Church whereof we are members, p. 434.435, etc.
sixthly, that we should not stint our Progress in Religion, (out of a fond
Opinion that we are good enough already) to any determinate Degrees or Measures
of Goodness, p. 458.459, etc. seventhly, that we should frequently entertain
our selves with the Prospect of our Mortality, 462.463. eighthly, that to put
our selves into a good Posture of Dying, we should discharge our Consciences of
all the Relics and Remains of our past Guilts, p. 467.468, etc. ninthly, that
to Compensate, so far as we are able, for those Guilts we should take care to
Redeem the Time we have formerly misspent in sinful Courses by being doubly
diligent in the Exercise of all the contrary Virtues, p. 471.472, etc. tenthly,
that we should labor after a rational and well-grounded Assurance, p. 476.477,
etc.

SECT. VI,
Containing certain Motives to persuade men to the Practice of these duties of
Perseverance, which are all deduced from the Consideration of the urgent
Necessity of our final Perseverance; as first, unless we immediately recover
when we have wilfully relapsed we shall go much faster back than ever we went
forward, p. 487.488, etc. secondly, if after we have made some Progress in
Religion we Totally Relapse we shall thereby forfeit the Fruit of all our past
Labor, p. 490.491, etc. thirdly, we shall forfeit the Fruit of it after we
have undergone the greatest Difficulty of it, p. 494.495, etc. fourthly, we
shall not only forfeit the Fruit of our past Labor, but render our Recovery
more hazardous, p. 497.498, etc. Fifthly, we shall not only render our Recovery
more difficult for the future, but plung our selves for the present into a far
more criminal and guilty Condition, p. 501.502, etc. sixthly, we shall not only
render our selves more guilty for the present, but expose our selves if we die
in our sin to a deeper and more dreadful Ruin, 508.509.

CHAP. V.
Containing some short Directions for the more Profitable reading the ensuing
Discourse, p. 513.514. and also directions for the good Conduct and regular
Exercise of our Closet Religion in all the different states of the Christian
Life, together with Forms of private Devotion fitted to each State, p. 517. the
first are for the State of Entrance into the Christian Life, p. 517.518, etc.
the second for the state of actual Engagement in it, p. 530. the third for the
state of Growth and Improvement toward Perfection.

OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE.
CHAP. I. Concerning the ultimate End of the Christian Life.
IN order to our understanding, what is the Nature, Use, and Excellency of any
Means, it is necessary we should have a true and genuine Notion of those
peculiar Ends which they drive at. For the nature of them, as they are Means,
consists in being serviceable to some End; but to what they are particularly
serviceable, must be collected from the nature of those particular Ends
whereunto they are directed. And therefore till we know what those particular
Ends are, it is impossible we should know whether they are Means or no, or,
which is the same thing, whether they are serviceable to any End or Purpose.

IT being therefore the Design of this Work to explain the nature of the
Christian Life, it will be necessary (for the clearing of our way) to give some
account of the blessed End for which it is intended; which will very much
contribute to our right understanding of the great usefulness and subserviency
of each part of it thereunto. Therefore,

I. I shall endeavor to show what is the peculiar End of the Christian Life.

II. Wherein the true Nature of this End consists.

I. As for the End of the Christian Life, we are assured from Scripture, that
it is no other but Heaven it self, that state of endless Bliss and Happiness
which God has prepared in the World above, for the reception of all those, who
by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality.
That this is the End of the Christian Life, is evident from hence, because it is
every where proposed by our Savior and his Apostles, as the Chief Good of a
Christian, and the Supreme Motive to all Christian Virtue. For so St. John,
that bosome-Favourite of our Savior, assures us, that This is the promise
which Christ has promised us, even Eternal Life, 1 John ii.25. And if we look
into the Gospel of St. John, who has more largely recorded our Saviors
Sermons and Discourses than any other Evangelist, we shall find Eternal Life
still proposed by him as the supereminent Promise to encourage and persuade men
to the profession and practice of Christianity. For so John iv.36. it is
proposed by our Savior as that which is the Harvest of a Christian, to which,
like the Husbandman's plowing and sowing, all our care and endeavor is to be
directed; He that reapeth, receives wages and gathers fruit unto eternal
life. Consonantly whereunto St. Paul tells us, that he that sows to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. vi.8. And this, as our
Savior tells us, is the great Reward which he gives to all those that hear and
follow him, John x.27, 28. and this the great argument which he every where
insists on, that he that believes has Life Everlasting, that whosoever
hears his word has Life Everlasting, and that his commandment is Life
Everlasting. And Romans vi.22. Everlasting Life is expressly said to be the End of
having our fruit unto Holiness; and as such we are bid to direct our actions
unto it, to believe in Christ unto Everlasting Life, 1 Timothy i.16. to do good,
to this end, that we may lay hold upon Eternal Life, 1 Timothy vi.18, 19. to look
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set
before him endured the cross, etc. Heb. xii.2. And therefore Heaven is
described to be the Christian Canaan, to which we are to direct all our steps,
whilst we are travailing through this World. Heb. xi.14, 15, 16. And the whole
life of a Christian is expressed by seeking it: Mat. vi.33. Heb. xiii.14. Col.
iii.1. And the incorruptible Crown is affirmed to be as much the end of the
race of the Christian Life, as those corruptible Crowns were of the races in
the Olympic Games. 1 Cor. ix.25. For it is to Eternal Glory that we are
called, 1 Pet. v.10. 2 These. ii.14. and in the discharge of all that Duty
whereunto we are called, we are to look to this blessed Hope as our great End
and Encouragement, Tit. ii.13.

THIS I have the more largely insisted upon, because of a great mistake that
many persons have lain under in this matter; which is, that the Glory of God is
the only ultimate End of a Christian, and that this is a distinct End from
Heaven; The first of which I confess, is very true, but the last absolutely
false. That the glory of God is the last End of a Christian, is evident from
those Texts which bid us do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. x.31. and which
make the glory of God to be the point in which all the fruits of righteousness
do concenter, Phil. i.11. which propose this as the End of all Religious
Performances, that God in all things may be glorified, 1 Pet. iv.11. and
affirm, that it is to this purpose that we are chosen to be Christians, that we
should be to the Praise of his Glory. Ephesians. i.12. But that the glory of God* is
no distinct End from our being made partakers of the Happiness of Heaven, is as
evident from hence, that this Glory consists not in any thing that we can add
or contribute to Him, whose essential Glory is so immense and secure, that
there is nothing we can do, can either Increase or Diminish it; and there is no
other Glory can redound to him from any thing without, but what is the
Reflection of his own natural Rays. He understands himself too well, to value
him self either the more or the less for the Praises or Dispraises of his
Creatures. For he is enough of Stage and Theater to himself, and has the same
satisfying Prospect of his own Glory in the midst of all the loud Blasphemies
of Hell, as among the perpetual Halelujahs of Heaven. And having so, it cannot
be supposed that he should enjoin us to Praise and Glorify him for the sake of
any Good or Advantage that can accrue to Himself by it, or out of any other
pleasure he takes in hearing himself applauded and commended by us, than he
does in any other Act that is decent and reasonable in it is own Nature; but
it is therefore, he will have us Praise him, because he knows it is for Our
Good, and highly conduces, as it is a most reasonable Action, to the Perfection
and Happiness of our reasonable Natures; because our praising him naturally
excites us to imitate him, and to transcribe into our own Natures those
Adorable Perfections, which we do so admire and extol in His. So that to pursue
our own Perfection and Happiness, is to Glorify God according to his own
design and intention; who requires us to Glorify him for no other purpose, but
that thereby we may Glorify our selves. And indeed our Happiness is Gods
Glory, even as all other worthy Effects are the Glory of their Causes. It Is He
that gives being to it, and consequently He that is glorified by it. It being
nothing but the resplendency of his own Almighty Goodness, or his own
outstretched Rays shining back upon Himself. And therefore we aim at Gods
glory just as He himself does, when we aim to be as happy as He would have us,
that is, when we pursue Heaven and cooperate with his Infinite Goodness, whose
great design is to advance us to that blessed condition in which we shall
Glorify him for ever, and be Everlasting Monuments of his overflowing
Benignity. So that whether we call our last End Heaven, or the Glory of God, it
is all but one and the same thing; since by obtaining Heaven, we shall Glorify
him according to his own Design and Intention. And this, I think, may suffice
to show, what is the true ultimate End of the Christian Life. But then

II. IT will be yet farther necessary for our clearing the way to the Design in
hand, to enquire what Kind of Happiness this is; Which when we understand, we
shall be the better able to comprehend what Duties or Means are necessary for
the obtaining it. And this Enquiry will be easily resolved, by considering the
Nature of Those for whom it was prepared and intended. For all Happiness
consists in the free and vigorous Exercise of the Faculties of Nature, about
Objects that are suitable to themselves. There is indeed a privative happiness,
which is nothing but Indolence or freedom from pain and misery; and this
consists not so much in the Exercise, as in the rest and quiet of the
Faculties. And herein the soft and restive Epicureans placed the whole
Happiness of a Man: In which I confess, they would not be very much mistaken,
if there were no happiness belonging to a Man beyond that Animal and Sensual
one, in which the Disciples of this Atheistical Philosopher placed their chief
Good. For the greatest part of the Pleasures of Sense indeed are merely
Privations of Misery, and short Reprieves from the Griefs and Troubles of a
wretched Life. For what else is our Ease and Rest, but only the removal of our
Pain and Weariness? which being removed, the Pleasure is presently over, and
then we grow weary again of our Rest and Ease; till Pain and Weariness return
and sweeten them, and gives them a fresh and new relish. For when we are weary
of Rest, we are fain to recreate our selves with Action, and when we are weary
of Action, to refresh our selves with Rest, and so round again still in the
same Circle. Thus the greatest part of the pleasure of Eating and Drinking
consists in asswaging the pain of our Hunger and Thirst. For when this is over,
you see the pleasure ceases, and till it returns again, every fresh morsel is
but a new load to a tired Digestion. So that in short, the greatest part of
those sensual Felicities which we do here enjoy, are only short intermissions
of the pains and uneasinesses of a wretched Life. But if there were no other
Happiness belonging to a Man, but what consists in not being sensible of
Misery, it were much more desirable to be a Stone than a Man, and the only way
for him to be perfectly Happy, would be, to deprive himself of all Sense and
Perception.

IT IS true, That which is positive in our Happiness can never be perfectly
enjoyed by us, without a perfect Indolence and Insensibility of Pain; it being
impossible for us to have a perfect sense of any thing, whilst we have the
least touch or feeling of its Contrary. But were Happiness nothing else but a
non-perception of Misery, it would have no positive Essence or Reality of its
own, which is directly contrary to all humane Experience. For we plainly feel,
that our Happiness has in it, not only a Rest from Evil, but a grateful Motion
to Good, and that as our Pain and Misery consists in an acute and sensible
perception of such things as are most ungrateful to our Natures; so Pleasure or
Satisfaction consists in a vigorous perception of the contrary. So that besides
the not being miserable (which is not so properly an Essential Part of
Happiness, as a necessary Disposition to it, without which the Faculties of our
Natures will be indisposed to relish and perceive it) there is a positive
Happiness which (as I said before) consists in a constant free and vigorous
Exercise of the Faculties about such Objects as are most convenient and
suitable to their Natures. For Happiness in the general includes Perfection and
Pleasure, both which are necessarily included in such an Exercise of the
Faculties. For then the Faculties are Perfect, when they are freely, constantly
and vigorously employed about such objects, as are most congruous to their
several natures; when they are recovered from all indispositions, whether
natural, or moral, to those proper motions and exercises for which they were
framed; and do freely, constantly, and without any clog or interruption direct
all their courses toward such Objects as are their natural Centers. And then
the Faculties are most pleased and delighted too, when they are most vigorously
exercised about that which is most suitable to them; when they are not only
determined to such Objects as are most agreeable to their Natures, but do also
act upon and exert themselves toward them with the greatest Sprightliness and
Vigor.

THESE things I thought meet to premise concerning Happiness in the General, as
being very needful to the clearer resolution of the present Enquiry, viz.
Wherein consists the Heaven or Happiness of a Man. In short therefore, the
proper Heaven and Happiness of a Man, considered as a rational Being, consists
in the constant, free, and sprightful Exercise of his Faculties about such
Objects as are most convenient to his rational Nature, which consisting wholly
of Understanding, and Will, that is, of a Faculty of Knowing and a Faculty of
Choosing, the most suitable Objects of it are such as are most worthy to be
known, and most worthy to be chosen. When therefore the Understanding is always
vigorously exercised in seeing and contemplating the most glorious and
excellent Truths, and the Will is always vigorously employed in choosing and
embracing the most desirable Goods, then is the whole Rational Nature Happy.
Now if you cast abroad your thoughts over the whole extent of Being; you will
presently find that there is nothing in it so worthy to be known and chosen as
God; whose Power being the source and fountain of all Truth, that is, of all
that either is or is possible, and whose Nature being the subject of all
rational Perfection, wherein it originally resides, and from whence'tis derived
to all the Rational Creation; you must upon these accounts necessarily allow
Him, to be infinitely the most worthy Object in all the World of Beings, for
our Understanding to contemplate, and our Will to choose. And if so, then the
very Life and Quintessence of the Heaven of a Man considered as a Reasonable
Being, must needs consist in a close and intimate Knowledge of God, and a Free
and Uncontroverted Choice of Him.

BUT that we may more fully comprehend the Nature of this Happiness, it will be
needful that we should more distinctly explain, what these two Essential Acts
of it do import, and what Happiness is included in them. And

I. THE Happiness of a Man consists in a free and intimate Knowledge of God,
For our Understanding has naturally as strong an Appetite to Truth, as our
Stomach has to Food, and as grateful a relish of it, when it has once
discovered it, as an Hungry-man has of a pleasant morsel. And though in this
life its Appetite is many times palled and deadned, partly through the
difficulty of knowing, occasioned either by the natural indispositions of its
Organs, or the inveterate prejudices of a bad Education; and partly by being
continually employed in secular cares and pursuits, which do perpetually
divert, and so by degrees wean it from its natural inclination to Truth: Yet
when we go from this World, and leave these causes behind us, which give such a
check to its Appetite, doubtless its hunger after Knowledge will immediately
revive, and there will be no possibility of ever satisfying it without it.

SUPPOSE we then the future World to be inhabited with a company of
Intellectual Beings, that do all most vehemently gasp after the knowledge of
Truth; What can there be imagined more grateful to them, than to be admitted to
the very Fountain of all Truth and Reality, there to quench their Thirst, and
satisfy their infinite Desires, with the free and easy, but still fresh
discoveries of his infinite Glories and Perfections? Where will they be able to
fix their greedy Eyes with comparably that Pleasure and Delight, as upon the
Mysterious Trin-un-Divinity, which is the eternal Author of all Being, the Root
of all Good, and the Rule and Source of all Perfection? But then supposing,
what is the case of these Blessed Contemplators, that their Minds are so
raised, and their Apprehensions are rendered so unspeakably quick and sagacious,
as that they can All know whatsoever they have a mind to, without the
difficulty of Study, and presently discern the Dependence and Connection of
Things without any puzling Discourse, or laborious Deduction: with what
incomparable satisfaction must they needs peruse that infinite Volume of the
Divine Being and Perfections.

NOW that in that Blessed State they have unspeakably clearer and more
perspicuous apprehensions of Things, than ever they had here, that noble
passage of St. Paul assures us, 1 Cor. xiii.12. For now we see through a glass
darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then I shall know, even
also as I am known; that is, now our Knowledge of Divine things is very obscure
and imperfect, they being shown us as it were through a glass, on purpose to
give us but a glympse of them; but when we come to Heaven, we shall look close
upon them, and have a far clearer, and more distinct Apprehension of them. Then
we shall know God as truly as He knows us, and have as real and certain
Apprehensions of his All-glorious Being, as He has of Ours. So that in Heaven,
you see, the Eyes of those Blessed Minds, that inhabit it, are so invigorated,
that they can gaze upon the Sun without dazzling; contemplate the pure and
immaculate Glories of the Deity, without being confounded with their
brightness; and their Understandings being thus exalted, they must needs
apprehend more at one single view, than we can do in volumes of Discourse, and
tedious long trains of Deduction.

AND then enjoying as they do, a most perfect repose both from within and
without them, they are never disturbed in their eager contemplations; which
having such an immense Horizon of Truth and Glory round about them, are still
discovering farther and farther, and so continually entertained with fresh
Wonders and Delights. What an infinite deal of Pleasure then must that
All-glorious Object afford to such raised and elevated Minds as these, which
like transparent Windows let in without any Labor or Difficulty all that
Divine and Heavenly light which freely offers it self unto, and shines for ever
round about them; and which by every new Discovery of God, and of these
bottomless secrets and mysteries of his Nature, are still enlarged to discover
more, and still have new Discoveries offering themselves, as fast as they are
enlarged to receive them. This of it self is so great a part of Heaven, that
St. John himself seems to be at a loss how to imagine any Heaven beyond it. 1 John iii.2. Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what we shall be; but we know that when He shall appear, we shall be like him,
that is in Glory and Happiness, for we shall see him as he is. But then

II. THE Heaven or Happiness of a Man consists also in a free and undistracted
choice of God; that is in choosing him for the Rule and Pattern of our Natures,
and for the object of our Love, Adoration and Dependence; all which, (as I
shall show hereafter) are Beatifical Acts, and do abundantly contribute to the
Happiness of Reasonable Creatures. For Happiness, (as has been premised)
consists not in Rest, but in Motion, and there is no Motion can contribute to
the Happiness of any Being but what is suitable to its own Nature. Now what
motion can be more suitable to the nature of a Reasonable Creature, than to
Love and Adore the Author of its Being and Well-Being; to bow to the will of
the Almighty Sovereign, and to imitate the Perfections of the Supreme Standard
and Pattern of all Reasonable Beings; to rely and depend on his infinite Power,
that is always conducted by his infinite Wisdom and Goodness? All which are
founded upon so many strong, evident and undeniable reasons, that the very
naming of them is sufficient to justify them to our Faculties, and demonstrate
them to be infinitely agreeable to the most fundamental Principles of our
Reasonable Nature. And being so, it is impossible but that of themselves they
should be exceeding joyous and blissful; for as the sensitive nature is most
gratified with those acts that have most of Sense in them, so is the Rational
with those that have most of Reason in them. And certainly those have most
Reason in them which are terminated upon Objects which most deserve them; and
what Object can so well deserve to be acted upon by Reasonable Beings as God?
or what Acts can they so reasonably exert upon him, as those of Love and
Adoration, Homage, and Imitation, Trust and Dependence? But as no Acts of Sense
can be very grateful to our Sensitive Nature so long as we exert them either
with repugnance, or indifferency, so neither can any Acts of Reason be to our
Rational; the Pleasure of all Acts, whether Sensitive or Rational, consisting
(as I showed before) in the Sprightfulness and Vigor of them. And this is the
cause why men now find so little Felicity in these most Rational Acts of
Godliness; because by their own bad customs they have rendered themselves
averse, or at least very cold and indifferent to them, which necessarily
renders us dead and listless in the exercise of them, and consequently causes
them to go off with little gust, if not with an ungrateful relish. But even in
this imperfect state we find by experience, that the more our corrupted nature
discharges and disburdens it self of those vicious indispositions, which do so
cramp and arrest it in these its Heavenly operations, the more it is pleased
still and delighted in them; Yea, and that when it is so far inured to a Godly
Life as to be able to practice the several virtues of it, but with the same
degree of activity and vigor as 'twas wont to do its most beloved Lusts, it is
unspeakably more pleased and satisfied, and finds more Sweetness by a thousand
degrees, in its Love and Adoration, Obedience and Imitation of God, than ever
it did in the highest relishes of Epicurism and Sensuality; that the more
perfectly we Love and Adore, etc. the more of Heaven we taste in these Blessed
Acts, and that, when by a long and constant practice of them we have once
rendered them natural to us, we enjoy such an Heaven upon Earth in the easy,
free and vigorous exercise of them, as we would not exchange for all the
Pleasures and Felicities which the World can afford us. And yet, God knows, the
most perfect state of Godliness which we attain to here, has so many degrees
of imperfection in it, and in this we are so disturbed and interrupted by
bodily Indispositions, and the troubles and necessities of this present Life,
that from the Joy and Pleasure which results from it here, we can hardly guess
at those ravishing Felicities which will spring out of it hereafter. When we
shall be perfectly released from all the encumbrances of flesh and blood, and
sin, when we shall be translated into a free and quiet state, wherein we shall
have nothing else to do, but only to know and love, obey and imitate, and have
no imperfection either natural or vicious, to clog or disturb us in this our
Beatifical employment. Wherein we shall act with all our vigor and might, and
thrust forth the whole strength of our Souls in every Love and every Obedience;
so that every motion of our Souls toward God, shall have the Vehemence of a
Rapture in it, without the Violence. When, I say, we shall be eternally fixed
in a State of such perfect Freedom and Activity, our Happiness must needs be as
large as our Desires, and as great as our utmost Capacity or Power of Acting
upon God. For now we shall most lively imitate the most Perfect, and adore the
most Adorable, as much as ever we are able; that is, we shall perform with all
our might and vigor the Acts that are most agreeable to our Reasonable Nature:
and in the utmost vigor of such Acts (as I have already showed) consists our
utmost Happiness.

SUPPOSE we then a Society of Rational Beings placed in such a State, wherein
they have an Object of infinite Perfections always before them, and no Evil
from without or within to check or divert them from exerting all their Powers
upon him in the most reasonable Actions: Suppose them now to be moving with
unspeakable vigor and agility, like so many ever-, living Orbs about this
their everlasting Center; to be as full of Love and Duty to him as ever their
Hearts can hold; to be copying his Perfections, and adoring his Excellencies
with an uncontrouled Freedom and Alacrity, and breathing forth themselves to
him in cheerful Praises and Rapturous Halelujahs; in a word, to be exercising
themselves about him to their utmost Strength and Power, in all those blessed
Offices which his Nature and their Relation to him call for: Suppose, I say,
all this, and you have before ye that which is the very top and flower of the
Heaven of a reasonable Creature; who in this blessed state is fixed, as it were
in his own proper Element, where without any let or disturbance, he freely
moves and acts according to his most natural Tendence and Inclination.

AND now by this time I think it is clear enough, that the main and principal
Part of the Heaven of a Man, considered as a reasonable Creature, consists in
Knowing and Choosing of God. But besides this, there are other blessed
Ingredients of Heaven; the principal whereof is, the Knowing and Choosing those
that are most like unto God; namely, the blessed Jesus in his Human Nature, and
the Holy Angels and Saints, who are all in their several Measures and Degrees
the express and lively Images of God. And therefore if to Know and Choose God be
the supreme Felicity of Heaven, then doubtless the next to that is, to Know and
be Acquainted with these blessed Images of him, and freely to choose their
Company and Conversation, and be entirely united to them in Affection; without
which it would be no Felicity to dwell in the same place with them. For to
co-habit with Jesus and with Saints and Angels, and not be acquainted with, and
united to them in Heart and Affection, would be rather a Burden than a
Pleasure. The Happiness therefore of being in their Society, consists in
Knowing and Choosing them. And this is every where implied, where our being with
them is mentioned as a part of our Heaven. Thus 1 These. iv.17. to be ever with
the Lord, is the same thing with being ever in Heaven; but then it is to be ever
with him upon Choice; for so those words imply, Phil. i.23. I desire to depart
and to be with Christ which is far better. And accordingly this is mentioned by
the Apostle as a dear Privilege of our being Members of the Christian Church,
whereby we are entitled to the Society of Holy Myriads of Angels, of the
general assembly of the Church of the firstborn, of God the Judge of all, of
the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and of Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, Heb. xii.22, 23, 24. And indeed this must needs be an inestimable
Happiness, not only to co-habit, but be acquainted with, and in Heart and Will
united to this Blessed and Glorious Company. For what Soul that has any Spark
of Cordial Love to Jesus, the best Friend of Souls that ever was; any grateful
remembrance of what he did and suffered for our sakes; would not esteem it a
mighty Felicity to be admitted into his Presence, and to be an Eyewitness of
the happy Change of his past woeful Circumstances? To see him that was so
cruelly treated, so barbarously vilified, tortured, and butchered for our
sakes, raised to the highest pitch of Splendor and Dignity, to be Head and
Prince of all the Hierarchy of Heaven, to be worshipped and celebrated
throughout all the noble Choir of Archangels and Angels and Spirits of just men
made Perfect? Verily methinks had I only the Privilege to look in and see my
dear and blessed Lord surrounded with all this Circle of Glories, it would be a
most Heavenly Consolation to me, though I were sure never to partake of it. The
very Communion I should have in the Joys of my Master, would be a kind of
Heaven at Second-hand to me, and my Soul would be wondrous Happy by
Sympathizing with him in his Felicity and Advancement. But Oh! when that
Blessed Person shall not only permit me to see his Glory, but introduce me into
it, and make me Partaker of it; when I shall not only behold his Beloved Face,
but be admitted into his Dear Conversation, and dwell in his Arms and Embraces
for ever; when I shall hear him record the wondrous Adventures of his Love,
through how many woeful Stages he passed to rescue me from Misery, and make me
Happy, and in the mean time shall have a most ravishing Feeling of that
Happiness; how will my Heart spring with Joy, and burn with Love, and my Mouth
overflow with Praises and Thanksgivings to him!

AND as our Acquaintance with, and Choice of the Blessed Jesus must needs
contribute vastly to our Happiness; so must also (though not in so high a
Degree) our being intimately acquainted and united with Saints and Angels. Who
being not only endowed with large and comprehensive Understandings, but also
with perfect Goodnature and most generous Charity, must needs make excellent
Company. For as their Goodness cannot but render their Conversation infinitely
free and benign, so their great Knowledge must necessarily render it equally
profitable and delightful. And then being so Knowing as they are, they must
needs be supposed to understand all the wise Arts of Endearment; and being so
Good, they must be also supposed to be continually practicing them. And if so,
what a Heavenly Conversation must theirs be, the Scope whereof is the most
glorious Knowledge, and the Law whereof is the most perfect Friendship? Who
would not be willing to leave a foolish, froward, and ill-natured World, for
the blessed Society of these wise Friends and perfect Lovers? And what a
Felicity must it be to spend an Eternity in such a noble Conversation! Where we
shall hear the deep Philosophy of Heaven communicated with mutual Freedom in
the Wise and Amicable Discourses of Angels and of Glorified Spirits; who
without any Reserve, or affectation of Mystery, without Passion or Interest or
peevish Contention for Victory, do freely Philosophize, and mutually impart the
treasures of each others Knowledge. For since all Saints there are great
Philosophers, and all Philosophers perfect Saints, we must needs suppose
Knowledge and Goodness, Wisdom and Charity to be equally intermingled
throughout all their Conversation; and being so, what can be imagined more
delightful! When therefore we shall leave this impertinent and unsociable
World; and all our good old Friends that are gone to Heaven before us, shall
meet us as soon as we are landed upon the shore of Eternity, and with infinite
congratulations for our safe Arrival shall conduct us into the Company of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, and introduce us into an
intimate Acquaintance with them, and with all those brave and generous Souls,
who by their glorious Examples have recommended themselves to the World; when
we shall be familiar Friends with Angels and Archangels, and all the Courtiers
of Heaven shall call us Brethren, and bid us Welcome to their Masters Joy, and
we shall be received into their glorious Society with all the tender
indearments and Caresses of those Heavenly Lovers; what a mighty Addition to
our Happiness will this be!

THERE are indeed some other additions to the Happiness of Heaven; such as the
Glory and Magnificence of the Place, which is the Highest Heaven, or the upper
and purer Tracts of the Ether, which our Savior calls Paradise, Luke
xxiii.43. and St. Paul the Third Heaven, 2 Cor. xii.2. both which in the phrase
of that Age bespeak it to be a place of unspeakable Glory; for so the Jews do
commonly call this blessed Seat the Third or Angel-bearing Region of Heaven, by
which they denote it to be the Palace of the King of the whole World, where his
most glorious Courtiers do reside; and they also call it Paradise, in allusion
to the Earthly Paradise of Eden; because as that was the Garden of this lower
World, so this is of the whole Creation. And though we have no exact
description of this place in Scripture, and that perhaps because no humane
language can describe it; yet since God has chosen it for the Everlasting
Theater of Bliss and Happiness, we may thence reasonably conclude that he has
most exquisitely furnished it with all accommodations that are requisite to a
most happy and blissful Life.

BESIDES which also there is the everlasting Duration of it, which is another
great Accession to its Happiness. That such is the Nature of its Enjoyments, as
that they do not, like all other Pleasures, spend and wast in the Fruition;
that though it will be always feeding our Faculties with new Delights, yet it
will never be exhausted, but be always equally, because infinitely, distant
from a Period. So that its Happiness consisting of an infinite Variety of
Pleasure extended to an infinite Duration, it will be impossible for those that
enjoy it to be either cloyd with the repetition of it, or tormented with the
fear of losing it.

BUT these Two last I only mention, because they do not so properly belong to
our present Argument; which is only to explain the Nature of Heaven so far as
is necessary to the right understanding of the Nature of those Means by which
it is to be attained.

NOW from what has been said concerning this great End of the Christian Life,
these Two things are to be inferred concerning the Nature of it.

I. THAT the main of Heaven consists not so much in any outward Possession, as
in an inward State and Temper. For though Heaven be doubtless a most glorious
Place, and all its blessed Inhabitants do possess and hold it by an everlasting
Tenure; yet it is a great mistake to imagine that the main happiness of Heaven
consists in living for ever in a glorious Place, which separated from all the
rest of Heaven would be but a poor and hungry kind of Happiness. For Life is no
otherwise a Happiness, than as it is the Principle of all our pleasant and
grateful Perceptions; and if we could live for ever without perceiving, it
would be the same thing to us, as if we were nothing but a Company of
everlasting Stones and Trees; and what great matter would it signify to live
for ever in a glorious Place, unless we could be for ever affected by it with a
delightful sense and perception; which is impossible, because all delightful
sense (as has already been proved) arises out of the vigorous exercise of our
Faculties about such Objects as are suitable to them; but what can there be in
the most glorious Place so suitable to a Rational Mind and Will, as to keep
them for ever vigorously employed and exercised about it? It may indeed for a
while employ the Mind in an eager Contemplation of its new and surprising
Beauties; but how soon would the Mind dis-relish it, were it to be its only
Entertainment for Eternity? And as for the Will, what would a fine Place
signify to it, if it were not replenished with such Objects as are suitable to
its own Options? And indeed there is nothing that can everlastingly gratify a
Rational Mind and Will, but what has in it such an Infinity of Truth as is
everlastingly Knowable, and such an Infinity of Goodness as is everlastingly
Desirable; or, which is the same thing, nothing but what has Truth enough in
it for the one to be vigorously contemplating for ever, and nothing but what
has Goodness enough in it for the other to be as vigorously loving, adoring,
and imitating for ever. And such an Infinitude of Truth and Goodness is no
where to be found but in God. But God, as well as the Place, and Duration of
Heaven, being an Object that is external to us, neither is, nor can be a
Happiness to us unless we act upon him, and freely exercise our Faculties about
him; unless we Know him, and Love him, etc. So that that which Felicitates all,
is our own Internal Act; it is by this that we enjoy Heaven, and perceive all
the Pleasures of it. It Is not by being in Heaven that men are constituted
Happy, but by vigorously exerting their Faculties upon the Heavenly Objects.
For without this, to be in Heaven or out of it would be altogether indifferent
to us. The Happiness of Heaven therefore consists in a State of Heavenly
Action; in being so attempered and connaturaliz'd to the Objects of Heaven, as
to be always acting upon, and cheerfully employing our Faculties about them.
For as there is no Pleasure in Acting coldly upon suitable Objects, so there is
Pain and Trouble in acting vigorously upon unsuitable ones. And therefore to
make Heaven it self a Happiness to us, it is necessary not only that we should
act vigorously upon the Objects of it, but that we should so act from a
suitableness of Temper to them. That we should contemplate God, submit to his
Will, adore and imitate his Perfections from a God-like Temper and Disposition.
For otherwise these Acts will be Penances instead of Pleasures to us; and the
more intensely we exert them, the more painful they will be. And if we were in
Heaven, all that Heavenly Exercise in which the Happiness of it consists, would
be but a Torment and Vexation to us, unless we had a Heavenly Temper. For as
the Parts of Matter can never rest, but do move about in a perpetual
Whirl-pool, till they are hit into a place or Interstice that is of the same
Form and Figure with them; so there is nothing can rest in Heaven but what is
Heavenly. All that is otherwise rebounds and flies off of its own accord, and
can never acquiesce there, till it is of the same Form, and Temper, and
Disposition with it. From hence therefore it is evident, that the Happiness of a
Man in Heaven consists not so much in the outward Glory of the Place, as in the
inward State of his own Mind, which from a suitableness of Temper to the
Heavenly Objects does always freely employ and exercise its Faculties about
them.

II. THAT the Heavenly State is nothing else but the Perfection of all Heavenly
Virtue. For it has been already proved, That Heaven consists in a clear and
intimate Knowledge, and a free and uncontested Choice of God, and of those
Blessed Beings that resemble him; and these Two comprehend all Heavenly Virtue.
So that the difference between the state of Grace and Glory is not in Kind, but
in Degree. For Grace is the Seed of Glory, and Glory is the Maturity of Grace.
It Is Knowledge exalted above all Error and Prejudice, above all Difficulty or
Obscurity of Apprehension; it is Love strained from all repugnancies of Flesh
and Spirit, and refined into a pure Celestial flame; it is Obedience to and
Imitation of God, perfectly separated from all sinful Defects, and freed from
the Clog of counter-striving Principles; it is Adoration of and Dependency upon
him, without the least degree of Indisposition or Despondency; in a word, it is
a free and uncontrolled Motion of all the Heavenly Virtues together, in which
they are every one most vigorously exerted, without the least Check or
Impediment. This therefore being the State of Heaven, as is evident from what
has been discoursed, it hence follows, that the main difference between Virtue
and Heaven is only Gradual; that Virtue is the Beginning of Heaven, and Heaven
is the Perfection of Virtue. And if so, then as the lowest Degree of true
Virtue is a step Heaven-wards, so every farther Degree is a nearer Approach
toward the Heavenly state. So that as we grow in Grace, and proceed from one
Degree of Virtue to another, we draw nearer and nearer to that blessed
Condition in which we shall be all pure Virtue without any sinful Alloy or
Intermixture. And this is the true State and Condition of HEAVEN.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Means by which this Great End of the Christian Life
is to be attained.
IT is to be considered that the great Design of Christianity being to advance
our Natures to such a sublime Degree of Purity and Perfection as is requisite
to capacitate us for the Enjoyment of a Heavenly Bliss; it was necessitated in
order hereunto, to strain our Duty to a greater Height than any preceding Law
had done before it. For the End of all Gods Laws is the Happiness of his
Subjects; and therefore that they may be effectual Means to promote this End,
it is necessary that the Duties they enjoin should be such as the Nature of our
Happiness requires. Now in the first state of our Nature, which was that of
Innocence, we seem to have been designed only for a Terrestrial Paradise, that
is, to enjoy a Sensual, Animal Happiness in a state of Earthly Immortality. And
to serve and promote this end, God gave us the Law of Nature, which seems to
have been nothing else but only Right Reason dictating to us what is necessary
to be done in order to an Earthly Happiness. And accordingly the Duties of this
Law were of a much lower strain than the Duties of Christianity; they being
intended for the Means and Instruments of a much lower Happiness. For in this
our Earthly and Animal State, Right Reason could require nothing of us but what
was subservient to our Earthly and Animal Felicity; and nothing could be good
for us but what tended thereunto, nothing evil but what did obstruct and oppose
it. But now that our Happiness is placed in another World, and in such vastly
different Enjoyments from those of a Terrestrial Paradise, we must proceed upon
other Principles. For now every Action is Good or Bad, Wise or Foolish, as it
serves or hinders our Happiness in the World to come. And therefore it is
highly reasonable that now we should live at a different rate, than what we
were obliged to in that Animal state wherein we were first Created; that we
should submit our earthly to our heavenly Interest, and renounce the Joys and
Pleasures of this Life, whenever they stand in competition with the spiritual
Felicities of the Life to come* Now we are no longer to look upon this World as
our Native Country, but as a Foreign Land; and so we are to reckon our selves
Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth; and accordingly to use the conveniences of
this Life as strangers do their Inns, not to abide or take up our habitation in
them, but only to bait and away, and refresh our selves that so we may be the
better enabled to perform our Journey to the Eternal World. For the scene of
our Happiness being shifted from an Earthly Immortality, to an Heavenly; and
consequently the Happiness it self being now much more sublime and pure and
spiritual than it would have been, had it continued Earthly; it is necessary
that our Nature should be exalted with it, and that we should be raised as high
above the condion of mere Earthly Creatures, as that is above the rank and
quality of an Earthly Happiness; otherwise it will be impossible for us to
relish and enjoy it.

NOW every Agent has need of more or fewer Means proportionably as he is
farther off, or nearer to the End he drives at. As for instance, the Husbandman
that has a fat and fruitful Soil to sow his Seed in, is nearer to the
attaining of a good Harvest, than he that has a barren or stony Ground to work
upon; and therefore has much less to do. For whereas the latter, before he can
plough and sow, must manure his Ground and gather out the stones of it; the
former needs only plough up the fertile Earth, and cast his Seed into it. Or to
come closer to the case in hand; a man that is merely ignorant is in a much
nearer capacity of true Knowledge, than he whose mind is altogether prejudiced
with erroneous Principles; and therefore needs much fewer Helps and Means to
attain it. For his mind being perfectly disengaged, is like a fair Paper, on
which as there is nothing writ, so there is nothing to be blotted out; So that
all that he has to do, is to inquire after and receive the Truth when it is
fairly proposed to him. But as for the Prejudiced man, he has a great deal to
unlearn before he can be capable of Learning; a great many false Principles to
be expunged, before ever the true Notions of Things can be imprinted on his
Understanding.

IF therefore we would take a true account of all those Means that are necessary
to our attaining of Heaven, we must consider what a vast distance we are from
it in this corrupt and degenerate state of our Nature. If we were in a state of
Indifference between Virtue and Vice we should be much nearer Heaven than we
are; For then, as we should be without those Heavenly virtues in the free
Exercise whereof the state of Heaven consists; so we should be without all that
Repugnance and Aversation to them which renders them so difficultly attainable;
and our Nature being already in an Aequilibrium would by the least over-weight
of Motive be presently inclined to Virtue and Goodness. But, alas! in this
corrupt state whereinto we are sunk, our Nature runs Evil-wards with a very
strong and prevailing Biass; and is not only void of virtue, but averse to it.
And this sets us at a far greater distance from the blessed End of our Religion
than otherwise we should be. For every Degree of vicious Inclination that is in
us, is a Remove from Heaven, a Descent from that Perfection of virtue wherein
the Heavenly Blessedness consists. And if so, how remote from Heaven are the
Generality of men in the Beginning of their Progress thither; when to their
natural Corruption they have superadded by their sinful Courses so many
inordinate Inclinations and inveterate sinful Habits; when by a long series of
wicked Actions, they have raised and blown up their Concupiscence into such
raging flames of Lust as generally they do! And being thus far gone back from
our End, there are sundry Means, which otherwise would have been perfectly
needless and superfluous, that are now become absolutely necessary thereunto.
For had we begun our Progress toward Heaven from a state of Indifferency
between virtue and vice, we had had no more to do but to practice those several
virtues of Religion of which the Heavenly Life and state consists; to love, and
to contemplate, to adore, and to obey God, and behave our selves justly and
charitably toward one another; all which would have been so easy, that we
should have had no occasion of any Instrumental Duties to facilitate them to
us. Whereas now starting Heaven-wards, as we generally do, from a most corrupt
and degenerate State, there are sundry other Means which we must use as
Instruments that are necessary to our acquiring and persevering in the virtues
of the Heavenly Life; to our conquering the Difficulties of, and killing the
vicious Aversations of our Natures against them: All which would have been
needless, at least in a great measure, had not our Nature been so depraved and
corrupt as it is.

SO that as the case now stands with us, there are Two sorts of Means that are
necessary to our obtaining of Heaven; The first is the Practice of those
Heavenly virtues, in the Perfection whereof consists the state of Heaven; the
Second is the Practice of certain Instrumental Duties, which are necessary to
our acquiring those Heavenly virtues, and overcoming the Difficulties of them.
The first sort of these are the proximate Means, those which directly and
immediately respect the Great and Ultimate End; The second the more remote
Means, which immediately respect those Means that immediately respect the End.
The first is like the Art of the Builder which immediately respects the House;
The second like the Art of the Smith which immediately respects the Means and
Instruments of Building.

I. ONE sort of Means necessary to the obtaining of Heaven, and that which more
directly and immediately respects it, is the Practice of those Virtues in the
Perfection whereof the Heavenly Life consists. For we find by experience that
all Heavenly Virtues are to be acquired and perfected only by Practice; That as
all bad Dispositions are acquired and improved into Habits by bad Practices and
Customs, so are all the contrary virtuous ones by the contrary Practices. For
Religion proceeds in the methods of Nature, and carries us on from the Acts to
the Dispositions, and from the Dispositions to the Habits of Virtue. And by the
same method the Divine Grace which accompanies Religion, does ordinarily work
its Effects upon the spirits of men, not by an instantaneous Infusion of
virtuous Habits into the Will, but by persuading them to the Practice of those
Virtues that are contrary to their vicious Habits, and to persist in the
practice of them till they have mortified those Habits, and thoroughly
habituated and inured them selves to these. So that the Grace of God is like a
Graff, which though it is put into a Stock which is quite of another kind, does
yet make use of the Faculties and Juices of the Stock, and so by cooperating
with them, converts it by degrees into its own Nature. And this is exactly
agreeable to the common experience of men, who in the beginning of their
Reformation are so far from acting virtuously from Habit and Inclination, that
it goes against the very Grain of their Nature, and they would much rather
return to their vicious courses, if they were not chased and pursued by the
Terrors of an awakened Conscience; and when afterward they come to act upon a
more ingenuous Principle, yet still they find in themselves a great Averseness
and Reluctance to it, and it is a great while usually ere they arrive to a Habit
or Facility of acting virtuously. But then by perseverance in the practice of
Virtue they are more and more inclined and disposed to it, and so by degrees it
becomes easy and natural to them. If therefore we would ever arrive to that
Perfection of Virtue which the Heavenly State implies, it must be by the
Practice of Virtue, by a continual training and exercising our selves in all
the parts of the Heavenly Life, which by degrees will wear off the Difficulty
of it, and adapt and familiarize our Nature to it. (...)^ Those things which
they that learn ought to do, they learn by doing them. Thus we learn Devotion
by Prayer, Submission to God by Denying our selves, Charity by giving Alms, and
Meekness by Forgiving Injuries. And we may as reasonably expect to commence
learned without study, as virtuous without the Practice of Virtue. Since
therefore the Formal Happiness of our reasonable Natures consists in the
Perfection of all the Heavenly virtues, and it is by these alone that we can
relish and enjoy the blissful Objects of Heaven; it hence follows, that the
Practice of those virtues is the most direct and immediate Means to obtain the
Blessed End of our Religion. But then,

II. ANOTHER sort of Means necessary to our obtaining of Heaven consists of
certain Instrumental Duties by which we are to acquire, improve, and perfect
these Heavenly Virtues. What these Means are will be hereafter largely shown:
All that I shall say of them at present is, That they are such as are no
farther good and useful, than as they are the Means of Heavenly Virtue, and do
tend toward the acquiring, improving, and perfecting it. For the whole Duty of
Man may be distributed into these Two Generals, viz. The Religion of the End,
and Religion of the Means. The Religion of the End contains all that Heavenly
Virtue wherein the Perfection and Happiness of Humane Nature consists; and this
the Apostle distributes into three particulars, viz. Sobriety, Righteousness,
and Godliness. The Religion of the Means comprehends all that Duty which does
either naturally, or by Institution, respect and drive at this Religion of the
End; and that all other Duty, that is not it self a Natural Branch and Part of
it, does respect and drive at it, the Apostle assures us, when he tells us that
the Gospel, or Grace of God, was revealed from Heaven for this very purpose, to
teach us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and
righteously and godly in this present world. And if we do not use the Religion
of the Means to this purpose, it is altogether useless and insignificant. For
the purpose of all Religious Duties is either, 1. To reconcile men to God, and
God to them; or, 2. To perfect the Humane Nature; or, 3. To entitle men to
Heaven; or, 4. To qualify and dispose them for the Heavenly Life. To neither
of which the Religion of the Means is any farther useful than as it produces
and promotes in us those Heavenly Virtues which are implied in the Religion of
the End. For,


I. IT is no further useful toward the reconciling Us to God, and God to Us.
For there can be no hearty Reconciliation between adverse Parties without there
be a mutual Likeness, and Agreement of Natures. Now the Carnal Mind, (which
includes all that is repugnant to the Heavenly Virtues) the Apostle tells us,
is Enmity against God, Romans vii.17. that is, has a natural Antipathy to the
Purity and Goodness of the Divine Nature. And this Antipathy the same Apostle
tells us, is founded in our wicked works, Coloss. i.21. So that though we
should practice never so diligently all that is contained in the Religion of
the Means, though we should pray, and hear and receive Sacraments, etc. with
never so much Zeal and Constancy, yet all this will be insignificant, as to the
reconciling our Natures to God, unless it destroy in us that Carnal Mind and
those wicked Works which render us so averse to his Goodness. And though God
bears a hearty good Will to all that are capable of Good, and embraces his
whole Creation with the outstretched Arms of his Benevolence, yet he cannot be
supposed to be pleased with, or delighted in any but such as resemble Him in
those amiable Graces of Purity and Goodness for which he loves Himself. For he
loves not Himself merely because he is Himself, (which would be a blind
Instinct, rather than a Reasonable Love) but because He is Good; and he loves
Himself above all other things, because he knows Himself to be the Highest and
most Perfect Good: and consequently He loves all other things proportionably as
they approach and resemble Him in Goodness. And indeed if He loved Us for any
other Reason besides that for which he loves Himself, he would not have
infinite Reason to love Himself; because he would not have that Reason to love
Himself for which he loves and takes delight in Us. Since therefore there is
nothing but our Resemblance of God can reconcile Him to Us, and since our
Resemblance of Him consists in Virtue and true Goodness, it hence follows that
all the Religion of the Means is insignificant to our Reconciliation with God,
if it does not render us truly virtuous. So that till this is effected there is
so vast a Gulf between God and Us, that neither We can go to Him nor He come
to Us; and unless he alter his Nature by becoming impure as we are impure, or
we alter ours by becoming pure as He is pure, there will be so immense a
Distance between Him and Us as that it is impossible we should ever meet and
agree. So that what the Prophet says of Sacrifice may be truly affirmed of all
Religion of the Means, Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams or with
ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? will He be reconciled upon our bare believing,
praying or receiving Sacraments, etc. No, no; He has showed thee, O man, what
is good; And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Mich. vi.7, 8.

II. THIS Religion of the Means is of no farther Use as to the perfecting our
Natures, than as it is instrumental to produce and promote in us those Heavenly
Virtues which are implied in the Religion of the End. For doubtless to be a
Perfect Man is to live up to the Highest Principle of Humane Nature, which is
Reason; and till we are once released from the slavery of Sense and Passion,
and all our Powers of Action are so subdued to this superior Principle as to
be wholly regulated by it, and we choose and refuse, and love and hate, and hope
and fear, and desire and delight, according as right Reason directs, we are in
a maimed and imperfect Condition. Now what else is Virtue but a Habit of Living
according to the Laws of Reason, or of demeaning our selves toward God, our
selves, and all the World, as best becomes Rational Beings placed in our
Condition and Circumstances? And till we are in some measure, arrived to this,
our Nature is so far from being perfect, that it is the most wretched and
confused thing in the whole world; A more undistinguished Chaos, where Frigida
cum Calidis, Sense and Reason, Brute and Man, are shuffled together without any
order, like a confounded Heap of Ruins. And therefore as for this Religion of
the Means, it will be altogether insignificant to the Perfection of our
Natures, unless by the Practice of it we do acquire a Habit of acting according
to the Law of our Reason, which Habit includes all Heavenly Virtue. For
constantly to know and do what is best and most reasonable, is the very Crown
and Perfection of every reasonable Nature; and therefore so far as our Faith
and Consideration, our Sorrow for Sin and the other Instrumentals of Religion,
promote this Heavenly Habit in us, so far are they perfective of our Nature,
and no farther.

III. THIS Religion of the Means is of no farther Use to Us as to the Entitling
us to Heaven, than as it is productive of those Heavenly Virtues which the
Religion of the End implies. For our Title to Heaven depending wholly upon Gods
Promise, must immediately result from our performance of those Conditions upon
which he has promised it; which till we have done, we can have no more Claim
or Title to it than if he had never promised it at all. But the sole Condition
upon which he has promised it, is Universal Righteousness and Goodness; for
so, without Holiness, we are assured that no man shall see God; and Mat. v. our
Savior intails all the Beatitudes of Heaven upon those Heavenly Virtues of
Purity of Heart, Benignity of Temper, etc. So also Romans ii.7. the Promise of
Eternal Life is limited to our Patient Continuance in well doing. And that we
may know before hand what to trust to, our Savior plainly tells us, that not
every one that cries Lord, Lord, that makes solemn Prayers and Addresses to me,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in Heaven; And this is the will of God, says the Apostle, even our
Sanctification; that is, our being purged from all Impurities of Flesh and
Spirit, and inspired with all Heavenly Virtues. And the Apostle expressly
enumerates those Virtues upon which our Entrance into Eternal Life is promised,
2 Pet. i.5, 6, 7, 8. Add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to
Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness,
and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness Charity; For if
these things be in you, and abound, says he, they make you that you shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that is, That you shall receive the proper Fruit of that Knowledge, which is
Eternal Life; for thus v. xi. he goes on, For so, or upon this Condition, an
Entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So that unless our Faith purifies our
Hearts, and works by Love; unless our sorrow for Sin works in us Repentance, or
a Change of Mind; unless our Prayers raise in us Divine and Heavenly
Affections, that is, unless we so practice the Duties of the Religion of the
Means as thereby to acquire the Virtues of the Religion of the End, it will be
all as insignificant to our Title to Heaven, as the most indifferent Actions in
the World.

IV. THIS Religion of the Means is of no farther Use to the disposing and
qualifying us for Heaven, than as it is an effectual means of the Religion of
the End. Which is a perfectly distinct Consideration from the former; For it
would be no advantage to us to have a Right to Heaven, unless we were
antecedently qualified and disposed for it. Because Pleasure which is a
Relative thing, implies a Correspondence and Agreement between the Object and
the Faculty that tastes and enjoys it. But in the Temper of every wicked Mind
there is a strong Antipathy to the Pleasures of Heaven; which being all chaste,
and pure, and spiritual, can never agree with the vitiated Palate of a base and
degenerate Soul. For what concord can there be between a spiteful and devilish
Spirit and the Fountain of all Love and Goodness; between a sensual and
carnalized one, that understands no other Pleasures but only those of the
Flesh, and those Pure and Virgin Spirits that neither eat nor drink, but live
for ever upon Wisdom and Holiness, and Love, and Contemplation? Certainly till
our Mind is contempered to the Heavenly State, and we are of the same
disposition with God, and Angels, and Saints, there is no Pleasure in Heaven
that can be agreeable to us. For, as for the main, we shall be of the same
Temper and Disposition when we come into the other World, as we are when we
leave this; it being unimaginable how a Total Change should be wrought in us
merely by passing out of one world into another: And therefore as in this world
it is Likeness that does congregate and associate Beings together, so doubtless
it is in the other too. So that if we carry with us thither our wicked and
devilish dispositions (as we shall doubtless do, unless we subdue and mortify
them here) there will be no Company fit for us to associate with, but only the
devilish and damned Ghosts of wicked men, with whom our wretched Spirits being
already joined, by a likeness of Nature, will mingle themselves, as soon as
ever they are excommunicated from the society of Mortals. For whither should
they flock, but to the Birds of their own Feather; with whom should they
associate, but with those malignant Spirits to whom they are already joined by
a Community of Nature? So that supposing that when they land in Eternity, it
were left to their own Liberty to go to Heaven or Hell, into the society of the
Blessed or the Damned; it is plain that Heaven would be no Place for them, that
the Air of that bright Region of eternal Day would never agree with their black
and hellish Natures. For, alas! what should they do among those Blessed Beings
that inhabit it, to whose God-like Natures, Divine Contemplations, and Heavenly
Employments, they have so great a Repugnancy and Aversation? So that besides
the having a Right to Heaven, it is necessary to our enjoying it that we shoule
be antecedently disposed and qualified for it. And it being thus, God has been
graciously pleased to to make those very Virtues the Conditions of our Right to
Heaven which are the proper Dispositions and Qualifications of our Spirits for
it; that so with one and the same Labor we might entitle our selves to, and
qualify our selves to enjoy it.

NOW (as we showed you before) the Condition of our Right to Heaven, is our
practicing those Heavenly Virtues which are implied in the Religion of the End;
and as the Religion of the Means no further entitles us to Heaven than as it
produces and promotes in us those Heavenly Virtues, so it no further qualifies
us for it. For when the Soul goes into Eternity, it leaves the Religion of the
Means behind it, and carries nothing with it but only those Heavenly Virtues
and Dispositions which it here acquired by those Means. For as for Faith and
Consideration, Hearing of Gods Word, and Receiving of Sacraments, etc. they are
all but Scaffolds to that Heavenly Building of inward Purity and Goodness; and
when this is once finished for Eternity, then must those Scaffolds all go down,
as things of no further Use or Necessity. But as for the Graces of the Mind,
they are to stand for ever, to be the Receptacles and Habitations of all
Heavenly Pleasure. And hence the Apostle tells us, that of those three
Christian Graces, Faith, Hope and Charity, Charity (which in the largest sense
of it comprehends all Heavenly Virtue) is the greatest; because the Two former,
being but Means of Charity, shall cease in Heaven, and be swallowed up for ever
in Vision and Enjoyment; but Charity, says he, never fails, 1 Cor. xii.13.

BY all which it is apparent that the Religion of the Means is no further
useful to us, than as it is apt to produce and promote in us those Heavenly
Virtues, the practice of which is the most direct and immediate Means to the
ultimate End of a Christian. Wherefore as a man may knock and file, and yet be
no Mechanic, though the Hammer and File with which he does it are very useful
Tools to the making of any curious Machine; so a man may pray, and hear, and
receive Sacraments, etc. and yet be a very Bungler in the blessed Trade of a
Heavenly Life. For though it is true, these are excellent Means of Heavenly
Living, yet as the Art of the Mechanic consists not barely in using his Tools
but in using them in such a manner, as is necessary to the perfecting and
accomplishing his Work; So the Art of one that pretends to the Heavenly Life,
consists not barely in praying and hearing, etc. but in using these Means with
that Religious Skill and Artifice which is necessary to render them effectually
subservient to the Ends of Piety and Virtue.

AND thus I have given a general Account of the Means which are necessary to
our obtaining of Heaven, and which, as I have showed, are either such as tend
more directly and immediately to it, or such as more remotely respect it. The
first is the Practice of those Heavenly Virtues in the Perfection whereof the
Happiness of Heaven consists; the second is the Practicing of those Duties
which are necessary to our acquiring and perfecting those Heavenly Virtues. And
of these two Parts consists the whole Christian Life; which takes in not only
all those Virtues that are to be practiced by us in Heaven, but also all those
Duties, by which we are to overcome the Difficulty of those Virtues, and to
acquire and perfect them. The first of these, for Distinction sake, we will
call the Heavenly Part of the Christian Life, it being that part of it which we
shall lead in Heaven, after we have learnt it here upon Earth; The second I
shall call the Warfaring or Militant Part of the Christian Life, which is
peculiar to our Earthly State, wherein we are to contend and strive with the
manifold Difficulties which attend us in the Exercise of those Heavenly
Virtues. Both which, I conceive, are implied in those words of the Apostle,
Phil. i.27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel; where the
Greek word (...), which we render, Let your Conversation be, strictly
signifies, behaving our selves as Citizens; or which, if we may have leave to
coin a word, may be fitly rendered, Citizen it as becomes the Gospel. For the
word implies that those of whom he speaks, were Denizens of some Free City; for
so the word (...), which Phil. iii.20. is rendered Conversation, strictly
denotes a Citizenship, from (...) Citizens; and is of the same Import with
(...), which, Acts xxii.28. is translatee a Freedom, i. e. of the City of Rome;
which denotes the State and Condition of those, who, though they dwelt out of
that City, and sometimes remote from it, had yet the Jus Civitatis Romanae, the
Privileges of it belonging to them. For thus Cicero describes it, Omnibus
Municipibus duas esse Tatrias, unam Naturae, alteram Juris, Catonis Exemplo,
qui Tusculi natus, in Populi Romani Societaem susceptus est: i. e. All such as
are made free of the City have two Countries, one of Nature, the other of Law;
As Cato, for instance, who was born at Tusculum, and afterward admitted a
Citizen of Rome. Which exactly agrees with the Nature of this Heavenly (...),
or Citizenship, which the Apostle here attributes to Christians, who though
they belong at present to another Country, and live a great way off from the
Heavenly City; have as yet no Domicilium in Vrbe, no actual Possession of any
of its blessed Mansions; are notwithstanding Free Denizens of it, and have by
Covenant a Right to all those blessed Priveledges which its Inhabitants do
actually enjoy. From whence it is evident, that the (...) in that Text, referrs
to their being Citizens of Heaven, and as such, it earnestly exhorts them to
behave themselves; to live as those who being now in a remote Country are yet
(...), as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. ii.19. i. e. Fellow-Citizens with
the Saints above; that are connaturalized with them into that Heavenly
Commonwealth. And being thus understood, the Apostles Advice will comprehend in
it both those kind of Means which I have before described. For, to live as
Citizens of Heaven, is, First to live like those who are the Inhabitants of
Heaven, to imitate their blessed Manners and Behavior, in doing the Will of
God upon Earth, as it is done by them in Heaven; and this takes in the Practice
of all those Heavenly Virtues of which the Religion of the End consists:
Secondly, To live like those that have a (...) or Citizenship in Heaven, that
are entitled by Covenant to the Privileges and Immunities of it, but are as
yet to win its Possession by a continual Warfare and Contention with those
manifold Difficulties and Oppositions which lie in our way to it; and this
takes in the Practice of all those Duties in which the Religion of the Means
consists. So that to live like Christians or as becomes the Gospel, is to live
in the continual Use of both kinds of the Means of Happiness. So that the
Christian Conversation consisting of these Two, is the only full and adequate
Means by which Heaven can be obtained.

BUT that I may make this more fully appear, I shall consider these two parts
of it distinctly, and endeavor to show how effectually each of them does
contribute in its kind, to our obtaining the Happiness of Heaven. And First, I
shall begin with the Proximate Means, viz. The Practice of all those Heavenly
Virtues, which are implied in the Religion of the End, and do make the Heavenly
Part of the CHRISTIAN LIFE.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Heavenly Part of the Christian Life, which is the
Proximate Means of obtaining Heaven; showing what Virtues it consists of, and
how much every Virtue contributes to the Happiness of Heaven.
VIRTUE in the general, consists in a suitable Behavior to the State and
Capacities in which we are placed; Now Man, who is the Subject of that Virtue
we are here discoursing of, is to be considered under a threefold Capacity. The
First is of a Rational Animal; the Second of a Rational Animal related to God;
the Third of a Rational Animal related to all other Creatures.


And these are the only capacities of Virtue that are in Humane Nature: So that
all the Virtues we are obliged to, and capable of, consist in behaving our
selves suitably to the State and Condition of Rational Animals, that are
related to God and their Fellow Creatures.

BY which three Capacities of our Nature, the Virtue or Suitableness of
Behavior which we stand obliged to, is distinguished into three kinds, viz.
The Humane, The Divine, and The Social.


Humane Virtue consists in behaving our selves suitably to the State and
Capacity of mere Rational Animals:

Divine Virtue consists in behaving our selves suitably to the Condition of
Rational Animals related to God:

Social Virtue consists in behaving our selves suitably to the Capacity of
Rational Animals related to their Fellow Creatures, but especially to Rational
Creatures that are of the same Class and Society with us.

THAT I may therefore proceed more distinctly in this Argument, I shall
endeavor to show what those Virtues of the Christian Life are, which are
proper to a man in each of these Capacities; and how much each of those Virtues
contributes to the Happiness of Heaven.

SECT. I. Concerning those Humane Virtues which belong to a Man as he is a
Reasonable Animal, showing that they are all included in the Heavenly Part of
the Christian Life, and that the Practice of them effectually conduces to our
future Happiness.
FIRST we will consider Man in the Capacity of a mere Rational Animal, that is
compounded of contrary Principles, viz. Spirit and Matter, or a Rational Soul
and Humane Body; by which Composition He is, as it were, the Buckle of both
Worlds, in whom the Spiritual and Material World are clasped and united
together; and partaking, as he does, of both Extremes of Spirit and Matter,
Angel and Brute, there arise within him from those contrary Natures contrary
Propensions, viz. Rational and Sensual, or Angelical and Brutish; And in the
due Subordination of these, his Sensual to his Rational Propensions, consists
all Humane Virtue.

For his Reason being the noblest Principle of his Nature, must be supposed to
be implanted in him by God to rule and govern him, to be an Eye to his blind
and brutish Affections, to correct the Errors of his Imagination, to bound
the Extravagancies of his Appetites, and regulate the whole Course of his
Actions; so as that he may do nothing that is destructive or injurious to this
excellent Frame and Structure of his Nature. But now in this compounded Nature
of a Man, there are his Concupiscible and Irascible Affections: with the first
of which he desires and pursues his Pleasures; and with the second, he shuns
and avoids his Dangers; and there are also Bodily Appetites, such as Hunger,
Thirst, and Carnal Concupiscence; and together with these a Self-Esteem and
Valuation; all which are the natural Subjects of his Reason, and indeed the
only Subjects upon which it is to exercise its Dominion. So that in the well
and ill Government of these, consists all Humane Virtue and Vice. To the
perfect well governing therefore of a man's self, there are Five things
indispensably necessary:

1. That He should impartially consult his Reason what is absolutely best for
him, and by what means it is best attainable, and and then constantly pursue
what it proposes and directs him to. For so far as he is wanting in this, he
casts off the Government of his Reason.

2. That he should proportion his Concupiscible Affections to the just value
which his Reason sets upon those things which he affects: For every Degree of
Affection which exceeds the merit of Things, is irrational, and consequently
injurious to our Rational Nature.

3. That he should not suffer his Irascible Affections to exceed those Evils
and Dangers which he would avoid; For if he does, they will prove greater Evils
to him than those Evils or Dangers are which raise and provoke them.

4. That he should not indulge his Bodily Appetites to the Hurt and Prejudice
of his Rational Nature: For if he does, he will violate the nobler, for the
sake of the viler Part of Himself. And

5. That upon the whole, he should maintain a Modest Opinion of himself; and
not think better of his own Conduct and Management of himself than it deserves:
For by so doing, he will be apt to overlook his own Misgovernments, and so
incapacitate himself for any farther Improvements. And in these five
Particulars consists all that Virtue which belongs to a man, considered merely
in the Capacity of a Rational Animal: The First is the Virtue of Prudence, The
Second is the Virtue of Moderation, The Third is the Virtue of Fortitude, The
Fourth is the Virtue of Temperance, The Fifth is the Virtue of Humility.
All which, as I shall show, are Essential Parts of the Christian Life, and
such as do effectually contribute to our Heavenly Happiness.

I. PRUDENCE. And this is the Root and Groundwork of all other Virtues; It Is
this that gives Law and Scope to all our Motions, that proposes the Ends, and
prescribes the Measures of our Actions. For Prudence consists in being guided
and directed by Right Reason, as it proposes to us the worthiest Ends, and
directs us to the fittest and most effectual Means of obtaining them. So that
to live prudently, is to live in the constant Exercise of our Reason, and to be
continually pursuing such Ends as Right Reason proposes, by such Means as Right
Reason directs us to, which is the proper Business of all the Virtues of
Religion. And hence Religion in the Scripture is frequently called by the Name
of Wisdom or Prudence; The Fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, says Job, and to
depart from Evil that is Understanding, Job xxviii.28. And, the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, says David, Psalm. cxi.10. where the Fear of
the Lord comprehends all the Acts of Religion, which are therefore wise and
prudent, because they are the fittest Means to those worthiest Ends which Right
Reason proposes. So that to exercise our Reason in the Search and Discovery of
what is absolutely best for us, and to follow our Reason in the Pursuit and
Acquest of what it discovers to be so, is that virtue of Prudence whereunto we
stand obliged as we are Rational Animals.

FOR our Reason being the noblest Principle of our Nature, That by which we are
raised above the Level of Brutes, yea, by which we are allied to Angels, and do
border upon God himself, ought upon that account to be submitted to, as the
supreme Regent and Directress of all our other Powers and to be looked upon as
the Rule of our Will, and the Guide of all our Animal Motions. And when to
gratify our sensual Appetites, or unreasonable Passions we either neglect
those Ends which our Reason proposes to us, or pursue them by such Means as our
Reason disallows of, we reverse the very order of our Natures, and tread
Antipodes to our selves; And while we do so, it is impossible we should be
happy, either here, or hereafter. For every thing, you see, is diseased while
it is in an unnatural State and Condition, while its Parts are displaced, or
put into a Disorder, or distorted into an unnatural Figure. And so it is with a
Man, who while he preserves his Faculties in their natural Station and
Subordination to each other, while he keeps his Affections and Appetites in
subjection to his Will, and his Will to his Reason, he is calm and quiet, and
enjoys within himself perpetual Ease and Tranquillity; But when once he breaks
this order, and suffers his Passions or his Appetites to usurp the Place of his
Reason; to impose contrary Ends to it, or prescribe contrary Means; his
Faculties, like disjointed Members, are in perpetual Anguish and Anxiety. And
hence it is that in the Course of a wicked Life, we feel such restless
Contentions between our Spirit and Flesh, between the Law in our Minds, and the
Law in our Members; because our Nature is out of Tune, and its Faculties are
displaced and disordered, and that sovereign Principle of Reason which should
sway and govern us, is deposed, and made a Vassal to our Appetites and
Passions. For in all our evil Courses we choose and refuse, resolve and act, not
as Reason directs us, but as Sense and Passion biasses us; and our Reason
having nothing to do in all this Brutish Scene of Action, either sleeps it out,
without minding or regarding, or else sits by as an idle Spectator of it, and
only censures and condemns it. And it is this that causes all that Tumult and
Contest that is in our Natures; and till, by the Exercise of Prudence, our
Faculties are reduced, and set in order again, our Mind will be like our Body,
while its Bones are out of Joint, continually restless and unquiet. And
therefore to remove this great Indisposition of our Nature to Happiness,
Prudence is required of us, as one of the principal Virtues of the Heavenly
Part of the Christian Life.

FOR thus our Savior injoins that we should be wise as Serpents as well as
harmless as Doves, Mat. x.16. which though it be here prescribed in a
particular Case only, viz. that of Persecution; yet since the Reason of it
extends to all other Cases, and it is fit we should be Prudent in all our
Undertakings as well as in suffering Persecution, it is upon that account
equivalent to an universal Command. So also Ephesians. v.15. See that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; i. e. In the whole Course of your
Actions take heed that ye follow the Guidance of your Reason, and do not suffer
your selves to be seduced by your blind Passions and Appetites, which are mere
Ignes Fatui, or the Guides of Fools. And accordingly the Apostle prays for his
Christian Colossians, That they might be filled with the Knowledge of God in
all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding, Coloss. i.9. i. e. That they might have
such a knowledge of Gods will as might render them truly prudent, and cause
them to pursue the best Ends by the best Means. And though this Virtue seldom
occurs in the new Testament under its own Name, yet, as in the abovenamed
Places it is expressed by Wisdom, so it is elsewhere by Knowledge, as
particularly, 2 Cor. vi.6. where he commands the Ministers of the Church to
approve themselves such by several Virtues, and particularly by Pureness, i. e.
Continence, and by Knowledge, i. e. by Prudence; For, besides that Knowledge as
it signifies an Understanding of Divine Things, was not a Virtue in the
Apostles, but a Gift of God, and so not proper to be enumerated amongst these
Virtues; there is hardly any Account to be given why the Apostle should place
Knowledge in the midst of so many Moral Virtues, if he did not thereby mean the
Virtue of Prudence, which is, as it were, the Eye and Guide of all the other
Virtues. So again, 2 Pet. i.6. where he bids us add to Faith, Virtue, i. e.
Fortitude, or Constancy of Mind; and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge
Temperance; By Knowledge it is highly probable he means Prudence, because he
places it in the midst of those two Virtues which border nearest upon Prudence.

NOW that the Practice of this Virtue is a most proper and effectual Means of
our Everlasting Happiness, is evident from hence, Because the Practice of it is
a constant Exercise of Reason. For to act prudently in Religion is to follow
the best Reason; to aim at Heaven, which is the best End, and direct our
Actions thither by the best Rules; It Is to consult what is best for our selves,
and how it may be most effectually obtained. In a word, it is to intend the
chiefest Good above All, and to level our Lives and Actions most directly
toward it. This is Religious Prudence in the General; and as for those
Particulars of it, which we are obliged to exercise in the several States,
Relations, and Circumstances wherein we are placed, they all consist in doing
what is most fit and reasonable with respect to that Great and Blessed End.

FOR by living in the continual Practice of Religious Prudence, we shall by
degrees habituate our selves to a Life of Reason, and shake off that drowsy
Charm of Sense and Passion which hangs upon our Minds, and renders our
Faculties so dull and unactive; And having disused our selves a while to obey
their blind and imperious Dictates, our Reason will reassume its Throne in us,
and direct all our Aims and Endeavors to what is Fittest and most Reasonable.
For we being finite and limited Beings, cannot operate diverse ways with equal
vigor at once; and our Faculties are made in such a regular and aequilibrious
order, that proportionably as the one does increase in Activity, the others
always decay; And so accordingly as we abate in the strength of our Brutish, we
we shall improve in the vigor of our Rational Faculties. But to act suitably
to their Natures being the End of all our Faculties and Powers of Action, the
God of Nature to excite them thereto, has founded all their Pleasure in the
vigorous Exercise of them upon suitable Objects. Since therefore our Reason is
the best and noblest of all Powers of Action, to be sure the greatest Pleasure
we are capable of, must spring out of the Exercise of our Reason. Wherefore
since Prudence consists in the Use of our Reason, the Practice thereof must
needs effectually contribute to our Pleasure and Happiness. For Use and
Exercise will mightily strengthen and improve our Reason, and render it not
only more apprehensive of what is fit and reasonable; but also more persuasive
and prevalent; and when once it is improved into a prevailing Principle of
Action, and has acquired not only Skill enough to prescribe what is Right to
us; but also Power enough to persuade us to comply with its prescriptions; to
choose and refuse, to love and hate, to hope and fear, desire and delight, and
regulate all our Actions by its Laws and Dictates, then are we entering upon our
Heaven and Happiness.

FOR that which makes us unhappy is that our sinful and ureasonable Affections
do so hamper and entangle us, that we cannot freely exercise our Faculties upon
such Objects as are most suitable to them; that our Minds and Wills are so
fettered by our vicious Inclinations, that we cannot exert them upon that which
is most worthy to be Known and Chosen, without a great deal of Difficulty and
Distraction. But now under the Conduct of our Reason our Faculties will by
Degrees recover their Freedom, and disengage themselves from those vicious
Encumbrances which do so clog and interrupt them in all their Rational Motions.
And when this is thoroughly effected, we are in full Possession of the Heavenly
State, which, as I have showed, consists in the free and vigorous Exercise of
our Rational Faculties upon the best and worthiest Objects. For when once our
Passions and Appetites are perfectly subdued to our Reason, all our Rational
Faculties will be free, and every one will move toward its proper Object
without any Let or Hindrance; our Understanding will be swallowed up in a fixed
Contemplation of the sublimest Truth, our Wills, entirely resigned to the
Choice and Embraces of the truest Good; our Affections, unalterably devoted to
the Love and Fruition of the most excellent Beauty and Perfection; and in this
consists the Happy State of Heaven; So that to live prudently, or, which is the
same, to govern our selves by our best Reason, is both a necessary and
effectual means of attaining to the Heavenly State.

II. ANOTHER Virtue which appertains to a Man considered merely as a Rational
Animal is MODERATION; which consists in proportioning our Concupiscible
Affections to the just worth and value of Things; so as neither to spend our
Affections too prodigally upon Trifles, nor yet be over-sparing or niggardly of
them to real and substantial Goods. But to love, desire, and expect things more
or less, according to the Estimate which our best and most impartial Reason
makes of their Worth and Goodness. For he that affects things more than in the
Esteem of Reason they deserve, affects them irrationally, and regulates his
Passion by his wild and extravagant Imagination, and not by his Reason and
Judgment. And while men do thus neglect their Reason, and accustom themselves
to desire, and love and affect without it, they necessarily disable themselves
to enjoy a Rational Happiness. For, besides that their Rational Faculties being
thus laid by and unemployed, will naturally contract Rust, and grow every day
more weak and restive; Besides that their unexercised Reason will melt away in
Sloth and Idleness, and all its vital Powers freeze for want of motion, and,
like standing water, stagnate and gather mire, and by degrees corrupt and
putrefie, till at last it will be impossible to revive them to the vigorous
Exercise and Motion wherein their Pleasure and Happiness consists; Besides
this, I say, by habituating our selves to affect things irrationally, i. e. to
love the least Goods most, and the greatest least; we shall disable our selves
from enjoying any Goods, but only such as cannot make us happy. For he that
loves any Good more than it is worth, can never be happy in the enjoyment of
it; because he thinks there is more in it than he finds, and so is always
disappointed in the Fruition of it. And the Grief of being disappointed of what
he expects, does commonly countervail the Pleasure of what he finds and enjoys.
While he is in the pursuit of any Good which he inordinately dotes upon, he is
wild and imaginative; he swells with Fantastic Joys, and juggles himself into
Expectations, that are as large and boundless as his Desires; But when once he
is seized of it, and finds how vastly the Enjoyment falls short of his
Expectation, his Pleasure is presently lost in his Disappointment, and so he
remains as unsatisfied as ever. And thus if he were to spend an Eternity in
such Pursuits and Enjoyments, his Life would be nothing but an Everlasting
Succession of Expectations and Disappointments. So that all inordinate
Affection destroys its own Satisfaction, and necessarily renders us by so many
Degrees miserable, as it exceeds the real worth and value of Things.

BESIDES which also it is to be considered, that all these lesser Goods which
are the Objects of our Extravagant Affections, are things which we must ere
long be for ever deprived of: For the lesser Goods are those, which are only
good for the worser Part of us, that is, for our Body and Animal Life; the
proper Goods whereof are the Outward, Sensitive Enjoyments of this World; All
which, when we leave this world we must leave for ever, and go away into
Eternity, with nothing about us, but only the Good, or Bad Dispositions of our
Souls, So that if our Soul be carnalized through our immoderate Affection to
the things of this World, we shall carry that Affection with us, but leave the
things which we thus vehemently affect behind us for ever. For that which is
the prevailing Temper of Souls in this Life will doubtless be so in the other
too; and so far is that of the Poet true -- Quae gratia currum
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos, eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
For though the coming into the other world will questionless improve those
Souls which are really good before, yet it is not to be imagined how it should
create those good who are habitually bad; and if we retain in the other world
that Prevailing Affection to these sensitive Goods which we contracted in this,
it must necessarily render us unspeakably miserable there. For every Lust the
Soul carries into the other world, will, by being eternally separated from its
Pleasures, convert into an Hopeless Desire, and upon that account grow more
furious and impatient. For of all the Torments of the mind I know none that is
comparable to that of an outrageous Desire joined with Despair of Satisfaction;
which is just the case of sensual and worldly minded Souls in the other Life
where they are full of sharp and unrebated Desires, and like starving men that
are shut up between two Dead Walls are tormented with a fierce, but hopeless
Hunger, which having nothing else to feed on, preys and quarries on themselves;
and in this desolate condition they are forced to wander to and fro, tormented
with a restless Rage, an Hungry and Unsatisfied Desire, craving food, but
neither finding, nor expecting any; and so in unexpressible Anguish they pine
away a long Eternity. And though they might find content and satisfaction,
could they but divert their Affections another way, and reconcile them to the
Heavenly Enjoyments; yet being irrecoverably preingaged to sensual Goods, they
have no Savor or Relish of any thing else, but are like Feverish Tongues that
disgust and nauseate the most grateful Liquors by reason of their own
overflowing Gall. So impossible is it for men to be happy, either here or
hereafter, so long as their Affections to the lesser Goods of this World do so
immoderately exceed the worth and value of them.

ONE Essential Part therefore of the Christian Life which is the Great Means of
our Happiness, is the Virtue of Moderation; the peculiar Office whereof is to
bound our Concupiscible Affections, and proportion them to the Intrinsic Worth
of those outward Goods which we affect and desire. For though the word
Moderation, according to our present Acceptance of it, be no where to be found
in the New Testament, yet the Virtue expressed by it, is frequently enjoined;
as particularly where we are forbid to set our Affections upon the Things of
the Earth, Col. iii.2. To love the World or the Things that are in the World, 1
John ii.15. Which Phrases are not to be so understood as if we were not to love
the Enjoyments of the World at all; for they are the Blessings of God, and such
as he has proposed to us in his Promises as the Rewards and Encouragements of
our Obedience; and to be sure, he would never encourage us to obey him by the
Hope of such Rewards as are unlawful for us to desire and love: The meaning
therefore of these Prohibitions is, that we should so moderate our Affections
to the world, as not to permit them to exceed the Real Worth and Value of its
Enjoyments. For it is not simply our loving it, but our loving it to such a
Degree as is inconsistent with our Love of God that is here forbidden; For he
that loves the world, says St. John, the Love of the Father is not in him, i.
e. he that loves it to such a Degree as to prefer the Riches, Honors, and
Pleasures of it before God and his Duty to him, has no real Love to God, i. e.
He loves not God as God, as the Chiefest Good and Supreme Beauty and
Perfection. And hence Covetousness, which is an immoderate Desire of the world,
is called Idolatry, Col. iii.5. because it sets the world in the place of God,
and gives it that supreme Degree of Affection which is only due to him; And
this the Apostle there calls Inordinate Affection, because it extravagantly
exceeds the Intrinsic Worth and Value of its Objects. Wherefore we are strictly
enjoined to take heed and beware of Covetousness, Luke xii.15. And to let our
Conversation be without Covetousness, Heb. xiii.5. By all which and sundry
other Commands and Prohibitions of the Gospel, the Moderation of our
Concupiscible Affections is made a necessary part of the Christian Life.

NOW that this also mightily contributes to our Acquisition of the Heavenly
Happiness, is evident, not only from what has been already said, but also from
hence, that till our Affections are thus moderated, we can have no Savor or
Relish of the Heavenly Enjoyments. For in this corrupt State of our Nature, we
generally understand by our Affections, which, like colored Glass, represent
all Objects to us in their own Hue and Complexion. When therefore a man's
Affections are immoderately carried out toward worldly things, they will be
sure by Degrees to corrupt and deprave his Judgment, and render him as unfit to
judge of divine and spiritual Enjoyments, as a Plowman is to be a Moderatour in
the Schools. For when a man's thoughts have been employed another way, and the
Delights of Sense have for a long while preoccupied his Understanding, he will
judge things to be Good or Evil according as they disgust, or gratify his
lower Appetites: And this being the Standard by which he measures things, it is
impossible he should have any Savor of those Spiritual Goods in which the
Happiness of Heaven consists. For though in his Nature there is a Tendency to
Rational Pleasures, yet this he may, and very frequently does, stifle and
extinguish by addicting himself wholly to the Delights and Gratifications of
his Sense, which by degrees will so melt down his Rational Inclinations into
his Sensual, and confound and mingle them with his Carnal Appetites, that his
Soul will wholly sympathize with his Body, and have all Likes and Dislikes in
common with it; And there is nothing will be capable of pleasing the One but
what does gratify the unbounded Liquorishness of the Other.

NOW to such a Soul the spiritual World must needs be a barren wilderness,
where no Good grows that it can live upon, none but what is nauseous and
distastful to its coarse and vitiated Palate; where there are noble
Entertainments indeed for Minds that are contempered to them, that have already
tasted and experienced them; but not one Drop of Water to cool the Tip of a
Sensual Tongue, or gratify the Thirst of a Carnal Desire. So that were we
admitted to that Heavenly Place where the Blessed dwell, yet unless we had
acquired their Heavenly Disposition and Temper, we could never participate with
them in their Pleasures. For so great would be the Antipathy of our sensual
Affections to them, that we should doubtless fly away from them, and rather
choose to be for ever Insensible, than be condemned to an everlasting Perception
of what is so ungrateful to our Natures. So that till we have in some measure
moderated our Concupiscible Affections, and weaned them from their excessive
Dotages upon sensual Good, it is impossible we should enjoy the Happiness of
Heaven; For such perfect Opposites are a Spiritual Heaven and a Carnal Mind,
that unless This be spiritualized, or That be carnalized, it is impossible they
should ever meet and agree.

III. ANOTHER Virtue that belongs to a Man considered merely as a Rational
Animal is FORTITUDE; which in the largest sense consists in not permitting our
Irascible Affections to exceed those Evils or Dangers which we seek to repel or
avoid; in keeping our Fear and Anger, our Malice, Envy, and Revenge in such due
subjection as not to let them exceed those Bounds which Reason, and the Nature
of Things, prescribe them. For I do not take Fortitude here in the narrow sense
of the Moralists, as it is a Medium between Irrational Fear and Fool-Hardiness;
but as it is the Rule by which all those Irascible Passions in us which arise
from the sense of any Evil or Danger, ought to be guided and directed; That by
which we are to guard and defend our selves against all those troublesome and
disquieting Impressions which outward Evils and Dangers are apt to make upon
our Minds: And in this Latitude Fortitude comprehends not only Courage, as it
is opposed to Fear; but also Gentleness, as it is opposed to Fierceness;
Sufferance, as it is opposed to Impatience; Contentedness, as it is opposed to
Envy; and Meekness, as it is opposed to Malice and Revenge; All which are the
Passions of weak and pusillanimous Minds, that are not able to withstand an
Evil, nor endure the least Touch of it without being startled and disordered;
that are so softened with Baseness and Cowardice that they cannot resist the
most gentle Impressions of Injury. For as sick Persons are offended with the
light of the Sun, and the freshness of the Air, which are highly pleasant and
delightful to such as are well and in health; Even so Persons of weak and
feeble minds are easily offended, their Spirits are so tender and effeminate
that they cannot endure the least Air of Evil should blow upon them; and what
would be only a Diversion to a Courageous Soul, troubles and incommodes Them.
And whatsoever Courage such persons may pretend to, it is merely a Heat and
Ferment of their Blood and Spirits; A Courage, wherein Game-Cocks and Mastives
out-vy the greatest Heroes of them all. But as to that which is truly Rational
and Manly, which consists in a firm Composedness of Mind in the midst of Evil
or Dangerous Accidents, they are the most wretched Cowards in Nature. For the
true Fortitude of the Mind consists in being hardened against Evil upon
Rational Principles; in being so fenced and guarded with Reason and
Consideration, as that no dolorous Accident from without is able to invade it,
or raise any violent Commotions in it; In a word, in having such a constant
Power over its Irascible Affections, as not to be overprone either to be
timorous in Danger, or envious in Want, or impatient in Suffering, or angry at
Contempt, or malicious and revengeful under Injuries and Provocations. And till
we have in some measure acquired this Virtue, we can never be happy either here
or hereafter.

FOR whilst we are in this world, we must expect to be encompassed with
continual Crowds of Evil Accidents, some or other of which will be always
pressing upon and justling against us: So that if our minds are sore and
uneasy, and over-apt to be affected with Evil, we shall be continually pained
and disquieted. For, whereas were our Minds but calm and easy, all the Evil
Accidents that befall us would be but like a Shower of Hail upon the Tiles of a
Musick-House, which with all its Clatter and Noise disturbs not the Harmony
that is within; our being too apt to be moved into Passion by them, uncovers
our mind to them, and lays it open to the Tempest. And commonly the greatest
Hurt which these outward Evils do us, is, their disturbing our Minds into
violent Passions; and this they will never cease doing, till we have thoroughly
fortified our Reason against them. For if our Reason commands not our Passions,
to be sure outward Accidents will; and while they do so, we are Tenants at will
to them for all our Peace and Happiness; and according as they happen to be
Good or Bad, so must we be sure still to be Happy or Miserable. And in this
Condition, like a Ship without a Pilot in the midst of a Tempestuous Sea, we
are the sport of every wind and wave, and know not, till the Event has
determined it, how the next Billow will dispose of us; whether it will dash us
against a Rock, or drive us into a quiet Harbor.

SO miserable is our Condition here, while we are utterly destitute of this
Virtue of Fortitude; But much more miserable will the want of it necessarily
render us hereafter. For all those Affections which fall under the Inspection
and Government of Fortitude, are, in their Excesses, naturally vexatious to the
Mind, and do always disturb and raise Tumults in it. For so Wrath and
Impatience distracts and alienates it from it self, and confounds its Thoughts,
and shuffles them together into a heap of wild and disorderly Fancies; so
Malice, Envy, and Revenge do fill it with anxious biting Thoughts, that like
young Vipers gnaw the Womb that bears them, and fret and gall the wretched Mind
that forms, and gives them Entertainment. And though in this world we are not
so sensible of the mischief which these black and rancorous Passions do us;
partly because our sense of them is abated with the Intermixture of our Bodily
Pleasures; and partly because while we operate, as we do, by these unwieldy
Organs of Flesh, our Reflections cannot be comparably so quick, nor our Passions
so violent, nor our Perceptions so brisk and exquisite as they will doubtless
be when we are stripped into naked Spirits; yet if we go away into the other
World with these Affections unmortified in us, they will not only be far more
violent and outrageous than now, and we shall not only have a far quicker Sense
of them than now; but this our sharp sense of them shall be pure and simple,
without any intermixture of Pleasure to soften and allay it. And if so, Good
Lord! what exquisite Devils and Tormentors will they prove, when an extreme
Rage and Hate, Envy and Revenge shall be all together, like so many hungry
Vultures, preying on our Hearts; and our Mind shall be continually baited and
worried with all the furious Thoughts which these outrageous Passions can
suggest to us! When with the meagre Eyes of Envy we shall look up toward the
Regions of Happiness, and incessantly pine and grieve at the Felicities of
those that inhabit them; when through a sense of our own Follies, and of the
miserable Effects of them, our Rage and Impatience shall be heightened, and
boiled up into a Diabolical Fury; and when at the same time, an Inveterate
Malice against all that we converse with, and a fierce desire of Revenging our
selves upon those who have contributed to our Ruin, shall, like a Wolf in our
Breasts, be continually gnawing and feeding upon our Souls, what an
insupportable Hell shall we be to our selves! Doubtless that Outward Hell to
which bad Spirits are condemned is very terrible; but I cannot imagine, but
that the worst of their Hell is within themselves, and that their own Devilish
Passions are severer Furies to them than all those Devils that are without
them. For Wrath and Envy, Malice and Revenge are both the Nature and the Plague
of Devils; and though, as Angels, they are the Creatures of God; yet, as
Devils, they are the Creatures of these their Devilish Affections; they were
these that transformed them from Blessed Angels into Cursed Fiends, and could
they but once cease to be envious and malicious, they would cease to be Devils,
and turn Blessed Angels again. If then these rancorous Affections have such a
malignant Influence as to blacken Angels into Devils, and make them the most
miserable who were once the most happy Creatures, how can we ever expect to be
happy so long as we indulge and harbor them?

WHEREFORE to remove this great Impediment of our Happiness, Christianity
strictly enjoins us to practice this necessary Virtue of Fortitude, which
consists in the due Regulation of all these our Irascible Affections; in
moderating our Anger and Impatience, suppressing our Envy, and extinguishing
all our unreasonable Hatred and Desire of Revenge. For hitherto tend all those
Evangelical Precepts which require us to put away all bitterness and wrath, all
clamor, and evil speaking and malice, Ephesians. iv.31. to lay aside all malice,
and to be children in malice, 1 Pet. ii.1. 1 Cor. xiv.20. to be strengthened
with all might unto all patience and long suffering, Coloss. i.11. And
accordingly all the Virtues which are comprehended in this of Fortitude are
reckoned among the Fruits of that Blessed Spirit by which we are to be guided
and directed, Gal. v.22. But the fruit of the Spirit is peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, and meekness; all which are nothing but this great Virtue
of Fortitude, severally exerting it self upon those several Irascible
Affections that are in us, and guiding and regulating them according to those
Laws and Directions which right Reason severally prescribes them; and setting
such Bounds and Limits to each of them as are necessary to the Peace and
Happiness of our Rational Natures; That so when Outward Dangers or Evils do
excite them, they may not start out into such wild Excesses as to become
Plagues and Diseases to our Minds.

NOW how much the Practice of this Virtue conduces to our Heavenly Happiness is
evident from hence, That all the Diseases and Distemperatures which our Mind is
capable of, are nothing else but the Excesses of its Concupiscible and
Irascible Affections; but its being affected with Good and Evil beyond those
Limits and Measures which Right Reason prescribes. Did we but love outward
Goods according to the value at which true Reason rates them, we should neither
be vexed with an Impatient Desire of them while we want, nor disappointed of
our Expectation while we enjoy them. And when our Desires toward these outward
Goods are reduced to that Coolness and Moderation as neither to be impatient in
the Pursuit, nor dissatisfied in the Enjoyment of them, it is impossible they
should give any Disturbance to our Minds. And so, on the other hand, did we but
take care to regulate our Resentments of Outward Evils and Dangers as Right
Reason advises, they would never be able to hurt or discompose our Minds. For
Right Reason advises that we should not so resent them as to increase and
aggravate them; that we should not add the Disquietude of an anxious Fear to
the Dangers that threaten us, nor the Torment of an Outrageous Anger to the
Indignities that are offered us, nor the Smart of a Peevish Impatience to the
sufferings that befall us; In a word, that we should not aggravate our Want
through an invidious Pining at another Fullness, nor sharpen the Injuries that
are offered us by a malicious and revengeful Resentment of them. And he that
follows these Advices of Reason, and conducts his Irascible Affections by them,
has a Mind that is elevated above the Reach of Injury; that sits above the
Clouds in a calm and quiet Ether, and with a brave Indifferency hears the
rolling Thunders grumble and burst under its Feet. And whilst Outward Evils
fall upon timorous and peevish and malicious Spirits, like Sparks of Fire upon
a heap of Gunpowder, and do presently blow them up, and put them all in
Combustion; when they happen to a dispassionate Mind they fall like Stones on a
Bed of Down, where they sit easily and quietly, and are received with a calm
and soft Compliance. When therefore by the continual Practice of Moderation and
Fortitude we have tamed and civilized our Concupiscible and Irascible
Affections, and reduced them under the Government of Reason, our Minds will be
free from all Disease and Disturbance, and we shall be liable to no other Evil
but that of Bodily Sense and Passion. So that when we leave our Bodies and go
into the World of Spirits, we shall presently feel our selves in perfect Health
and Ease. For the Health of a Reasonable Soul consists in being perfectly
Reasonable, in having all its Affections perfectly subdued to a well-informed
Mind, and clothed in the Livery of its Reason. And while it is thus, it cannot
be diseased in that Spiritual State wherein it will be wholly separated from
all bodily Sense and Passion; because it has no Affection in it that can any
way disturb or ruffle its calm and gentle Thoughts. And then feeling all within
it self to be well, and as it should be; every String tuned into a perfect
Harmony; every Motion and Affection corresponding with the most perfect
Draughts and Models of its own Reason, it must needs highly approve of, and be
perfectly satisfied with it self; and while it surveys its own Motions and
Actions, it must necessarily have a most delicious Gust and Relish of them,
they being all such as its best and purest Reason approves of, with a full and
ungainsaying Judgment. And thus the Soul being cured of all irregular
Affection, and removed from all corporeal Passion, will live in perfect Health
and Vigor, and for ever enjoy within it self a Heaven of Content and Peace.

IV. ANOTHER Virtue which appertains to a man considered merely as a Rational
Animal is TEMPERANCE; which consists in not indulging our Bodily Appetites to
the Hurt and Prejudice of our Rational Nature; Or, in refraining from all those
Excesses of Bodily Pleasure, of Eating, Drinking and Venery, which do either
disorder our Reason, or indispose us to enjoy the pure and spiritual Pleasures
of the Mind. For, besides that all Excesses of Bodily Pleasures are naturally
prejudicial to our Reason, as they indispose those Bodily Organs by which it
operates, (For so Drunkenness dilutes the Brain, which is the Mint of the
Understanding, and drowns those Images it stamps upon it in a Flood of
unwholesome Rheums and Moistures; and Gluttony cloggs the Animal Spirits, which
are, as it were, the Wings of the Mind, and indisposes them for the Highest and
Noblest Flights of Reason; so Wantonness chafes the Blood into Feverish Heats,
and by causing it to boil up too fast into the Brain, disorders the motions of
the Spirits there, and so confounds the Phantasms, that the Mind can have no
clear or distinct Perception of them; by which means our Intellectual Faculties
are very often interrupted, and forced to sit still for want of proper Tools to
work with, and so, by often loitering, grow by degrees listless and unactive,
and at the last, are utterly indisposed to any Rational Operations;) Besides
this, I say, (which must needs be a mighty prejudice to our Rational Nature) by
too much familiarizing our selves to bodily Pleasures, we shall break off all
our acquaintance with spiritual ones, and grow, by degrees, such utter
strangers to them, that we shall never be able to relish and enjoy them; and
our Soul will contract such an Vxorious Fondness of the Body (that being the
Shop of all the Pleasure it was ever acquainted with) that 'twill never be able
to live happily without it. For though in its separate state it cannot be
supposed that the Soul will retain the Appetites of the Body; yet, if while it
is in the Body, it wholly abandons it self to Corporeal Pleasures, it may, and
doubtless will, retain a vehement hankering after it, and longing to be
reunited to it; which, I conceive, is the only sensuality that a separated
Soul is capable of. For when such a Soul arrives into the Spiritual World, her
having wholly accustomed her self to bodily Pleasure, and never experienced any
other, will necessarily render her incapable of enjoying the Pleasures of pure
and blessed Spirits. So that being left utterly destitute of all her dear
Delights and Satisfactions, which are such as she knows she can never enjoy but
in conjunction with the Body, all her Appetite and Longing must necessarily be
an outrageous Desire of being Embodied again, that so she may be capable of
repeating her old sensual Pleasures, and acting over the brutish Scene anew.

AND this, as some think, is the Reason why such gross and sensual Souls have
appeared so often, after their separation, in the Churchyards, or
Charnel-Houses where their Bodies were laid; because they cannot please
themselves without them: Plat. Phaed. page 398.
(...) (...)^ The soul that is infected with a great Lust to the Body,
continues so, for a great while after Death, and suffering great Reluctancies,
hovers about this visible place, and is hardly drawn from thence by force, by
the Demon that has the Guard and Care of it. Where by the visible Place he
means, (...)^ Ibid. Page 386.
That is, About their Monuments and Sepulchers, where the shadowy Phantasms of
such Souls have sometimes appeared. For being utterly unacquainted with the
Pleasures of Spirits, they have nothing in all the spiritual world to feed
their hungry Desire, which makes them when they are permitted to wander, to
hover about, and linger after their Bodies; the Impossibility of being
reunited to them not being able to cure them of their impotent Desire of it,
but still they would fain be alive again, and reassume their old Instruments of
Pleasure; -- Iterumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora: --
-- Quae lucis miseris tam dira Cupido?
And hence, among other Reasons, it was that the Primitive Christians did so
severely abstain from Bodily Pleasures, that by this means they might gently
wean the Soul from the Body, and teach it before hand to live upon the Delights
of separated Spirits; that so upon its separation it might drop into Eternity,
like ripe Fruit from the Tree, with Ease and Willingness; and that by
accustoming it before to spiritual Pleasures and Delights, it might acquire
such a savoury Sense and Relish of them, as to be able, when it came into the
spiritual world, to live wholly upon them, and to be so entirely satisfied with
them, as not to be endlesly vexed with a tormenting Desire of returning to the
Body again. For so Clemens Alexandrinus, (...)^ Paedag. l. 2. c. 1. page 141.
We that are hunting after the Heavenly Food, must take heed that we keep our
Earthly Belly in subjection, and to keep a strict Government over those things
that are pleasant to it. For says he a little before, (...)^ Ibid. Page 139.
Neither, says he, is Food our Work, nor Pleasure our Aim, but we use them
only as necessaries to our present Abode, in which our Reason is instituting,
and training us up to a Life incorruptible. i. e. They did so use them, as that
as much as in them lay, they might wean their Souls from the pleasures of them,
that so they might have the better Appetite to that Spiritual Food upon which
they were to live for ever.

AND therefore thus to temperate and restrain our selves in the Use of bodily
Pleasures is one of the necessary Virtues of the Christian Life. For hitherto
tend all those Precepts concerning abstaining from fleshly lusts which war
against our Souls, I Pet. ii.11. and mortifying the deeds of the Body, Romans
viii.13. and keeping under the Body, 1 Cor. ix.27. and putting off the body of
the sins of the Flesh, Coloss. ii.11. And we are strictly enjoined to be
temperate in all things, to watch and be sober, and walk honestly as in the
day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
excess of wine, revellings and banquettings; The sense of all which is, That we
should not indulge our bodily Appetites to the vitiating and depraving of our
spiritual; that we should not plunge our selves so far in the Pleasures of the
Flesh, as to drown our Sense and Perception of Divine and Heavenly Enjoyments;
but that we should so far subdue and mortify our Sensuality, as that it may
not have the Dominion over us, nor be the prevalent Delight and Complacency of
our Souls; but that the commanding Biass, and swaying Propension within us may
be toward Divine and Heavenly Enjoyments; that so, when we leave this Body, we
may not be so wedded to the Pleasures of it, as not to be able to be Happy
without them; but that we may carry with us into Eternity such a quick Sense
and lively Relish of the Pleasures above, as to be able to live upon, and be
for ever satisfied with them.

SO that at first View it is evident how much the Practice of this Virtue
conduces to our Future Happiness. For by taking us off from all excess of
bodily Pleasure, it disposes us to enjoy the Pleasures of Heaven, and
connaturallizes our Souls to them: So that when after a long Exercise of
Temperance, we come to leave the Body, our Soul will be so loosned from it
before hand, and rendered so indifferent to the Delights of it, that we shall be
able to part both with It and Them without any great Regret or Reluctance, and
to live from them for ever without any disquieting Longings or Hankerings after
them. For, as when we are grown up by Age and Experience to a sense of more
manly Pleasures, we despise Nuts and Rattles, which when we were Children, we
accounted our Happiness, and should have reckoned our selves undone had we been
deprived of them; So when by the Practice of a severe Temperance, we have
acquired a thorough sense of the Pleasures of Virtue and Religion, we shall
look upon all our bodily Pleasures as the little Toys and Fooleries of our
Infant State, with which we pleased our childish Fancies when we knew no
better. And whereas had we been deprived of them then, we should have cried and
bemoaned our selves, as little Children do when they lose their Play-Games, and
reckoned our selves undone and miserable; upon the Experience we have had of
the Nobler and more Generous Pleasures of Religion, we shall be able to despise
these little, poor Entertainments of our Infancy; to take our leave of them
without a Tear in our Eyes, and to live eternally without missing them. For,
our Minds being for the main reconciled to Rational and Spiritual Pleasures, we
shall put off all Remains of bodily Lust with our Bodies, and so fly away into
the spiritual world with none but Pure and Spiritual Appetites about us; where
meeting with an infinite Fullness of Spiritual Joys and Pleasures, of which we
had many a foretast in the Body, our predisposed Mind will presently close
with, and feed upon them, with such an unspeakable Content and Satisfaction, as
will ravish it for ever from the Thoughts of all other Pleasures. So that now
we shall not only be able to subsist without Fleshly Delights, but to despise
and scorn them; our Faculties being treated every moment with far nobler Fare
and better Joys.

V. ANOTHER of those Virtues which belong to a man considered merely as a
Rational Animal, is HUMILITY; which consists in a modest and lowly opinion of
our selves, and of our own Acquisitions, Merits, or Endowments; Or, in not
valuing our selves beyond what is due and just, upon the account of any Good we
are possessed of, whether it be Internal or External. For Pride, or an
overweening Self-Conceit is the Bane of all our Virtue and Happiness. It
causes us to overlook our Defects, and thereby hinders us from making farther
Improvement; and it possesses us with an opinion that we deserve more than we
have and thereby renders us dissatisfied with our present Enjoyments. For by
how much any man over-values himself, by so much he under-values what he
enjoys; because while he compares what he enjoys with the fond opinion that he
has of himself, he always finds it short of his Desert, and so can never be
satisfied with it. Yea, such is the cross and capricious Humor of a proud
Spirit, that the more it possesses, the bigger it swells with the opinion of
its own Desert; and the more it is opiniated of its own Desert, the less it is
satisfied with that which it possesses and enjoys. For when a man is exceeding
apt to flatter and cokes himself, he will catch at any Pretense to exalt his
own Merit and Desert, and be ready to measure it, not only by what he is, but
by what he has too; and then reckoning his outward Possessions to be the
Rewards or Products of his Inward Worth, the more he has, the more he will
still imagine he deserves to have. So that his Opinion of his own Desert will
still run on so fast before his Enjoyments, that though they should follow it
never so close, as the Hinder Wheels of a Coach do the Fore ones, yet it would
be impossible for them to overtake it; And so long as he conceives his
Enjoyments to be behind his Desert, he will be always discontented, and
dissatisfied with them; and while he continues of this Humor, the utmost Bliss
and Glory that Heaven affords would not to be able to satisfy him. For if he
were set equal in Glory with the highest Saint, he would be so puffed and
exalted by it in his own Conceit, that he would fancy he merited the Glory of
an Angel; and if from thence he were advanced to the Throne of an Archangel*
he would flatter himself into a conceit that he deserved the Glory and Dignity
of a God: And so long as he fancied his Advancement to be below his Merit, he
would never be contented with it, how high soever it were, but be continually
vexing and repining that he was raised no higher.

AND this I verily believe was the Temper of the Devil, and that which finally
ruined and undid him. For when he was an Angel of Light he was doubtless placed
by the Father of Spirits, in such an Order or Degree of Dignity as became the
Dignity of his Nature. But he, reflecting on his own Indowments, and the
Glorious Condition wherein he was placed, began first to swell with an arrogant
and overweening conceit of himself, and to set too high a value upon his own
Angelical Graces and Perfections; and, as the natural Effect of this, to
imagine that he was not high enough advanced in the Scale of the Heavenly
Hierarchy, and that his Station in the Commonwealth of Angels was beneath the
Grandeur and Dignity of his Nature. This made him look up with envious Eyes
upon the Glorious Orders above him, into whose sublime Rank he being forbid to
aspire by God, the Prince of Spirits, he proceeded by Degrees to malign and
hate both Him and Them. And this he first expressed by entering into a
Conspiracy against him with some of his Fellow-Angels, whom he found most apt
to be wrought upon by him; together with whom he made an open Revolt, forsook
the Blessed Abodes, as not enduring to abide any longer amongst those Blessed
Orders whom he so inveterately hated and envied; and so with his revolted
Legions descends into this Aerie Region, where ever since he has persisted in
open Hostility against God and Heaven. And accordingly it is said of Him and
his Accomplices, that they kept not their first Station, that is, they would
needs have a higher Station in Heaven than that wherein God had placed them;
which because they could not obtain, they left their own Habitation, i. e.
forsook Heaven their Native Country and Abode, and came down into these lower
Parts of the World, upon Design to strengthen their Party against Heaven by
seducing Mankind into the same Revolt with themselves, Jude 6.

THUS 'twas the Devils Pride, you see, that made him Envious, his Envy that
made him Spiteful and Malicious, all which together made him a Devil. And thus
it would be with us, if we could be admitted into Heaven whilst we are under
the Power and Prevalence of Pride and Self-Conceit. For while we think better
of our selves, than God does, we shall never be contented with his
Retributions, who will be sure to deal with every man according to his works;
and that excessive value we should have of our selves, would cause us to
undervalue the Degree and Rank of Glory and Happiness wherein we should be
placed by the just Rewarder of Souls, as a Station much beneath our imagined
Excellency and Perfection. And hence we should proceed to think hardly of God,
and to repine against him as a partial and unequal Distributer of his Favors,
and to envy and malign those that were placed higher in Glory than our selves;
and so at last, out of an implacable Vexation and Discontent, to leave our
Habitations, as the Devils did, and fly away to their Revolted Party. So
impossible is it for a Soul that is under a prevailing Habit of Pride and
Self-Conceit to be happy either here or hereafter.

AND therefore to remove this Obstacle, Christianity imposes the Practice of
Humility, as a necessary means of our Happiness; and requires us to put on
humbleness of mind, Col. iii.12. to be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. v.5. to
walk with all lowliness and meekness, Ephesians. iv.1, 2. and in lowliness of mind
to esteem others better than our selves, Phil. ii.3. In a word, to follow the
Example of our Blessed Lord, who was meek and lowly, Mat. xi.29. and in honor
to prefer one another, Romans xii.10. The sense of all which is, that we should
labor, as much as in us lies, to think very meanly and modestly of our selves,
and not to be discontented if others think meanly of us too; i. e. that we
should neither be proud nor vainglorious, neither too much exalted in our own
opinions, nor endeavor to insinuate into others a higher opinion of us than we
do really deserve: In short, that we should so effectually represent to our
selves the little Reason we have to be proud of any Personal Accomplishment,
whether it be of Body, or Mind, to strut, like Esop's Crow, in these borrowed
Feathers, which we could neither give to our selves, nor merit of God, but are
wholly owing for to the Divine Bounty; so to inculcate upon our Minds the Folly
and Ridiculousness of being proud of any Outward Goods we possess, such as fine
Cloths, great Estates, or Popular Reputation, all which are so far from either
making or speaking us wiser or better men, that they are too often the Fruits
and Testimonies of our Folly and Knavery; And, in fine, that we should so
impartially reflect upon the many Follies and Indiscretions, Errors and
Ignorances, Irregularities of Temper, Defects of Manners, and Deviations from
Right Reason that we are guilty of, as to shame our selves out of all those
proud and arrogant Conceits that do so swell and impostumate our Minds.

AND when by these, and such like humbling Reflections we have laid our selves
low in our own Eyes, and so far abased our Pride and Self-Conceit as to be
effectually convinced of the Folly of it, and thoroughly persuaded to abhor and
hate it, to watch and strive against it, and to be habituated for the main to
mean and lowly thoughts of our selves; though we should not here arrive to an
absolute Perfection in Humility (having none here to converse, or compare our
selves with but such as our selves, such as are many of them our Inferiors,
many our Equals, and many but few* Degrees our Superiors) yet, as soon as we
go off from this lower Form, in which we may seem so considerable, into the
Class and Society of those Glorious Inhabitants above (in whose bright Presence
we shall appear but like so many Glow Worms in the midst of a Firmament of
Stars) all the little Remains of Pride and Self-Conceit in us, will immediately
vanish from our Minds. For if at the sight of an Angel the Beloved Apostle
could not forbear prostrating himself; how prostrate and lowly must we be, when
we see not only the whole Choir of Angels together, but God himself too, the
Prince and Father of Spirits! For even here we find that the nearer we approach
God, the more we shrink and lessen in our own Eyes; and if in the Presence of
Angels we are but Dwarfs, in the Presence of God we shall be Nothings. But Oh!
when we shall not only discern how infinitely he outshines us in Glory, but
shall also continually feel by the most sensible Communications of his Goodness
how we hang upon him, and derive every Breath and Joy and Glory from him; how
our Being and Well-Being are the mere Alms and Pensions of his Bounty; how
every Grace and Beauty in us is but the Reflection, and that a faint one too,
of his outstretched Rays; when, I say, we shall feel all this, as we shall do
in Heaven every moment, by a quick and sensible Experience, how must it needs
wean us from all self-arrogating Thoughts, and perfectly abase and humble us in
our own Eyes! And when this is done, our minds will be perfectly tempered and
prepared for the Enjoyment of a Perfect Happiness; For now, such a modest
opinion we shall have of our selves, that whatsoever Degree of Glory we are
placed in, we shall look upon it as far beyond our Desert, and upon that
account, be unspeakably satisfied and contented with it, and freely acknowledge
it to be a thousand Degrees beyond what we could desire or hope for. And so far
shall we be from grudging at, or envying those above us, that out of an humble
sense of our own Unworthiness we shall readily prefer them before our selves,
and freely acknowledge that we are only so many Degrees inferior to them in
Glory, as they are superior to us in Divine Graces and Perfections. Upon which
we shall not only acquiesce, but heartily rejoice in their Advancement, and be
abundantly pleased that their Reward is as much greater than ours, as we do
acknowledge their Virtue to be. In a word, so far shall we be from repining and
murmuring at God for not rewarding us as liberally as others, that we shall be
thoroughly sensible that he has been bountiful to us infinitely beyond our
Desert or Expectation; that 'twas not out of a fond Partiality, ot blind
Respect of Persons that he raised others to higher Degrees of Glory than our
selves, but out of a Principle of strict Justice that exactly balances and
adjusts its Rewards, according to the Degrees of our Desert and Improvement.
The sense of which will not only compose our Minds into a perfect Satisfaction,
but also continually excite us to those Beatifical Acts of Love and Praise,
Thanksgiving and Adoration. Thus Humility, you see, tunes and composes us for
Heaven, and only casts us down, like Balls, that we may rebound the higher in
Glory and Happiness.

THUS you see how all those Virtues which appertain to a man considered as a
Reasonable Animal, conduce to the Great Christian End, viz. The Happiness of
Heaven. It Is true indeed the immediate product of this sort of Virtues is only,
at least chiefly, pri^ative Happiness, or, the Happiness of Rest and Indolence,
which consists in not being miserable, or, in a perfect cessation from all such
Acts and Motions as are hurtful and injurious to a Rational Spirit. For, as I
have showed you in the Beginning of this Section, the proper office of Humane
Virtue consists in so regulating all our Powers of Action, as that we do
nothing that is hurtful or injurious to our Rational Nature; and thus, you
plainly see, these Five aforenamed. Virtues do most effectually perform. But
besides this Pri^ative, there is, as I showed you, a Positive Part of
Happiness, which consists not in Rest, but in Motion; in the Vigorous Exercise
of our Rational Faculties upon such Objects as are most suitable to them; And
to the obtaining of this Part of our Happiness, there are other kinds of
Virtues necessary to be practiced by us, of which I shall discourse in the two
following Sections. But though the immediate Effect of these Humane Virtues we
have been discoursing of, be only the Happiness of Rest, yet do they tend a
great deal farther, even to the Happiness of Motion and Exercise. For it is
impossible so to suppress that Active Principle within us, as to make it
totally surcease from Motion; and therefore as every intermission of its sober
and regular Actings does but make way for wild and extravagant ones; so every
abatement of its hurtful and injurious motions, makes way for beatifical ones;
And so the Humane Virtues by giving us rest from those Motions that are
afflictive to our Natures, incline and dispose us to such Motions and Exercises
as are most pleasant and grateful to it.

SECT. II. Concerning those Divine Virtues which belong to a Man considered as
a Reasonable Creature, related to God, showing that these also are comprehended
in the heavenly part of the Christian Life; and that the practice of them
effectually conduces to our future happiness.
I PROCEED now to the second kind of Virtues, viz. Divine, to which I told you
we are obliged in the capacity of reasonable Creatures related to God; who
being not only endowed with all possible perfections, with infinite Truth and
Justice, Wisdom and Goodness, and Power, with all that can render any being
most highly reverenced, admired, loved and adored; who being not only the
Author of our Being, and Well-being, as he is Creator and Preserver of all
things, but also our sovereign Lord and King, as he is God almighty, the
supreme and overruling Power of heaven and earth, has upon all these accounts
a just and unalienable claim to sundry duties and homages from his Creatures;
all which I shall reduce to these six particulars.

1. That we should frequently think of, and contemplate the beauty and
perfection of his nature.

2. That upon the account of these perfections we should humbly worship and
adore him.

3. That we should ardently love, and take complacency in him.

4. That we should attentively and unweariedly imitate him in all his imitable
perfections and actions.

5. That we should entirely resign up our selves to his conduct and disposal.

6. That we should cheerfully rely, and depend upon him. All which, as I shall
show, are included in the heavenly part of the Christian Life, and do most
effectually contribute to our future happiness.

I. AS we are rational Creatures related to God, we are obliged to be often
contemplating and thinking upon him. For the natural use of our understanding
is to contemplate Truth, and therefore the more of Truth and Reality there is
in any knowable object, and the farther it is removed from Falsehood and
Nonentity, the more the Understanding is concerned to contemplate and think
upon it. God therefore being the most true and real object, as he stands
removed by the necessity of his existence from all possibility of not-being,
must needs be the most perfect Theme of our Understanding, the best and
greatest Subject, on which it can employ its Meditations. And besides that he
is the most true and real of all beings, he is also the source and spring of
all Truth and Reality, his Power conducted by his Wisdom, and Goodness being
the cause not only of all that is, but of all that either shall be, or can be.
And is it fit that our Understanding which was made to contemplate, should
wholly overlook the fountain of it? But besides this too, that he is the
greatest Truth himself, and the cause of every thing else that is true and
real, he is the Sovereign of Beings, and the most amiable and perfect, as he
includes in his infinite Essence all possible perfections both in kind and
degree. And what a monstrous Irreverence is it for minds that were framed to
the contemplation of Truth, to pass by such a great and glorious one without
any regard or observance; as if he stood for a cipher in the world, and were
not worthy to be thought upon? Nay and besides all this (which one would think
were enough to oblige our Understandings to the strictest attendance to him) he
is a Truth in which above all others we are most nearly concerned, as he is not
only the Father and Prop of our Beings, and the Consolation of our lives, but
the sole Arbiter of our Fate too, upon whom our everlasting well or ill being
depends. And what can we be more concerned to think and meditate upon than this
great being, from whom we sprang, in whom we live and breath and of whom we are
to expect all that evil or good that we can fear or hope for. All which
considered, there is no doubt to be made but that our Understanding was chiefly
made for God, to look up to him and contemplate his Being and Perfections. And
though in this imperfect State it is too often averted from him, by this vast
variety of sensual things that surround it, and intercept its Prospect, yet as
our Soul recovers out of this sensual condition into a life of Reason, we find
by experience that its Understanding presently looks upwards, by a natural
Instinct, and directs it self to God, as to its proper Pole and Center. And as
it grows more and more indifferent to the objects of Sense, so it becomes more
and more vigorous in its tendency toward God and divine things. And it is no
wonder it does so, since it is God only who is an infinite Truth, that is able
to satisfy its infinite Thirst after Truth. And hence it is, that till we have
thoroughly fixed our Minds and Wills upon God, we do naturally affect such an
Infinity of Objects, that our Desires are always reaching at new Pleasures, and
carried forth after new Possessions; that our Fancy is always entertaining our
mind with new Ideas, and our Understanding continually calling for new Scenes
of Contemplation. By which, as one has well observed, the Soul declares that
it is not to be perfectly pleased with finite Truth or Good. Which possibly may
be the reason of that delight we take in Fables, and Pictures of Anticks and
Monsters, because they exceed the limits of Truth, and so do enlarge as it were
the prospect of the Soul, which by its unconfined motions, shows that it is of
a Divine Extract, and that it can never be perfectly satisfied but in union
with God, who is an infinite ocean of Truth and Goodness. For as for all other
beings, they are so very shallow, that we quickly see (or at least shall do,
when we see after the manner of Spirits) to the very bottom of their Truth and
Reality; and when we have done that, they have no more in them to feed and
entertain our understandings. So that when we have exhausted the Truth of
finite Beings, we must either cease to understand any more, which would be to
deprive our noblest Faculty of any farther Pleasure, or we must at last fix our
mind upon God, in whom it will find such infinite Truth, as will be sufficient
to exercise it throughout all its infinite Duration. But unless we do now
acquaint our minds with God by frequent thinking and meditating upon him, we
shall by degrees grow such Strangers to him, that, by that time we go into the
other world, we shall be so far from being pleased with contemplating him, that
we shall look upon him as an uncouth object, and out of distaste avert and turn
our eyes from him. For the mind of man must be familiarized to its objects,
before it will be able to contemplate them with pleasure, and though the
objects themselves be never so amiable, yet while the mind is unused to them,
its thoughts will start and fly off from them, and without a great deal of
violence, will never be reduced to a fixed and serious attention to them. So
that if we go into eternity with minds unaccustomed to the thoughts of God, we
shall be continually flying away from him, as Bats and Owls do from the light
of the Sun, and never be able to compose our awkward thoughts into a fixed
contemplation of his glory. And when we have thus banished our selves from the
only object that can for ever bless and satisfy our understanding, that can
keep it in everlasting exercise and motion, and feed its greedy thoughts
eternally with fresh and glorious discoveries, we have utterly lost one of the
sweetest Pleasures that humane nature is capable of; and so must necessarily
pine and languish, under an eternal discontentedness. To prevent which, the
Gospel enjoins us to train up our minds to divine Contemplation, and to be
frequently thinking and meditating upon God; to mind those things that are
above, for so the Greek word is to be rendered, Coloss. iii.1. to sanctify the
Lord God in our hearts, 1 Pet. iii.15. that is, by entertaining great and
worthy Thoughts of him. And therefore the Gospel is set before us as a Glass,
that therein we may contemplate and behold the glory of God, 2 Cor. iii.18.
namely, that divine glory which is therein discovered and revealed to us; that
we may set him always before our minds, and gather up our thoughts about him,
and force them to dwell and stay upon him, that so they may taste and relish
his heavenly beauties, and please and satisfy themselves with the view and
contemplation of them. For though to meditate closely upon God may at first be
irksome and tedious to our unexperienced minds, yet when by the constant
practice of it, we have worn off that Strangeness toward God which renders the
thoughts of him so troublesome to us, and by frequent converses are grown
better acquainted with him, we shall grow by degrees so pleased and satisfied
with the thoughts of him, that we shall not know how to live without them; and
our minds at last will be touched with such a lively sense of his attractive
beauties, that we shall never be well but while we are with him; so that he
will become the constant Companion of our thoughts, and the daily theme of our
Meditations; and nothing in the world will be so grateful and acceptable to us,
as to retire now and then from the world, and converse with God in holy
Contemplations. And though by reason of our present Circumstances and
Necessities there is no remedy but our thoughts must be often diverted from
him, and forced to attend to our secular occasions; yet after they have been
used a while to God, we shall find they will never be so well pleased, nor so
much at ease as when they are retired from every thing but God, and composed
and settled into divine meditations. So that when we go away into the other
world, where we shall be removed from those troublesome Circumstances and
Necessities, which did here so often divert our thoughts from God, our minds
which have been so long accustomed and habituated to him, will immediately
fasten upon him, and entirely devote themselves to the contemplation of his
nature and glory. For our minds being already strongly inclined and biased
toward God by those grateful foretasts we have had of him in the warmths of
our Meditation, when we come in the still and quiet regions of the blessed,
where we shall immediately have a more close and intimate view of him than
ever, all our thoughts will naturally run toward him, and be so captivated
with the first sight of his glory, that we shall never be able to look off
again, as long as eternity endures, but one view will invite us to another, and
what we see will so transport and ravish us, that we shall still desire to see
further and further. And because our finite mind will never be able fully to
comprehend all that is knowable in his infinite being, we shall be so delighted
in every further Knowledge of him, that we shall still desire to know further,
and that Desire as fast as it springs shall still be satisfied with a further
Knowledge, and so to eternal ages, each new satisfaction shall immediately
spring a new desire, and each new desire immediately terminate in a new
satisfaction. And now, O happy mind! what tongue can express thy joys and
raptures! that being thus in conjunction with God art always filled with
glorious Ideas, and compassed round with the wonders of his perfection; so that
at every glance thou see some new Charm, and with every thought make some
vast Discovery. O the transporting pleasure of that blessed Vision! which now I
can hardly think of without an ecstasie; when my poor longing Mind, which here
gropes about for truth in a dark dungeon of Error and Ignorance, shall be let
forth into the heavenly light, to see as it is seen, and know as it is known,
how will it fix its greedy eyes upon God, of whose acquaintance it is now so
desirous! With what infinite delight will its winged and active thoughts hover
in the light of his Countenance, which through every moment of Eternity will be
still revealing new Beauties to us, such as will not only for ever employ, but
for ever inflame our Meditations.

II. AS we are Rational Creatures related to God, we are obliged humbly to
Worship and Adore him, that is, that out of a most awful esteem and profound
reverence of his super-excellent Majesty, and boundless Perfections, we should
bow down our Souls before him, and address our selves to him by Invocation and
Prayer, by Praise and Thanksgiving, as to the Alsufficient, Independent, and
sole disposer of every good and perfect gift; and that in these our Addresses
we should outwardly express this our reverential Esteem of him, by such humble
gestures of Body, as are most apt to testify it to others. For all this is but
a just and due acknowledgment of what he is in himself, and to us, and all his
Creation. The profoundest Reverence and Veneration we can pay him, is but a
just Acknowledgment of his Infinite Majesty and Power; the most fervent
Invocations and Prayers we can offer him, are but a due owning of him to be
what he is, the supreme Disposer and Author of all things; the most ample and
glorious Praises we can give him are incomparably short of what is owing to his
infinite Excellencies and Perfections; the most thankful Acknowledgments we can
make him, are but poor compositions for those vast sums which we owe to his
Bounty and Liberality. So that all our Worship is a most just Due arising from
what he is in himself, and from what he does to us, and to all his Creatures.
And till we are made thoroughly sensible of both, we are utterly incapable of
eternal Happiness; which consisting, as I showed you before, in the vigorous
exercise of our Rational Faculties upon God, does necessarily require that we
should be duly affected with his Perfections and Actions. For unless we are
so, we shall never be able to engage our Faculties vigorously to employ and
exercise themselves about him; unless our minds be overawed with an habitual
sense of his infinite Majesty and Power, we shall be apt to negglect him as an
object too mean for our great Faculties to converse with; unless our minds be
strongly disposed to esteem and admire his Glory and Excellencies, we shall
never be able to excite our Understanding and Will to act upon him with any
life and vigor: in a word, unless we are possessed with a constant sense that
he is the Spring of all those goods which we enjoy or hope for, we shall be apt
to look upon him as one with whom we are very little concerned, and so to
neglect and disregard him. So that unless we do now acquire an habitual
Devotion of mind toward God, when we go from hence into the other world, we
shall find our faculties so averse and listless to all that heavenly Motion and
Exercise wherein the Happiness above consists, that we shall be utterly
incapable to taste and enjoy it. For in eternity our Souls will run according to
the prevailing bias which they carry thither with them; but it is impossible
they should run toward God with life and freedom, unless they are constantly
drawn and inclined to him by a devout veneration of his Majesty, and admiration
of his Glory and Perfection. And hence it is that the Gospel does so strictly
oblige us to adore and worship God, Rev. xxii.9. to worship him in spirit and
in truth, Joh. iv.24. to pray without ceasing, 1 These. v.17. and pray always
with all prayer and supplication, that is, earnestly to supplicate God upon
every fit opportunity and time of need, Ephesians. vi.18. in a word, to offer to
God the sacrifice of praise that is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his
name, Heb. xiii.15. and to thank God without ceasing, 1 These. ii.13. The
meaning of all which is, that out of a deep and quick sense of the infinite
Majesty and Power, Alsufficience and Beneficence of God, we should be
frequently bowing our selves before him, and offering up our Prayers and
Praises, and Thanksgivings to him. And in the constant practice of these, we
shall be growing up by degrees to that blissful state of Heaven. For all these
acts of divine Worship being immediate addresses of our minds to God, do so
unite us to him, that in every hearty Prayer, Praise, or Thanksgiving, we do in
a manner touch (...) him. So while we humbly adore (...), we are sensibly
struck with the rays of it; while we earnestly invocate his Goodness and Mercy,
we are touched with a strong attractive virtue from him, whereby we plainly
feel our selves drawn up to him, and rapt into a real enjoyment of him: in a
word, while we are offering our hearty Praises and Thanksgivings to him, we are
under a captivating sense of his infinite Gloy and Beneficence, and with a
sensible touch of this his heavenly fire, our hearts are kindled and inflamed.
Insomuch that while we are upon our knees in a warmth and fervor of Devotion,
our minds have many times as quick a perception, as strong and lively a relish
of God, as ever our bodily palate had of the most gustful meats or liquors. So
that by frequently repeating these our devotions, we frequently repeat these
our sensations of God; which being often renewed will grow more vigorous and
constant, and so at last improve into an active, permanent and habitual sense
of him. And having thus acquired by our frequent and devout Worship, a lively
constant feeling and perception of the Majesty and Glory, of the Bounty and
Benignity of God, when ever we go into eternity this like a vital spring will
give a perpetual motion to our Faculties, and vigorously exert and employ them
upon God for ever. The quick and lively sense we shall have of his infinite
Majesty and Power, will for ever aw our Understandings and Wills into a strict
attention and submission to him; and have such a commanding power over us as
will even constrain us to regard him with the profoundest Reverence and
Veneration. For there we shall have far greater and clearer apprehensions of
his Majesty than ever we had in this imperfect state; which will improve our
pre-acquired sense of it to such a degree of Respect and Veneration, as will
for ever overruled our Faculties, and keep our Understandings, Wills and
Affections in close and strict attendance to him. And as our sense of his
Majesty will sweetly command, so our sense of his infinite Beauty and
Beneficence will invincibly allure us to exert and exercise our faculties upon
him. For he that has an affectionate sense of the Beauty and Goodness and
Bounty of God, has a heart ready tuned for the Music of heaven, ready set and
composed for everlasting Praises and Halelujahs. So that when he goes away from
hence into the other world, and is there admitted to a more intimate view of
the perfections, and a more abundant participation of the blessings of God than
ever, his predisposed mind will immediately be seized with such a strong
pathetick sense of both, as that he will not be able to withhold expressing and
venting it in the most rapturous strains of Admiration, and Praise and
Thanksgiving. And this will be his business and employment for ever, to admire
and extol the Perfections of God, of which he will every moment make new and
glorious Discoveries; and to celebrate with grateful acknowledgments the
infinite riches of his Bounty, of which he will every moment have fresh and
sweet experiences. So that whilst by continual acts of Praise and Thanksgiving
we endeavor to affect our minds with a due sense of the Goodness and Bounty of
God, we are practicing beforehand the Music of Heaven, and taking out the
Songs of Zion; that so when we go from hence, we may be qualified and prepared
to bear a part in the Celestial Choir. So that true devotion (you see) which
consists in a quick and lively sense of the infinite Majesty, Beauty, and
Benignity of God, does most effectually dispose the mind to all those divine
and heavenly exercises wherein the state of heaven consists.

III. AS we are rational Creatures related to God, we are obliged to an
unfeigned love of, and complacency in him. And that both upon the account of
what he is in himself, as he is the most lovely and amiable of beings, in whom
there is an harmonious concurrence of all imaginable Beauties and Perfections,
of Wisdom and Goodness, of Justice and Mercy, and every other amiable thing
that can claim or attract a reasonable Affection, all which in infinite degrees
are contempered together in his nature: and also upon the account of his
infinite Kindness and Beneficence to us. For besides that he has compassed us
round, like so many fortunate Islands, with a vast Ocean of external Blessings,
in which there is all that is either necessary, convenient, or pleasant for our
bodily use and enjoyment; besides that he has inspired us with immortal Minds,
and stamped them with those fair impresses of his own Divinity, the knowledge
of Truth and the love of Goodness, which are both of them very forward
capacities of the highest Perfection, and most exalted Happiness: in a word,
besides that to supply and gratify these our noble Capacities he has prepared
for us an immortal Heaven, and furnished it with all the Pleasures and and
Delights that a Heaven-born Mind can desire or enjoy: besides all this, I say,
he has sent his own Son from heaven to reveal to us the Way thither, and to
encourage us to return into it, by dying for our sins, and thereby obtaining
for us a public Grant and Charter of Mercy and Pardon, upon Condition of our
return; yea and as if all this were too little, he has sent his Spirit to us
in the room of his Son to abide amongst us, and as his Vicegerent to drive on
this vast design of his love to us, to excite and persuade us to return into
that sure way to heaven, which he has described to us, and to assist us all
along in our travel thither. So wondrous careful has he been not to be
defeated of this his kind intention to make us everlastingly happy. And now
what Heart can be so hard and impenetrable as to resist such powerful Charms
and Endearments! Methinks if we had but the common Sense and Ingenuity of men
in us, it would be impossible for us to reflect upon such miracles of Beauty
and Love as these are, without being intimately touched and affected with them.
But till we are so, it will be impossible for us to enjoy Heaven; for how can
we freely exert our Faculties upon an Object that we do not love; and if we
cannot, how can we without loving God enjoy Heaven; which consists in the free
and cheerful outgoings of all our Faculties upon him? For if when we go into
Eternity we love him not, either he will be indifferent or hateful to us; if
the former, we shall altogether neglect and take no notice of him; if the
latter, we shall either fly away from him, and banish our selves from his
presence, or be forced to abide and endure it with extreme regret and torment.
For whilst our minds are averse and repugnant to him, whatsoever we see in him
will but the more enrage and canker our malice against him; and even the sight
of those his glorious Perfections which so enravish the hearts of the blessed
inhabitants of Heaven, will only provoke and boil up our Dislike of him to a
higher degree of Hatred and Aversation. For so we find by experience in this
life that while our minds are unreconciled to God, it is a Penance to us to
come near him, to admit any Thoughts of or Conversation with him. And this is
the reason why we take so much pains as we do to misrepresent him to our
selves, to draw such Pictures and Ideas of him upon our Minds, as best
correspond with our own Tempers; that so having thus transformed the Notion of
him into the Image of our selves, Narcissus-like we may fall in love with him,
or at least more easily endure his blessed Presence and Conversation. When
therefore we shall go into the other world where all these Disguises of the
divine Idea shall be taken off, and we shall see him as he is, circled about
with his own Rays of unstained and immaculate Glory, we shall never be able to
abide him; but being all affrighted and confounded at the Glory of his
Presence, we shall be forced to run away, and if possible to hide our selves
from him in everlasting Darkness and Despair. For our Wills being poisoned and
infected with an habitual Enmity against him, it must needs be torment to us to
see him, because we must always see him happy; which is so great an eyesore to
those damned Spirits that hate him, that I am apt to think, that next to being
delivered out of their own Misery, the chiefest Good they desire or wish for
is, to be delivered from the tormenting Sense of his Happiness.. For what
greater torment can our Mind endure, than to be an everlasting Spectator of the
Bliss and Happiness of one whom it hates? How then will it fret and gall our
meagre and envious Spirits to see that blessed Being whom we cannot endure,
surrounded with an infinite Happiness; with a Happiness so vast as that it can
admit of no Increase, and yet so secure, as that it can never suffer a
Diminution? So that it is impossible, you see, for the Mind of Man to live
happily upon God in the other life, unless it be inspired beforehand with an
hearty Love and Affection to him.

AND hence it is that our holy Religion does so strictly require us to love the
Lord our God, with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind,
Mat. xxii.37. to love him because he loved us first, to delight our selves in
the Lord, Psalm. xxxvii.4. and to rejoice in the Lord, Phil. iii.1. and to
rejoice in the Lord always, Phil. iv.4. i. e. to be habitually complacent or
well pleased with the infinite Beauty, Goodness and Perfection of the divine
Nature. Nay of such vast import is the Love of God in the account of the
Gospel, that it is there recommended as the proper Principle of Christian Life.
For so, Romans xiii.10. we are told that love is the fulfilling of the law, that
is, the adequate Principle of all Christian Obedience; and Gal. v.6. we are
told that neither Circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any thing in Christ
Jesus, but faith which works by love, that is, there is nothing of any
account with Christ, buch such a Belief of the Gospel, as begets in us a hearty
Love to God, and does thereby work and exert it self, as by that which is the
only genuine Principle of Christian Life and Action. It Is true, beside this
principle of Love, the Gospel acts us both by our Fear and Hope, exciting the
one by Threatenings of the greatest Evils, and animating the other with Promises
of the greatest Goods; but yet it is certain that neither these nor any other
Principles of religious Action can be acceptable to God, whilst they are
totally separated from Love to him. For there is no Principle of Obedience can
be acceptable to God that is not a Principle of Universal Obedience; but to
love God being a great and main instance of Obedience, that can be no principle
of Universal Obedience, which does not effectually excite us to love him.

IT IS true, the Religion of most men begins upon the Principles of Hope and
Fear, and it cannot be denied but these are good Beginnings; but yet till by
these we are excited to love God, as well as to do the other Parts of our Duty,
our Obedience is lame and partial, and consequently unacceptable. So that
though Hope and Fear are good Ingredients to compound an acceptable Principle
of Obedience, yet without an Intermixture of Love they are by no means
sufficient. There may be indeed, and at first there generally is, much less of
Love in this internal spring of our Obedience than of Hope or Fear, whilst yet
the whole Composition is truly pleasing and acceptable to God. For the lowest
degree of cordial Love intermixed with our Hope and Fear, is sufficient to
leaven and consecrate them into an acceptable Principle of Obedience; but still
the less of Love there is in it, the more weak and languid, and imperfect it
is, and in all its progresses toward Perfection, its ripeness and maturity is
to be measured by the degrees of Love that are in it. And till our Love is
arrived to that degree of Fervor and Ardency, as to become the predominant
Motive and Master Ingredient of this our compounded Principle of Obedience, our
state in Goodness is very low and imperfect. So that in short, the Principle
that acts and moves us in Religion, is still more and more perfect, the more of
Love there is in it, and the less of Hope and Fear; and when Hope and Fear are
both swallowed up in Love, and this is become the sole Spring of Action in us,
then it is the Principle of Heaven, the Soul that acts and animates the Religion
of just men made perfect.

SO that if ever we design to grow up to their blessed State, we must endeavor
to kindle and blow up the Love of God in our Hearts. And in order hereunto we
must be frequently representing to our own Minds, the infinite Reasons we have
to love him, and pressing our selves with the vast Obligations he has laid
upon us; spreading them fairly before our Thoughts in all their endearing
Circumstances. We must ever and anon set our cold and frozen Souls before those
melting Flames of his Love and Beauty, and never leave chafing them at 'em,
urging and pressing them with the Consideration of them, till we feel the
heavenly Fire begin to kindle in our Bosoms. And above all things we must take
care by the constant Practice of what is agreeable to Gods Nature, to reconcile
our Minds and Tempers to him; for till this is done we can never be habitually
pleased or delighted in him; but when once by the Practice of those eternal
Rules of Goodness that are founded in his blessed Nature, we have so far
reconciled our Natures to him, as that our Hearts and his stand bent the same
way, and are for the main alike inclined and disposed, then we are prepared
for, and made proper and convenient Fuel to receive this heavenly Flame of Love
to him; and when this is once so thoroughly kindled in our Hearts, as that we
are habitually well pleased and delighted in him, so as to rejoice in his
Happiness, acquiesce in his Will, and meditate on his Beauty and Goodness, with
an unfeigned complacency of Soul, we are then in the same State (that is in
Kind, though not in Degree) with the blessed People of Heaven. And though in
this Life we may not be able to raise our selves, to that Height of Love as we
desire, and much less as that blessed Object deserves, our present Knowledge
being short, our Thoughts unsteady and our Affections entangled in Sense and
sensual things; yet when we go from hence into the other World, and are there
admitted to a more intimate View of his Nature, Works, and Perfections, our
imperfect Love will be immediately improved into an high Seraphick Flame. For
now we shall not only know him better, having him always in our View, and
continually shining full in our Eyes; but we shall be removed from all other
Objects that are apt to divert our Thoughts, or divide our Affections from him.
So that now our Love being kindled and fed with the purest Light, with the ever
out-streaming Rays of the most perfect Beauty and Goodness, will always exert
its utmost Vigor, and spend it self without Decay in one continued everlasting
Rapture.

AND then how unconceivably happy will our State be, when we shall always live
in view of the most lovely Object, and always love him as much as we are able,
and be able to love him a thousand times more than we can now imagine! For the
longer we view the more we shall know him, and the more we know, the better we
shall love him, and so through everlasting ages our Love shall be stretching
and extending it self upon his infinite Beauty and Loveliness. Now Love is
naturally a most sweet and grateful Passion, a Passion that sooths and ravishes
the Heart, and puts the Spirits into a brisk and generous motion. For it wholly
consists in a fixed complacency or well-pleasedness of Mind arising from the
apprehended Goodness and Congruity of the thing beloved; and it is merely by
accident that it has any disquieting or ungrateful Emotion mingled with it.
Either the Person beloved is absent, which fills it with unquiet Desire; or he
is unhappy, or unkind, which mingles it with Grief and Sorrow; or he is fickle
and inconstant which imbitters it with Rage and Jealousy; but consider it
separately from all these Accidents, and it is nothing but pure Delight and
Complacency. But now in Heaven our Love of God will have none of these
disquieting Accidents attending it, for there he will never be absent from us,
but continually entertaining our amorous Minds with the Prospect of his
infinite Beauties; there we shall ever feel his Love to us in the most sensible
and endearing Effects, even in the Glory of that Crown which he will set upon
our Heads, and in the ravishing Sweetness of those Joys he will infuse into our
Hearts; there we shall experience the continuation of his Love, in the
continued Fruition of all that an everlasting Heaven means, and be convinced as
well by the Perpetuity of his Goodness to us, as by the Immutability of his
Nature, that he is an unchangeable Lover: in a word, there we shall find him a
most happy Being, happy beyond the vastest wishes of our Love, so that we shall
not only delight in him as he is infinitely lovely and amiable, but rejoice and
triumph in him too as he is infinitely blessed and happy. For Love unites the
Interests as well as the Hearts of Lovers, and mutually appropriates to each,
each others Joys and Felicities. So that in that blessed State we shall share
in the Felicity of God proportionably to the Degree of our Love to him. For the
more we love him, the more we shall still espouse his happy Interest, and the
more we are interested in his Happiness, the happier we must be, and the more
we must enjoy of it. Thus Love gives us a real Possession and Enjoyment of God;
it makes us Copartners with him in himself, and derives his Happiness upon us,
and makes it as really ours as his. So that Gods Happiness is as it were the
common Bank and Treasury of all divine Lovers, in which they have every one a
Share, and of which proportionably to the Degrees of their Love to him, they do
actually participate to all Eternity. And could they but love him as much as he
deserves, that is infinitely, they would be as infinitely blessed and happy as
he. For then all his Happiness would be theirs, and they would have the same
delightful Sense, and Feeling of it all, as if it were all transplanted into
their own Bosoms. God therefore being an infinitely lovely, infinitely loving,
and infinitely happy Being, when once we are admitted to dwell for ever in his
blessed Presence, our Love to him can be productive of none but sweet and
ravishing emotions; for the immense perfections it will then find in its
Object, must necessarily refine it from all those Fears and Jealousies, Griefs
and Displeasures that are mingled with our carnal loves, and render it a pure
Delight and Complacency. So that when once it is grown up to the Perfection of
the heavenly State, 'twill be all Heaven, 'twill be an eternal Paradise of
Delights within us, a living Spring whence Rivers of Pleasures will issue for
evermore. O blessed State, in which my heart shall be brim-full of Love, and my
Love shall triumph alone within me, and be all Joy and Ravishment, being
removed for ever out of the Noise and Neighborhood of all those disquieting
Affections which here are wont to mingle with, and continually disturb and
incommode it!

IV. AS we are rational Creatures related to God, we are obliged attentively to
imitate him in all his imitable Perfections and Actions. For this is an allowed
Maxim, Perfectissimum in suo genere est mensura reliquorum, that is, that which
is most perfect in its kind is to be the rule and measure of all those
Individual natures that are contained under it. For Perfection is the measure
of Imperfection, even as a straight line is of a crooked, and every Individual
of a kind must needs be so far defective in its nature, as it falls short of
that which is most perfect in its kind. God therefore being the most perfect of
all in the whole kind of reasonable Beings, must needs be the supreme Pattern
of all those Individuals that are under it; and so far as any of them disagree
with him, so far they are defective in their Natures. (...), Phil. lib. 2. page
132. i. e. God is the Archetype of every reasonable Nature, and Man is his
Imitation and Image. For he is a Being that is infinitely reasonable in all his
Volitions and Actions, that has not the least intermixture either of Humor or
Folly, or Prejudice in his Choices, but is always, and in every thing governed
by his own pure and all-comprehending Wisdom. Upon which account he ought to be
owned and looked upon by every reasonable Being, as the sovereign Standard and
Pattern of their Natures; and so far as any reasonable Nature moves or acts
counter to his, which is the most perfectly reasonable, so far it ought to be
looked upon as monstrous and unnatural in its kind. For as it is monstrous in a
humane Body to have its parts displaced, its Mouth opened in its Belly, or its
Legs growing out of its Shoulders, because these are unnatural positions, that
are directly contrary to the true Idea, Form and Figure of a humane body; so
every reasonable Nature that does not imitate and take after Gods, but chooses
and acts contrary to him, is so far monstrous and misshapen, because it is
wrythed and distorted into a Figure that is directly contrary to its natural
Pattern and Exemplar. And while it continues so, it is not capable of true
Happiness. For that which renders God so infinitely happy in himself, is not so
much the Almighty Power he has to defend himself from foreign Hurts and
Injuries, as the exact Agreement of all his Motions and Actions, with the
all-comprehending Reason of his own Mind. For he always sees what is best, and
what he sees is best he always chooses and affects, and this makes him perfectly
satisfied with himself, and fills him with infinite Joy and Complacency;
because when ever he surveys himself in the glorious mirror of his own Mind,
he discerns nothing in himself but what is infinitely lovely, nothing but what
exactly corresponds with the fairest Ideas of his own infinite Reason. Whereas
if, upon an impossible Supposal, it were otherwise, there would arise a Civil
War within his own Bosom, against which Omnipotence it self could not protect
or defend him. For in despite of himself he would be continually exposed to
the just reproaches of his own Mind, and his own All-seeing Eye would every
moment detect, and libel, and upbraid him, and render him a most inglorious
Spectacle to himself. So that he would be so far from being infinitely pleased
and satisfied with himself, that his own infallible Reason would be an
everlasting vexation to him.

AND so will ours be to us, unless we take care to imitate God in those his
divine Perfections, from whence his infinite self-satisfaction arises. For so
long as we are conscious to our selves that we wilfully swerve and deviate from
the great Exemplar of our rational Natures, we cannot but be ashamed of and
condemn our selves, and be highly dissatisfied with our own Actions. Our
Conscience must necessarily reproach our Will, and our Reason upbraid our base
Inclinations. Now what an intolerable plague is it for a man to be forced to
make Invectives against himself, and continually to carry his own Satyrs in his
bosom. In this life indeed, what by disguising our Faults with specious Names,
or coloring them over with plausible Pretenses; what by bribing our
Consciences with false Presumptions, or diverting our selves from listening to
their reproaches by hurrying into Vice or Business, we may happily make a shift
to deal well enough with our selves. But alas! what shall we do when we come
into the other world, where all fair Color and Pretense shall be wiped off,
our Vices and We shall appear to our selves in our own naked and undisguised
Ugliness; where all our false Presumption shall be baffled by a woeful
Experience, and all the din of worldly Pleasure and Business in which we were
wont to drown the clamours of our Conscience shall be for ever silenced; so
that we shall be exposed without Fence or Guard to the furious Reflections of
our own mind, and lie stark naked under the lash of an enraged Conscience for
ever! O good God! what Tongue can express the intolerable Anguish of such a
State; wherein our own Deformities shall be continually objected to our Eyes,
and we shall have nothing to palliate or excuse them, but be always forced to
condemn, and hate, and curse our selves for them, and yet not be able to
correct and reform them; wherein we shall still be hurried on to such Actions
by our own furious Inclinations, as when we have done them will startle and
amaze us, set on our Reason and Conscience to worry us with their reproachful
Reflections, yet in despite of all their Reproaches we shall still reiterate
and repeat them! Like a desperate Murderer who having killed an innocent
Person, reflects with Horror upon his own Act, tears his Hair, beats his
Breast, curses and calls himself a thousand Villains; but being hereby chased
into a greater Fury, instead of reforming he grows more mischievous, and so
murders another, and then rages afresh at his own Act, but still the more he
rages, the more he murders. And this will necessarily be our State in the
other world, if through our neglect of imitating God, we go away thither under
an habitual Contrariety of nature to him. Besides that we shall be wholly
indisposed to those beatifical Acts of divine Love, Worship and Contemplation,
in which, as I have showed, a great part of the pleasure Heaven consists. For
since all Love is founded in Likeness, and Likeness is the effect of Imitation,
how is it possible we should love God unless we imitate him, and if we do not
love him, what Pleasure can we take in contemplating and adoring him.

WHEREFORE in prosecution of its great Design, which is to make us happy, the
Gospel strictly requires us to be always imitating, so far as they are
imitable, the Perfections and Actions of our heavenly Father; to endeavor to
form our Natures to his, to rectify the Features and Lineaments of our Souls
by his most amiable Idea; to be continually framing our tempers, by the noble
pattern of his Mercy and Goodness, his Justice, Purity, and Wisdom; that so
being new cast as it were in the perfect mould of his Nature, we may be
transformed into living Images of him. So Ephesians. v.1. be ye therefore (...)
imitators, or followers of God, as dear Children, i. e. that so you may
resemble him in the Qualities of your Minds, as children do their Parents in
the Lineaments of their Bodies. And this is the sense of all those Evangelical
Injunctions, which require us to be pure as God is pure, merciful as he is
merciful, and perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect; that is, to take
example by God in the whole course of our lives, and trace and follow him in
all his imitable Perfections, by putting on that new, that god-like man, that
divine temper and disposition, which after God, that is, according to the
pattern of his Nature, is created in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians.
iv.24. This therefore is an essential part of our Christian Life, to set God
always before our Eyes, as the great Pattern of our Lives and Actions, and to
endeavor constantly to write after him, and transcribe his Graces into our
Natures; that so when we go away into the other World, we may carry with us at
least a rude and imperfect draught of his blessed Image upon our Minds, such as
when we are removed from the manifold impediments of flesh and blood, and the
perpetual diversions of this sensitive World, and admitted to a near view of
God, may be a prevailing bias upon our Wills, and incline us to imitate him
for ever. For if for the main we are here transformed by imitating God into a
godlike Temper and Disposition, all those involuntary contrarieties to him,
which by reason of our Ignorance of his Nature, of our bodily Temper, and the
manifold Temptations we are here exposed to, are still remaining in our
Natures, will be immediately extinguished upon our arrival into the other
World; where being freed from all our misconceptions of God, from all the
repugnancies of our bodily Temper to him, and from all those Temptations that
were wont to avert us from him, we shall have no involuntary Disposition or
Inclination in us; and then our Wills being already predominantly inclined to
follow God, and take example by him, and having no contrary Inclination to
contend with, we shall presently attend to and imitate his Perfections with the
greatest Vigor, Freedom and Alacrity of Soul. So that now we shall be so
intensely fixed to choose and act like God, who is the Example and Pattern of
our Natures, that we shall everlastingly regulate all our Motions by those very
eternal Laws of Reason, whereby he everlastingly wills and acts; and there is
nothing will be so abhorrent to our Natures as an ungodlike Will or Action. For
if as the Apostle tells us, by beholding now the glory of God in a glass, we
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. iii.18. then
doubtless much more shall we be so, when we behold him face to face. It Is true
as our Knowledge of God who is an infinite Truth can never be absolutely
perfect, because if it were it would be an infinite Knowledge; so neither can
our Resemblance of him be, who is an infinite Goodness, because if it were we
should be infinitely good; both which are contradictions to the state of a
Creature: yet as we shall be knowing him farther and farther, so proportionably
we shall be imitating him too through infinite Ages of Duration; and still
every act of our Imitation shall be so attentive and vigorous, that it shall
leave a further impression of his infinite Perfection on our Natures. So that
though our finite Nature can never arrive to a perfect Likeness of that
infinitely lovely and amiable Being, because it can never be infinitely
amiable; yet it shall be everlastingly approaching nearer and nearer to him,
proportionably as it discovers more and more of his infinite Beauties and
Amabilities, and be still growing more wise and pure, more righteous and
benign, according as its prospect of the Wisdom, Purity, Justice and Goodness
of his Nature is enlarged and extended. So that as his Beauty shines into us,
it will still imprint it self upon us, and transform us into blessed Images of
it self; and then according as we are assimilated to the divine Nature, we
shall still partake of those Joys and Pleasures which are inseparable to it,
and resemble it in Bliss as much as we do in Perfection. For as Gods infinite
Perfection is the spring of his infinite Self-satisfaction, so from our finite
Perfection there shall ever redound to us a Satisfaction equal to our finite
Capacities. For though we shall never attain to absolute Perfection, that is,
to all the possible degrees of Wisdom and Goodness, which is the Peculiar of
God; yet to Eternity we shall be growing on to it, and in every Period of our
growth, we shall be perfectly what we ought to be, that is, we shall ever know
as much of God as is possible for us, our present State and Circumstances
considered; and so far as we know of him we shall to our utmost power
continually imitate and resemble him. And thus in our eternal Race to
Perfection, our Wills shall always follow our Understanding, and our
Understandings shall always follow God with their utmost Vigor and Activity;
so that neither the one nor the other shall ever be deficient of any Degree of
Knowledge and Goodness which pro hic and nunc is possible to them.

NOW what an unspeakable Satisfaction must this give to the Mind, when
surveying it self round about, it shall find every thing within it self exactly
as it ought to be; every Faculty to its utmost Power and Capacity perfectly
corresponding with its original Pattern and Exemplar; when upon the strictest
Scrutiny it will discover nothing within it self, but what the most critical
Conscience will be forced to approve of; no Motion or Action, but what will
endure the Test of its severest Reason: in a word, when it shall
interchangeably turn its Eyes from God to it self, and compare Grace with
Grace, and Feature with Feature, and perceive what an amiable Consent and
Agreement there is between its own Copy and his fair Original; what a pure
Imitation of God its Life is, and how exactly Deiform all its Motions and
Actions are: when, I say, our blessed Minds shall always find themselves in
this Godlike Posture and Condition, O! what incomparable Content and
Satisfaction will they take in themselves! With what enravishing Pleasure will
they ever review their own Motions, which being immediately copied from the
Nature of God, will be such as its severest Reason will be always forced to
commend and approve of! So that now the happy Mind will be always triumphing in
its own Purity, and enjoy within it self an everlasting Heaven of Content and
Peace; now 'twill continually be crowned with Applauses of its own Reason, and
all its Actions will have the joyful Echoes of a well-pleased Conscience
continually resounding after them. And thus by imitating Gods Perfections, we
shall imitate his Happiness too, and shall for ever take after him, not only in
respect of the Rectitude of our Natures, but also in the most blessed and
comfortable Enjoyment of our selves. Besides that our Resemblance of God will
everlastingly dispose us to love, and our Love to contemplate and adore him.
For all these blessed Acts do reciprocally further and promote each other; just
like contiguous Bodies that are placed in a Circle, the first of which being
moved thrusts on the second, the second the third, the third the last, if there
be no more between; and then the last thrusts on the first, and so round again
in the same order. So that if we carry with us into Eternity a Frame and
Disposition of Nature like Gods, we shall always so imitate as still to love
him, so love as still to contemplate him, so contemplate as still to adore him,
so adore as still to imitate, and love and contemplate him anew; and in this
blessed Circle we shall move round for ever, with unspeakable Vigor and
Alacrity.

V. AS we are reasonable Creatures related to God, we are bound to resign up,
and submit our selves to his blessed Will and Disposal. For God has a just
Dominion ove^ all, founded in his own infinite Power, that does not like other
Dominions result to him from any external Acts or Achievements, but is the
eternal Prerogative of his own Nature. For he, as well as all other Beings,
has a freedom to exercise his own Abilities so far as it is just and lawful;
but being infinitely paramount to all other Powers whatsoever, he can be
subject to no superior Authority, nor consequently be obliged by any other Law
but that of his own Nature. So that whatsoever he can do, he can justly do, if
it be not contrary to the infinite Perfections of his Nature. For his Power
being infinite, and unconfined as well as his Wisdom, Justice and Goodness,
does sufficiently warrant him to do whatsoever is consistent with them;
otherwise he would be infinitely powerful in vain. And therefore since he can
exercise a Dominion over all, he must needs have an eternal Right to do it, so
far as his own Wisdom, Goodness and Justice will permit, which are the only
Laws by which he can be bounded in the exercise of his infinite Power and
Ability. So that while he governs us by such Rules and Laws, as are convenient
to his own Nature, his own Greatness and Power, which exalts him above all
other Law or Authority, sufficiently warrants him so to do. And being thus
rightfully enthroned by the infinite Preeminence of his own Power and Majesty,
all other Beings so far as they are capable stand immutably obliged to submit
and resign themselves up to his Government.

BUT besides that we are obliged to him as he is God, we are also bound to him
as he is our Creator. For there is always a Power acquired by Benefits, where
there is none antecedently; especially where the Benefit conferred is no less
than that of our Being, which is the case between us and God. And this is such
a Benefit as is sufficient to entitle him to us, by an absolute and unalienable
Propriety, though he had no antecedent right of Dominion over us by virtue of
his own infinite Greatness. So that though before he created us or any other
Being, he had free Power to act any thing that lay within the compass of just
and lawful, which just and lawful was undefineable by any other Law but that of
his own Nature; and though since his Creation his Power is no more than so, (so
that he has not acquired to himself any new Power by creating us, but only
made new Subjects whereon to exercise that ancient Power, and Dominion which
was eternally inherent in him) yet doubtless by giving us our Beings, he has
laid new Obligations upon us to obey him. For now deriving our selves, as we
do, from him, we are bound by all the ties of Equity and Justice to render back
our selves to him, and to submit those powers to his Dominion, which are the
effects and offspring of his Bounty. For what can be more just and equal, than
that that Will which is the Cause of our Beings, should be the Law and Rule of
our Actions; then that we should serve him with those Powers we derived from
him, and render him back the fruits of his own Plantation? For now we are not
our own but Gods, and He alone has power to dispose of us; and whenever we
dispose of our selves contrary to his Will and Pleasure, we do not only invade
his Property, but employ the spoils of it against him. And whilst we continue
thus doing, it is impossible we should ever be happy. For besides that while we
continue in Rebellion against him, we are in an actual Confederacy with Hell;
for so when we are told that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, that is,
Rebellion against God, the meaning is, that like Witches, we are in League with
the Devil, and are listed Volunteers under those infernal Powers, who for
blowing the Trumpet of Rebellion in Heaven were banished thence six thousand
years ago, and have ever since been raising Forces in this lower World against
God; so that whilst we continue with them in Defiance to God, we are in the
Devils Muster-Roll, who is Captain General of all the revolted Legions, and so
are of the quite opposite Party to the Loyal people of Heaven, and consequently
can never hope while we continue such to be admitted to their Society and
Happiness; besides all this, I say, Rebellion against God does naturally draw a
Hell of Miseries after it. For it cannot be supposed that the wise Sovereign of
the World, should be so unconcerned for his own Authority, as to suffer his
Creatures to spurn at and affront it without ever manifesting his Displeasure
against them in some dire and sensible Effects. And therefore though in this
Life which is the time of our Trial and Probation, he mercifully forbears us to
lead us to Repentance; yet if we leave this Life with our Wills unsubdued and
unresigned to him, we must not expect to be thus gently dealt with in the
other. For it is as easy for him who is the Father of our Spirits, to correct
our Spirits, as it is for the Parents of our Flesh to correct our Flesh. And
though our Souls are no more impressible with material stripes, than Sunbeams
are with the blows of a hammer; yet are they liable to have horrid and dismal
thoughts impressed upon them, and to be as much aggrieved by them, as sensible
Bodies are with the most exquisite Torments. So that if God be displeased with
us there is no doubt but he can imprint his Wrath upon our Minds, in black and
ghastly thoughts, and cause it perpetually to drop like burning sulphur on our
Souls. And it being in his Power thus to lash our Spirits, to be sure, when
once he is implacably incensed against us (as he will be in the other World if
we go Rebels thither) he will more or less let loose his Power upon us, and
make us feel his wrathful Resentments, by infusing supernatural Horrors into
our Souls, and scourging our guilty and defenseless Spirits with inspirations
of dire and frightful Thoughts. Now though this be not a natural and necessary
Effect of our Rebellion against God, because it depends upon his Will who is a
free Agent; yet considering that he is a wise Agent, and that as such it is
necessary he should one way or other manifest his Displeasure against such as
are unreclaimable Rebels to his authority, it is next to a natural one; and at
least the fearful Expectation of it in such rebellious spirits (which is a
misery next to the enduring it) is necessary and unavoidable. For God has
imprinted a dread of his own Power and Majesty so deeply on our Natures, that
we are not able with all our arts of Self-deceit wholly to obliterate and
deface it; and though in this life we may sometimes suppress and stupifie our
Sense of God, yet even here in despite of our selves, 'twill ever and anon
return upon us. And if when we have done what we know is offensive to that
invisible Majesty we stand in aw of, we do but suffer our selves seriously to
reflect upon it, there presently arises in our minds a swarm of horrid Thoughts
and dismal Expectations; and if in this present State in which we have so many
Salvo's for our wounded spirits, so many Pleasures and Self-delusions to charm
our natural dread of God, our overcharged Consciences do notwithstanding so
often recoil upon us, and alarm us with such dismal abodings; what will they do
hereafter, when all those Pleasures are removed, and all those Self-delusions
baffled with which we were wont to sooth and divert them. Then doubtless we
shall be continually stung with sharp and dire Reflections, and our Consciences
like tragic Scenes be all hung round with the Ensigns of Horror; then shall
the dread of God perpetually haunt us like a grim Fury, and the terror of his
offended Majesty strike us into an everlasting Trembling and Agony. For so S.
James tells us, that the Devils themselves do believe and tremble, James ii.19.
they believe that there is an Almighty Being above them, and are conscious that
they are in actual Rebellion against him, which makes them horribly afraid of
his vengeance; and yet such is the inveterate devilishness of their Natures,
that they will by no means hearken to a Submission, but in despite of their
own Dread and Horror, do still persist in an open Defiance to their Almighty
Enemy, and so tremble and sin, and sin and tremble for ever. And so shall we,
if we go into the other World habitual Rebels to God; our deep and inveterate
malice against him will still hurry us on to incense and provoke him, and then
our natural Dread of his Power and Majesty will break into frightful and
horrible Thoughts, and so be continually revenging upon us those our continual
provocations of him. For then our soul will be nakedly exposed to the lash of
its own furious thoughts, and have no shield to defend it self against the
terrors of its guilty Conscience, which being rouzed up and kept awake by the
unintermitting Sense of our misery, will be always clamouring upon us, and
continually torturing us with black and horrid Reflections. So that whilst we
are wandering among wretched Ghosts, through those dismal shades below, we
shall be perpetually meditating Horrors, and never leave lashing our selves
with our own sharp and terrible thoughts, till we have chased our selves into
Furies, and boiled up our self-condemning Rage into an everlasting Madness.
Thus as our sense of our unlikeness to God will ever fill us with Shame and
Confusion, so will the sense of our Rebellion against him continually strike us
into Fear and Amazement.

TO prevent which, our holy Religion, which does so industriously consult our
Happiness, requires us now to submit our selves to God, James iv.7. to live to
God, Gal. ii.19. to present our selves living sacrifices, holy and acceptable
to God, Romans xii.1. to yield our selves unto God, and our members as
instruments of righteousness unto God, Romans vi.13. the sense of all which is,
that we should endeavor, so to affect our Minds with the sense of Gods
Authority over us, and with the manifold Reasons of our obedience to him, as to
be firmly and constantly resolved within our selves, neither to choose any thing
that he forbids, nor to refuse any thing that he commands; that we should set
him up a Throne in our Hearts, a fixed and prevailing Resolution of Obedience,
that therein he may sit and reign, and have the absolute Empire and Command of
all our inward Motions and outward Actions; in a word, that we should acquire
such an habitual Respect to and Reverence of his sovereign Authority, that no
temptation from within or without us, may be able to countermand it, or to
seduce us from our duty into any wilful course of Rebellion against him. And
when once we have framed our minds into this obediential Temper, we are in a
forward preparation for Heaven. And though by reason of those Remains and
Relics of corrupt Nature that are in us, which are here continually excited
by the many Temptations among which we live, we may find reluctant and
counter-striving Principles within us; a stubborn Appetite contending against
an obedient Will, and sometimes upon Surprise or Inadvertence over-powering it;
yet if we heartily bewail this as our Unhappiness, and if when we thus fall we
weep and rise again, and take more care of our steps for the future, we shall
carry with us when we go from hence into the other World a Will that is
habitually resigned to God; and so being there removed from all the Temptations
that were wont to excite in us those contrary Appetites and Inclinations, we
shall immediately become all Duty and Obedience, and freely give up our selves
to God without the least shadow of Contest, or Reluctance. And in this blessed
State we shall continue for ever, so entirely devoted to God that between him
and us there shall ever be one common Will, and End, and Interest; and our
Hearts which before were in a great measure set and tuned to the Heart of God,
will be instantly such perfect Unisons with it, that whenever, or whatsoever
he speaks, we shall still resound and echo to him, from our inmost bowels,
with unspeakable Cheerfulness and Alacrity.

AND being thus reduced to a perfect Submission to the Will of God, we shall
therein find our selves incomparably happy. For now our Wills being always
determined by the Will of God, we shall be perfectly eased of all the Trouble
and Distraction of choosing. Now our Minds will no longer hover in Suspense, nor
be divided between contrary Reasons, but all its thoughts will glide gently on
in a calm and even Current, without ever being tossed and bandied to and fro by
cross and opposite Deliberations. For now it no sooner knows the Will of God,
but it rests in it immediately with a free Assent, and uncontrolled
Approbation; so that upon new Occasions it is free from the trouble of forming
new Choices and Resolutions, being already fixed under all Events to one steady
Course of Motion, and immovably resolved whatever befalls, ever to do what God
would have it. And its will thus perfectly acquiescing in God as in its proper
Place and Element, it will no longer dispute as it was wont to do, no longer
waver between two Loadstones, but always obey upon the first Motion, and follow
him for ever without Deliberation. In which happy state we shall be no longer
ground between those coutermoving Milstones, the law in our Minds, and the law
in our Members, but being entirely resigned to God we shall ever obey him
secundo flumine, with a full Current of Inclination, and Nature. And what a
mighty Ease must this be to the Soul; especially considering that by being thus
entirely subject to God, it will not only be released from the Trouble of
choosing and deliberating, but also thoroughly warranted of the Goodness and
Rectitude of its own Choices. For so far as we are subject unto God, our Wills
are his, and so are our Actions too; and whilst they are so, we can have no
reason to mistrust, either that they are bad in themselves, or that he is angry
and displeased at them. For his Will we know is governed by his Nature, which
is the Standard of Good and Evil, the Law and Measure of Right and Wrong; so
that while we will and act as he would have us, we have a sufficient warrant
for what we do; a warrant that will for ever bear us out and justify us to our
own Minds, and always render us abundantly satisfied with our selves; so that
we shall not only always acquit but always reverence our selves, and our
Conscience will not only cease to shame us, but be continually applauding and
smiling upon us, and instead of those importunate Clamours with which it was
wont to entertain us, its constant echo to all our actions will be well done
good and profitable servant. So that being entirely determined by the Will of
God, which never varies from the Law of his Nature, we shall be perfectly
satisfied with our selves, and for ever choose and act without the least
Mistrust or Hesitance. And then our Wills being perfectly subject to his, and
all our powers of action entirely at his Devotion, we shall never have the
least ground to fear or suspect his Displeasure, but be always fully satisfied
that he loves us, that we are dear and precious in his Eyes, and that to
Eternity he will respect and look upon us with the smiles of an unchangeable
Complacency. The sense of which will ravish our Hearts and for ever fill us
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. So that whereas rebellious Souls are
perpetually haunted with two restless Furies, viz. the shame of their guilt and
the fear of their danger, which even here do give them more disturbance than
all their sins can pleasure, and delight; when once we are perfectly subjected
to God, we shall be for ever discharged of them both, and then will our happy
minds be always as courageous as Truth, and as confident as Innocence it self.

AND as by our perfect Submission to God, we shall be wholly released from the
trouble of choosing, and sufficiently warranted in our own Choices, so we shall
be abundantly satisfied both of the Wisdom and Success of them. For then we
shall be assured, even by a sweet and happy Experience, that whatsoever God
commands us to do he most certainly knows that it is for our good, and that
that is the Reason why he commands it. So that when we are entirely subjected
to God, our Choices and Actions will be all directed by an infallible Wisdom to
our own good. For while we choose what God would have us, our Wills are guided
by Gods Wisdom, and so in every genuine act of Obedience we are as infallible
as Omniscience it self. When therefore we are perfectly resigned to God, we
shall always will and act with as much Confidence and Assurance of a happy and
prosperous Success as if we our selves were infinitely wise, and had a perfect
Comprehension of all possible Issues and Events. And whilst wretched Rebels
grope about under the Conduct of their own blind Wills, and for the most part
do they know not what, and go they know not where themselves, but live by
chance, and act at random; our Wills and Actions being wholly steered by an
All-wise Will, that never fails to measure them by the best Rules, and point
them to the best Ends, we shall be always sure of our hands, and know
infallibly before hand that every thing we will or do shall conspire to our own
good. And this will enable us to perform the everlasting Race of our Obedience,
with an unspeakable Freedom and Alacrity, and always render us wondrous light,
and nimble, and expedite in our Operations. For whereas when men know not what
may happen upon such an Action, and are not able to pry out all those hidden
Events, that lurk in the Womb of their own Designs, they always act with
Caution and Anxiety, and are doubtful and tremulous in their Motions; when once
we are sure of a good Event, we still go on with Courage, and Cheerfulness; and
so we shall ever do, when we ever perfectly will and act under the command of
God. For now we shall always see good Issues before us, and be firmly assured
from that infallible Wisdom which governs his Will, and by his ours, that every
thing we will or do shall be crowned with a happy Effect. And this will for
ever wing our Souls with an unwearied Vigor and Activity, and render each act
of our Obedience unspeakably sweet and delightful to us. And now O blessed
mind! what Tongue or Thought can reach thy happiness; who living in a most
perfect Subjection to an All-good and All-wise Will, art never in the least
concerned or troubled to debate and deliberate what to choose, but do
everlastingly embrace and follow what an infinite Goodness, and an infinite
Wisdom has chosen for thee!

VI. AS we are reasonable Creatures related to God, we are also obliged
cheerfully to trust in and depend upon him. For as he is the Prop and Center of
all the mouldering Creation, the Almighty Atlas, that bears it upon his
Shoulders, and keeps it from sinking into Ruin, we and every Creature in
Heaven and Earth do hang upon him, and draw our breath from him, and if he
shake us off but for a moment, we presently drop into nothing and perish. For
could we exist of our selves this present moment, we might as well have done so
the moment before, and may as well do so the moment after, and so backward and
forward to all Eternity; and unless we had such a Fullness of Essence in us, as
to exist of our selves from all eternity past to all eternity to come, it is
impossible we should exist so much as one moment without new supplies from the
infinite and independent Fountain of Being. And what can be more fit or
reasonable than that we who are thus born up by him, should freely trust in and
depend upon him; than that we should build our Hope upon the Prop of our
Existence, and make him the Stay of our Confidence in whom we live and move and
have our being? Especially considering what a proper Object of Trust and
Dependence he is; and that not only as he is the sovereign Disposer of all
those Issues and Events which concern us, but also as he is infinitely Wise,
and always understands what is good or hurtful to us, and as he stands engaged
both by his own essential Goodness, and free Promise never to fail those that
put their Trust in him, but to manage all their Affairs to their everlasting
Interest and Advantage. And in whom can we more rationally confide than in a
Being of infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Power; that always knows what is best
for us, that always wills what he knows so, and always does what he wills? All
which considered, its certainly incomparably more to our Interest and
Advantage, that our Concerns should lie in his hands, and be managed as he sees
best, than that every thing should happen to us according to our own Will and
Desire. For there are innumerable things which in the natural Series and Order
of Causes are concomitant and consequent to every Event, the greatest part of
which are out of the Sphere of our Cognizance; by reason of which it is
impossible for us to make an infallible Judgment of the good or evil of any
Event that befalls us; because though we may be secure that such an Event singly
and apart by it self may be good or evil for us, yet for all we know there may
be such Concomitants or Consequents inseparable to it, as may quite alter its
Nature, and render that evil, which considered singly may be good for us, or
that good which considered singly may be evil. We earnestly wish for such an
Event, and are very confident it would be mighty advantageous to us; but alas!
if it should befall us, according to the Series of things a thousand others
must, and what they will prove we are not able to prognosticate; but for all we
know, the Mischief of them may abundantly outweigh the Benefit of this. And
this being so, how extremely unfit are we to make Choices for our selves, since
in most particulars it is almost an equal lay whether what we choose will prove
our Food or our Poison? But now God being the supreme Orderer and Disposer of
things, and having the first link of every Chain of Causes in his own hands,
must needs have an entire Comprehension of all the intermediate ones, from the
beginning to the end; and his Power being not only the cause of all actual
Events, but also of the possibility of those that shall never be actual, he
must needs discern the utmost Issues and Concomitants of every possible, as
well as of every future Event, and perfectly understand not only what will be
beneficial or injurious to us, but also what might be so. So that it is
impossible for him to be mistaken in his Choices, because he knows as well
before hand what things would be to us if they were, as what they are when they
do actually exist. Upon the whole therefore it is doubtless of inestimable
Advantage to us, to be in the hands of God; and verily next to Hell it self, I
know nothing that is more formidable than for God to let us alone, and give us
up to our own Wills and Desires. And should he call to us from Heaven, and tell
us, that he was resolved to cross our Desires no more, but to comply with all
our Wishes, let the event prove good or bad, we should have just reason to look
upon our selves as the most forlorn and abandoned Creatures on this side Hell,
as Persons excluded from the greatest Blessing that belongs to a Creature; and
if we had any hope of his re-acceptance of us, it would be infinitely our
Interest to resign back our selves, and all our concerns to him, and on our
bended knees to beseech him above all things not to leave us to our selves, or
throw us from his Care and Conduct. It being therefore upon all accounts so
highly fit and reasonable, and so much to our Interest and Advantage, that we
should freely trust our selves, and all our Affairs into the hands of God, and
depend upon him for the good success of all our honest Endeavors and
Undertakings; that we should acquiesce in his Disposal of things, and under all
outward events be pleased and satisfied with his Conduct, as knowing that
howsoever things may happen to us, they cannot be otherwise than as the wise
and good God is pleased either to permit, or to order and determine them; this
I say being so fit in it self, and so much for our Interest, it is impossible
that without it we can be happy either here or hereafter. For since both our
Being and Well-being are wholly dependent on the Will of God, and we can
neither be, nor be happy one moment longer than he pleases, how is it possible
we should ever be quiet, and satisfied in our own minds without a great
Assurance of and Confidence in him? When we consider what a mighty Stake we
have in his hands, how all our Fortunes lie at his feet, and how easily he can
frown us into nothing, or spurn us into a Condition ten thousand times worse
than nothing when ever he pleases, how can we be otherwise secure in our own
minds, or avoid being eternally anxious and solicitous, but by firmly relying
on his Truth and Goodness; to the want of which is to be attributed all that
carking Care, tormenting Fear and disquieting Thoughtfulness, which perpetually
haunts the minds of men. They are sensible that their Condition is dependent,
and that it is not in their own Power, either to make it what they would have
it, or to secure and continue it when it is made so; they know that by a
thousand Chances which in despite of their Foresight or Power may happen, the
next moment either themselves may be snatched from what they possess, or what
they possess may be snatched from them; they find that their most probable
Designs are liable to innumerable Miscarriages, and that when they have formed
their Projects never so wisely, there are infinite cross Accidents may
intercurr and dash them in pieces; and in this uncertain State of their
Affairs, they either think not of God at all, but live at the Courtesy of a
fickle Chance, and leave themselves to be tossed, and bandied to and fro at the
pleasure of a blind and undesigning Fortune, upon whose ever-moving Wheel their
wearied thoughts can never rest; or if they think of God, it is with great
Mistrust and Despondency; they fear he will not be regardful enough of them,
nor prove so kind to them as they could wish, and are possessed with an obstinate
opinion that 'twould be much better for them to be their own Carvers, than to
live at his Disposal and Allowance. And hence proceed all those Anxieties and
Discontents, those fretting Cares, dismaying Fears, perplexing and misgiving
Thoughts, which do continually gaul and disquiet them; and from these their
thorny disquietudes it is impossible they should ever be wholly free, no not in
Heaven it self, till they have wrought their Minds to a perfect Trust and
Confidence in God. For we shall be altogether as dependent upon God for our
heavenly, as we are for our earthly Happiness; because, though all those Acts
of heavenly Virtue, in which our heavenly Happiness consists, will be much more
in our own Power, than any of these worldly goods are, yet they will be no
longer in our Power than God shall think fit to enable us to choose, and act,
and to support us in our Being and Existence, which then we shall sensibly
perceive entirely depends upon the All-enlivening vigor of his vital breath.
And therefore though he has promised to continue our being in that most
blessed State for ever, yet unless we perfectly trust in his Veracity, our
Minds will be continually disturbed with anxious and misgiving Thoughts; we
shall be afraid lest one time or other he should forget his Promise, and upon
some unknown Reason or Emergency withdraw from us that Influence of his
All-upholding Power, upon which our Being and Well-being depends, and let us
drop into Nothing. And the greater our Happiness is, the more we should be
afraid of losing it; because we should be always sensible that it entirely
depends upon the Pleasure of God, whose Truth and Goodness, we could not
perfectly confide in. So that were we placed in the midst of Heaven with a
misgiving, distrustful Mind of God, that would imbitter all the joys of it, and
give them a harsh and ungrateful Farewell. For the fearful Apprehensions we
should continually have of being thrust out of Heaven again, and tumbled
headlong from all our Glory, would be such a continual Affliction to us, that
we should even pine away our happy Eternity, for fear of being eternally
deprived of it. So impossible it is for any dependent Being to be happy,
without an entire Trust and Confidence in God upon whom its Being and Happiness
depends.

AND therefore the Gospel to render our future Happiness complete, endeavors
to train us up beforehand to a firm and perfect Confidence in God, by making
it an essential part of our duty to commit the keeping of our souls to God in
well-doing, 1 Pet. iv.19. to trust in the living God who gives us all things
richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy vi.17. not to trust in our selves but in God who
raises the dead, 2 Cor. i.9. to believe in God, and not be troubled at any
Events which happen to us in this world, John xiv.1. and not to cast away our
confidence, Heb. x.35. and the like; the Sense of all which is, to press and
engage us to a constant and cheerful Relyance upon God, and to endeavor to
affect our minds with a deep sense of his overruling Providence, and a full
Assurance of the Goodness of all those great Designs he is driving on in the
World; and accordingly to acquiesce in, and embrace all Events as the tokens of
his Love and Favor, and always to live upon this Persuasion, that it is
infinitely better for us to be in Gods hands than in our own, and that he knows
much better how to dispose of us, and our affairs than we do, and that he will
take care to dispose of them as much to our advantage as we our selves should,
if we knew as much as he does. Now though by reason of those strong Impressions
which sensible things in this Life of Sense make upon us, we should not always
be able so firmly to rely upon, and repose our selves in Gods invisible Power,
as not to be at all disquieted about the Issues and Events of things; yet if by
frequent acts of Trust and Relyance on him, we have so disposed our minds to
confide in him, as that by looking up to his overruling Providence, we can
ordinarily stay and support our selves, amidst the Changes and Revolutions of
this world; if when a storm of Adversity hangs lowering over, or showers down
upon us, we can fly to God for shelter, and promise our selves Safety and
Protection under the outstretched wings of his Providence; in a word, if when
we smart, we can ordinarily hope in him, and rest persuaded that under his
gracious Conduct and Disposal, all things shall work together for our good;
this our imperfect, wavering Hope and Dependence, shall in the other life be
immediately ripened into a most perfect Confidence, and Assurance. For there we
shall be wholly removed from this Life of Sense, by which our Trust in Gods
invisible Providence is very much weakened and distracted; and besides we shall
have much quicker and clearer apprehensions of his Nature, and of the infinite
Reasons we have to confide in him. And then when after all the threats of a
tempestuous Voyage, we shall find our selves landed in a blessed World, and
possessed of all its promised Glories, this mighty Experiment of Gods Fidelity
and Goodness, will immediately settle our predisposed minds, into such an
immovable Confidence in him, as that from thenceforth no Fear or Distrust will
ever find the least access to our thoughts, but we shall be so perfectly
assured of his Truth and Goodness, that though we shall feel our selves
sustained and blessed every moment by the arbitrary Influences of his Benignity
and Power, yet we shall be as confident for ever of the continuance of our
bliss, as we could be, if we did self-exist, and held the eternity of our Being
and Happiness as independently as God does his. For though our Condition will
be ever dependent, yet'twill be ever dependent upon such a foundation as can no
more fail than Gods own Life and Being; viz. upon his Veracity and Goodness,
both which are so essential to him, as that he cannot exist without them. And
knowing our selves so firmly secured in this our dependent State, as that we
can never sink unless God himself sink under us, we shall be to all Eternity
not only as safe, but as satisfied in it, as if we were every one a God to
himself; and in this blessed Security we shall quietly enjoy God and our selves
for ever. So that our Trust and Confidence in God will crown the Pleasure of
all our other Virtues, by giving us full Security of an everlasting Fruition of
it. For now the ravished mind will have no fear or distrust to cramp or arrest
it, in its blessed operations; no anxious Thoughts of a sad futurity to sower
its present enjoyments; but 'twill enjoy all Heaven every moment, in a fearless
Security of enjoying it all for ever. And when it shall perfectly love,
contemplate and adore God, with a sure and certain Confidence, of
contemplating, loving and adoring him perfectly for ever, O! how unspeakably
will this enhance the Pleasure of those beatifical Acts! For now in every
moment of all our blessed Eternity, we shall still have the Joy of a blessed
Eternity to come; and besides all those Pleasures which each present moment of
our heavenly Life shall abound with, we shall still have the Pleasure of a
Prospect of infinite Ages of Pleasure. And thus the blessed mind, you see, by
its perfect Dependence upon God, consummates its own Heaven, and secures it
self for ever in a most quiet and undisturbed Enjoyment of it.

BY all which I think it sufficiently appears, how much each of these Divine
Virtues, which as rational Creatures we are obliged to exert, and exercise upon
God, contributes to our heavenly Happiness; and consequently, how indispensably
necessary our present Practice of them is to dispose and capacitate us to enjoy
it.

SECT. III. Concerning the Social Virtues, showing that these also are included
in the Heavenly Part of the Christian Life, and that in their Natures they very
much contribute to our Heavenly Happiness.
MAN of all sublunary Creatures is the most adapted for Society. For though the
greatest part of other Creatures do covet Society, as well as he, yet he alone
is furnished with that gift of Nature which renders Society most pleasant and
useful, and that is the gift of Speech. By means of which we can express our
Thoughts, and maintain a mutual Intelligence of Minds, with one another; and
thereby divert our Sorrows, mingle our Mirth, impart our Secrets, communicate
our Counsels, and make mutual Compacts and Agreements to supply and assist each
other. And in these things consists the greatest Use and Pleasure of Society.
And as of all Creatures we are the best fitted for Society, so we stand in the
greatest need of it. For as for other Creatures, after they come into the World
they are much sooner able to help themselves than we; and after we are most
able to help our selves, there are a world of Necessaries and Conveniences
without which we cannot be happy, and with which we cannot be supplied without
each others aid and assistance; which in an unsociable State of Life we should
of all Creatures in the World be the most indisposed to render to one another.
For as Aristotle de Repub. lib. 1. page 298. has observed, (...) As man in his
perfect state is the best of all Animals, so separated from Law and Right he is
the worst. For out of Society we see his Nature presently degenerates, and
instead of being inclined to assist, grows always most salvage and barbarous to
his own kind. Since therefore we have so much need of each others help, Society
is absolutely necessary to cherish and preserve in us our natural Benevolence
toward one another, without which instead of being mutually helpful, we should
be mutually mischievous. For as the same Philosopher has observed, (...). Id.
ibid. He that cannot contract Society with others, or through his own
Self-sufficiency does not need it, belongs not to any Commonwealth, but is
either a wild Beast, or a God. We being therefore so framed for Society, and
under such necessities of entering into it, it hence necessarily follows, that
being associated together, we are all obliged in our several Ranks and Stations
so to behave our selves toward one another as is most for the Common Good of
All; and that since the Happiness of each particular Member of our Society
redounds from the Welfare of the Whole, and is involved in it, we ought to
esteem nothing good for our selves that is a Nuisance to the Public. Because
whatsoever this suffers, I and every man suffer; and unless I could be happy
alone, that can never be for my Interest in particular, that is against my
Interest in common. Now in such a mutual Behavior as most conduces to our
common Benefit and Happiness as we are in Society with one another, consists
all Social Virtue; the proper Use and Design of which is to preserve our
Society with one another, and to render it a common Blessing to us all. And
hereunto five things are necessary, viz.

1. That we be charitably disposed toward one another.

2. That we be just and righteous in all our Intercourses with each other.

3. That we behave our selves peaceably in our respective States and Relations.

4. That we be very modest toward those that are Superior to us in our
Society, whether it be in Desert or Dignity.

5. That we be very treatable and condescending to all that are Inferior to
us. Under these Particulars are comprehended all those Social Virtues upon
which the Welfare and Happiness of Humane Society depends. Now that the
Practice of all these is included in the Christian Life, and does effectually
conduce to our everlasting Happiness, I shall endeavor particularly to prove.
And

I. AS rational Creatures associated and so related to one another, we are
obliged to be kindly and charitably disposed toward each other. For the end of
our Society being mutually to aid and assist one another; it is necessary in
order hereunto that we should every one be kind and benevolent to every one,
that so we may be continually inclined mutually to aid and do good Offices to
one another. And so far as we fall short of this, we fall short of the End of
our Society. For to be sure the less we love one another, the less prone we
shall be to promote and further each others Welfare, and consequently the less
Advantage we shall reap from our mutual Society. But if instead of loving, we
malign and hate each other, our Society will be so far from contributing to our
Happiness, that it will be only a means of rendering us more miserable. For it
will only furnish us with fairer Opportunities of doing Mischief to one
another, and that mutual Intercourse we shall have by being united together in
Society will supply us with greater Means and Occasions to wreak our spite
upon each other. For Society puts us within each others reach, and by that
means (if we are enemies) renders us more dangerous to one another; like two
adverse Armies, which when they are at a Distance can do but little hurt, but
when they are joined and mingled never want opportunities to destroy and
butcher one another. So that Hatred and Malice, you see, renders our Society a
Plague, and we were much better live apart poorly and solitarily, and withdraw
from one another as Beasts of Prey do into their separate Dens, than continue
in one another reach, and be always liable, as we must be while we are in
Society, to be baited and worried by one another.

AND as Hatred and Malice spoils all our Society in this Life, and renders it
worse than the most dismal Solitude, so it will also in the other. For
whenever the Souls of men do leave their Bodies, they doubtless flock to the
Birds of their own Feather, and consort themselves with such separate Spirits
as are of their own Genius and Temper. For besides that good and bad Spirits
are by the eternal Laws of the other World distributed into two separate
Nations, and there live apart from one another, having no other Communication
or Intercourse but what is between two Hostile Countries that are continually
designing and attempting one against another; so that when wicked Souls do
leave this Terrestrial Abode and pass into Eternity, they are presently
incorporated by the Laws of that invisible State into the Nation of wicked
Spirits, and confined for ever to their most wretched Society and Converse;
besides this, I say, Likeness does naturally congregate Beings, and incline
them to associate with those of their own Kind. Now Rancour and Malice is the
proper Character of the Devil, and the natural Genius of Hell; and consequently
it is by a malicious Temper of Mind that we are naturalized beforehand Subjects
of the Kingdom of Darkness, and qualified for the Conversation of Furies. So
that when we go from hence into Eternity, this our malignant Genius will render
us utterly averse to the friendly Society of Heaven, and naturally press and
incline us to consort with that wretched Nation of spightful and rancorous
Spirits, with whom we are already joined by a Likeness and Communion of
Natures. But O! much better were it for us to be shut up all alone for ever in
some dark Hole of the World, where we might converse only with our own
melancholy Thoughts, and never hear of any other being but our selves, than to
be continually plagued with such vexatious Company! For though we who are
spectators only of Corporeal Action, cannot discern the manner how one Spirit
acts upon another; yet there is no doubt but Spiritual Agents can strike as
immediately upon Spirits, as bodily Agents can upon Bodies; and supposing that
these can mututually act upon one another, there is no more doubt but they can
mutually make each other feel each others Pleasures and Displeasures, and that
according as they are more or less powerful, they can more or less aggrieve and
afflict one another. And if so, what can be expected from a company of
spightful and malicious Spirits joined in Society together, but that their
Conversation should be a continual Intercourse of mutual Mischiefs and
Vexations? especially considering how they here laid the foundation of an
eternal Quarrel against one another. For there all those Companions in Sin will
meet, who by their ill Counsels, wicked Insinuations, and bad Examples did
mutually contribute to each others Ruin; and being met in such a woeful State;
how will the tormenting sense of those irreparable injuries they have done each
other, whet their Fury against and incite them to play the Devils with one
another? And what can be expected from such a Company of waspish Beings, so
implacably incensed against one another, but that being shut up together in the
infernal Den, they should be perpetually hissing at, and stinging each other?
But then besides those mutual plagues which these furious Spirits must be
supposed to inflict upon one another, they will be also nakedly exposed to the
powerful Malice of the Devils those fierce Executioners of Gods righteous
Vengeance, who, as we now find by Experience, have power to suggest black and
horrid Thoughts to us, and to torture our Souls with such dreadful Imaginations
as are far more sharp and exquisite than any bodily Torments. And if now they
have such Power over us, when God thinks fit to let them loose, what will they
have hereafter, when our wretched Spirits shall be wholly abandoned to their
Mercy, and they shall have free Scope to exercise their Fury upon us, and glut
their hungry Malice with our Griefs and Vexations? It seems at least a mighty
probable Notion, that that horrid Agony of our Savior in the Garden which
caused him to shriek and groan, and sweat as it were great Drops of Blood, was
chiefly the effect of those preternatural Terrors, which the Devils, with whom
he was then contesting, impressed upon his innocent Mind. And if they had so
much Power over his pure and mighty Soul, that was so strongly guarded with the
most perfect and unspotted Virtues, what will they have over ours when we are
abandoned to them, and thrown as Preys into their Mouths? With what an Hellish
Rage will they fly upon our guilty and timorous Souls, in which there is so
much Tinder for their injected Sparks of Horror to take fire on?

SINCE therefore Rancour and Malice does so naturally incline and hurry our
Souls toward the wretched Society of Devils and damned Spirits, the Gospel
which so industriously consults our Happiness, takes all possible Care to train
us up in Charity and mutual Love; and makes it a Principal, as well as
necessary Part of our Christian Life, heartily to love one another. For this,
as our Savior tells us, is the Darling Precept which lay next to his Heart;
this is my Commandment that ye love one another, Joh. xv.12. And accordingly we
are bid not only to follow after Charity, 1 Cor. xiv.1. and to do all things
with Charity, 1 Cor. xvi.14. but also to put on Charity above all things, Col.
iii.14. and to dwell in Love, which the Apostle tells us, is to dwell in God
who is Love, 1 John iv.16. The intent of all which is, to oblige us to bear an
universal good Will to all, and to take an hearty Complacency in all that are
truly lovely; to be ready to contribute to and rejoice in every ones Good and
Welfare, and in a word, to live in the continual exercise of all those
charitable Offices which our present State and Condition requires and calls
for. To be courteous and affable, and to treat all those we converse with with
an obliging Look, a gentile Deportment and endearing Language. To be
long-suffering, mild and easy to be entreated; not to break forth into Rage
and Storm upon every petty Provocation, and when we are justly provoked not to
suffer our Displeasure to fester into Malice and Rancour, but to be forward and
easy to be reconciled. To be of a compassionate and sympathizing Temper, and
to rejoice with those that rejoice, and weep with those that weep. To be candid
Interpreters of Men and their Actions; to be ready to mitigate and excuse their
Faults and put fair Comments on their Actions; and to be so far from making
malicious Glosses on their innocent Meaning, from proclaiming their
Miscarriages, and rejoicing in their Falls, as not to believe ill of them but
upon undeniable Evidence, and when we are forced to do so, to pity and lament
them, and endeavor and pray and hope for their Reformation. In short, to be
benign and bountiful to the necessitous and distressed, and to endeavor
according to our Ability to allay their Sorrows, remove their Oppressions,
support them under their Calamities, and counsel them in their Doubts; to be
ready to every good Work, and like Fields of Spices to be scattering our
Perfumes through all the Neighborhood; and all this out of an honest and
sincere purpose to promote their Good, and not merely to acquire to our selves
a popular Vogue and Reputation. All which are essential Parts of that Charity
which the Gospel enjoins us to exercise toward one another. For so the Apostle
assures us, 1 Cor. xiii.4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffers long, and is kind,
charity envieth not, charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not
behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked; thinks
no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth, bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things.

NOW though there be several Acts of Charity that will cease for ever in
Heaven, such as long-suffering, giving of Alms and forgiving of Injuries, and
the like; because among the People of Heaven there will be none of the Faults
or Miseries about which these Acts are conversant; yet even the Practice of
these is indispensably necessary to temper and dispose our Minds to heavenly
Charity, which till we are disposed to by universal Love, we shall never be
capable of exercising; but since all virtuous Dispositions are acquired by
Acts, it is impossible we should acquire the Disposition of universal Love,
unless we universally practice it. It Is by giving Alms that that we must
acquire cordial Charity to the poor and needy; and by forgiving Injuries that
we must dispose our selves to love those that offend us. For these Acts are
Causes as well as Signs of a charitable Temper, and are necessary not only to
signify it where it is, but also to produce it where it is not. When therefore
by acting all those Parts of Charity which are proper to this as well as the
other State, we have acquired this blessed Disposition of universal Charity,
our Minds are fairly framed and tempered for the Society of Heaven. And though
in the perpetual Justle and Tumult of this World some little Piques and
Displeasures should now and then arise in our Minds, yet if in the cool and
standing Temper of our Souls we are hearty Well-wishers to all Men, and hearty
Lovers of all that do in any measure love and resemble God, we are in a natural
Tendency to Heaven, that perfect Element of Love, and when we go from hence
shall consort our selves with unspeakable Joy and Alacrity with those great and
blessed Lovers that inhabit it. Who being all of them most amiable and Godlike
Souls, that are every one of the same Temper with our selves, being touched at
the same Loadstone and made partakers of the same Divine Nature, we shall
immediately close and join with them in the strictest Unions of Love. For those
heavenly People being all of them most flagrant Lovers of God, are so united in
him who is the common Center of Love, that no Saint or Angel can enjoy his Love
without possessing a proportionate Degree of theirs; and their Love of one
another being all subordinate to their common Love to God, and grounded upon
it, though their strongest Inclination, like that of excited Needles, be still
toward him the blessed Magnet at which they have every one been touched, yet
do they all stick fast to one another, being clung inseparably together by
those attractive Virtues which they have all derived from him. And in this
state of perfect Friendship they converse together with unspeakable Pleasure,
and all their Conversation is a perpetual Intercourse of wise and holy
Endearments. And now what a blessed Society must this be, wherein perfect Love
and Friendship reigns and has an All-commanding Empire; where every Heart
mingles with every one, and all like precious dusts of Gold, are melted
together into one solid Ingot; where infinite Myriads of blessed Spirits, by
interchangeably clasping and twining with one another, are so inseparably
united and grown together that they are all but one compounded Soul! And when
from the highest Angel to the lowest Saint they are all so tied together by the
Heart Strings that every one is every ones dear Friend, what inexpressible
Content and Complacency must they needs take in one another! When I shall pass
all Heaven over through ten thousand millions of blessed Beings, and meet none
but such as I most dearly love and am as dearly beloved by, O! what unspeakable
Rejoicings and Congratulations will there be between us! Especially when I
shall find no Defect either of Goodness or Happiness in them, nor they in me,
to damp our mutual Joy and Delight in each other; but every one shall be what
every one wishes him, a perfect and a blessed Friend. For perfect Lovers have
all their Joys and Griefs in common between them; but the Heavenly Lovers
having no Griefs among them, do only communicate their Joys to one another. For
where they love so perfectly as they do in Heaven, there can be no such thing
as a private or particular Happiness, but every one must have a share in every
ones; and consequently in this their mutual Communication of Blisses, every
ones Happiness will, by his Friendship to every one, be multiplied into as many
Happinesses as there are Saints and Angels in Heaven; and so every Joy of every
Member of the Church Triumphant runs round the whole Body in an eternal
Circulation. For that blessed Body being all composed of consenting Hearts,
that like perfect Unisons are tuned up to the same Key, when any one is
touched, every one echoes and resounds the same Note; and whilst they thus
mutually strike upon each other, and all are affected with every ones Joys, it
is impossible but that, in a State where there is nothing but Joy, there should
be a continual Consort of ravishing Harmony among them. For such is their dear
Concern for one another, that every ones Joy not only pays to, but receives
Tribute from every ones; so that when any one blessed Spirit rejoices, his Joy
goes round the whole Society; and then all their rejoicings in his Joy reflow
upon, and swell and multiply it; and so as they mutually borrow one another
Joys, they always pay them back with Interest, and by thus reciprocating do
everlastingly increase them.

II. AS we are rational Creatures related to one another, we are obliged to be
just and righteous in all our Intercourses with each other. To yield to every
one whatsoever by any Kind of Right, whether natural or acquired, he can demand
or challenge of us. For there are some things to which every Man has a Right
by Nature as he is a Part or Member of Humane Society. As for instance, Life,
which is the Principal of all our Actions and Perceptions, is freely lent us by
God, who is the Source and Fountain of Life; and consequently till God resumes
his Loan, or we forfeit it by our own Actions, we have all a natural Right to
live, and for any man to attempt to deprive us of our Life, or of our Means of
living, is the highest Injury and Injustice. Again, Words being instituted for
no other End but to signify our Meaning and to be the Instrument of our
Intercourse and Society with one another, every one who is a Member of Humane
Society has a Right to have our Meaning truly signified to him by our Words,
and whosoever lies or equivocates to another, does thereby injuriously deprive
him of the natural Right of Society. Again, a good Name being the Ground of
Trust and Credit, and Credit the main Sinew of Society, till men have forfeited
their good Name, they have a natural Right to be well reputed and spoken of;
and whosoever either by false Witness, public Slanders, or private
Whisperings, endeavors to attaint an innocent Man's Reputation, does thereby
injuriously attempt to exclude him from the Conversation of Men, and shut the
Door of Humane Society against him. Once more, Promises being the great
Security of our mutual Intercourse and Society with one another, every Man that
has a Right to Society has a Right to what another promises him, provided it
be but lawful and possible; and therefore for any man to promise what he
intends not to perform, or to go back from his Promise when he lawfully may and
can perform it, is an Act of unjust Rapine; and I may every whit as honesty rob
another Man of what is his without my Promise, as of what I have made his by
it; he having an equal Right to both by the fundamental Laws of Society. In
fine, the great Design of our Society being to help and assist one another,
every Man has a Right to be aided and assisted by every one with whom he has
any Dealing or Intercourse; to have some share of the Benefit of all that
Exchange, Traffic and Commerce which passes between him and others; and
therefore for any man in his Dealings with others to take Advantage from their
Necessity or Ignorance to oppress or overreach them, or to deal so hardly by
them as either not to allow them any share of the Profit which accrues from
their Dealings, or not a sufficient share for them to subsist and live by, is
an injurious Invasion of that natural Right which the very End and Design of
Society gives them. But then besides these natural, there are also acquired
Rights; and such are those which either by legal Constitution or by mutual
Compacts and Agreements we are seized and vested with; which Constitutions and
Compacts being absolutely necessary to the upholding and regulating of humane
Societies, it is no less necessary that all those Rights which they confer
should be inviolably preserved; and whosoever knowingly or wilfully takes away
or detains from another what he is thus entitled to by Law or Agreement, is
guilty either of a Fraud or a Robbery, either of which is an unjust Violation
of the Rights of humane Society. So that the Practice of Justice and
Righteousness, as it is confined to humane Society, consists in not intrenching
either upon the natural or acquired Rights of those with whom we have any
Dealing or Intercourse; in not endeavoring to deprive them either of their
Lives or Livelihoods, unless by their own Actions they forfeit them to us; in
imparting our true Meaning to them by our Words, and neitheir hiding it under
Lies and Falsehoods, nor disguising it with equivocal Reservations; in making
good to them all our lawful and possible Promises, in not falsely aspersing
their good Names and Reputations, nor suffering them to be falsely aspersed
when we are able to vindicate them; in neither using them cruelly in our
Dealings, so as wilfully to damnifie them, nor hardly so as either to rake all
the Advantage to our selves, or not to allow them such a competent share of it
as is necessary to support and maintain them: in a word, not to defraud or rob
them of any thing which either by Constitution of Law, or by Compact and
Agreement they have a Right to. This is civil Righteousness, and without this
it is impossible that any Society should be happy. For how can any one be
secure in a Society where Violence and Rapine, Falsehood and Oppression reign;
where Causes are decided not by Rules of Justice but by dint of Power, and the
strongest Arm is the sole Arbitrator of Right and Wrong; where Promises and
Professions are only Traps and Snares, and every man lays Ambushes in his
Words, and lurks behind them in reserved Meanings, only to await an Opportunity
to surprise and ruin every one he converses with? It would doubtless be far
more eligible for Men to disperse and disband their Society and live apart as
Vermin do, and subsist by robbing and filching from one another, than live
together as they must in such a State of Injustice like Bundles of Briars and
Thorns, and out of their mutual Jealousies and Distrusts be continually tearing
and scratching one another.

NOW, as I showed you before, what Men's Tempers are here, such will their
Company be hereafter. So that if we go out of this World with an unrighteous
Temper, we must expect to be confined in the other to an unrighteous Society;
and if Unrighteousness be such a Nuisance to our Society in this Life, what a
Plague will it be to it in the Life to come? For the most barbarous Societies
of Men in this Life, have some Remains of Justice and Equity among them; and
though the best of them have many corrupt Members that are bad in the main, yet
whether it be by their natural Temper, or their Fear of Punishment or Disgrace,
or by their Sense of Honor or Checks of Conscience, they are frequently
restrained from many bad things, and particularly from Dishonesty and
Injustice; by which means their Society is rendered much more tolerable. But in
the other Life, as they are all perfectly good that are in the Society of the
good, so they are all perfectly wicked that are in the Society of the wicked;
and whatsoever Checks there may be in their Natures to any particular Acts of
Wickedness, they are there all born down by their inveterate Malice against
God, and outrageous Despair of ever being reconciled to him. So that in all
their Society with one another there is not the least Intermixture of just and
righteous Intercourse, but all their Conversation is Falsehood and Treachery,
Violence and Oppression, and whatsoever else is hurtful and injurious to one
another. For the Devil who is the sovereign Prince of their Society, is
described in Scripture to be the Father of Lies, and a Murderer from the
beginning, that is, a most outrageously unjust and unrighteous Being, one whose
whole Trade has been to cheat and deceive, to rook men of their Happiness, and
mask his murtherous Intentions against them with dissembled Smiles, and fawning
Endearments. And doubtless Regis ad exemplum is true there as well as here; the
miserable Vassals of his dark Kingdom do all imitate his Manners and tread ^n
his Footsteps. And if so, O! good Lord what woeful Society must they have with
one another! When by reason of their continual Experience of each others
Falsehood and Insincerity, all mutual Trust and Confidence is banished from
among them, and every one is forced to stand upon his own Guard in continual
Expectance of Mischief from every one. When all their Life is a Trade of
diabolical Knaveries, and their whole Study is to do and retaliate Injuries,
and the main Business of this their hellish Society is to circumvent and play
the Devils with one another. Doubtless this alone is enough to make Hell a most
dreadful State though there were nothing else dreadful in it; and I verily
believe, if it were left to my own Option, I should much rather choose to
languish out an Eternity in some dismal Dungeon alone, and there converse only
wlth my own silent Griefs, than to dwell for ever in the Garden of the World
accompanied with such false and villainous Creatures.

THAT this therefore may not be our Fate hereafter, it is a great Part of the
Business of our Holy Religion to train us up for better Company, by inuring us
beforehand to the Practice of Righteousness and Justice. For so it obliges us
to do unto men whatsoever we would that men should do unto us, Mar. vii.12.
that is, so to deal with every man as if we had exchanged persons with him, and
he were in our place, and we in his. And in particular it enjoins us to be
harmless as Doves as well as wise as Serpents, Mat. x.16. to converse in the
World with simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. i.12. to keep up an honest
conversation in the world, 1 Pet. ii.12. not to lie to one another, Col. iii.9.
not to go beyond or defraud our brother in any matter, 1 Thessalonians. iv.6. The sense
of all which is, to oblige us to maintain a strict Integrity in all our
Professions and Intercourses with men, and not to allow our selves in any
Course of Action which the Laws of Justice and Sincerity disapprove; to measure
our Words by our Meaning, and our Meaning so far as we are able, by the Truth
and Reality of things; to converse among men with a generous Openness and
Freedom, and with as little Reserve and Disguise as is possible and prudent,
considering what a treacherous and ill-natured World we have to deal with; to
be what we seem, and not to paint ill Meanings with smiling Looks and smooth
Pretenses; to notify our Intentions and unfold our Hearts, and, so far as
innocent Prudence will admit, to turn our selves inside outward to all we
converse with; to give to every one his due and not to entrench upon other men's
Rights, whether it be to their Lives or Liberties, Reputations or Estates: in a
word, to weigh to our Neighbors and our selves in the same Balance, and to do
to them whatsoever we could reasonably wish they should do to us, if we were in
their Persons and Circumstances. By the Practice of which excellent Rules our
Mind will by degrees be refined and purified from all Disposition to Fraud and
Injustice; and then when we go from hence into Eternity we shall carry thither
with us such a just and righteous Frame of Mind, such an honest Plainness and
Integrity of Temper as will immediately qualify and dispose us for the Society
of just men made perfect, who finding us already united to them in Disposition
and Nature, will joyfully receive us into their blessed Communion. And now, O!
the blessed State we shall be in, when being stripped of all Partiality and
unjust Desire, of all Insincerity and Craftiness of Temper, we shall be
admitted into a Nation of just and righteous People, where every one has his
appropriate Seat and Mansion of Glory, and is so perfectly contented with it
that he never covets what another enjoys, so that every one possesses what is
his own without the least suspicion of being ejected by a subtiler or more
powerful Neighbor; where being perfectly assured of each others Integrity,
they converse together with the greatest Openness and Freedom, and in all their
Language, whatsoever it be, do read their Hearts and convey their Intentions to
one another; where their Souls converse face to face, and do freely unbosom
themselves to one another without the least Disguise or Dissimulation; so that
in all their Society there is no such thing as a Secret or Mystery, but they
are all Bosom Friends to one another, and every one has a Window into every
ones Breast! O! blessed God what a most happy Conversation must such just Souls
as these enjoy with one another, from whose Society all Fraud and Falsehood,
Violence and Oppression is for ever banished! For whilst they live together as
they do in the continual Exercise of perfect Righteousness and Integrity, they
can neither design upon nor suspect one another, and so consequently must needs
converse together with infinite Security and Freedom. And being all of them
thus inviolably safe in each others Sincerity and Justice; every one enjoys his
proper Rank and Degree of Glory without Fear or Disturbance, and freely
communicates his wise and excellent Thoughts to every one without any
Strangeness or Reserve. Thus all Heaven over there is a most perfect Freedom of
Conversation among those righteous People that inhabit it, and every one is
every ones Neighbor, and every ones Neighbor is as Himself. For in all their
Communication and Intercourse they mutually exchange Persons with one another,
and there is no one does that to another which he would not gladly have done to
himself in the same Condition and Circumstances. So that none of them all can
possibly be aggrieved because they are every one dealt by just as they would
be, most fairly, most righteously and faithfully. And hence there can be no
Grudges among them, no Whisperings, Backbitings or spightful
Misrepresentations, because every one likes what every one does, and so they
are all perfectly satisfied with one another. And thus you see in the Exercise
of perfect Righteousness and Integrity all the Society of Heaven is rendered
perfectly happy.

III. AS we are rational Creatures related to one another we are obliged to
behave our selves peaceably in our respective States and Relations. For Society
being nothing but an united Multitude, it is indispensably necessary to the
preservation of its Union, that every Individual Member of it should peaceably
comport himself toward every one in that Degree and Order wherein he is
placed. Because, as the Health of natural Bodies depends upon the Harmony and
Agreement of their Parts, so does the Prosperity of Societies or political
ones. For it is Peace and mutual Accord which is the Soul that does both animate
and unite Society and keep the Parts of it from dispersing and flying abroad
into Atoms, which nothing but Force and Violence can hinder them from, when
once they are broken into Discords and Dissentions. So true is that of our
Savior, A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. For besides that
Division impairs the strength of a Society, which like an impetuous Stream
being parted into several Currents runs with far less force, and is much more
easily forded; for the several Factions that are in it are like the several
Nations in a Confederate Army, which though they be all united into one Body
have several contrary Interests and Designs, which divides their Councils and
sows Jealousies among them, and so renders them not only less able to withstand
the Force of an unanimous Enemy, but also less willing to aid and assist one
another; besides this, I say, Faction and Discord naturally disunite and
separates Society, as it dissolves the Bond of Peace which holds it together.
For a Society without Peace is but an aggregated Body whose Parts lie together
in a confused heap, but have no Joints or Sinews to fasten them to one another;
for want of which instead of mutually assisting, they do but mutually load and
oppress each other; which must necessarily divide their Wills and their
Interests, and when that is done it is only external Force that hinders them
from dividing and separating their Society. Upon this account therefore every
man is obliged, as he is a Member of Humane Society, to comport himself
peaceably with all men; because otherwise he will necessarily render himself a
public Pest and Nuisance. For so long as he is of an unquiet and turbulent
Spirit, instead of being an Help he must necessarily be a Disease to every
Community of which he is a Member; and if those with whom he is joined were all
of his Humor and Spirit, it would be much better for them all to live asunder
in the most solitary Condition, than to continue in Society together; because
instead of helping and assisting they would be sure to be continually vexing
and plaguing one another.

IF therefore we go into the other World with an unquiet and quarrelsome
Temper, we shall be thereby inclined to and prepared for the most wretched and
miserable Society, even the Society of those factious Fiends that could not be
quiet even in Heaven it self, but raised a Mutiny before the Throne of God, and
for so doing were driven thence, and damned to keep one another Company in
endless Misery and Despair. The Souls of men therefore being by the Laws of the
Invisible State always assigned to that Society of Spirits whereunto they are
most connaturalized in their Temper, we must expect, if we go into Eternity
with turbulent and contentious Minds, to be thrust into the Society of Devils
and damned Ghosts, with whom we are already joined in a strict Communion of
Natures. And O! what a dreadful thing must it be, to be forced to spend an
Eternity in such wretched Company! Verily methinks the most horrid and
frightful Idea I can form in my own Mind, is, that of a company of snarling and
quarrelsome Spirits, crowded like so many Scorpions and Adders into a Den
together, and there forced by the Venomousness of their Temper to live in
continual Mutiny, and be perpetually hissing and spitting Poison at one
another. For though those words of our Savior, Mat. xii.25, 26. imply that
Satan's Kingdom is not divided, yet they are not to be so understood as if there
were any such thing as Peace or Concord among those rancorous Spirits, for that
is impossible to be imagined; no, doubtless they would be divided eterdally if
they could, being such continual plagues as they are to one another, and think
it a mighty Happiness to be shut up all alone in separate Dens, where they
might never see nor hear of one another more; but being chained together as
they are by an adamantine Fate, which they cannot withstand, they consent in
this and in this only, to oppose all good Designs, and do the utmost Mischief
they are able. But as to all their other Intercourses they are continually
embroiled, and do live in an eternal Variance with one another. So that their
Society is like that Monster Scylla, whom the Poets talk of, whose inferior
parts were a company of Dogs that were perpetually snarling and quarrelling
among themselves, and yet were inseparable from one another as being all of
them parts of the same substance.

WHEREFORE since to be united by indissoluble Ligaments to this wretched
Society will be the certain Fate of all factious and contentious Souls, our
blessed Religion, whose great Design is to advance our happiness, has taken
abundant care to educate our Minds in Quietness and Peace. For hither tend all
those Precepts of it which require us to follow peace with all men, Heb.
xii.14. to be at peace among our selves, 1 Thessalonians. v.13. to follow after the
things that make for peace, Romans xiv.19. to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. iv.3. to be of one mind and to live in peace, 2. Cor.
xiii.11. and if it be possible, and as much as in us lies, to live peaceably
with all men, Romans xii.18. in a word, to mark them that cause divisions among
us, and avoid them, Romans xvi.17. and to do our part that there be no divisions
among us, but that we be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment, 1 Cor. i.10. The Design of all which is to bind us over to the
Study and Practice of Unity and Concord, and restrain us by the strictest
Obligations from all schismatical, factious and turbulent Behavior in those
sacred or civil Societies whereof we are Members. And unless we do sincerely
endeavor to fulfill these Obligations, however we may monopolize Godliness to
our own Party, and claw and canonize one another, we are Saints of a quite
different strain from those blessed ones above, and are acted by the factious
Spirit of the Devil, whose Business it is to foment Divisions, and kindle
Disturbances and Commotions wherever he comes. This therefore must be our great
Care if we design for Heaven, to root out of our Tempers all Inclination to
Contention and Discord, and to compose our selves into a sedate and peaceable,
calm and gentle frame of Spirit; and not only to avoid all unnecessary Quarrels
and Contentions our selves, but so far as in us lies be Peacemakers between
others, and preserve a friendly Union with and among our fellow members. And if
through humane Frailty and Infirmity, through our own Ignorance or the
plausible Pretenses of Seducers, through the too great Prevalence of our
worldly Interest or the Principles of a bad Education, it should be our
Misfortune to be insensibly misled into unwarrantable Dissents and Divisions,
yet still to keep our Minds in a teachable Temper, and our Ears open to Truth
and Conviction; to be desirous of Accommodation, and willing to hear the
Reasons on both sides, and as soon as we are convinced of our Error to repent
of our Division and immediately return to Unity and Peace.

WHICH if it be our constant Practice and Endeavor, we shall by Degrees form
our Minds into such a peaceable and amicable Temper, that when we go into the
other World where we shall be perfectly disengaged from all temporal Interests,
and thoroughly convinced of all our erroneous Prejudice, our Souls will be
effectually contempered to the quiet and peaceable Society of the Blessed; who
having no private Interests to pursue, no particular Affections to gratify, no
Ends or Aims but what are common to them all, which is to adore and imitate and
love that never-failing Spring whence all their Felicity flows, it is
impossible there should be any Occasion administered by any of them of any
Schism or rupture of Communion. And so those happy People live in the most
perfect Unity and Concord, as being all united in their Ends and tied together
by their heart strings. For they having no counter Opinions or cross Interests
to divide them, nothing but Truth shining in their Minds, nothing but Goodness
reigning in their Wills, it is impossible there should be any dissenting
Brother among them, any Nonconformist to the blessed Laws of their Communion;
but conspiring together as they do in the same Mind and Interest, and in the
same peaceable Intentions and Affections, they must needs walk hand in hand
together in a most perfect Uniformity. So that if we would live for ever with
these blessed Folk, we must now endeavor to calm and compose our selves into
their Temper; to discharge our Minds, as much as we are able, of every froward
and contentious Humor, and reduce our Wills to a perfect loathing of them;
that so being qualified for their Society we may be admitted to it when we go
away from this wrangling World. And then how unspeakably happy shall we be,
when with Minds perfectly refined from all Contention and Bitterness we shall
be received into the Company of those calm and sedate Spirits, and bear our
part in their sweet and placid Conversation, wherein they freely communicate
their minds to one another without the least Fierceness or Insolence,
Captiousness or Misconstruction, Clamor or Contention for Victory, and do
eternally discourse over the wise things of Heaven and still perfectly
concenter both in their Understandings and Wills; wherein like so many Stars in
Conjunction they mingle Light with one another, and do peaceably communicate
the treasures of their Knowledge without the least bandying or Controversy.
For though some of them do doubtless know much more than others, yet there
being no Intermixture of Error in the Knowledge of any, it is impossible they
should oppose or contradict one another, because whatsoever is true, agrees
with every thing that is true. And being thus united in Mind and Judgment, they
freely communicate their Thoughts without ever disputing one another
Sentences, which renders it impossible for them ever to quarrel or disagree. So
that all their Communion is a perfect Concord of Souls; wherein there is no
such thing as a Schism or Division, as passing cruel Censures or affixing hard
Names or bandying Anathema's at one another, but in Mind and Heart they are all
as perfectly one as if they were all animated by one and the same Soul. And
thus they live unspeakably happy in the mutual Exercise of an everlasting
Peace, and all their Conversation with one another is perfect Harmony without
Discords.

IV. AS we are rational Creatures related to one another, we are obliged
modestly to submit to our Superiors, and cheerfully to condescend to our
Inferiors in those respective Societies whereof we are Members. These two I
put together, because they are Relatives, and as such do mutually explain and
contribute light to each other. Now it being necessary to the Order and End of
all Societies that their Members should be distinguished into superior and
inferior Ranks and Stations; that some should be trusted with the power of
Commanding, and others reduced to the condition of Obedience, that so in this
regular Subordination they may every one in their several stations be obliged
to aid and assist each other, and according to their several Capacities to
contribute to the good of the Whole; which in a state of Equality (wherein
every Man would be absolute Lord of himself) cannot be expected, considering
the different Humors and Interests by which Men are acted; this I say being
upon this account necessary, it is upon the same Reason equally necessary that
they should mutually perform those Offices to one another, which are proper to
their respective Ranks and Stations. That Superiors should look upon
themselves as Trustees for the Public Good, who are entrusted with Authority
over others not to domineer and gratify their own imperious Wills, but to
provide for and secure the Commonweal; and consequently to take care that they
do not prostitute their Power to their own private Avarice or Ambition, but
that they employ it for the Common Good and Benefit of their Subjects and
Inferiors; that they be ready to do them all good Offices, to compassionate
their Infirmities, consult their Conveniences, and comply with all their
reasonable Supplications; considering that for this End they derived their
Authority from God who is the Fountain of Authority, to whom they are
accountable for their good and bad Administration of it. And so for the
Inferiors, it is no less necessary for the Common Good, that they perform
their parts toward those that are above them; that they behave themselves
toward them, with all that Loyalty and Modesty, Respect and Submission which
their Place and Authority calls for; that they reverence them as the
Vicegerents of God, and address to them as to sacred Persons, and render a
cheerful Obedience to that divine Authority that is stamped upon all their just
Laws and Commands; considering that in their several Degrees, they represent
the Person of the great Sovereign of the World, to whom we owe an entire
Subjection, and consequently are in every thing to be obeyed and submitted to,
that he has not expressly countermanded. For that Subjects and Superiors
should thus behave themselves toward one another, is indispensably necessary
to the Welfare of all Societies. For whilst the Inferiors of any Society do
obstinately refuse to submit to the Will of their Superiors, and the
Superiors to condescend to the Common Good of their Inferiors, they are
contending together, either for a Confusion or a Tyranny; and if the Superiors
prevail Tyranny follows, if the Inferiors, Confusion; either of which is
extremely mischievous, not only to the Society in general, but to each of the
contending Parties, For if Confusion follows, it is not only the Superior Party
suffers by being deposed from its Authority, but the Inferior too by being
deprived of Protection, and exposed to one another Rapine and Violence; and if
Tyranny follows, it is not only the Inferior Party suffers by being forced upon
a rigorous and uneasy Obedience, but the Superior too, by being continually
perplexed how to force and extort that Obedience; and thus both Parties suffer
under the bad effects of each others Misdemeanour. So that to make our Society
happy, it is necessary, that whether we be Superiors or Inferiors, we should
be of a gentle, yielding and treatable Temper; that so which Rank soever we are
placed in, we may be pliable either way, to a fair Condescension, or a just
Submission. For whilst we are of obstinate, perverse and untractable Tempers,
we are neither fit to be Superiors nor Inferiors, but must necessarily be
Plagues and Grievances to our Society, which Rank or Order soever we are placed
in. And though in this life we have not always such a sensible Experience of
the Evil and Mischief of this malignant Temper, because now it is
counter-influenced by those more meek and auspicious ones that are in
Conjunction with it; yet when we go into Eternity, we shall be consigned to
such a Society of Spirits as are all throughout of our own Genius and Temper.
For as in the Society of the Blessed there is a Conjunction of every Virtue in
every Member, so there is of every Vice in the Society of the Wicked; who do
not only retain those Vices in their Natures, which they were here inclined and
addicted to, but are also continually excited to all other Vices they are
capable of, by their inveterate Enmity against God, which in that miserable
estate is perpetually enraged, by their Despair of being ever reconciled to
him. So that whatsoever wicked Temper we carry with us into Eternity, we shall
be sure to meet with it in every individual Member of the Society of the
Wicked, and consequently if we carry thither with us a perverse and untreatable
Temper that will not endure either to submit or condescend, we shall be sure to
find the same Humor reigning throughout all the Society of the Wicked. And
then being eternally united to it, (as we must expect to be if we are allied to
it by Nature) in what a miserable state shall we be, when every Member of our
Society shall be of the same unconversable Temper with our selves, and we shall
find none that will comply with, or endeavor to sooth and mollify our
Obstinacy; when all our whole Society shall consist of a Company of stiff and
stubborn Spirits that will neither submit to, nor bear with one another, but
every one will have his will upon every one, so far as he is able to force and
extort it; when those that are superior in Might and Power, do all rule with a
fierce and tyrannical Will, and will condescend to nothing that is beneficial
for their Subjects; and those that are inferior do obey with a perverse and
stubborn Heart, and will submit to nothing but what they are forced and
compelled to, and it is nothing but mere Power and Dread by which they rule and
are ruled: in a word, when they all mutually hate and abominate each other, and
those that command are a Company of cruel and imperious Devils that impose
nothing but Grievances and Plagues, and those that obey are a Company of surly
and untractable Slaves, that submit to nothing but what they are driven to by
Plagues; so that Plagues and Grievances, are both the Matter and the Motive of
all their Obedience and Subjection; when this, I say, is the State of their
Society with one another, how is it possible but that they should be all of
them in a most wretched and miserable Condition? For where all is transacted by
Force and Compulsion (as to be sure all is among such a Company of perverse and
self-willed Spirits) there every one must be supposed to be, so far as he is
able, a Fury and a Devil to every one; and those that do compel are like so
many salvage Tyrants continually vexed and enraged with stubborn Oppositions
and Resistances, and those that are compelled like so many obstinate
Gally-Slaves are continually lashed into an unsufferable obedience, and forced
by one Torment to submit to another; and thus all their Society with one
another is a perpetual Intercourse of mutual Outrage and Violence.

THIS being therefore the miserable Fate and Issue of a perverse and stubborn
and untractable Temper, the Gospel whose great design is to direct us to our
Happiness, does industriously endeavor to root it out of our Minds, and to
plant in its room a gentle, obsequious and condescending Disposition. For
hither tend all those Evangelical Precepts which require us to become weak to
the weak that we may gain them, 1 Cor. ix.22. to bear with their infirmities,
Romans xv.1. and support them, and be patient toward them, 1 Thessalonians. v.14. And on
the other hand, to submit our selves to our Elders, 1 Pet. v.5. and to those
that have the rule over us, Heb. xiii.17. to obey our Magistrates, our Parents,
and our Masters, to be subject to Principalities, and not speak evil of
Dignities, to honor Kings and submit to their laws, and Governors, 1 Pet.
ii.13, 14. in a word, to honor all men as they deserve, 1 Pet. ii.17. and to
hold good men in reputation, Phil. ii.19. and in honor to prefer one another,
Romans xii.10. The sense of all which is, to oblige us to treat all men as
becomes us, in the Rank and Station we are placed in; to honor those that are
our Superiors whether in Place or Virtue, to give that modest Deference to
their Judgments, that Reverence to their Persons, that Respect to their
Virtues, and Homage to their Desires or Commands, which the Degree or Kind of
their Superiority requires; to condescend to those that are our Inferiors, and
treat them with all that Candor and Ingenuity, Sweetness and Affability, that
the respective Distances of our State will allow; to consult their
Conveniences, and do them all good Offices, and pity and bear with their
Infirmities, so far as they are safely and wisely tolerable. By the constant
Practice of which, our minds will be gradually cured of all that Perverseness
and Surliness of Temper, which indisposes us to the respective Duties of our
Relations; of all that Contempt and Selfishness which renders us averse to the
proper Duty of Superiors, and of all that Self-Conceit and Impatience of
Command which indisposes us to the duty of Inferiors. And our Wills being once
wrought into an easy pliableness either to Submission or Condescension, we are
in a forward Preparation of Mind to live under the Government of of Heaven,
where doubtless under God the supreme Lord and Sovereign, there are numberless
Degrees of Superiority and Inferiority. For so some are said to reap sparingly
and some abundantly, some to be Rulers of five Cities, and some of ten, some to
be the least, and some the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven; all which
implies, that in that blessed State, there is a great Variety of Degrees of
Glory and Advancement. And indeed it cannot be otherwise in the Nature of the
thing; for our Happiness consisting in the Perfection of our Natures, the more
or less perfect we are, the more or less happy we must necessarily be; for
every farther Degree of Goodness we attain to, is a widening and enlargement of
our Souls for farther Degrees of Glory and Beatitude. And accordingly when we
arrive at Heaven which is the Element of Beatitude, we shall all be filled
according to the Content and Measure of our Capacities, and drink in more or
less of its Rivers of Pleasure, as we are more or less enlarged to contain
them. So that according as we do more and more improve our selves in true
Goodness, we do naturally make more and more Room in our Souls for Heaven,
which does always fill the Vessels of Glory of all sizes, and pour in happiness
upon them till they all overflow and can contain no more. Since therefore they
are all of them entirely resigned to, and guided by right Reason, there is no
doubt but in these their different Degrees of Glory and Dignity, they mutually
behave themselves toward one another, as is most fit and becoming; and that
since under God the Head and King of their Society, there is from the highest
to the lowest a most exact and regular Subordination of Members, they do every
one perform their Parts and Duties toward every one, in all those different
Stations of Glory they are placed in, and consequently do submit and condescend
to each other, according as they are of a superior or inferior Class and
Order. So that if when we go from hence into the other world, we carry along
with us a submissive and condescending Frame of Spirit, we shall be trained up,
and predisposed to live under the blessed Hierarchy of Heaven; to yield a
cheerful Conformity to the Laws and Customs of it; and to render all the
Honors to those above, and all the Condescensions to those beneath us in
Glory, which the Statutes of that Heavenly Regiment do require; in doing
whereof we shall all of us enjoy a most unspeakable Content, and Felicity. For
though in the Kingdom of Heaven, as well as the Kingdoms of the Earth, there
are numberless Degrees of Advancement, and Dignity, and one Star there, as well
as here, differs from another Star in Glory; yet so freely, and cheerfully do
they all condescend and submit to each other, in these their respective
differences of Rank and Station, that in the widest Distances of their State,
and Degrees of Glory, they all maintain the dearest Intimacies and
Familiarities with each other; and neither those that are Superior are either
envied for their Height, or contemned for their Familiarity, nor those that are
Inferior despised for their Meanness, or oppressed for their Weakness. For in
that blessed State, every one being best pleased with what best becomes him, it
is every ones Joy to behave himself toward every one as best becomes the Rank
and Degree he is placed in; and those that are above, do glory in condescending
to those that are below them, and those that are below, do triumph in
submitting to those that are above them; and thus in all those Differences of
Glory and Dignity between them, they alternately reverence their Superiors,
and condescend to their Inferiors, with the same unforced Freedom and
Alacrity, and so do eternally converse with one another (notwithstanding all
their Distances) with the greatest Freedom, and most endearing Familiarity.

AND thus I have endeavored to give you an account of the first sort of Means,
by which Heaven the great End of a Christian is to be obtained; viz. the
proximate and immediate ones, which comprehend the Practice of all those
Virtues, which as Rational Creatures related to God and one another we stand
eternally obliged to; and showed how they are all of them essential Parts of
the Christian Life, and how Heaven it self consists in the Perfection of them.

SO that upon the whole, the best Definition I can give of the State of Heaven
is this, That it is the everlasting, perfect Exercise of all those Humane,
Divine, and Social Virtues, which as Rational Animals, related to God, and all
his Rational Creation, we are indispensably and everlastingly obliged to. And
therefore since the only natural way, by which we can acquire and perfect these
Virtues is Use and Practice, it hence necessarily follows, that the Practice of
them is the only direct and immediate Means, by which that Heavenly State is to
be purchased and obtained.

SECT. IV. Wherein for a Conclusion of this Chapter some Motives and
Considerations are proposed to persuade men to the Practice of these Heavenly
Virtues.
IT having been largely shown in the foregoing Sections, that the Practice of
all those Virtues which are included in the Heavenly Part of the Christian Life
tends directly toward the heavenly State, and naturally grows up into it; I
shall now briefly conclude this Argument with some Motives to persuade men to
the Practice of them. And these I shall deduce, 1. From the Suitableness of
them to our present State and Relation. 2. From the Dignity. 3. From the
Freedom. 4. From the Pleasure. 5. From the Ease, and 6. And lastly, From the
Necessity of them.


I. Therefore let us consider the Suitableness of these Virtues to our present
State and Relation. For in our Baptism, wherein we gave up our Names to Christ,
we become Denizens and Freemen of Heaven, and were received into a Covenant
that upon Performance of our Part of it actually entitled us to all its
blessed Privileges and Immunities. So that in that sacred Solemnity of our
Initiation into the Christian Covenant, we contracted a strict Alliance with
the blessed People of Heaven, and became their Brethren and Fellow-Citizens.
For so the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. ii.19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers
and forraigners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God; and the household of God consists of the whole Congregation of the Saints,
whether militant upon Earth or triumphant in Heaven. For so, Ephesians. iii.15. it is
called the whole family of heaven and earth. So that we are Confederates with
them in the same Covenant, even that by which they hold all the Joys and
Glories they are possessed of; and if we will do as they have done, that is,
perform the Conditions of it, we shall be Cohabitants with them in the same
Glory. We are adopted Children of the same Father with them, Members of the
same Family, Coheirs of the Promise of the same Glory, Brethren of the same
Confraternity and Corporation; and all the difference between them and us is
only this, that we are abroad and they at home; we are on this, and they on
the other side Jordan; we in the Acquest and they in the Possession of the
heavenly Canaan; to which we are entitled as well as they, and that by the same
Grant from the supreme Proprietor. So that by calling our selves Christians, we
do in other words call our selves Brethren, Coheirs, and Fellow-Citizens with
the blessed Inhabitants of Heaven. And what can be more suitable to such a
Profession than for us to live as they do, in the continued Practice of all
these heavenly Virtues? And what a shame will it be for us that are by
Profession their Brethren, not to copy and imitate their Behavior; that we
who are below Stairs in the same House and Family should abandon our selves to
Sensuality and Devilishness, whilst our blessed Kindred above are entertaining
themselves with those heavenly Pleasures which result from the perfect Exercise
of all heavenly Virtue; that we should be neglecting, provoking and blaspheming
God, whilst they are contemplating and admiring, loving and praising, imitating
and obeying him; that we should be cheating and defrauding, envying and
despising, maligning and embroiling one another, whilst they are conversing
together with the greatest Freedom and Integrity, with the most obliging
Respects and Condescensions, and in the strictest Unity and dearest Friendship?
What a vile Reproach are our wicked lives to the Conversation of these our
Fellow-Citizens above? For while we profess our selves their Brethren, those
who understand no better will be prone to suspect that they live as we do; and
how would such a Suspicion tempt an honest Heathen to renounce Heaven, as the
Indian King did, when he was told that the bloody Spaniards went thither; and
rather choose to go down to the darkest Hell than to a Heaven that is peopled
with such diabolical Company? So that by our wicked and unsaint-like Lives, we
take an effectual Course to bring Heaven it self into Disgrace, and to cast
such a Slander on its blessed Inhabitants, as may justly expose them to the
Scorn and Hatred of all those honest Minds that know them no otherwise than by
us their unworthy and degenerate Fellow-Citizens; and could those blessed
Spirits look down from their Thrones of Bliss, and see what a Company of
wretched Christians there are that claim Kindred with them, they would
doubtless be ashamed of the Relation, and count themselves highly dishonored
and disgraced by it, and heartily wish that we would disown our Sins or our
Baptism, and openly renounce their Alliance or more strictly imitate their
Manners. And really it is a burning Shame that we should profess our selves
Fellow-Citizens with them for no other purpose but to scandalize and reproach
them; and it were heartily to be wished even for the Credit of Heaven and of
our blessed Brethren that inhabit it, that if we will not be so generous as to
follow their Example, we would at least be so honest as to renounce their
Kindred, and not to claim a Relation to their Family merely to shame and
disgrace them.

II. CONSIDER the Honor and Dignity of the heavenly Life. For if we may
estimate Actions by the Examples from whence they are copied, as in other Cases
we are wont to do, doubtless the most noble and honorable are such as are
copied from the Lives of the glorious Inhabitants of Heaven. For besides that
sublime Rank of Dignity whereunto they are advanced, as being the Courtiers and
immediate Attendants of the Almighty Sovereign of Heaven and Earth; a Dignity
which by how much more it excells that of the greatest Potentate of this world,
by so much more it authorizes the Examples of those that wear it; besides this
I say, their Examples being the most perfect Copies and Imitations of the Life
of God, are thereby rendered not only more eminent and glorious, but also more
obliging and authoritative. For by following them, we follow God, who is the
Standard of all rational Perfection, and who by being the first and best in the
whole kind of Rational Entities, is the supreme Rule and Measure of them all.
So that in imitating the blessed People above, we imitate those who in their
Place and Station do live at the same Rate as the great God does in his, and
regulate themselves by the same infallible Reason. We do what God himself would
do if he were in our Place; and there is no other difference between his life
and ours, but what necessarily arises out of our different States and
Relations. And what more glorious thing can we do, than to live by the Pattern
of their Lives, who live so exactly by the Pattern of God's? For the Example of
living which those blessed People set us, is the Example of God at second-hand;
it is his most rational Life transcribed, so far as it is rationally imitable,
that is, so far as it is honorable and glorious for a rational creature to
transcribe it. For in the State of finite Creatures they live in a perfect
Conformity to the same immutable Reason whereby God regulates himself in the
State of an infinite Creator. So that their Example is an Imitation in kind of
all those particular Excellencies in him, which they may and ought to imitate;
and it is an Imitation in general of that eternal Decorum with respect to
Conditions and States, which he constantly observes in all his transactions
with his Creatures. And as their Example is a perfect Copy of God's, so it is a
Copy fitted in all particulars for our Use and Imitation. For it does not only
describe to us all those particular Excellencies in him which are to be
imitated by us, but all those particular Duties to which that eternal Law of
Equity and Goodness by which he governs himself in his State requires of us in
ours; and shows not only wherein we are to imitate him in kind, but also
wherein we are to follow him in general, in doing what is most fit for us in
the State and Relation of Creatures, even as he does what is most fit for him
in the State and Relation of a God and Creator. So that the Example of those
heavenly Inhabitants is the Example of God himself, exactly fitted and
attempered to the State and Condition of Creatures. For just as they live, the
All-wise and All-good God himself would live, if he were in their State and
Relation. Wherefore by imitating their heavenly Lives and Manners, we do our
selves the greatest Right, and do most effectually consult the Glory and Honor
of our own Natures. For whilst we tread in theirs, we tread in the Footsteps of
God, and have his glorious Example to warrant and justify our Actions; we
behave our selves as it becomes the Children of the King of Heaven, and so far
as it consists with the condition of Creatures, we live like so many Gods in
the world; which is doubtless the utmost height of Honor and Glory that any
rational Ambition can aspire to. So that methinks had we any spark of true
Gallantry and Bravery of Mind in us, we should despise all other kinds of Life
but this, and pity those gilded Bubbles that have nothing to boast of but their
fine Clothes and great Estates and empty Titles of Honor; we should look upon
all other Dignities as the trifling Play-games of Children in comparison of
this, of living like the great Nobility of Heaven, that do all live by the
pattern of the Life of God.

III. CONSIDER the great Freedom and Liberty of a heavenly Life. So long as we
live earthy and sensual Lives, our freeborn Souls are imprisoned in Sense, and
all their Motions are circumscribed and bounded within the narrow Sphere of
sensitive Goods and Enjoyments. So that when we would follow our Reason, and do
as that prescribes and dictates, we find our selves miserably hampered and
entangled; the Lusts of our Flesh do hang like gyves so heavily upon us, that
when ever our Reason and Conscience call we cannot move with any Freedom, but
are fain to labor at every Step, and after a few faint Essays are utterly
tired under the weight of our reluctant Inclinations. So that the good which
many times we would we do not, the law in our Minds being counter-voted by the
law in our Members. Our reason and conscience tell us that we ought to love God
above all, to adore and worship him and surrender up our selves to his Command
and Disposal; and we are many times strongly inclined to follow its Dictates
and Directions; but alas when we come to put them in Execution, we find so many
pull-backs within us, ^o many strong and stubborn Aversions to our good
Inclinations, that we have not the power to do as we would, or to dispose of
our selves according to our own most reasoable Desires, but like miserable
Slaves that are chained to the Oar, we are fain to row on whithersoever our
imperious Lusts do command us, though we plainly see we are running on a Rock
and invading our own destruction. And as we are not free in this ill State of
life to follow our Reason, so neither are we free to follow our Lusts. For as
when we would follow our Reason, our Lusts cling about and entangle us, so when
we would follow our Lusts our Reason clogs and restrains us; and by objecting
to us the Indecency and Danger, the infinite Turpitude and Hazard of our sinful
Courses, lays so many Rubs in our way that we cannot sin with any Freedom, but
whithersoever we go we walk like Prisoners with the Shackles of Shame and Fear
on our heels. So that which way soever we turn our selves, we find that our
Power to dispose of our selves is under a great Restraint and Confinement, and
we can neither get leave of our Lusts to follow our Reason, nor of our Reason
to follow our Lusts. For when we attempt the latter, our Reason curbs us with
Shame and Fear; and when we endeavor the former, our Appetite bridles us with
Dislike and Aversation. In this extremity therefore what is to be done that we
may be free? Why the case is plain, we must resolve to conquer either our
Reason or our Lusts: if we conquer our Reason, (which we shall find by far the
harder Task of the two) we shall acquire the Freedom of Devils and Brutes, the
Freedom to do Mischief and wallow in the mire without Shame or Remorse; but if
we conquer our Lusts, we acquire the Freedom of Men, yea of Saints and of
Angels; the freedom to act reasonably without Reluctance or Aversation; and
this being much more easily to be acquired than the former, I dare appeal to
any man's Reason which of the two is in it self most eligible. If therefore we
would vindicate our rational Freedom, we must resolve to shake off those
slavish Fetters, our brutish and our devilish Appetites, that do so perpetually
turmoil and incumber us in all our virtuous Attempts and rational Operations;
we must tie up our selves from executing their Commands and serving their
wicked Wills and Pleasures, and heartily resolve to act as it becomes us in the
Capacity of rational Creatures related to God and one another. And then though
at first we must expect to find our selves confined and straightened by our
vicious Aversations, we shall be immediately released from all that Shame and
Fear which did so continually curb us in the carreer of our Wickedness; and
even our vicious Aversation (if we courageously persist in our good Resolution)
will grow weaker and weaker, and be every day less and less combersome to us,
till it is totally extinguished. And then we shall feel our selves entirely
restored into our own Power, and be able without Check or Control to dispose
of our selves and all our Motions according as it shall seem to us most fit and
reasonable; then we shall act with the greatest Vigor and Freedom, having no
counter-striving Principles to restrain or retard us, no vicious Aversations on
the one side, or guilty Shame or Fear on the other to counterpoize us in our
rational Motions; then we shall move without Check or Confinement in a large
and noble Sphere, for we shall be pleased with what is fit and wise and good
without any Reserve or Exception, and we shall do what we please without any
Let or Hindrance. So that by engaging our selves in the heavenly Life, we enter
into a state of glorious Liberty, and if we constantly persist in it and do
still prevalently list to live as becomes us, we shall be more and more free to
live as we list, till at last we are arrived into a perfect Liberty, wherein we
shall live without Restraint or Control, without check of Conscience, or
reluctance of Inclination, which are the two main Bars that confine and
straiten men in their Operations. If therefore we would ever be free, let us
immediately come off from our vicious Courses to the Practice of this divine
and heavenly Life, wherein by degrees if we courageously hold on we shall wear
off those Shackles that do so miserably hamper and entangle us; and then we
shall be entirely free to do whatsoever our reason dictates to us; then we
shall run the ways of Gods commandments, and like our blessed Brethren above be
all Life and Spirit and Wing in the discharge of our Duty to him.

IV. CONSIDER the Pleasure of this heavenly Life. It Is true there is a sort of
Pleasure that results from all the Acts of a sensual and earthly Conversation;
but we find by Experience, that though in the pursuit it strangely allures and
inchants us, yet in the Fruition it always disappoints our Expectation, and
scarce performs in the Enjoyment one half of what it promised to our Hope; and
at the best it is but a present and transient Satisfaction of our brutish Sense,
a Satisfaction that dims the Light, sullies the Beauty, impairs the Vigor, and
restrains the Activity of the Mind; diverting it from better Operations, and
indisposing it to the fruition of purer Delights; leaving no comfortable
Relish or gladsome Memory behind it, but oftentimes going out in a stink, and
determining in Bitterness, Regret and Disgrace. But in each act of this divine
and celestial Life, there is something of the Pleasure of Heaven, something of
those divine Refreshments and Consolations upon which the good People of Heaven
do live. For the greatest part of their Heaven springs from within their own
Bosoms, even from the Conformity of their Souls to the heavenly State and the
sprightful outgoings of their Minds and Affections toward the heavenly
Objects; from their contemplating and loving, their praising and adoring the
most high God, from their Imitation of his Perfections, their Subjection to his
Will, and Dependence on his Veracity; all which Acts, as I have already showed,
have the most ravishing Pleasures appendant to them, and are so necessary to
the Felicity of rational Creatures, that the Wit of Man cannot fancy a rational
Heaven without them. For the heaven of a rational Creature consisting in the
most intense and vigorous Exercise of its rational Faculties about the most
suitable and convenient Objects, what Object can be more convenient to such
Faculties than that Almighty Sovereign of Beings, whose Power is the Spring of
all Truth, and whose Nature is the Pattern of all Goodness. So that without a
perfect Union of our Minds and Wills and Affections with God, there can be no
possible Idea of a perfect Heaven of rational Pleasures, but in this blessed
Union lies the very Soul and Quintessence of Heaven. Since therefore in every
Act of every Virtue of the divine Life, there is at least an imperfect Union of
the Soul with God, it necessarily follows that there must be some degree of the
Pleasure of Heaven in every one. So that if we do not experience much greater
Joy and Delight in the Acts of this divine Life, than ever we did in the
highest Epicurisms and Sensualities, it is not because there are not much
greater in them, but because we never exerted them with that Sprightliness and
Vigor as we do our sensual Appetites and Perceptions; because we are clogged
in the Exercise of them either by false Principles, or bodily Indispositions,
or sinful Aversations. But if we would take the pains to inure and accustom our
selves to these heavenly Acts, we should find by degrees they would grow
natural and easy to us; and our Souls would be so habituated, contempered and
disposed to them that we should upon all Occasions exert them with great Fredom
and Enlargement. And then we should begin to feel and relish the Pleasure of
them; then we should perceive a Heaven of Delights springing up from within us
and unfolding it self in each beatifical Act of our heavenly Conversation; then
we should find our selves under the central force of Heaven most sweetly drawn
along and attracted thither by the powerful Magnetism of its Joys and
Pleasures; and in every act of our celestial Behavior we should have some
Foretast of the celestial Happiness. So that now we shall no longer need
external Arguments to convince us of the Truth and Reality of that blessed
State; for we shall feel it within our selves, and be able to penetrate into
its blessed Mysteries by the light of an infallible Experience. Now we shall
have no Occasion to search the Records of Heaven to assure our selves of our
Interest in it; for by a most sensible Earnest of Heaven within us, we shall be
as fully satisfied of our Title to it, as if one of the winged Messengers of
Heaven should come down from thence and tell us that he saw our Names enrolled
in the Book of Life. And with this sweet Experience of Heaven within us we
shall go on to Heaven with unspeakable Triumph and Alacrity, being tolled all
along from step to step with the alluring Relishes of its Joys and Pleasures;
and in every vigorous Exercise of every Virtue of the Heavenly Life, we shall
have such lively tastes and sensations of Heaven, as will continually excite us
to exercise them still more vigorously; and still the more vigorously we exert
them the more of Heaven we shall taste in them; and so the Vigor of our Virtue
shall increase the Pleasure of it and the Pleasure of it shall increase its
Vigor, till both are perfected and grown up into the blessed State of Heaven.
Wherefore as we do love Pleasure, which is the great Invitation to Action, let
us be persuaded once for all to make a through Experiment of the heavenly Life;
and if upon a sufficient Trial you do not find it the most pleasant kind of
Life that ever you led, if you do not experience a far more noble Satisfaction
in it than ever you did in all your studied and artificial Luxuries, I give you
leave to brand me for an Impostor.

V. CONSIDER the great Repose and Ease of a Heavenly Life and Conversation. In
every sensual and devilish Course of Life, we find by Experience there is a
great deal of Uneasiness and Disquiet. For the Mind is disturbed, the
Conscience galled, the Affections divided into opposite Factions, and the whole
Soul in a most diseased and restless Posture. And indeed it is no Wonder it
should be so, since it is in an unnatural State and Condition. For whilst it is
in any unreasonable Course of Action, the very Frame and Constitution of it, as
it is a rational Being, suffers an unnatural Violence, and is all unjointed and
disordered. And therefore as a Body when its Bones are out, is never at Rest
till they are set again; so a rational Soul when its Faculties and Powers are
dislocated and put out of their natural, i. e. rational Course of Action, is
continually restless and disturbed, and always tossing to and fro, shifting
from one Posture to another, turning it self from this to the other Object and
Enjoyment, but finding no ease or satisfaction in any till it is restored again
to its own rational Course of Motion, and that is to act and move toward God,
for whom it was made, and in whom alone it can be happy. And if its Reason were
not strangely dozed and stupefied with Sense and sensitive Pleasure, it would
doubtless be a thousand times more restless and dissatisfied in this its
preternatural State than it is; it would feel much more Distraction of Mind,
Anguish of Conscience, and Tumult of Affections than it is now capable of,
amidst the numerous Enjoyments and Diversions of this World. For as a musical
Instrument, were it a living thing, would doubtless be sensible of Harmony as
its proper State (as a great Author of our own ingeniously discourses) and
abhor Discord and Dissonancy as a thing preternatural to it; even so were our
Reason but alive and awake within us, our Souls which according to their
natural Frame were made Unison with God, would be exquisitely sensible of those
divine Virtues wherein its Consonancy consists, as of that which is its proper
State and native Complexion; and complain as sadly of the vicious Distempers
of its Faculties, as the Body does of Wounds and Diseases; 'twould be perfectly
sick of every unreasonable Motion, and never be able to rest till its
disjointed Faculties were rectified, and all its disordered Strings set in tune
again. Which being once effected (as it will quickly be in a continued Course
of heavenly Action) we shall presently find our Souls disburthened of all those
malignant Humors that do so perpetually disease, disquet and disturb us. For
by relying upon God, we shall totally quit and discharge our selves of all
those restless Cares and Anxieties which circle and prick us like a Crown of
Thorns; by our hearty Submission to his heavenly Will, we shall ease our
Consciences of all that Horror, Rage and Anguish which proceeds from the
invenomed Stings of our Guilt; by loving, admiring and adoring him, our
Affections will be cured of all that Inconsistence and Inordinacy that render
them so tumultuous and disquieting. And these things being once accomplished,
the sick and restless Soul will presently find it self in perfect Health and
Ease. For now all her jarring Faculties being tuned to the musical Laws of
Reason, there will be a perfect Harmony in her Nature, and she will have no
disquieting Principle within her; nothing but calm and gentle Thoughts, soft
and sweet Reflections, tame and manageable Affections, nothing but what
abundantly contributes to her Repose and Satisfaction. So that do but imagine
what an Ease the Body enjoys when after a lingering Sickness it recovers a
sound Constitution and feels a lively Vigor possessing every Part, and
actuating the Whole; such and much more is the Ease and Quiet of the Soul, when
by the diligent Practice of the heavenly Life it feels it self recovered from
the languishing Sickness of a sensual and devilish Nature. Now she is no more
tossed and agitated in a stormy sea of restless Thoughts and guilty
Reflections, no more scorched with Impatience, or drowned with Grief, or shook
with Fear, or bloated with Pride or Ambition, but all her Affections are
resigned to the blessed Empire of a spiritual Mind, and clothed in the Livery
of her Reason. Now all the War and Contest between the Law in her Members and
the Law in her Mind is ended in a glorious Victory and happy Peace; and those
divided Streams her Will and Conscience, her Passions and her Reason are united
in one Channel and flow toward one and the same Ocean. And being thus jointed
and knit together by the Ties and Ligaments of Virtue, the Soul is perfectly
well and easy, and enjoys a most sweet Repose within it self. Wherefore as you
value your own Rest and Ease, and would not be endlesly turmoiled and
disquieted, be persuaded heartily to engage your selves in the Course of a
heavenly Conversation; and then though at first you must expect to find some
Difficulty in it by reason of its Contrariety to your corrupt Natures, yet if
you vigorously persist in it, you will find the Difficulty will soon wear off,
and then 'twill be all Ease and Pleasure. For when our Nature is depraved
either by Sensuality or Devilishness, it is like a Bone out of joint, full of
Pain while it is out, and much more painful while it is setting, but as soon as
that is done, it is immediately well and easy.

VI. AND lastly, Consider the absolute Necessity of this heavenly Life and
Conversation. For besides that God exacts it of us as an indispensable
Condition of our Happiness, and has assured us that if we live after the flesh
we shall die, and that without holiness we shall never see the Lord, besides
this, I say, an heavenly Conversation is in the Nature of the thing necessary
to qualify us for Heaven, or, as the Apostle expresses it, to make us meet to
be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. For Happiness being a
relative thing, implies in the very Nature of it a mutual Correspondence
between the Objects which felicitate and the Faculties which are felicitated by
them; and be the Objects never so good in themselves, never so pregnant with
Pleasure and Bliss, yet if they do not agree with the Faculties whereunto they
are objected, instead of blessing, they will but afflict and torment them; and
if a man were placed in the midst of Heaven among all the ravishing Fruitions
with which that blessed place abounds, yet unless his Mind and Temper did suit
and agree with them, they would be so many Miseries and Vexations to him, and
he would be afflicted even in Abraham's Bosom, and grope for Heaven in the
midst of Paradise. So that supposing that God were so unreasonably fond of the
Happiness of wicked Souls, as to prefer it before the Honor of his Government
and the Purity of his Nature and the Sanction of his Laws, yet still there is
an invincible Obstacle behind that must render their future Felicity
impossible; and that is, that it cannot be without a plain Contradiction to the
Nature of things, the Temper of wicked Souls being wholly repugnant to all the
Felicities of the other World. So that if they were all set before them, they
would not be able to enjoy them, but must be forced to pine and famish amidst
all that plenty of Delights, there being no viand in all that heavenly
Entertainment that they would relish any Sweetness in. And therefore if God
should so far pardon them, as not to punish them himself by any immediate
stroke of Vengeance, that would be the utmost Favor that his Omnipotent
Goodness could do for them whilst they continued in their Sins; which,
notwithstanding such a Pardon, would for ever continue them extremely
miserable. And what great matter does a Pardon signify to a Malefactor that is
dying of the Stone or Strangury? he could but have died though he had not been
pardoned, and die he must though he be. And just as little almost would it
signify to a depraved Soul to be pardoned and absolved by God, whilst it has
a Disease within that preys upon its Vitals, and hastens it on to a certain
Ruin. For it could have been but miserable in the future Life if it had not
been pardoned, and miserable it must be, if it continue wicked, whether it be
pardoned or no. For it is not so much the Place as the State that makes either
Heaven or Hell; and the State of Heaven and Hell consists in perfect Holiness
and Wickedness; and proportionably as we do improve in either of these, so we
do approach toward the one State or the other. For as Heaven is the center of
all that is virtuous, pure and holy, and all that is good tends thither by a
natural Sympathy; so Hell is the center of all Impiety and Wickedness, and all
that is bad does naturally press and sink down thither, as toward its proper
Place and Element; and should not the divine Vengeance concern it self to
exclude wicked Souls out of Heaven, yet their own Wickedness would do it. For
that is a Place of such inaccessible Light and Purity, that no Impurity or
Wickedness can approach it, but must of necessity be beaten off with the
dreadful lightnings of its Glory, and tumbled headlong down as often as it essays
to climb up thither; as on the other hand, should not God by an immediate
Vengeance precipitate wicked Souls into Hell, yet their own Wickedness by the
mighty weight of its own Nature, would inevitably press and sink them down into
that miserable Condition. What egregious Nonsense therefore is it, for wicked
men to talk of going to Heaven? Alas! poor Creatures what would you do there?
There are no wanton Amors among those heavenly Lovers; no Rivers of Wine among
their Rivers of Pleasure to gratify your unbounded Sensuality; no Parasites to
flatter your lofty Pride; no Miseries to feed your meagre Envy; no Mischiefs to
tickle your devilish Revenge; nothing but chaste and divine, pure and spiritual
Enjoyments, such as your brutish and devilish Appetites will eternally loath
and nauseate. Wherefore if we mean to go to Heaven, and to be happy there, we
must now endeavor to dispose and attemper our Minds to it; which is no other
way to be done, but by leading a heavenly Life and Conversation; which by
degrees will habituate and naturalize our Souls to the heavenly Virtues, and so
work and inlay them into the Frame and Temper of our Minds, that 'twill be our
greatest Pleasure to be exerting and exercising them. And then our Souls will
be dressed and made ready for Heaven, and when we go from hence to take
Possession of its Joys, they will be all so agreeable to our prepared
Appetites, that we shall presently fall to and feed upon them with infinite
Gust and Relish. But till by living a heavenly Life we have disposed our selves
for Heaven, we are utterly incapable of enjoying it. So that now things are
reduced to this Issue, that either our Sins or our Souls must die, and we must
necessarily shake hands either with Heaven or our Lusts. And therefore unless
we value eternal Happiness so little as to exchange it for the sordid and
trifling Pleasures of Sin, and unless we love our Sins so well as to ransom
them with the blood of our Immortal Souls, it concerns us speedily to engage
our selves in this heavenly Life and Conversation. For this is an eternal and
immutable Law, that if we will be wicked, we must be miserable.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the militant or warfaring Part of the Christian Life, by
which we are to acquire and perfect the heavenly Virtues; showing how
effectually all the Duties of it conduce thereunto.
HAVING in the former Chapter given a large Account of the heavenly Part of the
Christian Life, and shown how directly and immediately the Practice of all the
Virtues that are comprehended in it tends to the heavenly State, and how
naturally they all grow into eternal Happiness; I shall in the next Place
endeavor to give some brief Account of that Part of the Christian Life which
is purely militant, and which wholly consists of those instrumental Duties, by
the Use of which we are to conquer the difficulties of those heavenly Virtues,
and to acquire and perfect them. Which Difficulties, as I showed before, Chap.
2. are the inbred Corruptions of our own Nature, together with those manifold
Temptations from without, by which they are continually provoked and excited:
and so to subdue and conquer these, as that they may neither take us off from
nor clog and indispose us in the Exercise of the heavenly Virtues, is the great
Design and Business of this warfaring Part of the Christian Life.

THAT I may therefore handle it distinctly, I shall divide it into three Parts,
and endeavor with as much Brevity as I can; First, To explain the Duties of
each Part, and to show how they all conduce to our conquering the Difficulties
of the heavenly Virtues, and to the acquiring and perfecting them; and,
Secondly, To press the Duties of each Part with proper and suitable Arguments.

IN this part of our Christian Life therefore there is,

1. Our Beginning or Entrance into it, which is in Scripture called Repentance
from dead works.

2. Our Course and Progress in it, and this is nothing but a holy Life.

3. Our Perfecting and Consummation of it, and this is final Perseverance in
well doing. Each of which have their proper and peculiar Duties, which I shall
endeavor in this Chapter to explain and enforce.

SECT. I. Concerning those Duties that are proper to our Beginning and Entrance
into this warfaring Part of our Christian Life; showing how they all conduce to
the subduing of Sin, and acquiring the heavenly Virtues.
THIS first part of our militant Life being nothing but our Initial Repentance,
or the first turning of our Souls to God from a state of wilful Sin and
Rebellion, the Duties that are proper to it, and by which this turn of our
Souls is to be introduced and performed, may be reduced to these six Heads,

1. A hearty and firm Belief of the Truth of our Religion.

2. A due Consideration of its Motives, and a ballancing of them with the
Hardships and Difficulties we are to undergo.

3. A deep and through Conviction of our great need of a Mediator to render us
acceptable to God.

4. A hearty Sorrow, Shame and Remorse for our Sins past.

5. Earnest Prayer to God for Aid and Assistance to enable us effectually to
renounce them.

6. A serious and well weighed Resolution to forsake and abandon them for ever.

I. IT is necessary to our good Beginning of this our Christian Warfare, that
we should heartily believe the Truth and Reality of our Religion. For our
hearty Belief of the Gospel is in Scripture represented as the main and
principal Weapon by which we are to combat against the World and our own Lusts.
And hence it is called the shield of faith, and the breastplate of faith, which
are the two principal parts of Armor of Defense, denoting that an hearty
Belief of the Gospel is the principal Defense of a Christian against all the
fiery darts of Temptation; the Armor of Proof that guards our Innocence, and
renders us Invulnerable in all our spiritual Conflicts. For, above all things,
says the Apostle, take the shield of faith whereby ye shall be able to quench
the fiery darts of the wicked one, Ephesians. vi.16. And as it is the principal part
of our defensive, so it is also of our offensive Armor. For so we find all the
Victories and Triumphs of those glorious Heroes, Heb. xi. attributed to this
irresistible Weapon of their Faith. 'Twas by Faith that they despised Crowns,
confronted the Anger of Kings, and triumphed over the bitterest Torments and
Afflictions; by faith that they wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of
the sword, and out of weakness were made strong. Nay so great a share has
Faith in the Successes of our Christian Warfare, that it is called by the
Apostle, the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy vi.12. and S. John assures us, that
this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John v.4.

FOR if we firmly believe the Gospel, that will furnish us with undeniable
Answers to return to all Temptations, and enable our Faith infinitely to
out-bid the World whatsoever it should proffer us for our Innocence. For our
Belief of the Gospel carries in the one hand infinitely greater Goods, and in
the other infinitely greater Evils to allure and bind us fast to our Duty, than
any the World can propose to entice or terrify us from it. For on the one hand
it discovers to us those immortal Regions of the Blessed, which are the proper
Seat and pure Element of Happiness; where the blessed Inhabitants live in a
continued Fruition of their utmost Wishes, being every moment entertained with
fresh inravishing Scenes of Pleasure; where all their Happiness is eternal, and
all their Eternity nothing else but one continued Act of Love and Praise and
Joy and Triumph; where there are no Sighs or Tears; no Intermixtures of Sorrow
or Misery, but every Heart is full of Joy, and every Joy is a Quintessence, and
every happy Moment is crowned with some fresh and new Enjoyment. On the other
hand it sets before our eyes a most frightful and amazing Prospect of those
dismal Shades of Horror, where mighty Numbers of condemned Ghosts perpetually
wander to and fro, tormented with endless Rage and Despair; where they always
burn without consuming, always faint but never die, being forced to languish
out a long Eternity in unpitied Sighs and Groans. And after such a Prospect as
this, what poor, inconsiderable Trifles will all the Goods and Evils of this
world appear to us? But yet unless we believe the Reality of them, how great
soever they may be in themselves, they will signify no more to our Hope and
Fear (which are the Master Springs of our Action) than if they were so many
golden Dreams or liveless Scare-crows. For all Proposals of good and evil do
work upon the Minds of men proportionably as they are believed and assented to;
and as that which is not true, is not, so that which we do not believe, is to
us as if it were not. How then is it possible we should be moved by that Good
or Evil which we do not believe, and in which by consequence we cannot
apprehend our selves concerned?

WHEREFORE in our Entrance into the Christian Warfare, it is highly necessary
that we do not take up our Faith at a venture, and believe winking, without
knowing why or wherefore; but that we should, so far as we are able,
impartially examine the Evidences of our Religion, and search into the Grounds
of its Credibility, that so we may be able to give some Reason to our selves
and others of the Hope that is in us. For which End it will be needful that we
should read, and impartially consider, some of the Apologies for the Christian
Religion; of which we have sundry excellent ones in our own Language Dr.
Stillingfleets Origines. Dr. Patricks Translation of Grotius. Sir Charles
Wolsely.
; and if we will but take the pains to instruct our selves in the plain and
easy Evidences of Christianity, we shall quickly see abundant cause to assent
to it; and then our Faith being founded on a firm Basis of Reason will be able
to bid defiance to the World, and to out-stand the most furious Storms of
Temptation.

II. TO our good Beginning of this our Christian Warfare, it is also necessary
that we should duly consider the Motives of our Religion, and balance them
with the Hardships and Difficulties we are to undergo. For thus our Savior
makes Consideration a necessary Introduction to our Christian Warfare, Luke
xiv.28. where he compares men's rushing headlong into the Difficulties of the
Christian Life without Consideration, to a man's resolving to build a Tower
without computing the Charge of it, or a Kings going to War without ever
considering beforehand whether with his Army of ten Thousand he be able to
encounter his Enemy with Twenty. By both which Comparisons he intimates to us
the unprosperous Issue of men's listing themselves under his Banner to combat
the Devil, the World and their own Lusts without ever considering beforehand
either their own Strength or their Enemies, the Arguments with which they must
fight, or the Difficulties that will trash and oppose them. So that when they
come to execute their rash Resolutions, there start up so many Difficulties in
their way which they never thought of, and against which they took no care to
fore-arm themselves, that they have not the Heart and Courage to stand before
them, but after a few faint Attempts are presently sounding a cowardly Retreat.

FOR indeed Consideration is the Life and Soul of Faith, that animates and
actuates its Principles, and elicits and draws forth all their natural Power
and Energy. And let the Truths we believe be never so weighty and momentous in
themselves, never so apt to spirit and invigorate us, yet unless we seriously
consider and apply them to our Wills and Affections, and take the pains to
extract out of them their native Vigor and Efficacy and to infuse it into our
Faculties and Powers, they will lie like so many dead Notions in our Minds, and
never impart to us the least Degree of spiritual Courage and Activity. And
accordingly our Savior attributes the ill Success of Gods Word in the Hearts
of men (which he compares to the highway, the stony and thorny Ground) either
to their not considering it at all, or to their not considering it deeply
enough, or to their not considering it long enough. Either the divine Truths
which they heard went no farther than their Ears, and so lay openly exposed
like so many loose corns upon the highway to be picked up by the Fowls of the
Air; or if it entered into their Mind and Consideration, it was so slightly and
superficially, that like corn sown in a rocky ground it had not Depth enough to
take root, to fasten and grow into their minds and digest into Principles of
Action; or if they at present received it into their deeper and more serious
Consideration, it was but for a little while, for by and by they permit their
worldly Cares and Pleasures, like Thorns, to spring up in their Thoughts and
Choke it, before it was arrived to any Maturity. But that which rendered it so
prosperous and fruitful in good and honest Hearts, was, that having heard the
word they kept it, i. e. retained it in their Thoughts and Consideration, and
so brought forth fruit with patience, Luke viii.12, 13, 14, 15. So that to the
making of a good Beginning in Religion, it is not only necessary that we should
ponder the Motives and Arguments of Religion, and balance them with the
Difficulties of it, but that we should revolve and repeat them on our minds
till we have represented to our selves with the utmost Life and Reality,
whatsoever makes for and against our Entrance into the Christian Warfare; and
upon our having weighed them over and over in the Scales of an even and
impartial Judgment, we have brought the Debate to this Result and Conclusion,
that there is infinitely more Weight in the Arguments of Religion to persuade
us to it, than in all the Difficulties of it to dishearten us from it. For
unless we enter into Religion fore-armed with the Motives, and forewarned of
the difficulties of it, we shall never be able to stand our Ground; but finding
more Opposition than we expected, and having not a sufficient Strength of
Argument to bear up against it, we shall quickly repent of our rash
Undertaking, and be forced to retreat from it with Shame and Dishonor. For
this is usually the Issue of those rash and unsettled Purposes which men make in
the heats of their Passion; when they have been warmed by some pathetick
Discourse, or startled by some great Danger, or chafed into a Displeasure
against their Sins by the sense of some very dolorous Accident whereinto they
have been betrayed by them; in these or such like Cases, its usual with men to
make hasty Resolutions of Amendment, without considering either the Matters
which they resolve upon, or the Motives which should support their Resolution;
and so finding when they come to Practice, more Difficulty in the Matter than
they were aware of, and having not sufficient Motives to carry them through it,
their Resolution flags in the Execution, and very often yields to the next
Temptation which encounters them.

NOW though I do not deny but that those Heats of Passion are good
Opportunities to begin our Religion in, and if wisely improved will very much
contribute to our Voyage heavenwards, and like a brisk Gale of Wind render it
much more expedite and easy; yet if in these Heats we resolve too soon,
without a due Consideration of all Particulars, and of the Difficulties on the
one side and the Arguments on the other, it is hardly possible that our
Resolution should ever prove a lasting Principle of Goodness. For when we
resolve inconsiderately, we resolve to do we know not what, and our Resolution
includes a thousand Particulars that we are not aware of; most of which being
repugnant to our vicious Inclinations, will when we come to practice them be
attended with such Difficulties as will easily startle our weak Resolution,
which having not a sufficient Foundation of Reason to support it, will never be
able to outstand those boisterous Storms of Temptation whereunto it will be
continually exposed. If therefore we mean our Resolution should hold out, and
commence a living Principle of Goodness, we must found it in a through
Consideration both of the Duties and Difficulties of Religion, and of the
Motives which should engage us to embrace it; we must set before our Minds all
the Sins we must part with, and all the Duties we must submit to, and fairly
represent to our selves all the Difficulties and Temptations wherewith we must
engage; and as much as in us lies render them actual and present to us, by
supposing our selves already engaged in our Spiritual Warfare and surrounded
with all the Temptations both from within and without that we can reasonably
expect will oppose themselves against us; and having thus placed our selves in
the midst of the Difficulties of Religion, we must never cease urging our
selves with the great Arguments and Motives of it, till we have thoroughly
persuaded our stubborn Wills and obtained of them an explicit Consent to every
Duty that calls for our Consent and Resolution.

III. TO our good Beginning of the Christian Warfare it is also necessary that
we be deeply and thoroughly convinced of our great need of a Mediator to make a
Propitiation for our Sins and render us acceptable to God. For it is to convince
us of this necessary Truth that the Scripture does so expressly declare that as
there is one God, so there is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy ii.5. that if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and that he is the Propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only but for the sins of the whole world; and that it is for his
name sake that our sins are forgiven, 1 John ii.1, 2, 12. that we have
redemption through his blood, Ephesians. i.7. and that without the shedding his blood
there is no remission, and that 'twas by the sacrifice of himself that Christ
put away sin, Heb. ix.22, 26. that we are accepted of God through his beloved
Son, Ephesians. i.6. that Christ is entered into heaven now to appear in the presence
of God for us, Heb. ix.24. and that there he ever lives to make intercession
for us, Heb. vii.25. that it is through him that we have access unto the Father,
Ephesians. ii.18. and by him that we have admittance to his grace and favor, Romans
v.2. The design of all which is, thoroughly to convince us of this great truth,
that by our Apostasy from God and Rebellion against him we have all rendered our
selves so very obnoxious to his Vengeance, that he would not pardon us upon any
less Atonement than the precious Blood, nor admit us into favor upon any less
Motive than the powerful Intercession of his own Son; that by the heinousness
of our Guilt we have so highly incensed the Father of Mercies against us, that
no less consideration than the Death and Advocation of the greatest and dearest
Person in the whole world will move him to admit of our Repentance and listen
to our Supplications. And certainly next to exacting the Punishment due to our
sins at our own hands, the most dreadful Severity he could have expressed was
to resolve not to remit it upon any other consideration than that of his own
Sons undergoing it in our stead; by which he has given us the greatest reason
that Heaven and Earth could afford to tremble at his Justice, even whilst we
are enclosed in the Arms of his Mercy.

THIS therefore we ought to be deeply and thoroughly convinced of, that our Sins
have set us at such a distance from God, that it is nothing but the blood of
Christ will reconcile him to us; and that though without our Repentance he will
never be reconciled to us, yet it is not for the sake of that or any thing else
we can do that he will be induced to receive us into favor, but only for the
sake of that precious Sacrifice which his eternal Son has offered up for us.
The firm Persuasion and Consideration of which will mightily overawe our
minds, and imprint upon them such ghastly and horrible Apprehensions of sin, as
will scare us from all thoughts of Compliance with it; the dreadful
demonstration which God has given us of his righteous severity against it in
the very Reason of his pardoning it, will effectually antidote us against all
our sinful Securities and Confidences: For this way of Gods pardoning us upon
the Sacrifice of his Son, guards his Mercy with such an awful Terror, as is
sufficient to dishearten the most desperate sinner from presuming upon it. For
he that dares presume to sin on upon a Mercy that cost the blood of the Son of
God, has courage enough to outface the Flames of Hell, and is not capable of
any Mercy that the great God can indulge with safety to his own Authority. For
what Mercy can be safe from that man's Abuse and Presumption, that dares abuse a
Mercy so guarded and secured as this is, by being founded upon such a dreadful
Consideration?

AND as a through Persuasion of the Necessity of Christ's Sacrifice to the
Forgiveness of our Sins will fill us with awful Apprehensions of the divine
Severity, and set before us a most dismal Prospect of the vast demerit of our
Sin, both which are necessary to engage us to a through Reformation; so a
through conviction of the Necessity of his Intercession to render our Duties,
our Prayers and Persons acceptable to God, will effectually humble and abase us
in our own eyes, which, as I shall show you by and by, is highly conducive to a
good Beginning of this our Christian Warfare. For next to banishing us from his
Presence for ever, the most effectual course God could take to abase us was to
exclude us from all immediate Intercourse with him, and not to admit of any
more Addresses or Supplications from us, but only through the hands of a
Mediator; which is a plain Demonstration how infinitely pure he is, and how
base and vile our Sins have rendered us: insomuch that he will not suffer a
sinful Creature to come near him otherwise than by a Proxy, that he will not
accept of a Service from a guilty Hand, nor listen to a Prayer from a sinful
Mouth, till it is first hallowed and presented to him by a pure and holy
Mediator. So that unless we are strangely inconsiderate, we cannot but be
touched with a deep sense of our own Vileness, when we think at what a distance
the pure and holy God keeps us; how he stands off at the Stench of our
Abominations, and notwithstanding all his Benignity toward us, will neither
hear us, nor have any thing to do with us, without the powerful Intercession of
his own Son.

AND as our Conviction of the Necessity we have of Christ's Sacrifice and
Intercession is very apt to affect us with holy Sorrow and Fear, both which are
very powerful Instruments of our Reformation; so our persuasion of the Reality
and Excellency of his Mediation is no less apt to inspire us with a mighty Hope
and Assurance of Acceptance with God if we reform and amend. For it seems that
upon propitiatory Sacrifices and interceding Spirits, guilty Minds have been
always inclined to place their Confidence of Acceptance with God. Hence it was
a Principle generally received by men of all Nations and Religions, (however it
came to pass I know not,) that for sinful men to appease the incensed Divinity
it was necessary, first, that some Life should be sacrificed to him by way of
Satisfaction for their Sins, and that the nobler it was, the more propitious it
rendered him. 2. That some high Favorite of his should be prevailed with to
intercede with him in their behalf. Whereupon understanding by universal
Tradition that there were a sort of middle Beings (whom they called Demons)
between the sovereign God and Men, they began to address to these and to bribe
them with sacred Honors to interpose with God in their Behalf. And if they
could make a shift to rely upon Sacrifices, the most precious of which were the
Lives of sinful Men; and to depend upon Intercessors of whose Interest with God
they had little or no Security; what a mighty ground of Confidence and
Assurance have we, for whom the Son of God once offered such a meritorious
Sacrifice upon Earth, and continues to make such a powerful Intercession in
Heaven? For besides that as he was a spotless and innocent Person, his
Sacrifice was wholly meritorious for guilty offenders, and besides that as he
was a Person of infinite Value and Dignity his Sacrifice was meritorious for a
World of guilty offenders; God, upon whose good Pleasure the Admission or
Refusal of it entirely depended, has openly declared his Acceptance thereof as
a Propitiation for the sins of the World, and engaged himself by a public
Grant and Charter of Mercy to indemnifie for the sake of it every sinner in the
World that will but return to him by a serious and hearty Repentance; neither
of which great things could ever be said of any other Sacrifice. And in the
virtue of this Sacrifice, as well as of his own personal Interest with his
Father, he now intercedes in our behalf; and pleading our Cause, as he does,
with the price of our Souls in his hand, even his precious Blood by which he
redeemed them, we may be sure that with that powerful Oratory he cannot fail of
succeeding in our behalf. For having purchased for us by his Blood, all those
favors which he intercedes for, he is invested with the Right and Power of
bestowing them upon us. So that now, for our greater Security, all those
Favors which God has promised us, are actually deposited in the hands of our
Mediator; and though his bare Promise is in it self as great an Assurance as
can be given us, yet it is to be considered that guilty Minds are naturally
anxious and full of unreasonable Jealousies, and consequently whilst they
looked upon God as their adverse Party, and a Party infinitely offended by
them, would have been very prone to suspect the worst, had they had nothing but
his bare Word to depend on. And therefore in Condescension to this pitiable
Infirmity of his sinful Creatures, he has not only promised them his
Acceptance and Favor upon Condition of their Return to him, but has also put
the Performance of his Promise into a third Hand, even into the Hand of a
Mediator, who by the Nature of his Office is equally concerned for both
Parties; as well that God should perform his Promise, if we performed our Duty,
as that we should perform our Duty if we received the Benefit of his Promise.
And hence, Heb. vii.22. our Mediator is called the Sponsor, or Surety of a
better Covenant. So that now we have no longer to do with God immediately as
our adverse Party, but by a Mediator, who by his Office is obliged to be on our
side as well as Gods, and to take care that neither receive the others Part of
the Covenant without performing his own. Thus as he has been sometimes pleased
in Compliance with humane Weakness to enforce his Promise with his Oath, not
that the one is in its own Nature a greater Security from God than the other,
but because with Men an Oath is more obliging than a Promise; so in great
Condescension to the unreasonable Diffidence of our guilty Minds, he has not
only promised us Pardon and Acceptance upon our Repentance, but he has also
given us a collateral Security for the Performance of it, even the Security of
a Mediator, in whose hands he has deposited whatsoever he has promised us.
Not that in it self this is a greater Security than his own bare Word and
Promise, which he cannot falsify without renouncing his Being: but because
this way of giving Security by a third Person is more accommodate to the Method
of our Covenants and Agreements with one another, and consequently more apt to
satisfy our anxious and diffident Minds.

AND thus the Conviction of our need of a Mediator, and the Persuasion of the
Reality and Excellency of his Mediation will powerfully work both on our Hope
and Fear, which are the main Springs of all our religious Endeavors; and give
us at once the most horrible Prospect of the Evil of Sin, and the most
comfortable Assurance of Pardon and Acceptance with God upon our Repentance and
Amendment; both which are absolutely necessary to our successful Entrance into
the Christian Warfare.

IV. TO our Beginning of this Holy Warfare it is also necessary that we should
be affected with a deep Sorrow and Shame and Remorse for our past Iniquities.
For this the Apostle calls sorrowing to repentance, and tells us that godly
sorrow works repentance to salvation not to be repented of, 2 Cor. vii.9, 10.
and accordingly it is recorded of St. Peter's Converts that the beginning of
their repentance was their being pricked at the heart, Acts ii.37. and even
Repentance it self is in Scripture called a broken and contrite heart, this
being the most immediate Preparation to a true Repentance or Change of mind,
Psalm. li.17. And hence the ancient Penitents are described in Scripture as
girding themselves with sackcloth and repenting in dust and ashes; in Allusion
to the ancient manner of great and solemn Mournings, which was to put on
Sackcloth, cover the Head with Ashes, and sit in the Dust. And in the primitive
and purest Ages of Christianity it is evident that the bitterest Sorrows and
Remorses were looked upon as necessary Preparations to Repentance; for the
Penitents in those days, as Tertullian and Nazianzen describes them, lay
prostrate at the Church Doors in Sackcloth and Ashes, supplicating the Prayers
of the Presbyters and Widows, hanging on the Garments and Knees of those that
entered into the Church, kissing their Footsteps and with rivers of Tears in
their eyes beseeching their Prayers to God for their Pardon. Now though we are
not under the Severities of such an Ecclesiastical Discipline, yet are we
equally obliged with those ancient Penitents to exercise it internally in our
Hearts. For sin is as bad now as it was then, and as great an evil in us, as it
was in them; and therefore ought to be lamented by us with an equal Sorrow and
Remorse. And indeed if we ever mean to wage War with it with Success, it is
necessary we should acquire beforehand a through sense and feeling of the Evil
of it; that we should chastise our souls with some degree of that bitter Sorrow
and Regret it deserves, and inflict upon our selves some part of that Hell of
infinite Horror and Anguish that is ingendring in its Womb; that so being the
more sensible of its Malignity, we may be the more enraged against it and enter
the Lists with it with the greater Resolution and Animosity. For our Sorrow and
Remorse for our Sins, if it be serious and hearty, will convert into Hatred and
Indignation against them, and that Hatred will animate us in all our Conflicts
with them, and render us more obstinate against their Terrors and Alurements.
So that when in the aftercourse of our Warfare against them, we are tempted
afresh to yield and comply with them, the Remembrance of the past Shame and
Sorrow, Remorse and Confusion we have undergone for their sakes, will render us
far more deaf and inexorable than otherwise we should be to their Solicitations.

IF therefore we would engage in this spiritual Warfare with Success, we must
be often reflecting upon our past Sins, and representing them to our selves in
all their aggravating Circumstances. And when we have surveyed them round
about, and considered them in all their natural Turpitude; Disingenuity and
Indecency, and applied them to our selves with all their appendant Stings,
shameful Effects and dismal Circumstances, so that our hearts begin to feel
them, and to smart and bleed under the dolorous Sense of them; then must we
pour them out before God in sad and mournful Confessions. For the very
Confession of our Sins before so pure and great a Being, is in it self an
effectual Means to increase our Shame and Sorrow for them; and he must have a
very hard Heart that can ingenuously and without any Reserve lay open his
crimes before the God of Heaven and Earth in all their black Aggravations,
without being stung with a sensible Regret and Confusion; especially if he
frequently repeat his Confessions as he ought to do.

V. TO our successful Beginning of this our Christian Warfare it is also
necessary that we earnestly implore the divine Aid and Assistance to enable us
to go through with it. For God knowing how unable we are of our selves to
engage in this great Enterprise with that good Conduct that is necessary to
give us any probability of Success, has promised us his own Presence and
Assistance even from the Beginning to the End of it; and if in any part of it
his Assistance be necessary, it is doubtless in the Entrance, which, as I shall
show you by and by, is by far the most difficult and hazardous. If therefore we
presume to enter upon it without supplicating God to second us with his Grace
and Assistance, we shall quickly find our selves shamefully foiled and
defeated. For though he has promised to assist us, yet it is upon Condition
that we earnestly beg and seek him; he will give his Spirit, but it is to those
that ask it, Luke xi.13. he will draw near unto us, but first we must draw near
unto him, James iv.8. and we are assured that we shall have if we ask, that we
shall find if we seek, and that it shall be opened unto us if we knock, Mat.
vii.7. And therefore we are bid to go boldly to the throne of grace that we may
obtain mercy and find grace to help us in the time of need, Heb. iv.16. and not
only to pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. v.17. but in every thing by prayer and
supplication to let our requests be made known unto God, Philip. iv.6. and if
in every thing we ought to make known our Wants to him, then much more in this
great and difficult Undertaking, in which it will be impossible for us to
succeed without his heavenly Aid and Assistance.

WHEREFORE as we hope for Victory in this our spiritual Warfare, we must
earnestly implore his Concurrence with us, and beseech him to second us in all
our weak Efforts and Endeavors. We must lay open our woeful Case before him,
and remonstrate to him that we are heartily willing to do what we are able, but
that without him we are abundantly sensible all will be in vain. We must tell
him that our Dependence is upon him, and that all our Hope of Success is in
him, and that we dare not stir one step without him; and beseech him that he
will not stand by, and see us spend our selves in ineffectual Struglings, but
that he will graciously stretch forth his helping Hand to us, and not suffer us
to miscarry for want of his necessary Assistance. Which if we do, we may assure
our selves that the merciful God, who is the Father of our Spirits, will never
abandon his own offspring whilst it cries out to him, and with pitiful and
bemoaning Looks implores his Aid and gracious Cooperation.

WHILST therefore we are thus endeavoring to prepare our selves for our
spiritual Warfare, we ought in every act of Preparation to look up to God, and
earnestly supplicate the Concurrence of his Grace and Spirit. While we are
endeavoring to believe, we must beg him to help our Unbelief, to remove all
Prejudices from our minds and present the Evidences of our Religion to our
Understandings in a clear and convincing Light. When we are setting our selves
to a serious Consideration, we must beseech him to fix our Thoughts, to suggest
to and repeat his heavenly Motives and Arguments so fast and thick upon our
Minds, that no sinful or worldly Thought may be able to crowd in to disturb or
divert our Meditations. When we are laboring to persuade our selves of our
Need, and the Reality of our Saviors Mediation, we must earnestly entreat him
to open our eyes, and convince us effectually of the horrible Danger of our
sin, and of the infallible Efficacy of that blessed Remedy. When we are
attempting to affect our selves with the bitter Sense of our past
Transgressions, we must implore him to strike in with us, and to inspire our
Minds with such piercing and powerful Convictions of the infinite Shame,
Baseness and Danger of them, as may sting our brawny Consciences to the quick,
and dissolve our frozen Souls into a sorrowful Repentance; that so when we
enter the lists and proceed to Resolution, which is the Beginning of our
spiritual Warfare, we may be armed against our Sins with such a lively Faith,
such puissant Considerations, such Horror and Animosity against them, and such
an assured Hope of being rescued from the fatal Issues and Effects of them, as
that we may be able to promise our selves a happy Success in the ensuing Course
of our Warfare against them. And having thus fitted and accoutred our selves
for this great and momentous Enterprise;

VI. WE are to enter into a serious and solemn Resolution of Amendment, of
forsaking and renouncing all our Sins and never returning to them more,
whatsoever Temptations may invite, or Difficulties encounter and oppose us.
Which Resolution is in Scripture called (...), which we translate Repentance,
but in strictness signifies a Change of Mind or of Purpose and Resolution, a
renouncing our sinful Purposes and solemnly engaging our selves in a contrary
Resolution of living soberly and righteously and godly in this present World.
So that wheresoever the Precept of Repentance is expressed by this word, the
meaning of it is, to oblige us to change the wicked Purposes of our Hearts into
a firm and serious Resolution of forsaking all ungodliness and worldly lusts
and entirely resigning up our selves to the Will and Disposal of God. And hence
it is that (...) and (...), i. e. to change our minds and convert or turn, are
in Scripture so often put together; the one denoting the inward Change of our
Resolution, the other the outward Change of our Practice pursuant to it. So
Acts iii.19. repent and be converted, and Acts xxvi.20. that they should repent
and turn to God and do works meet for repentance; that is, that they should
resolve to forsake their Sins, and submit to their Duty, and put their
Resolution into Practice. And so that other word (...), which we also render
Repentance, strictly signifies an after-care, that is pursuant unto this (...)
or Change of Resolution.

NOW this Repentance or Change of Resolution is the Initial Act of the Religion
of Sinners, whereby they resume their inward man from the Service of sin, and
submit and resign their Wills to God; whereby in Heart and Will they forsake
the Devils Colors, and list themselves Volunteers under the Banner of Christ.
And being so, it ought to be performed with so much the more Care and
Preparation. For the Beginning of all great Enterprises is the Ground and
Foundation of them; which if it be not firmly laid will be apt to sink under
the Superstructures, and to endanger their Ruin and Downfall. Now all the
foregoing Duties being necessary Preparations to a good Resolution, we ought
before we resolve, to spend a considerable portion of time in the diligent
Practice of them; and not to resolve hand over head till we are duly and
thoroughly prepared for it, till by exercising our Faith and Consideration, etc.
we have broken and tamed our perverse and obstinate Wills, and thoroughly
persuaded them to part with every Sin, and to approve of and consent to every
Duty that is comprehended in a through Resolution of Amendment. And if when we
are about to resolve, we find upon a strict Examination any secret Reserve or
Exception in our Wills, if there be any Lust which they are not thoroughly
persuaded to part with, or any Duty to which they are not fully reconciled, we
ought for that time to forbear resolving, and to go on in the Exercise of the
preparatory Duties, till we find our reluctant Wills thoroughly conquered and
persuaded by them. For if there be any leak left open in our Resolution for any
Sin to creep in at, that will be sure to insinuate in the next Storm of
temptation; and if it should not let in other Sins after it, as it is a thousand
to one but it will, 'twill by its own single Weight sink us into eternal
Perdition. Wherefore before ever we enter into the Resolution of Amendment, we
ought to be very careful that our Wills be thoroughly prepared for it; that they
be reduced to a fair Compliance with the matter we are resolving upon, and
effectually dissuaded out of all Resolution to the contrary; and when this is
done, we may cheerfully proceed to the forming of our good Resolution.

WHICH ought to be performed by us, between God and our selves, with the
greatest Seriousness and Solemnity. For now our Hearts being ready, we are to
betake our selves to our Knees, and in these or such like words to devote our
selves to God, O thou blessed Author of my Being, I am now fully convinced that
I ow my self to thee by a thousand Ties and Obligations, and am infinitely
sorry and ashamed that I have so long sequestered and withdrawn my self from
thee to serve my own base Lusts and Affections. Wherefore now in thy dread
Presence, and in that of thy holy Angels, I here entirely resign up my self
unto thee, and do resolve without any Reserve or Exception that whatsoever
Temptations I may meet with for the future, I will never wilfully withdraw or
alienate my self from thee more. From henceforth I heartily renounce all my
Sins, and particularly those that have been most dear and pleasant to me, and
do faithfully promise to continue thy true and loyal Subject as long as I
breath, and that whatsoever Invitations I may have to the contrary I will never
revoke the Resolution I now make, or any part of it. So help me O my God.

AND having thus solemnly resolved, it will be highly necessary that for the
farther Ratification of it, we should yet more solemnly repeat it in the holy
Sacrament; wherein, according to the Custom of Feasts upon Sacrifices, God and
every faithful Communicant do mutually re-oblige themselves to one another, and
upon the sacred Symbols of the Body and Blood of Jesus do ratify to each other
each others Part of that everlasting Covenant which by the Federal Rite of his
meritorious Death and Sacrifice was inviolably sealed and confirmed. So that
when we take those holy Elements into our hands, which the Priest in Gods stead
presents and offers to us, we do in effect make this solemn Dedication of our
selves to God; Here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our
souls and bodies to be a reasonable, holy and lively Sacrifice unto thee; and
here we call to witness this sacred Blood that redeemed us, and those vocal
Wounds which do now intercede for us, that from henceforth we oblige our selves
never to start from thy service what Difficulties soever we may encounter in
it, or what temptations soever we may have to forsake it. And having thus
resolved and confirmed our Resolution by the Body and Blood of our Savior, and
taken the Sacrament upon it not to depart from what we have resolved, we have
actually listed and engaged our selves in a Warfare against Sin, the World and
the Devil, upon the final Success whereof our everlasting Fate depends. And
thus you see what Duty is implied in the Beginning or Entrance of this
warfaring Part of the Life of a Christian.

SECT. II. Wherein some Motives are urged to persuade men to the Practice of
those Duties that are proper to the Beginning of the Christian Warfare.
HAVING in the former Section given a brief Account of those Duties which are
necessary to the well Beginning of our Christian Warfare, I shall now, for a
close of that Argument endeavor to press and persuade those who have not as
yet begun, to enter immediately upon it, by putting in practice these Initial
Duties of it. You who have been hitherto warring against God, and striving
against your Duty and your Happiness, be at last persuaded to make a Stand for
a while, and to listen to the voice of Reason and Religion, which do both call
aloud to you to face about, to desert the Party wherein you are engaged, and
come over to the Side of Virtue. And that I may if possible prevail, I do here
earnestly beseech you even by all that is dear and precious to you, by the Love
of God and by the Lives of your Souls, and by all your Hopes of Happiness in
the world to come, seriously to consider with me these following Motives.

1. That there is a vast Necessity of beginning this our Spiritual Warfare one
time or other.

2. That it is unspeakably most secure and advantageous for us to begin it now.

3. That the final Success of it does very much depend upon the well Beginning
of it.

4. That when once we have well begun it, the main Difficulty of it is
conquered.

I. CONSIDER the vast Necessity there is of beginning this Spiritual Warfare
one time or other. For that which is necessary for us to accomplish at last, is
necessary to be undertaken by us one time or other. Now it is as necessary for
us to oppose and vanquish the Temptations of the World and the Corruptions of
our own Nature, as it is not to go to Hell, or not to miss of Heaven. For in
this great Battle the everlasting Fate of our Souls is to be decided, and if we
come off Victors, we are made, if vanquished, we are undone to eternity. So
that in this spiritual Warfare we do not contend like the Warriors of this
World for a Triumphal Wreath that will wither upon our Brows, or for Fame and
Renown which is nothing but the Breath of a company of talking People, or for
the enlarging of our Empire over the next handful of a Turf; but we are
contending with Enemies that are pursuing us to Hell, and binding us in Chains
of everlasting Darkness. We are to fight for our Immortality, for all our hopes
of Happiness and Well-being in a never-ending Life a; nd when so much depends
upon the Success of our Conflict, and we must conquer and be crowned or die;
win the Field and Heaven or yield our selves captive to eternal Misery, I leave
you to judge whether we are not obliged under the vastest Necessity one time or
other to begin. And if we must begin one time or other, why not now as well as
hereafter? and to what purpose should we defer entering upon that Work, which we
all confess we must at last not only begin but accomplish? For to have
accomplished a necessary Work, especially when it is difficult and important,
is a great Satisfaction to the Mind; and whereas while it is yet to do, the
prospect of the pain and labor of it creates in us a great deal of Trouble and
Anxiety; when once it is done, or the main Difficulty of it is over, every
Reflection on our past pains sweetens our present Repose, and crowns it with
Joy and Triumph. And thus it is in our Entrance into the Christian Life, which
we all confess to be both necessary and difficult; and it being so, what do we
else by our delaying it, but only prolong the pain and trouble of it? And
whereas by one brave Attempt we might ease our selves and set our Souls at Rest
for ever; we languish away our life in misery, and are sick with the Fear of
our Remedy. Just like poor men that are under the torment of the Stone, they
know they must be cut or die, but out of a frightful Apprehension of their
Remedy they put it off from time to time; they promise they will endure it
rather than lose their Lives, but when they come to the Trial their Hearts
fail, and they must needs have a little longer Respit; but all the while they
endure not only the pain of their Disease, but also the Apprehensions of their
Cure, which at last they must also actually endure, or Death which is much more
terrible to them. Whereas had they been cut at first, they might have saved
themselves all that Torment and Fear of farther Torment, which they endured in
the time of their Delay. And just thus it is with those who defer their
Repentance, which had they begun at first when they fell into their sinful
Courses, their Hearts might have been at Ease a great while ago, and they might
have saved themselves all those Gripes and Twinges of Conscience, and all those
painful Apprehensions of the Smart and Difficulty of repenting at last, which
they have been forced to endure in the several periods of their Delay. But
alas, Repentance is a sad Remedy! Well, be it never so sad, you know you must
endure it or that which is a thousand times worse. Why then you will endure it,
that you are resolved upon, but fain you would have a little longer Respite. Ah
foolish Souls! why will you prolong your Misery and linger out your Lives in
Torment, when as by enduring now what you must endure at last, you might be
presently at Ease, not only from the Pain of your past Guilt, but from the Fear
of your future Repentance.

II. CONSIDER that it is unspeakably most secure and advantageous for us to
begin our Christian Warfare now. For this Life is the only time of our Trial
and Probation, the Field in which our spiritual Warfare is to be fought, and
from which we must all go off triumphing Conquerors or eternal Slaves. And alas
such a slippery and uncertain thing is this our present Existence, that there
is no one part of it we can call our own, but what is present. For all our
Futurity is in Gods Hand and Disposal, and how he will shorten or prolong it we
are not able to prognosticate. So that for ought we know the next moment may
finally determine our everlasting Fate, and the Hopes of eternity which are now
in our hands may slip through our fingers before to morrow morning, and leave
us desperate for ever. What a dreadful Venture therefore do those men run, that
delay from time to time the securing their Salvation by a timely Repentance?
When it is now in their own Power, would they but lay hold on the present
Opportunity, to secure their Victory and Crown, they rather choose to go to
cross or pile for them, and to stake them upon a Contingency that is not in
their Power to dispose of.

BUT suppose they could secure that hereafter to themselves to which they do so
venturously defer their Repentance, yet still there is another Venture of which
they can never be secure, and that is, whether when that hereafter comes, God
will not out of a just Resentment of their present Despite to, and Contempt of
his Grace withdraw it from them. Which if he should, they would be left in as
great an incapacity of repenting as if he had withdrawn their Lives from them;
it being as possible for us to repent without Life when we are dead, as without
Gods Grace while we are living. So that promising that we will repent
hereafter, we promise not only for our selves but for God too; we promise that
he shall wait our leisure and dance Attendance after us through all the tedious
Stages of our Delays and Procrastinations; that he shall tamely put up all
those Affronts and Provocations which between this and our hereafter we are
resolved to offer him, and in the end be as much at our beck, and as ready to
come in to our Assistance, when we shall think fit to call for him, as if we
had never given him the least Offense or Provocation to the contrary. For
unless we can secure our selves of this, it will be every whit as uncertain
whether we repent hereafter if we live, as whether we live to hereafter to
repent. And what a madness is it for men that have now their Lives and Souls in
their own hands, to stake and venture them upon two such contingent Issues,
that are both of them so far out of their Power and Disposal?

BUT suppose there were no Hazard in either of these, that we were as secure
both of our own Lives and Gods Grace as we are of the present Moment, yet we
can never hope to begin our Christian Warfare so advanaagiously as now. For all
the time we are deferring it, our Enemies are gathering Strength and mustering
up their Forces against us; our bad Inclinations are ripening and improving,
and our evil Habits are growing more inveterate; and so many Degrees of
Strength as these get, we lose; and so proportionably as their power to offend
us increases, ours to defend our selves against them decreases. What a madness
therefore is it for men who pretend to be resolved to engage in the Christian
Warfare, to defer it as they do from time to time, when they cannot but be
sensible, if they take any notice of themselves, how much every further Delay
improves their Lusts and impairs their Reason, how it fortifies their Enemy,
and weakens themselves. You say you are convinced of the Necessity of this
Warfare, and resolved to undertake it one time or other, though as yet you
cannot prevail with your selves to enter upon it. And why not yet? why for some
reason or other forsooth you find your selves averse to it; and do you imagine
that if you are averse to it to day, you will be less averse to it to morrow or
next day? No, fond Men, do not abuse your selves, for if you will not enter
upon it now, be assured of this you will never find your selves either so
willing to it, or so fit and able for it again as long as you live. For your
Lusts will grow every day dearer and dearer to you, and so twine and wrap
themselves by degrees about your Hearts and Affections, that you will every day
find your selves more and more unwilling to part with them; and at last they
will cling so fast, that there will be no pulling them from ye without pulling
away your Souls with them. Wherefore talk no more, I beseech you, of repenting
hereafter, but resolve once for all that you will repent now or never.

III. CONSIDER the final Success of this your spiritual Warfare does very much
depend upon your well beginning of it. By what has been said you plainly see
there is an absolute Necessity of beginning it one time or other, and that you
can never begin it so securely and advantagiously as now; but unless you begin
it well now, that is with a through Preparation of Heart, you were even as good
sit still and not begin at all. For when once you come to the Trial, to
encounter the Oppositions of a corrupt Nature, and contend with the
Difficulties of a holy Life, you will then quickly find your sappy Resolutions
sink, and like so many rotten Banks yield and give way at every springtide of
Temptation. But as the well laying the Foundations of a house secures the
Superstructures against the violences of all future Storms and foul weather, so
the first settling of your Resolution upon a firm and steadfast Basis will be a
mighty Safeguard to it against all ensuing Storms of Temptation. That
well-grounded Faith and through Consideration which induced us to it, will go
along with it and guard it through the Enemies Quarters with such invincible
Reasons as no sinful Motive will be able to disprove or cope with. That hearty
Shame and bitter Sorrow and Regret which we felt in the forming our Resolution
will animate and render it more firm and inexorable against all the
Solicitations of sin for the future. Those fervent and earnest Prayers which
preceded and accompanied it, will not only engage us to take the more care and
regard of it, but engage God also to contribute more aid and assistance to it
in all its ensuing Conflicts and Encounters. And when in the framing of our
Resolution we have taken effectual care beforehand not to resolve upon any
thing but what we have considered the difficulty of, or against any thing but
what we have felt the shame and smart of, or upon any Reason, but what we have
thoroughly pondered and do firmly believe, and together with all this have
engaged by our earnest Prayers the God of all Grace to aid and assist us, we
may with some Assurance promise our selves a blessed Issue and Success. For now
we are forewarned of, and fore-armed against all that can happen to us in our
spiritual Warfare; now there is no Difficulty can arise in our way which we did
not foresee and provide against when we first set forward to Heaven. So that if
from henceforth we do but take an honest care to watch the Motions of our
Enemy, and to keep up our own Hearts and Courage, we cannot miss of a glorious
Victory, and after that an everlasting Triumph.

BUT if we make a rash Beginning, and resolve precipitantly without observing
the abovenamed Rules and Directions, in all probability our hasty Purposes
will end in a leisurely Repentance. So that unless we intend to take a great
deal of pains in Religion to no purpose, to weave a Penelope's web, and do and
undo as long as we live, and only to dance round in an eternal Circle of
sinning and resolving against it, resolving and sinning again, without ever
making a step forward but still wheeling about to the same Point; let us now at
last resolve to begin in that prudent Method which God has prescribed us.

IV. CONSIDER that when once we have begun it well, we have conquered the main
Difficulty of this our spiritual Warfare. For though it be an easy matter to
begin ill, to resolve against our sins in a sudden Pet, or transient Heat of
Passion; yet it must be confessed that to resolve well and wisely, that is,
with that firm Belief and through Consideration of things, with that Shame and
Sorrow and those earnest Cries to Heaven for Aid and Assistance, which are
necessary to the founding of a strong and lasting Resolution, is no so easy a
matter. For in all those preparatory Exercises, we have a roving Mind, a hard
Heart, and a perverse Nature to contend with; and we shall find it a very hard
matter to call in our wandering Thoughts and unite them together into a fixed
and steady Consideration of the Evidences of the Truth of Religion, and of the
Duties and Motives and Difficulties of it. And whilst we are entertaining them
with this unwonted Argument, there are a thousand Objects with which they are
better acquainted that will be calling them away; so that without a great deal
of Violence to our selves we shall never be able to keep them together so long,
as is necessary to the forming a firm Assent to the Truth, and the passing a
true and impartial Judgment upon the Proposals of Religion. And when we have
fixed our Thoughts into a serious Consideration of the Evidences of Religion, we
shall find that our Lusts will object much more against them than our Reason;
that they will be casting mists before our Eyes and bribing and biassing our
Understanding the other way, and that thereupon 'twill be more difficult than
we are aware to convince our selves thoroughly of the truth of a Religion that
is so diametrically opposite to our vicious Inclinations. But when this is done
and we proceed to consider the Duties of Religion, and to balance the Motives
with the Difficulties of them* in order to the obtaining of our selves a full
and free Consent to them; here again we shall find our selves at a mighty
Plunge. For though the Motives to our Duty are at first View infinitely greater
and more considerable than the Difficulties of it; though it be unspeakably
more intolerable to lose the Joys of Heaven and incur the Pains of Hell than to
endure the sharpest Brunts of this spiritual Warfare; yet these being present
and sensible have a more Immediate Access to us, and consequently are apter to
move us than either of those Motives which are both of them future and
invisible. So that unless we do earnestly press and urge our selves with those
Motives, and imprint them upon our minds in the most lively and real
Characters, we shall find our selves overruled in despite of them by these
present and sensible Difficulties that are before us. But when we have
effectually convinced our selves that those Difficulties of our Duty are much
less considerable than the Motives to them, we shall find it a hard Task to
persuade our Wills into a free and explicit Consent to all the Particulars of
it. For now we shall find a strong Aversation in our Natures to sundry of those
Duties that call for our Approbation, and there will be a mighty
Counterstriving between our Reason and Inclinations. Our darling Lusts, those
bosom Orators within us, will now employ all their Rhetoric to dissuade us
from parting with them; they will clasp about our Souls, like departing Lovers,
and use all their Charms and Allurements to hold us fast and reconcile
themselves to us; and under these Circumstances, though we have all the reason
in the world on our side, we shall find it will be no such easy matter
effectually to dispose our Wills to close with so many offensive Duties, and
part with so many beloved Sins. But when this is done, which to be sure will
cost us many a violent Struggle and Contention with our selves, there are other
Difficulties to be mastered. For now we must reflect upon our past ill Life,
and expose it to our own Eyes in all its natural Horror, Turpitude and Infamy,
and never leave reproaching our selves with the Foulness and Disingenuity, the
Madness and Folly of it, till we find our hearts affected with Shame and Sorrow
for and Indignation against it. And for us that have been so long used to cokes
and flatter our selves, to paint and varnish our Deformities* and crown our
Brows with forced and undeserved Applauses; for us to condemn and upbraid our
selves, to strip our Actions of all their artificial Beauty, and set our selves
before our own Eyes in all our naked, undisguised Ugliness, and not look off
till we have looked our selves into Shame and Horror and Hatred of our selves,
will be, at first especially, a very ungrateful Employment; and yet it may be a
good while perhaps before our hard and unmalleable Hearts will yield to the
impressions of godly Sorrow and Remorse. But when this Difficulty is conquered,
our Work is not yet totally finished. For now we must come off from our selves
and all our presumptious Dependances upon our own Ability and Power, and in a
deep sense of our own most wretched Weakness and Impotency throw our selves
wholly upon God, and with earnest and importunate Outcries implore his gracious
Aid and Assistance. And let me tell ye, to men that have been all along inured
to such glorious Conceits of themselves, such mighty Confidences in their own
Abilities; that have promised themselves from time to time that at such and
such a time they would repent and amend, as if without Gods Help 'twere in
their Power to repent when they pleased; for such men as these, I say, to come
out of themselves and their own self-confidences, and wholly cast themselves
upon a foreign Help; so sensibly to feel, and ingenuously to own their own
Inability, as to fly to God, and confess themselves lost and undone without
him, is a much harder matter than we can well imagine till we come to make the
Experiment. And yet this, all this, must be done bfore we can be well prepared
to resolve upon the Christian Warfare.

THIS I have the longer insisted on, because I would deal plainly with you, and
show you the worst of things. For whether you are told of it or no, you will
find it, if ever you make the Experiment, that all your good Resolutions
without these Preparations will soon unravel in the Execution; and that after
you have resolved a thousand times over you will be just where you are, and not
one step farther in Religion. But for your Encouragement, know that when with
these necessary Preparations you have solemnized your Resolution, you have won
the main and toughest Victory in all your spiritual Warfare; a Victory by which
you have pulled down your Sin from its Throne, and broken and disarrayed its
Power and Forces; so that now you are upon the pursuit of a flying Enemy, and
if you do but diligently follow your Blow, and pursue your brave Resolution
through all Temptations to the contrary, and do not suffer your vanquished
Enemy to rally and reinforce himself against ye, you will sensibly perceive his
Strength decay; and those Lusts which seemed at first invincible, will languish
away by degrees from weak to weaker, till at last they expire into the Habits
of their contrary Virtues; and so proportionably those Virtues which through
our vicious Aversations to them seemed at first impossible, will grow on by
degrees from possible to easy, and from easy to necessary; and then the Sins
will be more impossible to us than the Virtues.

NOW what a mighty Encouragement is this to make a good Beginning of the
Christian Warfare, that in so doing we are sure to conquer the main Difficulty
of it; that when we have broke through all those Oppositions that lie in the
way to a wise and good Resolution, we are past the Frontiers of Religion, and
having gotten over those steep Alps at its Entrance shall be sure to find the
Region round about a plain and an easy Champain, in which the further we go,
the smoother 'twill be, and so smoother and smoother till at last 'twill be all
sweet and delightful, like the flowery Walks of Paradise. Let us therefore be
persuaded, without any farther Delay, to enter immediately upon this our holy
Warfare, and by Faith and Consideration, etc. to lay the Foundations of a
religious Resolution; that so when we are actually engaged against our
spiritual Enemies we may be able to stand our ground against all Temptations,
and that having finally conquered and subdued them we may receive that Immortal
Crown which God the righteous Judge has laid up for the victorious.

AND so I have done with the First Part of our Christian Warfare, viz. our
Entrance into it.

SECT. III. Concerning the Second Part of the Christian Warfare; with a
particular Account of the Duties thereunto appertaining.
I SHALL now proceed to the Second Part of our Christian Warfare, viz. the
Course and Progress of it, which consists in holy living. For when once we have
reduced our Wills to a firm and well-grounded Resolution of entering into this
militant State, that which is next incumbent upon us is to pursue our
Resolution in the future Course of our Lives and Actions, that is, to abstain
from all Sin and endeavor to mortify our Inclination to it, and to practice
all the contrary Graces and Virtues, and endeavor to improve them to farther
and farther degrees of perfection; or as the Scripture expresses it, to cease
to do evil and to learn to do well; to strive against sin and to die to it, and
to grow in grace and perfect holiness in the fear of God. In this consists the
Course and Progress of our Christian Warfare. In order whereunto it is
indispensably necessary that we should still repeat the Practice of those
Duties by which we were first prepared to enter into it; all those means by
which our good Resolution was produced, being naturally conducive to maintain
and support it. And therefore we find that Faith and Consideration, etc. are
not enjoined as temporary Duties, that are only to be practiced in the
Beginning of our Warfare, but as means that will be always necessary for us
throughout our whole Progress to Heaven. For so we are commanded not only to
acquire a sincere Faith or Belief of the Gospel, but to continue and be
stablished in it, Col. i.2, 3. compared with Cap. ii.7. And so again we are
injoined not only to admit the proposals of Religion into our Consideration,
but to keep them there, Luke viii.15. and suffer them to dwell richly in us,
Coll. iii.16. And so for all those other preparatory Duties. For that from a
hearty Conviction of our need of Christ we should beg all Mercies of God in his
Name and for his sake, is a standing Precept of Christian Devotion, John
xvi.24. and so is also Confession of our sins to God, 1 John i.9. and Prayer
for his Grace and Assistance, Coll. iv.2. Nor is it only required that we
should once repent or change our bad Resolution for a good one, but that we
should also repeat and confirm our good Resolution; that we should stablish our
hearts, that is, keep our Wills fixed and determined to all good Intentions and
Purposes, James v.8. and stand fast in the Lord, that is, adhere to the
Profession and Practice of Christianity with a firm and constant Resolution,
Phil. iv.1. For to proceed in our Christian Warfare, is constantly to live up
to our good Resolution, which will require a continued Application of those
means by which we were first prepared and disposed to enter into it. Thus Faith
is no less necessary to enable us to perform, than it was to prepare us to make
our good Resolution; and still the more we believe our Religion, the more we
shall think our selves concerned in its proposals, and consequently the more
firmly we shall be resolved to close with and embrace them; and so still as our
Faith improves in degrees of Certainty, our Resolution will proportionably grow
stronger and stronger. Again, if it were necessary to the Birth of our
Resolution that we should first duly weigh and consider the Motives and the
Difficulties of the Duties we were resolving on, then it will be no less
necessary to the Growth and Emprovement of it that we should frequently
consider over these Motives and Difficulties again, and balance them one
against another. And at first especially, while our good Resolution is yet in
its Infancy, it will be very necessary that we should every day before we go
abroad into the World spend some portion of Time in fore-thinking of the many
Temptations that do lie in wait for us, whether in our Business or Company or
necessary Refreshments and Diversions; and fore-arming our selves against them
with the Motives and Arguments of our Religion; that so we may have our Weapons
ready when ever they shall assault us, and be always provided to resist them.
Again, if it were necessary to the forming our Resolution, that we should be
convinced of the Necessity and Reality of our Saviors Mediation, then it will
be no less necessary to the performance of it that our Hope and Fear which are
the Springs of our Action should still be excited by the glorious Assurance of
Mercy and horrid Prospect of Sin which this Conviction implies. Once more, was
it necessary to the well making of our Resolution that we should affect our
selves beforehand with a hearty Shame and Sorrow for our past Transgressions,
then will it be no less necessary for the strengthening and confirming it, that
we should ever and anon revive this our Shame and Grief, by reflecting on the
Filthiness of our past State, and the Weakness and Imperfection of our present,
and by an ingenuous Confession of both to the high and holy God; that so our
Shame and Sorrow for our Sins being digested into Anger and Displeasure, may
sharpen our Resolution and animate it more and more against them. In short, if
it be necessary to the founding of our Resolution, that we should first
earnestly implore the divine Grace and Assistance, then it will be no less
necessary for the continuance of it, that for the same purpose we should
continually apply our selves to the Throne of Grace; that we should every
Morning commit our selves to Gods Grace and Protection, and never presume to
venture among the Snares of the World without him; that we should count it as
unsafe for us to go out of our Chambers without being armed with Gods Aid, as
it is to rush naked into a Battle amongst Swords and Spears: in a word, that we
should every Morning and Evening at least, recommend our selves to God, and
beseech him to defend us against all those Terrors and Allurements which either
the Devil or our own Lusts shall propose to withdraw us from our good
Resolution. And if upon all these preparatory Exercises of our Faith,
Consideration, etc. it was at first necessary for us to enter into a solemn
Resolution, it will be no less necessary that with the same continued
Preparations we should frequently iterate and renew it; especally at first,
till the Strength of our bad Inclinations is in some measure broken and abated.
Now we should take care to go every day out of our Chambers fresh armed, as men
that expect an Enemy at the Threshold; and not to trust our weak Souls among
the Temptations of the World till we have first chained up our Inclinations
with new Vows of fidelity. So that you see the Duties of our Entrance into the
Christian Warfare are not so peculiar to to that State, but that they are also
to be practiced in the Course and Progress of it.

BUT then besides these, there are sundry others that are necessary to our
successful Progress therein. All which I shall reduce to these following Heads,

1. That we take care to arm our selves with Patience and Courage to undergo
and encounter the Trouble and Difficulty of it.

2. That we propose to our selves the most excellent Examples.

3. That we apply our selves to our Spiritual Guides for Direction.

4. That we be very curious of our Aims and Intentions.

5. That we should possess our minds with a lively Sense and awful Apprehension
of Gods Presence with, and Inspection over us.

6. That we frequently examine and review our own Actions.

7. That we be very watchful and circumspect in the Conduct and Management of
our selves.

8. That we should betake our selves to some honest Calling, and behave our
selves diligently and industriously therein.

9. That we should endeavor after a cheerful Frame of Spirit.

10. That we should maintain in our minds a constant Sense and Expectation of
Heaven.

11. That we should live in the constant use of the external Ordinances and
Institutions of our Religion.

I. TO the Course and Progress of our Christian Warfare, it is necessary that
we arm our selves with Patience and Courage to undergo and encounter the
Troubles and Difficulties of it. For so we are commanded to be strong in the
Lord, Ephesians. vi.10. and to be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy ii.1. that is, to fortify our selves with the Grace of God and the
Motives of Religion against all those Hardships and Oppositions which may rise
up against us in our March to Heaven; for we are assured beforehand that we
have need of patience that after we have done the will of God we may receive
the promise, Heb. x.36. and therefore we are bid to strengthen our selves with
all patience and long suffering with joyfulness, Coll. i.11. and to run with
patience the race that is set before us, Heb. xii.1.

FOR though it is certain that when we have well and wisely resolved, the
greatest Difficulty of our spiritual Warfare is over, yet it cannot be
dissembled that even when this is performed, and we proceed from hence to
Execution, there will, at first especially, arise such Difficulties and
Oppositions in our way as will sufficiently try our Courage and Patience. And
though if when we were forming our Resolution we considered the whole matter,
we could not but foresee great Difficulties in the Execution of it, and be very
sensible what strong Inclinations from within and Temptations from without we
were to struggle and contend with; yet alas the Difficulties of all
Undertakings are usually much less in our Foresight, than in our Sense and
Experience of them. For while they are in our Foresight we have only the
Notions and Ideas of them to encounter, and these being not so stubborn as the
things themselves are much more easily conquered by us. So that when instead of
our own easy and compliant Notions we come to contend with the Difficulties
themselves, we very often find the Face of things quite changed, and those
Difficulties which did so easily submit to our Apprehensions, do many times
make an obstinate Resistance to our Endeavors. And thus many times it is in
the matter in hand. So that when we are fore-casting the Difficulties of
Religion in our Minds, we must always allow for the Distance of them which
usually lessens their Appearance, and conclude with our selves that when we are
actually engaged with them we shall find them much more stiff and incompliant
to our Endeavors than they are now to our Thoughts; and accordingly prepare
and arm our selves against them. For when from considering we proceed to
encounter them, we must expect to find that to discourse and execute are things
of a widely different nature; and that those Difficulties which we so easily
vanquished in our Thoughts and Discourses, will when we are actually contending
with them put us to a much harder Trial of our Valor and Constancy than we
were aware of.

FOR if we should have nothing but our own bad Inclinations and the ordinary
Temptations of the World to struggle with, yet even these we shall find
sufficient to exercise our utmost Patience and Constancy. For we must not
expect that our bad Inclinations, especially after they have been pampered and
improved by a long and frequent Repetition of forbidden Enjoyments, will be
presently subdued and mortified when there are so many Temptations all around
us continually exciting and provoking them. No, you may be assured they will
struggle for their lives before they give up the Ghost, and if they are deeply
radicated, will not be torn from their Roots without a great deal of Time and
Labor. So that unless you have a great stock of Patience and Courage to endure
and out-stand their tedious Resistances to your pious Endeavors, and to deny
them those vicious satisfactions which they feed and live upon, till you have
starved them out, you will quickly be weary of contending with them, and rather
choose to yield them their Desires, than be plagued with their restless
Importunities.

BUT then besides these ordinary Difficulties of denying your sinful Desires
and Inclinations, it may be your Lot to take up the Cross too, and to follow
your Savior through a dark Lane of Sufferings and Persecutions; and then you
will need a world of Patience and Courage to undergo all that Shame and
Reproach, Loss and Pain, Fear and Suffering, through which you must fight your
way to Heaven if ever you come there. Since therefore this may happen to ye,
and is not altogether unlikely, it concerns ye as ye hope for Heaven to
fore-arm and prepare your selves against it. So that our Christian Warfare
exposing us, as it does, to so many certain and probable Difficulties, it is
not without reason that the Apostle exhorts us to be steadfast and immovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord.

II. TO the Course and Progress of our Christian Warfare it is necessary that
we propose to our selves the most excellent Examples. For Experience tells us
that good Example has a stronger Influence upon men than good Precepts or
Counsels; and the reason is plain, because he that only gives others good
Advices or Instructions does not give them that Security that he believes
himself, as he that seconds his Counsel with his own Example. For they who are
instructed do in a great measure depend upon the Judgment and Authority of
their Teachers, and therefore must have a reasonable Security that their
Teachers do believe themselves before they will be induced to believe and
comply with what they are taught; and such a Security is not to be fetched so
much from their Words as from their Actions. But when by their Examples they
transcribe their own Doctrines, it is visible they are in earnest, and that is
a probable Argument to their Disciples that their Doctrine is true. So that
good Example teaches with greater Force and Authority than good Doctrine can
do, because it more sensibly confirms what it teaches, and does at the same
time direct us what to do, and by a very popular Argument prove that we ought
to do it. Besides when the matter which the Teacher advises or enjoins is hard
and difficult, he ought for the Encouragement of those whom he teaches, to give
them a full Assurance that it is practicable; which no Argument will so
effectually do as his own Example. For when they see that he himself practices
what he teaches, that is an ocular Demonstration to them that it is practicable.
So that good Example carries in it this strong Encouragement to Goodness, that
there is nothing in it but what is possible, and that the greatest Difficulties
that attend it are such as may be conquered by Diligence and sincere Endeavor.
And as it gives us the most sensible Direction and Encouragement to Virtue, so
it also represents it to us to the greatest Advantage. For whereas Precepts and
Discourses of Virtue are only the Pictures and artificial Descriptions of it, a
virtuous Example is Virtue animated and exposed to our view in all its living
Charms and Attractions. And therefore by how much Nature exceeds Art, and the
most accomplished Beauties excel their Statues and Pictures, by so much is
Virtue in Examples more amiable and attractive than in Precepts and Discourses.
Since therefore in good Examples we see Virtue alive and in motion, exerting it
self in the most comely Actions and graceful Gestures, this must much more
effectually recommend and indear it to our Minds and Affections than the most
pressing Discourses or lively Descriptions of it.

THIS therefore is one of those great means of holy living which the Gospel
has prescribed us, viz. that we should propose to our selves the best and most
excellent Examples; that we should be followers of them who through faith and
patience inherit the promises, Heb. vi.12. and that we should be followers of
the Apostles and Leaders of the Flock of Christ, as they were of Christ
himself, 1 Cor. xi.1. But because the Examples of the best of Men have a great
many imperfections in them, and are very often intermixed either with Excesses
or Defects, and tainted with Superstition or Enthusiasm, by reason whereof they
frequently mislead those that tread too close upon the heels of them; therefore
we are more particularly directed to the Example of the great Master of our
Religion; which though it consists of an unspotted Innocence and perfect
Virtue, yet is every way accommodated to the State and Condition of humane
Nature and Conversation. For he conversed among men with a modest Virtue, and
such as was every way consistent with an ordinary Course of life. His Piety was
even and constant and unblameable, but such as fairly complied with civil
Society and a secular Conversation. It affected not high Transports, and
Raptures of Devotion, but was such as was both fit and easy for Mortals to
imitate. His Virtue consisted not in prodigious Fastings, or sour and
unpracticable Abstractions from Sense, but in a life of Justice and Temperance,
of Humility and Charity and Patience, and the like; that is, in such a life as
is not only proper, but possible for us to transcribe. So that in his glorious
Example he has transmitted to us an imitable Virtue; for he took care not to
outrun the Capacities of Men in inimitable Expressions of Sanctity and Virtue,
but so far as he could innocently, complied with our Weakness, and kept pace
with our Strength; that so he might entertain us all along with the Comforts of
his Company, and the Influence of a perpetual Guide. And as that Rule of Faith
which he has propounded to us, is fitted to our Understandings, being very
short, easy and intelligible; so, as an excellent Writer of our own has
observed, that Copy of Manners which he has set before us, is not only fitted
with Excellencies worthy, but also with Compliances possible to be imitated by
us.

AND as his Example is all imitable, so it is all throughout substantially
good. For it consisted in a modest Piety, a simple and unaffected Goodness. His
Devotions to God never affected the Stage, nor did they ever evaporate in
enthusiastic Rants, or unaccountable Raptures of Passion, but were always
secret and serious, calm and manly, animated with a seraphick Fervor, and yet
conducted with Reason and Sobriety. His Government of himself was exact and
regular, his Affections were always fixed to their proper Objects, and never
exceeded the just Limits of Reason; and his Appetites were always moderated by
his Understanding, and never transgressed the bounds of Temperance and Nature.
His Conversation among men was most innocent and candid, free and ingenuous;
neither vain nor morose, haughty nor sordid, but equally poised between all
Extremes. He was just without Partiality, humble without Affectation,
charitable and beneficent without Noise or Respect of Persons. His Zeal was
wise, temperate and substantial, such as did not spend it self in a furious
Contention for, or Opposition to things of an indifferent Nature, but it
quietly submitted to the Customs of his Country and of the Church in which he
was born and educated; and all his Invectives were against Hypocrisy and
Immorality, which were the only things to which his noble and generous Temper
could never be reconciled. In a word, his whole Religion was modest and
serious, and affected rather to be seen than to be heard, and to be than to be
seen. His Heavenly-mindedness was such as rendered him neither too sour nor too
talkative; and his Patience was always equally distant from Stupidity and
Effeminacy. For so when he endured that miserable Death of the Cross, he
suffered like a Man that was sensible of Pain, and yet very well knew how to
undergo it as became him. For as on the one hand he did not breath out his Soul
like an effeminate Epicure, in whining Complaints and wretched Lamentations; so
neither on the other hand did he give up the Ghost like a flanting Stoic in a
huffing Contempt of death, or an affected Insensibility of Pain and Misery. But
from the beginning to the end he acted his Part in that bloody Tragedy, as one
that was neither insensible of Torment, nor conquered by it. For the last words
which he breathed, which were a hearty Prayer for his Murderers, manifested his
Soul to be calm and serene under all the Agonies of his Body. Thus is his great
Example entirely composed of those excellent Virtues, that are the proper
Graces and Ornaments of humane Nature. Now though there be some Actions of our
Saviors Life which were never intended for our Imitation, viz. such wherein he
either exercised or proved and asserted his divine Authority; yet whatsoever he
did of precise Morality, and in pursuance to his own Laws, he designed and
intended for our Imitation. So that in all such matters, as his Law is to be
our Map and Rule, so his Practice is to be our Guide and President.

FOR this is the great End of our Religion, to which God has predestined us.
namely, to be conformable to the Image of his Son, Romans viii.29. and in this
consists our putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ, namely, in imitating his
Manners, and following the Garb and Fashion of his Conversation; and
accordingly our Savior tells his Disciples, John xiii.15. I have given you an
example (that is of Humility and Charity) that you should do as I have done to
you; and it is one of his great Commands that we should learn of him who was
meek and lowly of heart, with a promise that in so doing, we should find rest
unto our Souls. Mat. xi.29.

WHEREFORE if we would lead a holy Life, pursuant to our holy Resolution, we
must set holy Examples before our eyes, and especially that most holy one of
our blessed Savior. We must peruse the History of his sacred Life, and
diligently observe his Carriage and Demeanor in all those Capacities and
Circumstances wherein he was placed, and closely apply it all to our selves as
a perfect Pattern of Action. Thus and thus did my Savior, Sic ille manus sic
ora -- so he demeaned himself when he was in my Circumstances, after this
manner he acted and thus he suffered; and can I follow a more glorious Example,
nay would it not be a burning Shame for me not to imitate his Manners whilst I
profess my self his Disciple? Think, O my Soul, what would he have now done, if
he were in thy Condition and had thy Temptations before him. Would he have
pawned his Innocence for such a Trifle, or prostituted himself to such a base,
infamous Action, to avoid such an inconsiderable Inconvenience? No, doubtless
he would not; and art thou not ashamed to comply with such a Temptation,
knowing with what Indignation thy Savior would have rejected it? If we would
but thus inure our selves to reflect upon our Saviors Example, and apply it to
and compare it with our own Actions, we cannot imagine with what a divine
Emulation 'twould inspire us; how it would animate our Weaknesses, and shame
our Irregularities, and inamour our Souls with true Virtue and Goodness.

III. TO the Course and Progress of our Christian Warfare it is also necessary
that we should frequently apply our selves for Advice and Direction to our
spiritual Guides. For it is to be considered that men of a secular Life and
Conversation are generally so engaged in the Business and Affairs of this
World, that they very rarely acquire Skill enough in Religion to conduct
themselves safely to Heaven through all those Difficulties and Temptations that
lie in their way. For before they can be capable to guide themselves safely,
they must in all points of great moment be able to distinguish between Truth
and Falsehood, and to make a difference between good and evil, which in many
Instances do border so near upon one another, that it requires much greater
Skill and Knowledge than the Generality of men are Masters of to discern the
Point and Boundary that parts them. And supposing their Understandings to be so
well instructed as to be able to resolve them truly in all those doubtful Cases
wherein they are or may be concerned, yet still there is generally such a fault
in their Wills as renders them incompetent Judges for themselves; and that is,
that through an Excess of Self-love they are prone to be partial in their own
Concerns, and consequently, unless the Case be very plain, to vote that true
that is most for their Interest, and determine on that side they are most
inclined to. For when a man's Judgment is before in Suspense, a very small
weight of Interest on the wrong side of the Question usually turns the Scale
against the greater probability on the right. And whilst Interest fees men's
Affections, and their Affections bribe their Judgments, it will be almost
impossible for them to secure their Innocence whilst they determine all Cases
of Right and Wrong at the Tribunal of their own Reason. For when once they have
determined falsely (as many times to be sure they will) besides the many single
Miscarriages in Practice that will be consequent thereunto; by practicing on
upon their false Determinations, they will entangle themselves in such evil
Customs and Habits, as by that time they have discovered the Error of their
Judgment will render it very difficult for them to correct the error of their
Practice. And therefore to secure our selves in our Innocence and Duty, it is
mighty necessary that in all doubtful Cases we should appeal from our selves to
the Judgment of others, who having no Interest to biass them one way or
the other, will be much more impartial, and therefore (if they have but equal
Understanding) more competent Judges of our Case than our selves.

UPON both which accounts the Christian Religion has wisely separated an Order
of Men from the World to be the Guides and Conducts of Souls, to oversee and
direct the secular Flock, who upon the abovementioned accounts cannot be
supposed to be in all Cases competent Guides of themselves. For 'twas to this
purpose that our Savior before his Ascension commissioned his Disciples, Mat.
xxviii.18, 19, 20. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I am with you always, even unto the end
of the world. And that he did not intend this merely for a temporary Commission
which was to expire with the first Bishops and Propagators of the Gospel, but
designed to have it derived from their hands to all the succeeding Ages of
Christianity, is evident not only from the Promise annexed to it, that he would
be with them to the end of the world, which plainly shows that 'twas to
continue in force till then; but also from hence, that they to whom this
Commission was immediately given, did actually derive it to others, 2 Timothy i.6.
with a strict Charge that these also should successively derive it to others,
Tit. i.5.

AND as by this perpetual Commission Christ has Established a Succession of
men to be the Guides of Souls to the end of the World, so he has obliged all
Christian People to attend to and respect them as such. For he that hears
you, says he, hears me, and he that despises you despises me, and he that
despises me despises him that sent me, Luke x.16. and 1 Cor. iv.1. the
Apostle injoins all Christians to account of these spiritual Guides as of the
Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the Mysteries of God; so also 1 Thessalonians.
v.12, 13. he earnestly beseeches them, as a matter of vast importance, that
they would know them which labor among them, and are over them in the Lord,
and were to admonish them, and esteem them very highly in love for their works
sake; and Heb. xiii.17. he gives this Injunction, obey them which have the rule
over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give account, that they may do it with joy and not with grief; for that is
unprofitable for you.

THERE being therefore an Order of men that are thus sanctified and set apart
from the World, by the Commission of our Savior, to consult the various
Necessities of Souls, and administer to them in all their religious Concerns;
it would doubtless mightily contribute to their successful Progress in the
Christian Warfare, if in all their streights and difficulties men would apply
themselves to them for Counsel and Direction with such Modesty and Sincerity as
they ought to do. For besides that they might reasonably expect a greater
Blessing upon their Counsels than other men's, they being commissioned Guides
under the great Shepherd of Souls, who, we must needs suppose, will more
especially cooperate with the Means of his own Ordination, besides this I say,
they being persons that are wholly devoted to the Study and Ministries of
Religion, must needs be supposed caeteris paribus, to have a farther Insight
into the Cases of Souls, into their Dangers and Refuges, Diseases and Remedies,
and consequently to be better able to counsel and direct them than men of a
secular Life and Conversation. If therefore men would be but so kind to
themselves, as to apply themselves in all their spiritual Exigencies to a holy,
wise and well-instructed Guide; to uncover their Sores, lay open their Cases,
and reveal the Secrets of their Souls to him, so far as is necessary to enable
him to make proper Applications; it is not to be expressed what a vast
Advantage they might make of him. He would be instead of a good Genius or
Tutelar Angel to their Souls, to suggest many a good Thought to them, and feed
their Meditations with many an useful Notion; to enable them to extract from
the Articles of their Belief their just and proper Inferences, and reduce them
to practical Principles; to rectify their Wanderings, and extricate them from
their Doubts; to comfort them in their Sorrows, and quicken them in their
Indispositions; to warm their Indifferencies, and moderate their Zeal, so as
that they may neither be becalmed by the one, nor overborn by the too violent
Gusts of the other; and in a word, to direct them to the proper Methods of
mortifying their bad Inclinations and conducting their Religion so, as to
render it more easy and delightful to them. These and a great many other good
Offices a wise and well-experienced Guide would be able to do men, if they
would but take him along with them in their Journey to Heaven, and modestly
submit themselves to his Conduct and Direction. And in thus doing they would
act not only with greater Security to their Innocence, but with greater
satisfaction to their Consciences; because then their Actions would be
warranted not only by their own private Sentiments, which in many Cases they
will have just cause to suspect, but also by the better and more impartial
Judgment of an authorized Guide. For if under his Conduct they should happen in
any doubtful Instance to err from the way of Truth or Righteousness, they will
have this Satisfaction, that they have used the best Means to prevent it, the
Means to which God himself has remitted them, to whom alone they are
accountable for their Actions, and who, as they may well imagine, will very
much compassionate such Miscarriages as may follow upon their Submission to his
own Appointments. But if notwithstanding the great Care that he has taken of
their Souls, in appointing them Pilots to steer them safely to Heaven, they
will embark without them, and presume so far upon their own Skill as to venture
to their eternal Port through all those Rocks and Quicksands that lie in their
way; they must needs be in great Danger of miscarrying, which if they do; they
may thank themselves for it and can expect no Pity from God, whose careful
provision for their eternal Safety they have so ungratefully contemned and
neglected.

IV. TO our prosperous Course and Progress in the Christian Warfare it is also
necessary that, as often as we can, we should actually intend and aim at God in
the Course of our Lives and Actions. For it is of mighty Advantage to the
Conduct of a man's Life to have his Intentions united, and continually to act
with one steady Drift and Aim. Because while he intends but one thing, he
unites the whole Vigor of his Nature in the pursuit of it, and is continually
driving at it with all the Force and Activity of his Faculties. It Is an Italian
Proverb, From the man of one Business good Lord deliver me; because minding
that only, he must needs be supposed to be the more expert and sagacious in it,
and consequently the more able to exceed and overreach another man who has
only minded it by the by; but when a man acts with a multifarious Intention, he
must needs be distracted in his Operations, and the force of his Faculties
being divided by the multiplicity of his Aims must needs be so weakened that
'twill be impossible for him to pursue any one of them with Vigor and
Activity. It Is one of Pythagoras his Maxims, (...), a man ought to be one, i.
e. so far as he is able, to fix all his Aims upon one End and unite them in one
Center, and not to suffer himself to be tossed hither and thither by
independent Designs and Intentions; because this will unavoidably distract him
in his prosecutions, and so divide and weaken his Principles of Action that he
will be able to do nothing to any Purpose. God therefore being the great Object
of Religion, it is necessary in order to our progress therein, that we should,
as much as in us lies, respect and aim at him in the whole Course of our
Actions; that we should continually look up to him as to the directing Star by
which we are to steer our Motions and conduct our whole Lives under a fixed
Intention to obey his Will, and imitate his Nature.

AND indeed unless we do this, we are not good Men in the Sense and Judgment of
Religion. For Religion, as such, is a Rule of divine Worship; and under this
Notion the Christian Religion in particular enjoins all its Duties, viz. of
Homage and Worship, to God. For it requires us to do all as unto God, Col.
iii.23. and to do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. x.31. that is, to do all in
Obedience to him, and Imitation of him, from a sincere Acknowledgment of the
Perfections of his Nature, of his sovereign Authority over us, and immutable
Right to rule and command us. Not that an actual, explicit Intention of
obeying or imitating God is necessary to every good Action; for our Occasions
of doing good, being so infinite and so often occurring in our secular Affairs,
and our Minds being so incapable as they are of attending many things at once;
it is impossible for us actually to intend Obedience to God in every good thing
we perform; but that in the general we should heartily intend it is
indispensibly necessary to the consecrating our best Actions, and adopting them
into the Family of Religion. For that we must obey God, is the fundamental Law
of Religion, from whence all the particular Commands and Prohibitions of it do
receive their Force and Obligation. So that unless we do what he commands with
a general Intention of Mind to obey him, we do not act upon a religious
Obligation, and consequently though our Actions should be materially good, yet
are they not formally religious.

NOW to the fixing and settling such a general Intention in our Minds, it is
necessary that in the particular Exercises of our Religion we should; so far as
we are able, actually intend and aim at God; that we should throw by all other
Ends, so far as we are able, and refer our Actions directly and immediately to
him; in a word, that we should formally devote and dedicate them to his blessed
Will and Pleasure, so as to be able to say, this and this I do purely to please
God, with a single Intention of Soul to resemble and please him, to transcribe
his Nature and comply with his Will. For which end we must take care as often as
we can to perform our religious Actions in such a manner, as that no secular
Ends may interpose between God and our Intentions; to be as private and as
modest as we can in our Religion, and not expose it any more than needs must to
the eye of the World, lest Applause and Reputation should intrude themselves
upon us, and carry away our Intention from God. For thus our Savior advises in
the Case of Charity and Prayer, Mat. vi.1, 7. that we should not do our alms
before men, to be seen of them, nor sound a trumpet before them, to make the
Streets ring of our Charity; nay, if possible, that we should not let our left
hand know what our right hand does; but that our Alms should be secret, and
known only to God and our selves; and that when we pray, we should not affect
to make a pompous show of it, in the Synagogues and corners of the streets, but
that we should enter into our closets and shut our door and in the most private
manner unbosom our Souls to God; the sense of all which is that should we
endeavor, so far as in us lies, so to circumstantiate our Charity and Devotion
as not to give any Opportunity to secular Ends and Aims to obtrude themselves
upon us, to mingle with our pious Intentions and deflower the Purity of them.

NOT that I think it unlawful for a man to intend any thing but God in the
discharge of his Duty, or that our Intention is bad when it immediately
respects any worldly End, such as Pleasure or Profit or Honor, which are
proposed by God himself as Arguments to persuade men to their Duty; and what
hurt can it be for men to aim at that in the discharge of their Duty, which God
has proposed to them as an Encouragement to it? It Is true if worldly Advantage
be the only or chief End we aim at, our Intention is naught, and so are all the
Actions thence proceeding; but if together with that we do so heartily intend
and aim to please God and conform our selves to his blessed Will and Nature, as
to continue on in the path of our Duty to him not only when we have no prospect
of outward Advantage to induce us to it, but when outward Evils and
Inconveniences lie in our way, we need not doubt but our Intention is truly
good and sincere, notwithstanding those immediate Respects which it many times
has to secular Ends and Inducements. But yet it is certain that the more it
respects these, the more imperfect it is, and the more liable to be vanquished
by outward Temptations. For it is a plain sign that it is conscious of its own
Weakness, when it dares not stand alone, but is fain to call in to it the
Assistance of these worldly Ends to support and defend it; and the less of
worldly Aim there is in our religious Intention, to be sure the more pure and
simple it is, and the more of substantial Piety there is in it; and though it
may be truly sincere notwithstanding its being compounded with secular Aims and
Respects, yet the more of these there is in it, the weaker and more instable it
must necessarily be. For, our Mind being finite, cannot possibly intend many
things with equal Strength and Vigor, as it can do one; and when its Intention
is dispersed among various Objects it must necessarily be more languid than
when it is collected, united and fixed upon one; and consequently the more a man's
Intention respects the World, the less in proportion it must respect God, and
so on the contrary. And then the less a man respects God in his Duty, and the
more he respects the World, the more liable he will be to the Temptations of
worldly Loss or Advantage. For when those Advantages which he so much respects
lie on the opposite side to his Duty, to be sure he will be so much the more
inclined to desert it; and as often as Fortune shifts sides, and carries with
it the Advantages of Pleasure, Profit or Honor, from Virtue to Vice, or from
Vice to Virtue, he will still be ready to face about with it, and be always
veering like a Weathercock to a contrary Point upon every Change of Wind.
Whereas when a man's Intention purely respects God, 'twill be immovably fixed
among all the Changes and Alterations from without. For there is no outward
Change or Capricio of Fortune can hinder a man from pleasing God, whose Love to
us depends not upon our being poor or rich, pleased or pained, depressed or
advanced, but upon our being truly virtuous and religious. And therefore if our
Aim be purely to please him, we shall be sure to continue so, which side soever
Fortune smiles upon.

WHEREFORE to our successful Progress in Religion it is highly necessary that,
so far as in us lies, we should abstract and separate our religious Intentions
from all these worldly respects; and this must be done by looking frequently up
to God, and actually referring and dedicating our Actions to him; by shutting
our eyes, when we are entering upon any Duty, to all worldly Considerations, and
determining with our selves, this I will do purely because it is Godlike, or
because God has commanded it; whether I shall be commended or disgraced for
it, whether I shall get or lose by it I will not now regard, it is sufficient
that it is good, and that God has commanded it, and therefore for this Reason
only I will do it, without any other Respect or Consideration. By which means
we shall by degrees so purify our Intentions, and refine them from worldly
Aims, that we shall be able to act vigorously in Religion without any other
Respect but that of pleasing God, and conforming our selves to his Will and
Nature. And when once we can do thus, we are in a great forwardness in
Religion. For now the Will of God has got such an Ascendant over ours, that as
we can cheerfully obey him without external Inducements, so we can freely
contemn all Inducements to the contrary; and it being our great and chief Aim
to please and be like him, the things that are without us will have very little
Power to move us one way or 'tother. Because now our great Aim is above them,
and our eyes are so steadfastly fixed upon God, that we are not at leisure to
regard them. And our Mind being thus indisposed to listen to the restless
Importunities of external Goods and Evils, our Innocence is safe, and we may
pass triumphantly through all their Temptations. It Is a noble Saying of
Epictetus, lib. 2. c. 19. (...), etc. (...), i. e. there is no other way for a
man to eject sorrow and fear and lust from his soul, but by looking up to God
alone, and resigning our selves to him only, and devoting our lives to the
Obedience of his Commandments. And elsewhere he tells his Scholars, that the
main thing which he drove at was, (...), i. e. to make them free and blessed by
persuading them to look up to God in every thing whether it be small or great,
lib. 2. c. 19. For whilst in our religious Intentions we do too much respect
the things that are without us, we do in a great measure entrust them with our
Virtue and Religion; and so far as we make them Inducements to our Duty, so far
it is in their Power to secure or betray it. As for Instance, so much as I aim
at Profit in any religious Action, so much Power Profit has over my Religion;
and if the same Profit should invite me to a wicked Action, it will have as
much Power to betray my Religion, as it had to secure it; for the same Gain
will have the same Influence on me when it tempts me to sin, as it has when it
tempts me to obey. What a dangerous thing therefore is it for men to entrust
such a treasure as their Innocence and Religion in such irresponsible hands,
and to give those outward things which are the Temptations of Vice, a power to
dispose of their Virtue? What is this but to commit the keeping of our Sheep to
a Wolf, or of our Chastity to a Goat? Wherefore as we would be safe in our
religious Progress, it highly concerns us to purify our good Intentions so far
as we are able from all worldly Respects, and to level them directly and
immediately at God. And in order hereunto,

V. To render the Course and Progress of our Christian Warfare successful, it
is also necessary that we possess our Minds, with an awful Apprehension of Gods
Presence with, and Inspection over us. Among the many excellent Rules, which
the Heathen Moralists have given for the Conduct of men's Lives, this is one,
that in the whole Course of their Lives they should imagine some excellent
person, for whom they have a great Veneration, to be present with 'um, as a
Witness and Spectator of all their Actions. And it was wholesome Advice that
one gave his lewd Friend, that he should hang the Picture of his grave and
serious Father in the Room where he was wont to celebrate his Debauches;
imagining that the severe eye of the good old Man, though but in Effigy, would
give a mighty check to the wanton Sallies of the intemperate Youth. And if the
bare Fiction of a Man's being present with us, or his being present only in a
dead Picture, may be rationally supposed to have so strong an Influence on our
Actions; of how much greater Force must our firm Belief and Sense of Gods
Presence with us be to regulate our Lives and Actions? And that he is thus
present with us we have sufficient reason to conclude, not only from the
infinite Plenitude of his Essence, which being Self-existent could not be
bounded or limited by any Cause from without, and therefore must necessarily be
boundless and immense; but also from express Assertions of Scripture, which
assures us that his eyes are in every place beholding the evil and the good,
Prove. xv.3. That he is a God at hand and not a God afar off; and that no man
can hide himself in secret places that he shall not see him; and that he fills
heaven and earth, Jer. xxiii.23, 24. and that we can go no whither from his
presence, Psalm. cxxxix.7, 8. and that all things are naked and open to his
eyes, Heb. iv.13. that is, that the World is surrounded and filled with his
Being, which is both the Womb that contains, and the Soul that pervades the
Creation; and that being thus present with us wherever we are, he must needs be
supposed to have a constant Inspection over us, and a clear Sense and
Perception of whatsoever we do.

AND he being thus present with us in Reality and not in Fiction or Picture, it
must doubtless be of mighty avail to the Well-government of our Lives; to be
continually inspired with an actual and vigorous Sense of it. And therefore our
Savior commands us to do good from a lively Sense that Gods eye is upon us,
Matt. vi.4.6. That our father who sees us in secret shall reward us openly. And
this I conceive to be the meaning of that comprehensive Precept which God gave
to Abraham, Walk before me and be thou perfect, Genesis xvii.1. i. e. behave thy
self as one that art sensible thou art always in my Presence, and under my eye,
and in the sense of this see thou be upright and sincere, and that thou do
not vainly attempt to impose upon me by any demure Shows or hypocritical
Pretenses. And the same is implied in that of the Apostle, Col. iii.22,
Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh, not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God, i. e. be
not like those Servants that do their Duty for no other end but to ingratiate
themselves with their Masters, and accordingly do it no longer than while their
Masters eye is upon them; but do you it with all Sincerity, out of an awful
respect to God, considering that when man's eye is off, his eye is upon you. The
sense of all which is, that after the example of holy David, Psalm. xvi.8. we
should endeavor to set the Lord always before us, and to possess our minds
with a quick and lively Sense of his being continually present with us,
wheresoever we are, and whatsoever we are about, and a constant Witness and
Spectator of all our Actions.

AND this we shall find will be of unspeakable Use to us in the whole Course
and Progress of our Christian Warfare. For,

1. It will mightily restrain us from all sinful Actions. For as St. Austin
observes, the greatest part of Sin is taken away if a man has but a Witness of
his Conversation; and much more if he be sensible that he has such a Witness
as God, with whom he is infinitely more concerned than with all the World
besides; who is the Judge of all his Actions, the Rewarder of Virtue, and
Punisher of Vice, the eternal Source of all those Evils or Goods that he can
fear, or hope for. And who but a man that is desperately wicked, dares do an
evil Action in the Presence and Sight of such a formidable Witness? For suppose
you beheld this Almighty Being sitting upon a Cloud in some visible Form, with
a Thunderbolt in his hand; and from thence looking down upon you, curiously
observing how you demean your selves, and closely pursuing you with his awful
eye through all your dark Retreats and Privacies; would not the thought of any
Action that is displeasing to him be ready to strike you into Trembling and
Horror? Could you imagine your selves to be any where secure in your Wickedness
while you saw your selves uncovered to his All-seeing Eyes, to which your
Closets lie as open as your Halls, and your Hearts as the Highways? Doubtless
you could not. Why now the lively Belief and Apprehension of a thing, is
equivalent to a sensible Perception. If I were thoroughly assured that the King
were listening behind the Curtain, and heard every word that is spoken in the
Room, I should doubtless be as much afraid of talking Treason against him,
though I saw him not, as if he stood just before me. And so though God be with
me in an invisible manner, and I am not able to see him through that thick
Curtain of Matter which is drawn between me and his Spiritual Essence, yet if I
firmly believe that he is behind it, and am constantly aware that he is
listening to what I say, and prying into what I do, that he keeps Intelligence
with my Thoughts, and is intimately acquainted with all my Designs and
Intentions, it will render me as cautious of my Thoughts and Words and Actions,
as if I saw him standing by me in a visible Shechinah or Glory, to record every
Passage of my Life, and enter into his Debt-books every Item of my Guilt
against the great Day of Accounts. But how much the want of such a due
Apprehension of Gods Presence with us, lets men loose to all Wickedness, may be
collected from that of the Prophet, Ezekiel. ix.9, The iniquity of the house of
Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of
perverseness, and how comes this to pass? Why, they say, the Lord has forsaken
the earth, and the Lord sees not; whereas, on the contrary, David attributes
his keeping Gods precepts and testimonies, to the lively Sense he had that his
ways were always before God, i. e. lay open to his Sight and Inspection, Psalm.
cxix.168. But then,

2. Such a lively Sense of Gods Presence with, and Inspection over us, will be
of mighty Use to keep us sincere and upright in the whole Course of our
Actions. For alas to what purpose should we dissemble and conceal our
Wickedness from the eye of the World, so long as we lie open to the eye of God?
Would you not think it very strange to see a Company of Prisoners that within a
few Hours are to be tried for their Lives, solicitously concerning themselves
how to appear lovely and innocent to one another, hiding their Deformities, and
disguizing their Crimes with artificial Pretexts and Apologies, that so they
may cheat and juggle one another into a mutual good Opinion of themselves; but
in the mean time take no notice of their Judge, who sits before them upon the
Bench, observing all their Tricks and Impostures, and holds their Lives in his
Hands, being commissionated to discharge or condemn them according as he finds
them innocent or guilty. And yet just thus do those men act whose Religion is
nothing but a vain Ostentation and Ambition of popular applause; they skrew
their Looks, study their Actions, force their Inclinations, and all to compose
themselves into an outward Semblance of Religion; they employ a world of Care
and Art to disguise themselves, and with the Colors of Sanctity to varnish
their unhallowed Natures; they openly deny themselves their dearest Pleasures,
and in the view of the world are many times forced to act against the grain of
their strongest Inclinations; and all this to mask their depraved Tempers, that
they may appear what they are not, in the view of the world, and juggle
themselves into a Saintly Reputation: but whilst they are thus industriously
courting the good Opinion of their Fellow Prisoners, their All-seeing Judge upon
whose final Sentence their everlasting Fate depends, is present with them; and,
though they take no more notice of him than if he were a cipher in the World,
is perfectly conscious to all their Artifice, and sees through all their
hypocritical Disguizes, and will ere long unmask and expose them to the View
and Scorn of all the World. And this considered, what a ridiculous Folly is
Hyprocrisie, that hides us only from those that have little or nothing to do
with us, but leaves us bare and naked to his eye with whom we are most
concerned. Alas! what a poor project is it to take so much pains, as we do, to
recommend our selves to men, to men that must stand at the same Tribunal, and
undergo the same Judgment with our selves? For what will their good Opinion
avail us, if the Judge disaprove us, in whose hands our Lives and Souls are? If
he think well of us, we are safe though all the World should condemn us; but if
he condemn us, though every Creature should acquit, they cannot rescue us from
his Sentence. But alas! how differently soever God and Men may think of us now,
yet when he comes to discover his Thoughts of us, in his public Judgment and
Sentence, all the World will be of his Mind; and if we stand right in his
Opinion, we shall be applauded by the whole Universe, howsoever we may be
vilified now; as on the contrary, if he condemn us, we shall be sure to be
hissed at throughout all the Congregation of Spirits, how gloriously soever we
may be thought of at present. And by how much the better we are esteemed of
now, by so much the more we shall be hissed at then, when the Cheat is
discovered, and the hypocritical Vizor is plucked from our Devils faces.

THIS if men duly considered, and fixed it in their Minds, would effectually
cure them of all their Hypocrisy. For alas! what Hypocrisy can so cunningly
disguise them, as to render them Incognito to Omniscience? If men will be
wicked therefore, they were even as good put on a bold Face, and be wicked
openly; for it is to very little purpose for them to sneak into Corners, unless
they could find one dark enough to conceal them from God, and cover them from
his All-seeing Eye. For why should that man be ashamed or afraid to let a Boy
or Neighbor be conscious to his Wickedness, that never scruples to commit it
in the open View of the dreadful Majesty of Heaven, by whose final Sentence his
everlasting Fate must be decided?

AND so on the other hand, to what purpose should we study to be more devout
and temperate, sober and charitable in the view of the World, than we are in
our Retirements, when we have no other Eye but God's upon us? That which we are
mainly concerned in, is to approve our selves to him, and if we can do this,
what great matter is it though our Closet be all our Stage, and Heaven our only
Spectator? God hears the softest Whispers of our Souls, and sees through all
our honest Intentions, and our most secret Virtues are as legible to his Eye as
if they were written on our Foreheads with a Sunbeam. We need no Trumpet to
proclaim our Alms in his Ears, for he knows by whom such a poor man was
relieved, such a starving family succored, though we should not superscribe
our Names upon our Charity, nor let our left hand know what our right hand has
done. And if by the sincere Discharg of our Duty we have approved our selves to
God, what need we concern our selves any farther? since it is not from Men, but
from God, that we expect the Recompense of our Obedience. No doubtless, did we
but live under the constant sense of God Presence with, and Inspection over us,
we should regard him much more in every good Action, and the good Opinion of
the World much less than we do; and the more secret our good Deeds were, the
more we should rejoice in them, because they would give us a stronger Testimony
of our Simplicity and Sincerity. For what should move us to be good when God
only sees us, but pure Respect to his Authority, and an honest Intention of
obeying him? And if Obedience be our Design, the more private our good Deeds
are, the more Pleasure they will afford us, because those good Deeds have most
of Obedience in them, that have least of the Theater.

VI. To prosper our Course and Progress in the Christian Warfare, it is also
necessary that we should frequently examine and review our own Actions. For this
our Religion injoins as a necessary Part of the militant Life of a Christian,
So 2 Cor. xiii.5, Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your
own selves; and particularly, it is injoined as a proper Preparation to the
Sacrament, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, 1 Cor. xi.28. So also
Gal. vi.4. Let a man prove, or examine, his own work, where the Greek word
(...), which in all these Texts we render to prove or examine, has two
Significations. First, to call our selves to Account, to try our past Actions
by the Rule, whether they be good or evil; Secondly, to take such a due Care of
our Actions as that upon a strict Trial of them we may be able to approve them
to God and our own Consciences. In the first of which Senses the New Testament
does most commonly understand it, namely to call our selves to Account, and
make a strict Survey of our Actions, and pass an impartial Judgment upon them,
whether they are good or evil; and accordingly, 1 Cor. xi.31. instead of (...)
in the 28th Verse, i. e. let a man examine himself, the Apostle uses as a
synonimous Phrase, (...), i. e. if we judge our selves, if we summon our past
actions before the Tribunal of our Consciences, and try and examine them by the
Rule whether they are good or evil, and according as we find them, to approve
or condemn our selves for them.

AND this is a Duty of great Necessity to the successful Prosecution of our
Christian Warfare. For unless we do frequently reflect upon our selves, and
take a strict Account of our past Actions and Behavior, we shall incur a
thousand Errors and Immoralities in the Hurry of our secular Occasions, without
taking any Notice of them; and those sins which we heedlesly commit, and never
think of afterward, though at first perhaps they may have little or no Malice
in them, do yet leave a malicious Infusion behind them, and infect the will
with bad Inclinations, and insensibly dispose it to wilful and deliberate Sins.
For the Pleasure of one bad Action will be still inviting us to another, and
that to a third, and so we shall be inconsiderately tolled on from Sin to Sin
in the course of a heedless and unreflecting Life, till, before ever we are
aware, our Inclination to the Sin which we have so heedlesly repeated, becomes
too strong for our pious Resolution. For when we have carelessly permitted one
Sin to break through our Fence, that will open a gap for another to follow, and
if this be not presently stopped by Repentance, 'twill make the Breach yet wider
for others, and those again for others, till at last they have quite trodden
down our good Resolution, and made a Through-fare in our Wills for a Custom of
sinning. But if we frequently reflect upon, and examine our selves, it is
impossible our Faults should long escape our Discovery, and we shall be sure to
see them time enough to correct and amend them before they are too deeply
rooted in our Natures, and have wound themselves too far into our Inclinations;
and a wound in our Innocence, as well as our Bodies, may be easily cured if it
be taken in time, but if it be neglected too long, it will rancle by Degrees
into an incureable Gangreen.

AND as frequent Self-Examination is a great Bridle to our Sin, so it is also
an effectual Spur to our Virtue. For as when a man reflects upon his Sins and
Miscarriages, and considers how and where he has done amiss, his Conscience
will be presently urging and exciting him to Repentance and Amendment; so when
he reflects upon his own Virtue and Sincerity, his conscience will smile upon
and crown him with Applauses, and give him such a sweet and grateful Relish of
his own Actions, as will mightily encourage him to persevere in Well-doing. For
in all our Self-examinations we taste the difference between Good and Evil, the
Sweetness of that, and the Bitterness of this, and consequently, the oftener we
do so, the more we shall be sure to like and approve of the one, and to dislike
and nauseate the other.

WHEREFORE to secure a good success to this our Christian Warfare, as it is
necessary, especially at first, that we should every Morning, before we go into
the World, repeat and enforce our good Resolution; so it is no less requisite,
especially till we have made some considerable Progress, that we should every
Night, when we are withdrawn from the World, strictly examine the performances
of the Day, whether they are such as do comport with our solemn Engagements.
And if upon an impartial Survey, it appear that they do, though as yet it be
but weakly and imperfectly, let us attend to the Sense of our own Minds, to
that silent Melody that resounds from our Consciences to our Actions, and so
lie down in Peace, blessing and adoring that Grace, by which we have been
assisted and preserved. Or if it appear that we have been unwarily faulty, for
want of due Care and Watchfulness, let us resolve to take more Care for the
future, and thereby to put a timely Stop to our Sin before it has too far
insinuated into our Will and Inclinations; but if we are conscious of any
wilful Breach upon our Morning Vows of Obedience, let us lament and bewail it
with Shame and Indignation. What have I done, O wretched Traitor that I am to
God and my own Soul! I have falsified my Vows to Heaven, and broke those Sacred
Bands by which I was tied up from my Lusts and my Ruin, What can I plead for my
self, base and unworthy that I am? with what Face can I go into his dreadful
Presence whom I have so often mocked with my treacherous Promises of Amendment?
Yet go I will, though I am all ashamed and confounded, and confess and bewail
mine Iniquity before him.

IF we would but take care thus to call our selves to Account every Night, and
impartialy to censure the Actions of the day, it is not to be imagined how fast
'twould set us forward in our Christian Warfare; how much the Reflection on a
well-spent Day would cheer and enliven us; how the grateful Sense of it would
spirit our Faculties, and encourage us to go on against all Oppositions; how
much the Review of the Sins of the Day would contribute to make our Reason more
vigilant, and our Consciences more tender for the future; how much the Pleasure
of our Sins would be allayed and abated by the stinging Reflections we should
make upon them, and how much the Dread of having the same Reflections repeated
to us at Night, would secure us against the Temptations of the Day.

VII. TO prosper the Course of our Christian Warfare, it is also necessary that
we should be very watchful and circumspect. For this also is one of those
militant Duties which the Gospel injoins us. Thus Matt. xxvi.41. Watch and pray
that ye enter not into temptation; and Mark xiii.37. What I say unto you, I say
unto all, watch: so also, 1 Cor. xvi.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith,
quit your selves like men; and 1 These. v.6. Wherefore let us not sleep, as do
others, but let us watch and be sober; where the Nature of the Duty is plainly
discovered by its Opposite or Contrary, let us not sleep, but watch, i. e. do
not behave your selves like men that are asleep, that take no Notice or Regard
of what is done by, to, or about them; but be sure you exercise a suitful,
prudent and constant Care over your own Actions and those manifold Temptations
that assault and surround you. And therefore elsewhere it is expressed by walking
circumspectly, Ephesians. v.15. i. e. looking round about you, weighing the nature
and circumstances of your Actions, and using all honest Care either to prevent
the Temptations that threaten you, or to provide against them; so that in short
the sense of this Duty is this, that we carefully avoid acting rashly and
precipitantly without considering beforehand the Nature of our Action whether
it be good or evil; that in all doubtful and suspicious Cases we impartially
consult our Rule and Conscience, and look before we leap, and take care to
satisfy our selves of the Goodness of our Designs, before we put them into
Execution; in a word, that we do not carelessly run our selves into Temptations,
but, if possible, to avoid them, if not to be sure to arm our selves against
them, and keep as far off from all sin, especially from that we are most
inclined to, as is consistent with our necessary Occasions; or, in fewer words,
it is to be always well advised in what we do, whether it be good or evil; and
if it be evil, to remove so far as we can from all Occasions that lead to it,
and provide our selves with Considerations against it, and to keep them always
awake in our Minds, that we may not be surprised by it unawares.

WHICH is a Duty indispensably necessary for us in the whole Course of our
Christian Warfare, For whilst we accustom our selves to act rashly and
inconsiderately, without bethinking beforehand what we say or do, we wander
like blind men in a Field that is full of Pits and Quagmires, and are every
moment in Danger of stumbling into one Mischief or other, and shall certainly
plunge our selves into many an evil Custom before ever we have bethought our
selves of the evil of it; and so instead of conquering our old Sins, we shall
be ever and anon running our selves into new ones, and while we are running
away from one evil, shall many times stumble into another, and to avoid the
Defects of Virtue leap headlong into the Excesses of it. For in most moral
Actions the Transition from the utmost of what is lawful into the nearmost of
what is sinful is indiscernible; and that line which parts this Virtue from
that neighboring Vice is generally so small, that it is hard to distinguish
where they are separated, and to fix the just Boundary whitherto we may go and
no farther. But then considering that almost every Virtue lies in the Middle
between two sinful Extremes, neither of which are separated from it by any
plain or visible Landmark, how is it possible for us, without great Care of
our Steps, to keep on steadfastly in the right Path, when there are so many
wrong ones bordering upon it? For when we perceive we have wandered too far
toward either Extreme, and are endeavoring to retrieve our selves, if we do
not take great Care of our Steps we shall be apt to wander as far the other
way, and so stumble out of one Extreme into another. For he who lives heedlesly
and incuriously, regards not how near he approaches to any sin, provided he
does but keep himself out of it; and when once a man takes the Liberty to go as
near to any Sin as he thinks he lawfully may, it is a thousand to one but he
will be transported by his Inclination a great deal further than he should. So
true is that of Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. c.1. (...), i. e. they who will do
all things that are lawful, will quickly be induced to do what is unlawful;
especially if they be strongly inclined to it; because the very Nearness of
what a man loves, does always render it more tempting and alluring to him. Thus
he that has a strong inclination to Lying, can never be safe so long as he
allows himself to be excessively talkative; he that is vehemently propense to
fleshly Lust, must needs endanger his Innocence if he come too near the
farthermost Limits of a modest Freedom; and he whose nature is prone to Malice
and Revenge cannot but run a mighty Hazard if he indulge to himself the utmost
Degree of a just and lawful Resentment. For bad Inclinations are never so
impatient of Restraint, as when they are within Prospect of their proper
Satisfactions, and the objects which attract them are near and easy to be
enjoyed. Upon which Account it must needs be a very dangerous thing for such as
are engaged in the Christian Warfare to live within Sight of the Temptations
they are most inclined to; because the nearer they are to them the more they
will court and importune them, and while a man comes near a beloved Lust and
does not enjoy it, he does but Tantalize himself, and inrage his Appetite after
those vicious Satisfactions whose alluring Relishes he had almost forgotten. If
therefore he would obtain a perfect Victory over his Lust, he must not only
forbear to act, but also to approach it; at least, till he has so far weaned
his Inclination from it, as that its Nearness ceases to be a Temptation to him.
For Inclination, like all other Motion, is always swiftest when it is nearest
its Center, and when once it is within the Reach and Attraction of it, it
hurries toward it with Fury and Impatience; and if in this its violent Rage it
happen to break out to its beloved Sin, and to taste the forbidden Pleasure of
it, 'twill thereby immediately recover all its impaired Strength, and become as
headstrong and outrageous as ever; and so all that Ground which we get in a
Months Abstinence from our sin, we shall lose in a Moments Enjoyment of it.
Upon this account therefore it highly concerns us, if we would succeed in our
Christian Warfare, to be very watchful and circumspect, to look well to our
Steps, and not approach too near to any Sin, but especially to any that we are
strongly inclined to.

VIII. TO give us good Success in this our Christian Warfare, it is also
necessary that we be diligent and industrious in our particular Callings. This
is one of those instrumental Duties which our Religion prescribes throughout
the whole Course and Progress of our Christian Warfare. Thus 1 These. 4. x, 2.
We beseech you brethren that you increase more and more, and that ye study to
be quiet, and to do your own business, and work with your own hands, as we
commanded ye; and this 2 These. iii.10. he backs with another, that if any would
not work, they should not eat, i. e. that they should not be maintained in
their Sloth and Idleness, and like Drones be permitted to dwell at ease in the
Hive, and devour the Labors of the more industrious Bees; and this verse xi.
he calls walking disorderly, and v. viii. and ix. he tells us that 'twas for
this cause that he rather chose to work with his own hands for his Livelihood,
than to be maintained by them, as he might justly have demanded; that he might
make himself an Example of Diligence for them to follow. So also, Ephesians. iv.28.
Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his
hands the thing which is good, i. e. employing himself in some honest Calling,
that he may have to give to him that needs; the sense of all which is to oblige
us to engage our selves in some honest Calling or Employment, and to be
diligent and industrious in it.

AND how necessary this is to secure us in the whole Course and Progress of our
Religion, appears from hence, that we are naturally a sort of very active
Beings, that must be employed one way or other; that we have a Mind within us,
that will be always in Motion, that being a spiritual subsistence, and as such,
of a quite different Nature from dull and sluggish Matter, will never admit of
Rest and Inactivity; that derives all its Pleasures from Action, and has
nothing to live upon but the grateful relish of its own Motions. And this being
the state of that active Principle within us, that constitutes us Men, we had
need take great care to keep it honestly busied and employed. For it being
naturally such an exceeding busy thing, 'twill be sure to find something or
other to work upon; and if it be not constantly employed about honest and
lawful things, 'twill quickly divert the current of its Motion another way, and
exert its Activity upon dishonest and unlawful ones. And hence it is that,
since the Apostasy of humane Nature, God has placed the generality of Men in
such Circumstances wherein some honest Calling, and their Diligence and
Industry therein, is indispensibly necessary to their comfortable Subsistence.
For he wisely considered that such was the Indisposition of our degenerate
Natures to the divine and spiritual Exercises of Religion, that 'twould be
impossible for us in this imperfect State to keep our Minds always intent upon
them, to fix our thoughts continually upon him, and exert our Powers without
any Pause or Interruption in perpetual Acts of Love, Adoration and Imitation of
him; that there is such a Repugnance in our tempers to these blessed
Operations, that if we had nothing else to do, they would soon grow irksome and
intolerable to us; and therefore, lest being quite tired out with these
spiritual Acts of Religion, we should hate them, and so turn the Current of our
Activity into the contrary Channel, he has placed us in such Circumstances,
wherein we have frequent Opportunities to rest our wearied Minds from these
abstracted Exercises in such innocent Employments as are necessary to our
comfortable Subsistence in this World. So that by putting us under the
necessity of employing our selves in secular Trades and Callings, he has taken
care to intercept our Minds, that they may not fly off from the pure Acts of
Religion into the contrary Impieties; and that when they are not divinely, they
may be innocently employed, and by diverting our Activity with honest, when it
is weary of spiritual Exercise, he has taken a wise Course to confine and
bound it, and leave it less Scope and Liberty to rove and make Incursions into
sinful and prohibited Actions. And therefore, as Aristotle commends Archytas
for his Invention of Rattles, because Children by playing with them are kept
from breaking Vessels of use; so ought we to admire the Wisdom and Goodness of
God, for thus necessitating us to exert our Activity in secular Acts and
Trades, because by this innocently employing our corrupt and busy Natures, he
has taken an admirable Course to divert us from mischievous Actions.

AND he having thus obliged us by our Necessities to follow some honest Calling
for a comfortable Livelihood, he expects that we should be diligent and
industrious in that particular Calling wherein his Providence has placed us.
For otherwise he looses his End; which was to restrain us from being sinfully
active, by necessitating us to be innocently so. And now that by putting us
into those Necessities by which we are put upon furnishing one another with
those several Conveniences of life, for the supply of which our respective
Trades and Callings are intended, we by being diligent therein approve our
selves faithful Servants in the great Family of God, and by industriously
discharging those particular Offices wherein he has placed us, we act as
dutiful Ministers of his Providence toward one another. Because by so doing we
supply those Wants and Necessities which God has made, and which he has made
to be supplied by our Office and Ministries; So that now to mind our own
Business, is a Part of our Religion, and it is that particular Part to which
Gods Providence has called us. If therefore we are idle and neglective in
this, we are undutiful Servants to the common Master of the World, how
officious soever we may be in other matters. For this is the proper Work of our
Office, and therefore if we are unfaithful in this, we can be faithful in
nothing. Should the Bailiff of a Family neglect letting his Masters Lands and
gathering in his Rents, he would be thought a bad servant, how diligent soever
he might be in the Kitchen or the Stables; and so if we are remiss in our
particular Offices and Employments, we are bad Servants to God, how sedulous
soever we may be either in the Offices of other Men, or in the common Services
which we all owe him; and he that neglects his own Calling to serve God in his
Closet or in the Church, is like an unfaithful Steward that neglects providing
for the Family to dress the Garden and water the Flowers.

IT IS true as we ought not to devote to the common Service of God, that Time
and Attendance which by the rules of Prudence and good Husbandry are
appropriated to our particular Callings; so neither ought we to permit our
particular Calling so to ingross our Time and Attendance as to leave none for
our Prayers and those common Services whether private or public, which as
Creatures and Christians we are obliged to render to our Creator. For as he
that to serve God neglects his Calling is a religious Truant, so he that to
attend his Calling neglects to serve God is a profane Drudge. But for a truly
pious and industrious Man it is not at all difficult so to keep his Business
and his Religion apart, as that they may not interfere with one another; and
faithfully to discharge whatsoever his Calling exacts of him, and yet leave
void Spaces enough in his time to do all that his Religion requires.

NEITHER are we obliged to be so industrious in our Calling as to deny our
selves any moderate Refreshments or Recreations, which are not only useful, but
sometimes necessary to breath our Spirits after they have been almost stifled
in a Crowd of Business, and divert our wearied Thoughts, which like the strings
of a Lute by being slackned now and then will sound the sweeter when they are
wound up again. But then we ought to take care that we do not turn our Physic
into Food, and make that our Business which should be only our Diversion; that
our Recreations be short, and apt to refresh, but not to steal away our Minds
from severer Employments. For long Sports and Recreations are like a large
Entry to a little House, they take up so much Room in the narrow Compass of our
Time, that there is not Space enough left in it for the more useful Apartments;
and so far as our Sports do exceed the Measures of necessary and convenient
Recreation, they are unwarrantable Encroachments upon our Calling and Religion.
It Is true, as for the Measures of Convenience, they are not alike to all; for
as for those whose large Fortunes have placed them beyond the Necessities of
the World, they may conveniently allow themselves larger Portions of Recreation
than those of meaner Circumstances, who having not yet made a competent
provision for their Families, are obliged in Justice to a more constant
Industry, lest they fall under St. Paul's Censure of being worse than Infidels.
But how plentiful soever our outward Condition may be, it will by no means
warrant us either to live idely, or to make our Recreations our continual
Employments; but the more Leisure we have from secular Business, the greater
Portions of our Time we ought to consecrate to Religion, and since our Bodies
and our Families are so liberally provided for, to be so much the more
industrious in supplying the Necessities of our Souls, that so these may not be
the only miserable things about us. But then our Natures being so depraved, as
that they cannot dwell long on the severe Exercises of Religion and yet so
active as that if in the Intervals of our Religion they be not Innocently
employed, they will be apt to run into Mischief; it is in our own Defense
necessary, how prosperous soever our outward Condition may be, that we should
find out some honest Business or other to keep our Activity regularly
Exercised. And this will be no hard matter for us to do, considering how many
generous, liberal and ingenuous Employments there are, fit for persons of the
highest Rank and Condition. They may dedicate such Portions of their Time to
the useful Studies of Philosophy or History, or of the Laws and Customs of
their own Country; and such to the Inspection of their own Estates, or to
overlook and govern their Families, and such to examine the Complaints of their
Tenants, or the Necessities of their Neighbors, or to reconcile Differences or
conciliate Love and good Neighborhood among those that are near or under them;
in these and such like Employments they may innocently exercise their active
Minds, and thereby not only divert themselves from sinful Courses, but also
render themselves very useful to the World.

BUT whatsoever our Condition in the World may be, it must doubtless be of very
dangerous Consequence to our Religion not to be innocently and usefully
imployd. For as the wise Cato has observed, nihil agendo, male agere disces,
i. e, by accustoming your self to do nothing, you will most certainly learn to
do ill. For your busy Mind, like Nature, will admit of no Vacuum but must be
always full of one thing or other; and it can no sooner dismiss its pious or
honest thoughts, but vicious and unlawful ones will be swarming about it. For
religious, lawful and sinful Objects, are the only Companions our Minds have to
converse with, and therefore since they must and will be conversing with one
thing or other, we ought to take great care that as soon as ever they have done
entertaining religious Objects, they be presently supplied and presented with
lawful ones, with some honest Business, or innocent Diversion; that so we may
not be at leisure to attend to those sinful Objects, which in the others
Absence will be perpetually crouding and thrusting themselves upon us. For when
we are neither honestly nor religiously employed, we shall be perfectly at
leisure to attend to any Invitation to Sin; and since we must still be doing
one thing or other, our having nothing else to do, will be a strong inducement
to do that which is evil, and to spend our restless Activity in some irregular
Course or other, accordingly as we are tempted and inclined. If we are of a
busy and pragmatical Temper, our leisure will presently invite us to be
intermedling with other Folks Business, to be tampering with State Affairs and
casting new Models of Government, and censuring the Wisdom of those public
Administrations of which we do not understand the Reasons: If we are of a
froward peevish and untractable Temper, we shall be apt when we have nothing
else to do, to be venting our Activity in factious and turbulent Zeal, in
seditious Pratings and Conspiracies* in backbiting our Adversaries, and
fetching and carrying scandalous Reports to create Jealousies and Animosities
between Neighbor and Neighbor. In a word, if we are of sanguin and jovial
Dispositions, our idle hours will be so many tempting Opportunities to
Intemperance and Wantonness, Profaness and Scurrility, and all the other
Wickednesses of a lewd and dissolute Conversation. If therefore we mean to be
secured from sinful Actions, we must allow our selves no leisure from religious
or honest ones, which for the above named Reason, we shall find utterly
unpracticable, if we be not diligent and industrious in some honest Calling.

BUT whilst men's Minds are honestly employed, they will not be at leisure to
listen to Temptation; and 'twill be difficult for any of those Inducements to
Sin, which the Devil and outward Objects do perpetually suggest to us, to
obtain Admittance to speak with our Thoughts, whilst they are thus taken up
with wiser and better Company. But as soon as we dismiss these, we do in effect
beckon Temptations to our selves, and invite the Devil and the World to invite
us to be wicked. For, as we say Opportunity makes the Thief, i. e. it tempts
him to steal, and so when we give the Devil the Opportunity of an idle Hour, we
do thereby tempt him to tempt us, and importunately invite him to steal away
the Treasure of our Innocence, by putting the Key of it into his hand, and
giving him a free Access to it. And though we should be firmly resolved not to
sin, yet it is impossible we should be safe so long as we are at leisure to be
tempted; because while we are at leisure we shall be very often disputing and
holding Argument with the Tempter, who by his Quirks and Sophistries will many
times circumvent such Novices as we, before we are aware. But when we are not
only resolved against him, but are also so employed as that we are not at
leisure to attend to him, it is past his skill to fasten any Temptation upon
us. Wherefore, if we would be secure in the Course of our Christian Warfare, we
must follow St. Jeroms Counsel to his Friend Rusticus, Semper boni aliquid
operis facito, ut Diabolus te semper inveniat occupatum, be always doing one
good Work or other, that so the Devil may always find thee busy.

IX. TO our Course and Progress in the Christian Warfare, it is also necessary
that we should endeavor, so far as in us lies, to keep up a constant
Cheerfulness of Spirit in our Religion. It is doubtless a great Disgrace to our
Religion to imagine (as too many superstitious Christians do) that it is an
Enemy to Mirth and Cheerfulness, and a severe Exactor of Pensive looks and
solemn Faces; that men are never serious enough till they are mope'd into
Statues, and cloisterd from all Society, but that of their own melancholy
Thoughts; that it is a Gospel-Duty to whine or to be silent, and retire
themselves from the most innocent Pleasures and Festivities of Conversation;
and in a word, that all kind of Mirth and facetious Humor is to be rankt among
those Idle Words which our Savior tells us shall be brought to Judgment. As if
Religion were a Caput mortuum, a heavy, stark, insipid thing, that had neither
Heat nor Life nor Motion in it; or were intended for a Medusa's Head to
transform men into monuments of Stone. By which false Conceptions of it, they
render it much more burdensome than it is in its own Nature. For to make
Religion forbid us any thing that is humane and natural, is to render it a real
grievance unto humane nature; it is to make our Duty run a tilt at the
Principles of our Being, and set our Conscience and our Nature at Variance with
one another. And therefore, since to be risible and sociable, is as natural to
us as to be reasonable, to make our Religion an Enemy to our Mirth and
Conversation, is to represent it as a tyrannical Invader of the essential
Liberties and Properties of humane Nature. It Is true indeed, though it denies
us not the freedom of an innocent Humor, nor disallows those little Plaisances
and inoffensive Raileries of Fancy which are sometimes requisite to sauce our
Conservation, and give it a quicker Relish; yet has it taken care to bound our
Merriments with the necessary Precepts of Sobriety and Gravity, that so by too
much whifling up and down in the little levities of Fancy, our Minds may not
grow vain and light and trifling, and be thereby indisposed to serious Thoughts
and Reflections: But so long as we keep within the Bounds of Sobriety, and do
not sally out into malicious or scurrilous or profane Jesting, our Religion
does not only connive at our Mirth, but commend and approve it: and so remote
is it from cramping those Strings and Sinews of the Mind, Cheerfulness and
Action, that it recollects their scatterd Vigor, and winds up their Slackness
to a true Harmony.

FOR it requires that our speech should be always with grace, Col. iv.6. i. e.
as some Expositors understand the Phrase, that it should not be whining and
melancholy, but sprightly and cheerful; it bids us rejoice evermore, 1 These.
v.16, and rejoice in the Lord always, and again rejoice, Phil. iv.4. that is, to
indeaver to be cheerful in all Conditions, and to bear all Events with a serene
and lightsome mind. And therefore the Apostle reckons this among the blessed
Fruits and Effects of that Divine Spirit which accompanies and animates
Christianity, viz. Joy, or Cheerfulness, Gal v.22. and this is one of the
Particulars in which the same Apostle makes the Christian Laws to consist, as
they stand opposed to the Ritual Laws of the Jews; the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e.
the Laws of the Christian Church, is not meat and drink, i. e. consist not of
Injunctions or Prohibitions of things that are of a Ritual or indifferent
Nature; but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans xiv.17.
which three Particulars being opposed to things that are unnecessary, must by
the Law of Oppositions denote things that are necessary; and therefore as by
Righteousness and Peace, must be meant Justice and Peaceableness, so by Joy in
the Holy Ghost, must be meant Cheerfulness and Alacrity in doing the will of
God; because Joy can be in no other Sense Matter of Necessary Duty. By all
which its evident, that Cheerfulness of Temper is so far from being
discountenanced by our Religion, that it is required and injoined by it, so far
as it is in our Power and Choice. And indeed it highly becomes us who serve so
good a Master, to be free and cheerful, and thereby to express a grateful sense
of his Goodness, and of those glorious Rewards which we expect from his
inexhaustible Bounty; but as for a gloomy Look and dejected Countenance, it
better beseems a Gally-slave than a Servant of God. And as Cheerfulness is a
Duty that very well becomes our State, so it is highly necessary to support and
carry us on in our Christian Warfare.

FOR Cheerfulness is Natures best Friend; it removes its Oppressions, enlivens
its Faculties, and keeps its Spirits in a brisk and regular Motion, and hereby
renders it easy to it self, and useful and serviceable to God and Man. It
dispels Clouds from the Mind, and Fears from the Heart, and kindles and
Cherishes in us brave and generous Affections, and composes our Natures into
such a regular temper as is of all others the most fit to receive religious
Impressions, and the breathings of the Spirit of God. For what the Jews do
observe of the Spirit of Prophecy, is as true of the Spirit of Holiness, that
it dwells not with Sadness, but with Cheerfulness; that being it self of a calm
and gentle Nature, it loves not to reside with black and melancholy Passions,
but requires a composed and serene Temper to act upon. And hence Tertul. in his
de Spectac. Deus praecepit Spiritum sanctum, utpote pro Naturae suae bono
tenerum and delicatum, Tranquillitate and Lenitate and Quiet and Pace
tractare; non Furore, non Bile, non Ira, non Dolor inquietare, i. e. God has
commanded that the holy Spirit, who is of a tender and delicate Nature, should
be entertained by us with Tranquillity and Mildness, with Quietness and Peace,
and that we should take care not to disturb him with Fury and Choler, or with
Anger and Grief. And indeed Melancholy naturally infests the holy Spirit, and
disturbs him in all his operations; it overwhelms the Fancy with black Reeks
and Vapors, and thereby clouds and darkens the Understanding, and intercepts
the holy Spirits Illuminations; and, like red colored Glass before the eye,
causes the most lovely and attractive Objects, to look bloody and terrible. It
distracts the Thoughts, and renders them wild, roving and incoherent; and
thereby utterly indisposes them to Prayer and Consideration, and renders them
deaf and unattentive to all good Motions and Inspirations. It freezes up the
Heart with dispairing Fears and Despondencies, and represents easy things as
difficult to us, and difficult as impossible, and thereby discourages us from
all those virtuous Attempts, to which the blessed Spirit does so importunately
excite and provoke us. In a word, it naturally benums and stupifies the Soul,
obstructs its Motions, and makes it listless and unactive, and so by
indisposing it to cooperate with the holy Spirit, renders it an incapable
Subject of his divine Grace and Influence. Thus melancholy you see, by its
sullen and malevolent Aspects, does obstinately resist and counter-influence
the holy Spirit, without whose Aid and Assistance we can never hope to prosper
in our spiritual Warfare.

WHEREFORE if we mean to succeed in this great Affair, it concerns us to use
all honest and innocent Means to dispel this black and mischievous Humor, and
to beget and maintain in our Minds a constant Serenity and Cheerfulness of
Temper; and when ever our Spirits begin to droop and languish, to betake our
selves to such natural Remedies, such harmless Diversions, Refreshments and
Recreations, as are fit and proper to raise them up again; and not to suffer
them to sink into a Bog of Melancholy Humors, whilst it is in our Power by any
honest Art or Invention to support them. Which if we can but effect, will be of
vast Advantage to us in the whole Course of our Religion. For in an even
Cheerfulness of Temper, our Spirits will be always lively, strong and active,
and fit for the best and noblest Operations; they will give Light to our
Understandings, Courage to our Hearts, and Wings to our Affections; so that we
shall be able more clearly to discern divine and heavenly things, more
resolutely to practice, and more vehemently to aspire after them; and our
Considerations will be more fixed, our Devotions more intent, and all our
spiritual Endeavors more active and vivacious. For a cheerful Temper will
represent every thing cheerfully to us; 'twill represent God so lovely,
Religion so attractive, the Rewards of it so immense, and the Difficulties of
it so inconsiderable, and thereby inspire us with so much Life and Courage, as
that none of all those spiritual Enemies we war and contend against, will be
able to withstand our Resolution.

X. TO our Course and Progress in this our spiritual Warfare, it is also
necessary that we maintain in our Minds a constant Sense and Expectation of
Heaven; that since the things of the other World are future and invisible, and
consequently less apt to touch and affect us than these worldly things which
are continually pressing upon our Senses, we should as often as we have
Opportunity, withdraw our Thoughts from these sensible Objects, and retire into
the immaterial World, and there entertain our selves with the close View and
Contemplation of the Joys and Glories it abounds with. For we are a sort of
Beings that being compounded of Flesh and Spirit, are by these opposite
Principles of our Nature allied to two opposite Worlds, and placed in the
middle between Heaven and Earth as the common Center wherein those distant
Regions meet. By our spiritual Nature we hold Communion with the spiritual
World, and by our corporeal with this earthly and sensible one; whose Objects
being always present with us, and striking as they do immediately upon our
Senses, we lie much more bare and open to them, than to those of the spiritual
World. So that unless we now and then withdraw our selves from these sensible
things, which hang like a Cloud between, we can never have a free Prospect into
that clear Heaven above them. And hence it becomes necessary that we should now
and then make a solemn Retirement of our Thoughts from earthly Objects and
Enjoyments, that so we may approach near enough to Heaven to touch and feel the
Joys and Pleasures of it, which while we transiently behold in this Crowd of
worldly Objects, is placed at such a Distance from us, that it looks like a
thin, blew Landscape, next to nothing; and has not apparent Reality enough in
it to raise our Desires and Expectations.

AND hence we are commanded to set our affections upon, or as it is in the
original, to mind those things that are above, Col. iii.2. and that by these
things above, he means the Enjoyments of Heaven, it is plain from v. 1. where he
expressly tells us that by the above in which these things are, he means Heaven,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. So that the Sense of the Precept is
this, that we should fix in our Minds such lively Representations of the Glory
and Reality of the Celestial State, as may raise in our Hearts a longing Desire
and earnest Expectation of being made partakers of it. Which Hope and
Expectation he elsewhere injoyns us to put on for an Helmet, i. e. for a
necessary Piece of defensive Armor against the Difficulties and
Discouragements of our Christian Warfare, 1 These. v.8. and Heb. vi.xix. this
hope which enters into that within the veil, i. e. into Heaven, is said to be
the Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, i. e. it is that which stays and
secures the Soul in the midst of those many Storms of Temptation it meets
withal in its Voyage to Heaven; and it being so, we are bid to look to and
imitate our Blessed Lord, who for the joy that was set before him endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is now sat down at the right hand of God, Heb.
xii.2. The meaning of all which is, that we should earnestly endeavor to fix
in our minds a vigorous Sense and Expectation of that immortal Happiness with
which God has promised to crown all that come off Conquerors from this
spiritual Warfare; that all along as we march we should keep Heaven in our Eye,
and encourage our selves with the Hope of it to charge through all those
Difficulties and Temptations that oppose us in the way; in a word, that we
should frequently awaken in our minds the glorious Thoughts of a blessed
Immortality, and possess our selves with a lively Expectation of enjoying it,
if we hold out to the End.

WHICH is a Duty of a vast Consequence to us in the Course of our spiritual
Warfare. For Heaven being the End and Reward of our Warfare, must needs be the
grand Encouragement thereunto; and consequently if once we lose Sight of
Heaven, and suffer earthly things to interpose and eclipse the Glory and
Reality of it, our Courage will never be able to bear up against those manifold
Temptations that do continually assault us. But whilst we continue under a
lively Sense of that blessed Recompense of Reward, that will so spirit and
invigorate our Resolution, that nothing will be able to withstand it; and all
the Terrors and Allurements that Sin can propose, will be forced to fly before
it, and to retreat like so many impotent Waves that dash against a Rock of
Adamant. For while we are under a lively Sense and Expectance of the Happiness
above, we live as it were in the Midway between Heaven and Earth, where we
have an open Prospect of the Glories of both, and do plainly see how faint and
dim those below are in comparison with those above; how they are forced to
sneak and disappear in the presence of those eternal Splendors, and to shroud
their vanquished Beauties, as the Stars do when the Sun appears. And whilst we
interchangeably turn our eyes from one to the other, how fruitlesly do the
Pleasures, Profits and Honors below, importune us to abandon the Joys and
Glories above, and with what Indignation do we listen to the proposals of such
a senseless and ridiculous Exchange? And could we but always keep our selves at
this stand, we should be so fortified with the Sight of those happy Regions
above, that no Temptation from below would ever be able to approach us; and the
sense that we are going on to that blessed State would carry us through all the
weary Stages of our Duty with an indefatigable Vigor. For what may a man not
do with Heaven in his Eye, with that potent, I had almost said Omnipotent,
Encouragement before him? To pull out a right Eye, to cut off a right hand, to
tear a darling Lust from his Heart, even when it is wrapped about it, and twisted
with its Strings, what an easy Achievement is it to a man that has a Heaven
of immortal Glories in his View? The Hope of which is enough to recommend even
Racks and Torments, and turn the Flames of martyrdom into a Bed of Roses. For
'twas this blessed Prospect that enabled the Good old martyrs to triumph so
gloriously as they did in the midst of their Sufferings; they knew that a few
Moments would put an End to their Miseries, and that when once they had
weathered those short storms, they should arive at a most blessed Harbor, and
be crowned at their landing; and that from thence they should look back with
infinite Joy and Delight upon the dangerous Sea they had escaped, and for ever
bless those Storms and Winds that drove them to that happy Ports for as the
Author to the Hebrews tells us, they sought a heavenly Country, Heb. xi.14.16.

XI. AND lastly, To the successful Progress of our Christian Warfare, it is
also necessary that we should live in the frequent use of the public
Ordinances and Institutions of our Religion; namely, in the religious
Observation of the Lords Day, and in frequent Communion with one another in the
Holy Sacrament, both which are of great Use to us in the Course and Progress of
our spiritual Warfare. For as for the Lords Day, it is instituted, and ever
since the Apostles Time has been observed in the Christian Church, as a Day of
public Worship and weekly Thanksgiving for our Saviors Resurrection, in which
the great Work of our Redemption was consummated. And certainly it must needs
be of vast Advantage to be one day in seven sequestered from the World and
employed in divine Offices, in solemn Prayers, Praises and Thanksgivings, and
be obliged to assist and edify one another by the mutual Example and Union of
our Devotions; to hear the Duties of our Religion explained, the Sins against
it reprehended, and the Doctrins of it unfolded and reduced to plain and easy
Principles of Practice; what a mighty advantage might we reap from all these
blessed Ministries, if we would but attend to them with that Concern and
Seriousness which the matter of them requires and deserves? Especially if when
the public Offices are over, we would not let loose our selves all the rest of
the Day, as we too frequently do, to our secular Cares and Diversions, and
thereby choke those good Instructions we have heard, and stifle those devout
and pious Affections which have been raised and excited in us; but instead of
so doing, we would devote at least some good Portion of it to the Instruction
of our Families, and to the private Exercise of our Religion, to Meditation and
Prayer, to the Examination of our selves concerning our past Behavior, and the
reinforcing our Resolution to behave our selves better for the future; if, I
say, we would thus spend our Lords Day, we should doubtless find our selves
better Men for it all the Week after; we should go into the World again with
much better Affections, and stronger Resolutions, with our Graces more
vigorous, and our bad Inclinations more reduced and tamed, and whereas the Jews
were to gather Manna enough on their sixth Day, to feed their Bodies on the
ensuing Sabbath, we should gather Manna enough upon our Sabbath, to feed and
strengthen our Souls all the six days after.

BUT to this we must also add frequent Communions with one another in the Holy
Sacrament, which is an Ordinance instituted on purpose by our blessed Savior,
for the improving and furthering us in our Christian Warfare. For besides that
herein we have one of the most puissant Arguments against Sin represented by
visible Signs to our Sense, viz. the bloody Sacrifice of our blessed Lord to
expiate and make Atonement for it; besides that those bleeding Wounds of his
which are here represented by the breaking of the Bread and pouring out of the
Wine, do proclaim our Sins his Asassines and Murderers, the thought of which,
if we had any ingenuity in us, were enough to incense in us the most implacable
Indignation against them; besides that his Sufferings for our Sins, of which
this sacred Solemnity is a lively Picture, do horribly remonstrate Gods
Displeasure against them, who would not be induced to pardon them upon any
meaner Expiation than the Blood of his Son, than which Hell it self is not a
more dreadful Argument to scare and terrify us from them; in a word, besides
that his so freely submitting and offering up himself to be a Propitiation for
us, of which this holy Festival is a solemn Commemoration, is an expression of
Kindness sufficient to captivate the most ungrateful Souls, and extort
Obedience from them; besides all this, I say, as it is a Feast upon the
Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, it is a Federal Rite, whereby God and we, by
feasting together, do accordingly to the ancient Customs both of Jews and
Heathens, mutually oblige our selves to one another; whereby God, by giving us
the mystical Bread and Wine, and we by receiving them, do mutually engage our
selves to one another upon those sacred Pledges of Christ's Body and Blood, that
we faithfully perform each others Part of that everlasting Covenant which was
purchased by him. And what can be a greater Restraint to us when we are
solicited to any Sin, than the sense of being under such a dreadful Vow and
Obligation? With what face dare we listen to any Temptation to Evil, when we
remember lately we solemnly engaged our selves to the contrary, and took the
Sacrament upon it? And verily I doubt it is this that lies at the bottom of that
seeming modest Pretense of Unworthiness, which men are wont to urge in Excuse
for their Neglect of the Sacrament; namely, that they love their Lusts, and
cannot resolve to part with them, and therefore are afraid to make such a
solemn Abjuration of them, as the eating and drinking the consecrated Elements
implies. And I confess, if this be their Reason, they are unworthy indeed, the
more shame for them, but it is such an Unworthiness as is so far from excusing,
that it only aggravates their Neglect. For for any man to plead that he dares
not receive the Sacrament because he is resolved to sin on, is to make that
which is his Fault, his Apology, and to excuse one Sin with another. Wherefore
if we are heartily resolved by the Grace of God to reform and amend, let us
abstain no longer from this great Federal Rite, upon Pretense of Unworthiness.
For it is by the use of this, among other Means; that we are to improve and grow
more and more worthy. For the very Repetition of our Resolution, as I have
showed above, is a proper Means of strengthening and confirming it; and
certainly it must needs be much more so, when it is renewed and repeated with
the Solemnity of a Sacrament. And therefore it is worth observing, how much
Care our Lord has taken, in the very Constitution of our Religion, to oblige
us to a constant, solemn Repetition of our good Resolutions. For at our first
Entrance into Covenant with him, we are to be baptized, in which Solemnity we
do openly renounce the Devil and all his Works, and religiously devote our
selves to his service. But because we are apt to forget this our baptismal Vow,
and the Matter of it is continually to be performed, and more than one World
depends upon it, therefore he has thought fit not to trust wholly to this
first Engagement, but has so methodized our Religion, as that we are ever and
anon obliged to give him new Security. For which End, he has instituted this
other Sacrament, which is not like that of Baptism to be received by us once
for all, but to be often reiterated and repeated, that so upon the frequent
Returns of it, we might still be obliged to repeat over our old Vows of
Obedience. For he has not only enjoined us that we should do this in
remembrance of him, Luke xxii.19. i. e. that we should celebrate this sacred
Festival in the Memory of his Passion; but by thus doing the Apostle tells us
we are to continue the Memorial of it to the end of the World, or to show his
death till he comes, 1 Cor. xi.26. And that this does not, like the Precept of
Baptism, oblige us for once only and no more, is evident from the foregoing
words of this last recited Text, as often as ye eat this bread and drink this
cup, which plainly shows that these sacramental Elements are to be more than
once received by us. It Is true, how often it is to be done neither Christ nor
his Apostles have any where defined, but if we consult primitive Example (which
in the Absence of express Precept is the best Rule to determine our selves by)
we shall find that it was very frequently received. For from some Passages in
the Acts of the Apostles, it seems probable that Christians did then
communicate every Day; as particularly Acts ii.46. where they are said to
continue daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread, (...) in the
house, that is as it seems probable, in some upper room of the Temple; though
perhaps this daily may refer only to the Lords Day, agreeably to that Acts
xx.7. on the first day of the week when the Disciples came together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them. But it is certain that whenever they assembled
to the public Worship, they closed it with the Lords Supper; which they did
for a great while in the Western Churches every day in the Week, and in the
Eastern, as St. Basil tells us, Epist. 289. four times a Week, besides
Festivals. So that allowing for our Declensions from the primitive Zeal and
Devotion, one would think that to communicate now once in four Weeks should be
a very moderate Proportion. But as for those that wholly neglect this sacred
Institution, for my own part I see not how they can excuse themselves from
being guilty of a wilful Rebellion against their Savior, or with what
Confidence they can expect either that he should assist them with his Grace on
the Way, or crown them with his Salvation in the End, when they so perversely
turn their backs upon an Ordinance which he has solemnly instituted for a
Conveyance of the one, and a Seal of the other.

BUT would we take that Care that becomes us, to prepare our selves for, and
frequent this holy Institution, there is no doubt but we should find it of
mighty Advantage to us in the whole Course of our Religion. For till we are
arived to a confirmed State of Good, our holy Fervours will be very apt to
cool, our good Purposes to slacken and unwind, and our virtuous Endeavors to
languish and tire; and therefore unless we take care frequently to revive our
Religion with this spiritual Repast and Restorative, and still to add new Fuel
to it as the Flame decays, it will quickly pine away and expire. But if upon
the solemn Returns of this sacred Festival, we would constantly come with due
Preparation to our masters Table, and here renew our Vows, re-invigorate our
Resolutions, repair our Decays, and put our sluggish Graces into a new
Fermentation, we should find our Religion not only live, but thrive, and be
still acquiring new Degrees of Strength and Activity. But because this Argument
has been already so fully handled in our Practical Treatises, particularly by
the Reverend Dr. Patrick in his Mensa Mystica and Christian Sacrifice, I shall
refer the Reader thither for the farther Consideration of it.

And thus, with all the Brevity I could, I have endeavored to give an Account
of those Duties which are necessary in the Course and Progress of our Christian
Warfare.

SECT. IV. Containing certain Motives to animate men against the Difficulty of
these Duties which appertain to the Course of our Christian Warfare.
HOW necessary and useful to us those aforenamed Duties are, in the Course of
our Christian Warfare, has been sufficiently shown. So that now there is
nothing that our Sloth and Unwillingness can object against them, but only
this, that they are very difficult, and do require more of our Time and Care
and Pains than we can conveniently spare from our other necessary Occasions;
that the Practice of them is so unpleasant and severe, and attended with so
much Cumber and Trouble, that we very much doubt we shall never be able to go
through with them. And therefore to remove this Objection out of men's way, and
to excite them to the Practice of these necessary Duties, I shall for a
Conclusion of this Argument add, to what has been said of it, these following
Considerations.

1. That whatsoever Difficulty there is in the Practice of them, we may thank
our selves for it.

2. That in the Course of our Sin there is a great deal of Difficulty, as well
as in our Warfare against it.

3. That how difficult soever this Warfare may be, it must be endured, or that
which is a great deal worse.

4. That though it be difficult, yet there is nothing in it but what the Grace
of God will render possible to us, if we be not wanting to our selves.

5. That the Practice of these Duties is not so difficult, but that it is
fairly consistent with all our other necessary Occasions and Diversions.

6. That the Difficulty of them is such as will certainly abate and wear off by
Degrees, if we constantly practice them.

7. That with the difficulty of them there is a World of present Peace and
Satisfaction intermingled.

8. That their Difficulty is abundantly compensated by the final Reward of them.

I. CONSIDER that whatsoever Difficulty there is in the Practice of them, we
may thank our selves for it. For if we had betaken our selves to the Practice
of Religion as soon as we were capable of it, before we had entered our selves
into sinful Courses, and had therein contracted sinful Habits and Inclinations,
we might have prevented those Difficulties which we now complain of. For our
Religion was made for and adapted to our Nature, and would have sweetly
accorded with all its Affections and Propensions, had we not vitiated them by
our own wilful Sin, and clapped a preternatural Biass upon them. But though the
Light be naturally congruous to the Eye, yet if through a Distillation of ill
Humors into it the Eye grow sore and weak, there is nothing more grievous and
offensive to it. And so it is with Religion, which to the pure and
uncontaminated Nature of a Man, is the most grateful and aggreeable thing in
the World; but if by our own ill Government we disease our Nature, and deprave
its primitive Constitution, it is no wonder that Religion which was so well
proportioned to it in its Purity, should sit hard and uneasy upon it, in its
Apostasy and Corruption. For to a man that is in a Fever, every thing is
bitter, even Honey, which when he is well, is exceeding sweet and grateful; but
the Bitterness which he tastes is not in the Honey but in the Gall which
overflows his own Palate; and so to a Nature that is diseased with any
unnatural Lust, that which is most congruous to it self, will be most nauseous
to its Disease; and those Duties which in its Health 'twould have embraced with
the greatest Pleasure, will in its Sickness be the greatest Burden and
Oppression to it. And when we have spoiled the Purity of our Constitution, and
are degenerated from the humane Nature into the brutal or diabolical one, it is
no great wonder that the Religion of a Man should be a Burden to the Nature of
a Beast or a Devil. So that whatsoever Difficulties there are in Religion, they
arise not out of the Nature of the things it requires, but out of the perverse
Indispositions of our Natures to them; and these were for the most part
contracted by our selves; so that instead of complaining of the Difficulty, we
ought to strive and contend the more earnestly against it, because we may thank
our selves for it. When a man has played the Fool, and set his House on Fire,
the Sense of his own Folly ought to make him more industrious to extinguish it;
but if instead of so doing, he should sit with his Hands in his Bosom and
complain of the Mischief, and the Difficulty of stopping it, what would Folks
say of him? Mischievous, does it become thee to sit here idely complaining of
the Effect of thy own Villainy, whilst it is yet in thy Power, would thou but
bestir thy self, to quench the Flame, and prevent the spreading of it? For
shame get up and do thy utmost Endeavor to repair thy own Act, and to
extinguish this spreading Mischief of which thou art the Author. Since
therefore we have been so obstinately foolish as to set fire to our own Souls,
and kindle in them by our vicious Courses such destructive Flames of unnatural
Lust, how monstrously ridiculous is it, whilst it is yet in our Power to
extinguish them, to sit whining and complaining of the Difficulty of it, and in
the mean time permit them to rage and burn on without Interruption? O miserable
men, if they are so hard to be quenched, who may ye thank for it? Was it not
you that kindled them, and do you now sit idly complaining of your own Act,
when you should be the more industrious to repair the Mischief of it, because
it is your own. For shame arise and bestir your selves, and since you are
conscious that the Difficulties of your Religion are of your own creating, and
that those Lusts which indispose ye to it are the products of your own Actions,
let this excite ye to a more vigorous Endeavor to subdue and conquer them.

II. CONSIDER that in the Course of your Sins there is a great deal of
Difficulty, as well as in your Warfare against them. For I dare appeal to your
own Experience whether you have not found a great deal of Hardship in
Wickedness, especially while you were educating and training up your Natures to
it? Did not your Nature oftentimes recoil and start and boggle at your vicious
Actions; and were you not fain sometimes to curb, and sometimes to spur it, to
commit many Outrages and Violences upon it, whilst you were backing and
managing it, before you could reduce it to a Through-pace in Iniquity? How
often have you put your modest Nature to the Blush, at the sense of a filthy
and uncomly Action, whilst your wicked Will has been dragging it along like a
timorous Virgin to an Adulterers Bed; and what terrible Shreiks have your
Consciences many times given in the midst of your sinful Commissions, when you
were acting the first Rapes upon your Innocence? How many a pensive Mood has
the Review of your sinful Pleasures cost ye, and what Swarms of Horror and
dreadful Expectation has the Reflection on your past Guilts raised in your
Minds? And then with what excessive Difficulty have you been fain to practice
some Vices, only to get an Habit of practicing them more easily? How often have
you been forced to swallow Sickness, to drink dead Palsies and foaming
Epilepsies, to render your Intemperances familiar to you, and in what Qualms
and fainting sweats, and sottish Confusions have you many times awaked, before
ever you could Connaturalize your midnight Revels to your Temper? And when with
so much Labor and Violence, you have pretty well trained and exercised your
selves in this hellish Warfare, and thereby rendered it natural and habitual to
you, to how many Inconveniences has it daily exposed you, and what base and
unmanly Shifts has it put you upon, to extricate your selves out of those
Difficulties wherein it has involved you? What violent Passions and
Perturbations does it raise in your Minds, and into what wild Tumults of Action
does it frequently hurry you? In a word, how does it perplex and intrigue the
whole Course of your Lives, and entangle ye in a labyrinth of Knavish Tricks
and Collusions; so that many times you are at your Wits end, and know not which
way to turn your selves? All these Difficulties, and a great many more, which I
cannot presently think of, you must have contended with in a sinful Course of
Action, if you have made any considerable Experiment of it.

AND do you complain of the Difficulty of persevering in Religion; you that
have so courageously persevered in a worse Way against Difficulties that are as
great, all things considered, if not greater; you that have hitherto sinned on
so industriously, that have broke through so many strong Barricadoes to come at
and enjoy your Lusts, are you not ashamed to start and boggle as you do, at the
Difficulties of Virtue and Religion? Look but how the industrious Sinner
upbraids you? His way leads directly to Ruin, and he knows it, and yet he
presses on courageously, as if he were ambitious to be a Hero in Iniquity, and
charges through all the modesty of Humane Nature, through all his native sense
of a God and a divine Vengeance; he marches forward through Infamy and
Diseases, Dangers and a world of Inconveniences, and offers a kind of Violence
to Hell, as if he meant to force open its brazen Portal, and enter headlong
into it before it is ready to receive him, whilst you in the mean time like a
company of Crest-faln Creatures, stand shivering at a few trifling Difficulties
in your Way, though you have Heaven for your End, and a Crown of Glory for your
Reward.

IN short therefore, this is the true State of your Case; choose which side you
please, whether to march under Christ's or the Devils Banner; you must expect
beforehand to encounter some Difficulties, yea and perhaps as great on the one
side as on the other; and if so, then you have little else to do but to compare
their Ends, and to consider which of the two is most eligible, a Crown of
Glory, or eternal Torment.

III. CONSIDER that how Difficult soever this your spiritual Warfare may be, it
must be endured, or that which is much more intolerable. I confess were it not
absolutely necessary, we might with some color of Reason urge the Difficulty
of it, to excuse our selves from undertaking and prosecuting it; but when our
Case is such, as that we must either conquer or perish, swim through, or sink
under the Difficulties we complain of, the matter will admit of no further
Debate, but we must even resolve of the two Evils to choose that which is the
least. When the Ship has sprung a Leak, it is a Madness for the Mariners to sit
still and complain of the Pains and Labor of pumping; for in the Extremity
they are in, there is no more to be said, they must pump or perish, and it is
not to be debated where there is so vast an Inequality between the Objects of
their Choice, which of the two they were best to fix upon, whether to take
pains for the present to secure the Ship, or to sit still and suffer themselves
to be swallowed up in the Ocean. And thus it is in the Case before us; our Soul
has sprung a Leak, and let into its Holds those Stygian Waters of sensual and
Diabolical Lust, which will sink us down to Hell if they be not pumped out
again; and this is not to be done without a great deal of Labor and
Difficulty. But what then; were we not better labor for a while then perish
for ever? do we talk of Labor when our Souls are at stake, and our immortal
Life is upon the Brink of an everlasting well or ill-being? In other Cases we
never think much to endure a present Inconvenience for the Prevention of a
future Mischief; we are content to fast, when we perceive it is necessary to
obviat an approaching Fever, to be cupp'd and scarrified with all the Artifice
of Pain to prevent or remove a dangerous Disease; and in all other Cases are
generally willing to prolong our Torment that we may be the longer a dying;
except where the Prescription is Virtue, and the Death prescribed against is
eternal; though this be the most formidable Mischief of all, as being the
utmost Consummation of humane Misery, and compared with which all the Labors
and Difficulties of Religion have not the Proportion of a gentle Flea-biting to
the acutest Torments of the Rack or Stone. For I beseech you to consider, will
it not be easier for you to endure the short Agonies of a bitter Repentance,
than the horrid Despair of a damned Ghost for ever; to thwart a foolish and
unreasonable Lust, than to lie roaring to Eternity upon the Rack of a guilty
Conscience? Is there any Proportion between your abstaining from the Pleasures
of Sin that are but for a moment, and your being excluded from Heaven and all
Hope of Happiness for ever? Alas! if it be so difficult to you to contend with
an evil Habit, to struggle with a stiff and obstinate Inclination, how
difficult will it be to dwell with everlasting burnings, and suffer the dire
Effects of an unappeasable Vengeance to Eternity? Wherefore since we are under
an absolute Necessity of enduring the one or the other, in the name of God let
us act like Men, and of the two evils choose that which is most tolerable.

IV. CONSIDER that though it be difficult, yet there is nothing in it but what
the Grace of God will render possible to us, if we be not wanting to our
selves. I confess the Necessity of it would be no Argument to engage us to
undertake it, were it not a possible Undertaking; yea, and readily acknowledge,
that it very far exceeds our poor Possibility singly and nakedly considered. So
that if we were left to struggle with the Difficulty of it in our own single
Strength, we might justly despair of Success, and so tamely lie down and yield
our selves foiled and defeated. But God be praised this is not our Case; for
though when we cast our eyes upon the many violent Inclinations to evil that
are within us, and upon the numberless Temptations to evil that are about us;
when we seriously reflect upon the Weakness of our Reason, and the Strength of
our Lust, and the Number and Nearness and Prevalency of those Objects from
without that are continually pressing upon and assaulting our good Resolutions;
though, I say, when we reflect upon all this, we are ready to cry out as
Elisha's Servant did when he beheld the City compassed with Horses and with
Chariots, Alas, Master, how shall we do? how shall we be able to withstand all
this mighty Army of Enemies? yet if we turn our Eyes from our own Weakness, and
our Enemies Strength to those gracious Promises of Assistance which the Father
of Mercies has made to us, we shall quickly be able to answer our selves, as
Elisha did him, fear not, O my Soul, for they that are with us, are more, and
more powerful, than they that are against us. For we have with us not only the
outward Arguments of Religion, which are of infinitely more Force than any
outward Inducement to Vice whatsoever; we have with us not only the holy Angels
of God, who are as willing and more able to direct and strengthen us, than all
the infernal Furies to ensnare and captivate us; but we have with us also the
Almighty Spirit of God, who by the Economy of Heaven, and the Promise of our
Lord, is obliged to minister to us in all our Necessities, and to aid and
assist us against all those Difficulties which would be otherwise too hard for
us, if we were left to our selves. So that if we do but hold true to our own
Interest, and take care that we do not drive him away from us, by siding
wilfully with our Enemies against him, we shall not, no we cannot miscarry;
unless (which is impossible) some such Temptation should befall us, as neither
we nor he can resist and cope with. For till by our wilful Sin we have
forfeited our Title to the promise of his Assistance, we are as sure of his
Help in all things that are necessary, as we can be of our own Endeavor; and
it is not more in our power to do what we can by the Strength of our own
Faculties, than it is to engage him to enable us to do what we cannot with his
Aid and Assistance. For by faithfully endeavoring to persevere in well-doing,
we entitle our selves to all the necessary Assistances of his Grace, and so
long as this Title continues, we are Masters not only of our own Strength but
of his too, and can do not only whatsoever is within our own Power without him,
but also whatsoever is in his Power concurring with ours.

SO that though our Warfare be difficult, it cannot be impossible, unless we
will have it so. For to be sure there is nothing in it that can be too hard for
Gods Grace cooperating with the Powers of our Nature; and therefore there can
be nothing in it too hard for us, whilst it is in our Power to secure our selves
of that his gracious Cooperation.

WHEREFORE let us stand boggling no longer at the Difficulty of our Progress in
Religion, since God be praised, there is nothing required of us beyond what we
are able; do you but your Part which is only what you can, and then doubt not
but God will do his; put forth but your honest, hearty Endeavor, and earnestly
implore his Aid and Assistance, and if then you miscarry, let Heaven answer for
it. But if upon a Pretense that your Work is too difficult, and your Enemies
too mighty for you, you lay down your Arms and resolve to contend with them no
longer, let Heaven and Earth judge between God and you, which is to be charged
with your ruin; God, that so graciously offered you his Help, that stretched
out his Hand to raise ye up, tenderd you his spirit to guard and conduct ye
through all Oppositions to eternal Happiness, or you, that would not be
persuaded to do any thing for your selves, but rather chose to perish with
Ease, than take any Pains to be saved.

V. CONSIDER that the Practice of these Duties is not so difficult, but that it
is fairly consistent with all your other necessary Occasions. When men are told
how many Duties are necessary to their successful Progress in Religion, what
Patience and Constancy, what frequent Examinations and Trials of themselves,
what lively Thoughts and Expectations of Heaven, etc. they are apt to conclude
that if they should engage to do all this, they must resolve to do nothing
else, but even shake hands with all their secular Business and Diversions, and
Cloister up themselves from all other Affairs. Which is a very great Mistake,
proceeding either from their not considering, or not understanding the nature
of these religious Exercises, the greatest part of which are such as are to be
wholly transacted in the Mind, whose Motions and Operations are much more
nimble and expedite than those of the Body, and so may be very well intermixed
with our secular Employments, withour any Let or Hindrance to them. For what
great Time is there required for a man now and then to revolve a few wise and
useful Thoughts in his Mind, to consider the Nature of an Action when it
occurs, and reflect upon an Error when it is past and has escaped him? I can
consider a Temptation when it is approaching me, and with a Thought or two of
Heaven or Hell arm my Resolution against it in the twinkling of an eye; I can
look up to Heaven with an eye of earnest Expectance, and send my Soul thither
in a short Ejaculation without interrupting my Business; and yet these, and
such as these, do make up a great Part of those religious Exercises wherein the
proper Duty of our Christian Warfare consists. And though to the due
performance of these Duties, it will be sometimes necessary that our Minds
should dwell longer upon them, yet it is to be considered that when once we are
entered upon the Practice of them, our Mind will be much more at Leisure to
attend to them; for then 'twill be in a great measure taken off from its wild
and unreasonable Vagaries, from its sinful Designs and lewd Contrivances, from
its Fantastic Complacencies in the Pleasures of Sin and anxious Reflections
on the Guilt and Danger of it; and when all this Rubbish is thrown out of the
Mind, there will be Room enough for good Thoughts to dwell in it, without
interfering with any of our necessary Cares and Diversions. For would we but
give these our religious Exercises as much Room in our Minds as we did
heretofore freely allow to our Sins; they would ask no more, but leave us as
much at Leisure for our other Affairs as ever.

I confess there are some of these Duties that exact of us their fixed and
stated Portions of Time, such as our Morning Consideration and Prayer, our
Evening Examination and Prayer, our religious Observation of the Lords Day, and
our preparing for and receiving the Holy Sacrament; but all this may be very
well spared without any Prejudice to any of our lawful Occasions. For what
great matter of Time does it ask for a man to think over a few good Thoughts in
the Morning, and fore-arm his Mind with them against the Temptations of the
Day; to recommend himself to God in a short, pithy and affectionate Prayer, and
repeat his Purpose and Resolution of Obedience; what an easy matter were it
for you to borrow so many Moments as would suffice for this Purpose from your
Bed and your Comb and Looking-glass? And as for the Evening, when your Business
is over, it is a very hard case if you cannot spare so much time either from
your Company or Refreshments as to make a short Review of the Actions of the
Day; to confess and beg Pardon for the Evils you have fallen into, or to bless
God for the Good you have done, and the Evils you have avoided; and then to
recommend your selves to his Grace and Protection for the future. And as for
your religious Observation of the Lords Day, it is only the seventh Part of
your Time; and can you think much to devote that, or at least the greatest Part
of that, to him who gives you your Being and Duration? And lastly, as for your
receiving the Lords Supper, it is at most but once a Month that you are invited
to it, and it is a hard Case, if out of so great a proportion of Time you cannot
afford a few Hours to examine your Defects and to quicken your Graces, and to
dress and prePare your selves for that blessed Commemoration. Alas! how easy
were all this to a willing Mind? and if we had but half that Concern for our
Souls and everlasting Interest that we have for our Bodies, we should count
such things as these not worth our mentioning. How disingenuous therefore is it
for men to make such tragical Outcries as they do of the Hardship and
Difficulty of this spiritual Warfare, when there is nothing at all in it that
intrenches either on their secular Callings or necessary Diversions; when they
may be going onward to Heaven while they are doing their Business, and
mortifying their Lusts even in the Enjoyment of their Recreations, and so take
their Pleasure both here and hereafter?

VI. CONSIDER that the Difficulty of these Duties is such, as will certainly
abate and wear off by Degrees, if we constantly practice them. For in all
Undertakings whatsoever, it is Use that makes Perfectness, and that which is
exceeding hard to us at first, either through want of Skill to manage, or
Inclination to practice it, will by degrees grow easier and easier, as we are
more and more accustomed and familiarized to it. And this we shall find by
Experience, if we constantly exercise our selves in these progressive Duties of
our Religion, which to a Mind that has been altogether unacquainted with them,
will at first be very difficult. 'Twill go against the grain of a wild and
ungoverned Nature, to be confined from its extravagant Ranges by the strict
Ties of a religious Discipline; and to reduce a roving Mind to severe
Consideration, or a fickle one to Constancy and Resolution, or an unreflecting
one to Self-examination; to raise up an earthly Mind to heavenly Thoughts and
Expectations; and confine a listless and regardless one to strict Watchfulness
and Circumspection; to confine a carnal mind to frequent Sacraments; or an
indevout and careless one to its daily and weekly periods of Devotion, will at
the first no doubt be very painful and tedious; but after we have persisted in
and for a while accustomed our selves to it, we shall find it will quickly grow
more natural and easy to us, and from being grievous it will become tolerable,
from being tolerable easy, and from being easy delightful. For when once we
come to feel the good Effects of those Duties in our Natures, how fast our
Lusts do decline, our Dispositions mend and all our Graces improve in the Use
of them, the Sense of this will mightily indear and ingratiate them to us. Just
as it is with a Scholar, when he first enters upon the Methods of Learning,
they are very tedious and irksome to him; the Pains of reading, observing and
recollecting, the Confinement to a Study and the racking his Brains with severe
Reasoning and Discourse, are things that he cannot easily away with, till he
has been inured and accustomed to them a while, and then they grow more
natural and easy to him; but when he comes to be sensible of the great
Advantages he reaps by his Labor, how it raises and improves his
Understanding, inlarges its prospect and furnishes its Conception with brave
and useful. Notions; then do his Labors which were formerly so grievous become
not only easy but delectable to him. And even so it is with these spiritual
Exercises of Religion, which to unexperienced persons that are yet but newly
entered upon them will be very painful and troublesome; but if they have but
Patience and Courage to hold on, Custom will quickly render them more
tolerable, and when they have practiced them so long as to find and perceive
the blessed Effects of them, how much they have contributed to the reforming
their Tempers, reducing their Inclinations, filing and polishing their rough
and misshapen Natures; with what amiable Graces, divine and godlike Dispositions
they have adorned and beautified them; their Sense and Feeling of this will
convert them all into delightful Recreations. Thus as the Custom of them will
render them easy, so the blessed Fruits of them will make them delectable; the
former will render them facil as Nature, the later eligible as Reward. And if
so, why should we be discouraged, faint-hearted Creatures that we are, at those
little present Difficulties, which our Diligence will soon wear off and convert
into Ease and Pleasure?

VII. CONSIDER that with the Difficulty of them, there is a world of present
Peace and Satisfaction intermingled. If you fall back again to your old Lusts,
instead of these present Difficulties you start at, you must expect to have the
Trouble of a guilty Soul to contend with; which, if you have any sense of God
and of Good and Evil, will be much more grievous to you than they. But if you
go on, you will carry with you a quiet and a satisfied Mind, a Conscience that
will entertain you all along with such sweet and calm Reflections as will
abundantly compensate you for all the Hardships and Difficulties you encounter
on the way; that with innumerable Iterations will be always resounding to your
honest Endeavors those best and sweetest Echoes, Well done good and
profitable servant, how bravely have thou acquitted thy self, how manfully have
thou stood to thy Duty against all Oppositions, and with what a Gallant
Resolution have thou repulsed those Temptations that bore up against thee? Now
for a man to have his own Mind continually applauding him and crowning his
Actions with the Approbations of his Conscience, is Encouragement enough to
balance a thousand Difficulties; and the Sense that he has done his Duty, and
that the God above, and the Vice-god within him, are both satisfied and pleased
with him, will give him such a grateful Relish of each Action of his Warfare,
that the Difficulty will only serve to inhance the Pleasure of it.

AND as he will have great Peace and Satisfaction whilst he is contending with
these Difficulties, so when he has so far conquered them as that they are no
longer able to curb and withold him from the free and vigorous Exercise of
the heavenly Virtues, but in despite of them he can easily moderate his
Passions and Appetites by the Laws of his Reason, and freely love, adore and
imitate, submit to and confide in the ever blessed God, and cheerfully exert an
unforced Plainess and Simplicity, Good Will and Charity, Submission and
Condescension, Peace and Concord toward all men; when, I say, he has so far
surmounted the Difficulties of his Warfare, as that with any Measure of Freedom
and Vigor he can put forth all these heavenly Virtues, he will find himself not
only in a quiet, but in a heavenly Condition. For these heavenly Graces are the
Palate by which the immortal Mind tastes and relishes its Heaven, the blessed
Organs and Sensories by which it feels and perceives the Joys of the World to
come, and without which it can no more relish and enjoy them, than the
senseless Hive can the sweetness of the Honey that is in it. And consequently
the more quick and vivacious these heavenly Organs of the Mind are, and the
more they are disburthened of those carnal and devilish Lusts that blunt their
Sense and Perception, the more accurately they will, taste the Joys and
Pleasures of Heaven. So that when by the constant Practice of the warfaring
Duties of Religion, we have conquered those bad Inclinations of our Natures,
which render the heavenly Virtues so difficult to us, and do so clog and
incumber us in the Exercise of them, we shall find our selves in a Heaven upon
Earth, and each Act of Virtue will be Presention and Foretast of the Joys of a
celestial Life. And being arrived at this blessed State in which all heavenly
Virtue is so connaturalized to us, the sweet Experience we shall have of the
unspeakable Joys and Pleasures it abounds with, will cause us to look back with
wondrous Content and Satisfaction upon all those Difficulties we contended with
in our Way to it, and bless those Prayers and Tears, and Strivings with our
selves, those tedious Watchings and Self-examinations, etc. by which we have
now at last conquered and subdued them.

WHEREFORE since the Practice of these our warfaring Duties has so much
present Peace going along with it, and since by its natural Drift and Tendency
it is leading us forward to a State of so much Pleasure and Satisfaction, what a
Madness is it, for a man to be beaten off from it, by those present little
Difficulties that attend it! What man that consults his own Interest would ever
desist from the prosecuting such a gainful Warfare, in which to make him amends
for the present Pains it puts him to, he is not only possessed of Peace of
Conscience for the present, but assured of a happy Life for the future, when he
has conquered the Difficulties he contends with.

VIII. CONSIDER that the Difficulty of these Duties is abundantly compensated
by the Reward of them. A generous Mind will think no Means too hard which tend
to noble and worthy Ends; in the prosecution of which Opposition only whets its
Courage and Resolution. So that doubtless had we any Spark of Generosity in us,
the Vastness and Excellency of the End we pursue, would make us despise all
Difficulties in the Way to it. What a Meanness of Spirit therefore does it
argue in us to stand boggling, as we do, at the Difficulties of Religion; to
think much of spending a few Days or Years in this World in striving and
contending with our Inclinations, in Consideration and Watchfulness, in earnest
Prayer and severe Reflections on our selves, when we are assured beforehand
that at the Conclusion of this short Conflict we shall be carried off by Angels
in Triumph to Heaven, and there receive from the Captain of our Salvation a
Crown of everlasting Joys and Pleasures; when after a few Moments Pains and
Labor, we shall live Millions of Millions of most happy Ages in the ravishing
Fruition of a boundless Good, and after these are expired have as many Millions
of Millions more to live. What an unconscionable thing is it for us to complain
of any Difficulty, who have such a vast Recompense of Reward in our View? In
the name of God, Sirs, what would you have? Why we would have Heaven drop down
into our Mouths, and not put us to all this Trouble of reaching and climbing
after it. Would you so? it is a very modest Desire indeed; that is, you would
have the God of Heaven thrust his Favors upon you while you scorn and despise
them, and prostitute his Heaven to a company of Drones that don't think it
worth their while to go out of their Hives to gather it. O! for Shame look once
more upon Heaven, and consider again what it is to dwell in the Paradise of the
World with God and Angels and Saints, and in their blessed Company to live out
an Eternity in the most rapturous Contemplations and Loves and Joys; to bath
our dilated Faculties in an everflowing River of Pleasures, and in perfect
Ease, Health and Vigor of Mind to feed upon a Happiness that is as large as our
Capacities and as lasting as our Beings. Is this a Reward of that
inconsiderable nature, that we should think much to labor and contend for it;
is not the Hope of being satisfied for ever, a sufficient Encouragement to
induce us to deny our Lusts and Appetites a few Moments, or is there not good
enough in an everlasting Rest, to countervail a few Days and Years Labor and
Contention? What though you pant and labor now while you are climbing the
everlasting Hills, God be praised it is not so far to the Top but that the
pleasant Gales and glorious Prospects you shall everlastingly enjoy there, will
so abundantly compensate for the Difficulty of the Ascent, that instead of
complaining of it you will to eternal Ages reflect upon it with Pleasure and
Delight. Wherefore when your Courage begins to shrink at the Difficulty of your
Warfare, do but lift up your Eyes to the Recompense of Reward, and to be sure,
if you have any Heart, that will inspire you with such a brave Resolution, as
nothing will be too hard for but what is absolutely impossible. For how can we
be disheartened at any superable Difficulty, so long as we are animated with
this persuasion, that if we have our Fruit unto holiness, our End shall be
everlasting Life?

SECT. V. Concerning those Duties which appertain to the Perfection and
Consummation of our Christian Warfare, showing what they are, and how
effectually they conduce to the perfecting us in the Virtues of the Heavenly
Life.
I PROCEED now to the Third and last Part of our Christian Warfare, viz. the
Consummation of it, which is final Perseverance. For after we have actually
engaged, and made some Progress in it, our next Care and Duty is that we do not
relapse and basely retreat from what we have so prosperously undertaken, and
hitherto so effectually prosecuted, but that so long as we live we persist in
an open Defiance to our Sins, and Endeavor to pursue and mortify our
Inclinations to them, and persevere in the Practice of all Virtue; still
endeavoring thereby to improve and grow on to Perfection, that so we may die
as we have hitherto lived, and consummate our Warfare in a final Victory, and
that when our Lord shall come or send his Herald, Death, to summon us off from
the Field, we may be found fighting under his Banner against Sin, the World and
the Devil, and finally die as we have lived, his faithful Soldiers and
Followers. For this he indispensably exacts of us, viz. that we should be
faithful unto Death, Rev. ii.10. that we should patiently continue in
well-doing, Romans ii.7. that we should endure to the end, Matt. x.22. and hold
the beginning of our confidence steadfast to the end, Heb. iii.14. that we
should keep his works to the end, and finally overcome as well as fight, Rev.
ii.26. in a word, that having set our hands to the plow, we should not look
back, Luke ix.62. but that we should be always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
xv.58. the sense of all which is, that we should not only begin this our
Christian Warfare and prosecute it for a while, but that we should proceed and
persevere in it as long as we breath, and never lay down our Arms till we lay
down our Lives. In order to which, as we must still persevere in the Practice
of those Duties which appertain to the Course and Progress of our Warfare, so
there are sundry other Duties which we must practice, and which have a more
direct and immediate Influence upon the final Success and Consummation of it.
All which I shall reduce to these following Particulars;

1. That while we stand, we should not be over- confident of our selves, but
still keep a jealous eye upon the Weakness and Inconstancy of our own Natures.

2. That if at any time we wilfully fall and miscarry, we should immediately
arise again by Repentance.

3. That to prevent the like Falls and Miscarriages for the future, we should
endeavor to withdraw our Affections from the Temptations of the World, but
more especially from those which were the Occasions of our Fall.

4. That we should more curiously search into the smaller Defects and
Indecencies of our Nature, in order to our reforming and correcting them.

5. That, so far as lawfully we can, we should live in a close Communion with
the Church whereof we are Members.

6. That we should not out of a fond Opinion that we are good enough already,
stint our progress in Religion to any determinate Degree or Measure of Goodness.

7. That we should frequently entertain our selves with the prospect of our
Mortality, and endeavor to compose our selves beforehand into a good Posture
of dying.

8. That in order thereunto, we should be wondrous careful to discharge our
Consciences of all the Relics and Remains of our past Guilt.

9. That to compensate for these, so far as we are able, we should take care to
Redeem the Time we have formerly spent in sinful Courses, by being doubly
diligent in the Exercise of all the contrary Virtues, and the doing all the
contrary Good we are able.

10. That we should labor after a Rational and well-grounded Assurance of
Heaven.

I. TO the Perfection and Consummation of our Christian Warfare it is necessary
that while we stand, we should not be over confident of our selves, but still
keep a jealous Eye upon the Weakness and Inconstancy of our own Natures. For
thus the Apostle declares it to be the Will of God, that we should not trust in
our selves, i. e. rely too much upon our own Strength and Ability, 2 Cor. i.9*
and elsewhere he admonishes, let him that thinks he stands (or, the present
being put for the future, as it is very frequently, let him that thinks he
shall stand) take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. x.12. so also, Romans xi.20. Thou
stand by faith, be not high-minded but fear, i. e. it is thy Faith that
upholds thee, but be not too secure of thy Support, lest thou also fall and
perish, as thy Brethren the Jews have done before thee. And hence we are bid to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. ii.12. i. e. with a holy
Solicitude and Jealousy lest one time or other we should be Tempted and
overcome, and at the last finally miscarry. And indeed there is nothing does
more expose men to the hazard of falling than too much Confidence in their own
Strength. This makes them venture upon a thousand Temptations which they might
have fairly and much more prudently avoided; and hurries them hand over head
into such inviting Occasions and Opportunities of sinning, as do too often
inveagle and betray them in Despite of all their good Resolutions to the
contrary. Whereas had they but suspected themselves, and not presumed too much
upon their own Stedfastness, they would many a time have kept out of harms-way,
and avoided the Snares that did entangle them; but by venturing like Sampson to
lay down their Heads in a Dalilahs Lap, in Confidence of the Strength of their
own Resolution, they have been insensibly enticed, after some coy Refusals, to
betray themselves into the Snare of the Devil.

AND as through an overweening Confidence of our own Strength we expose our
selves to many needless Temptations, so we do also too often provoke God to
withdraw his Grace and Assistance from us, and to leave us to contend alone
with those Temptations whereunto we do so confidently expose our selves. For as
he is always ready to assist us, so he always expects that we should
acknowledge our Need of, and Dependence upon him, and not presume too much upon
our own Strength, which without his gracious Concurrence, is Weakness and
Impotence. When therefore without Gods Call and Warrant we will needs rush into
Temptations in Confidence of our own Ability to resist and conquer them, he
many times leaves us without his Aid and Assistance, that so he may chastise
our Presumption by permitting us to be defeated, and convince us by the woeful
Experiment of our Fall, how unable we are to stand without his Aid and Support.
It is our daily Prayer that God would not lead us into Temptation; but if for
our Trial he thinks meet to do so, we have all Assurance that if we be not
wanting to our selves, he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be
able to bear it, Cor. i.10.13. But if we will lead our selves into Temptation,
in Confidence of our own Ability to contend with and break through it, God is
so far from being obliged to second us in our Folly and unwarrantable Rashness,
that he is justly provoked by it to abandon us to our selves, and, as a certain
Consequence of that, to permit us to be vanquished and led captive. Wherefore as
we hope to persevere to the End and to bring our Warfare to a happy Conclusion,
it is highly necessary that we should always keep a jealous Eye upon our
selves, and not confide too much in our own Strength and Ability.

II. TO our final Perseverance in the Christian Warfare, it is also necessary
that if at any time we wilfully fall and miscarry in it, we should immediately
arise again by Repentance. For what is forbidden us as to one Sin, equally
extends to all, let not the sun go down upon your wrath, Ephesians. iv.26. that is,
if you have wilfully given the Reins to your Wrath, suffer it not to break
forth into contumelious Behavior, but repent of it immediately, before the Sun
sets; according to that old Practice of the Pythagoreans, mentioned by
Plutarch, who when at any time they fell into reproachful Language out of
Anger, (...) i. e. before ever the Sun set they always took care to be
reconciled, and constantly shook hands with and embraced one another; and the
reason of the Prohibition, which you have in the next verse, viz. neither give
place to the Devil, that is, by suffering your Wrath to grow into inveterate
Malice, equally extends to all other Sins, which if they be not immediately
rooted out by Repentance, will quickly improve into Habits. So that we have as
much reason to repent of our Lust before the Sun rises on it, and of our Fraud
and Oppression before it has run its course on it, as of our Wrath before it
goes down upon it. And consequently, by a parity of Reason, the Prohibition
must extend to all other Sins as well as this, and oblige us, when ever we have
wilfully sinned in any Particular, to revoke and expiate it by an immediate Act
of Repentance.

FOR he that has sinned wilfully and not repented of it, does all the while
continue an obstinate Rebel against God, and is so far from persevering in the
Christian Warfare, that he is actually listed a Voluntier in the adverse Party.
And if after we have thus sinned, Death should interpose between us and our
Repentance, (as who knows but it may if we repent not immediately) we shall be
so far from consummating our Christian Warfare in Victory, that we shall die
Vassals to the Devil. But then as by sinning wilfully we do desert God, so by
continuing impenitent under it we still run farther and farther from him, and
thereby make so wide a Gap and Interruption in our religious Progress, as will
not be easily repaired again; and whereas had we repented and come back without
Delay as soon as we had strayed from our Duty, we might have soon recovered the
Ground we had lost by it, and by a little more Diligence have gotten as far
onward as if we had never interrupted our Progress at all; by deferring our
Repentance we set our selves farther and farther back and shall every day be
more and more indisposed to return. For in the Course of our Religion there is
no standing still, but either we are progressive or retrograde, going backward
or forward as long as we live; so that when once we are out of our Way, we are
still going farther out, till such time as we return again; and consequently
the longer we are out, the harder 'twill be to return, and the farther we shall
have to the end of our Way. For when I first sin, and the Wound of my Innocence
is yet green and fresh, it may easily be cured by the timely Application of a
sorrowful Confession and new Resolution of Amendment; but if I neglect it,
'twill rot and putrify, my Sense of it will be hardened, and my Inclination to
it grow every day more inveterate, and then if it be not lanc'd and corroded by
a sharp, a long and a painful Repentance, it will turn into an incureable
Gangrene. Hence the Apostle bids us exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, that is, to repent while it is called to day, lest any of us be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. iii.13. So that when we have
wilfully sinned, we run a mighty Hazard of our final perseverance, if we don't
repent immediately. For all the while we delay, our Conscience grows more
seared, and our Lust grows more confirmed, and God knows where it will end, but
it is fearfully to be suspected that that neglected Bruise which we got by our
Fall will grow worse and worse, and determine at last in final Impenitency.
Wherefore as we intend to persevere in well-doing, it concerns us in the first
place to take all possible* Care not to give way to any wilful Sin, nor suffer
our selves by any Hopes or Fears to be tempted from our good Resolution; but if
at any time our wicked Inclinations should prevail against it, to betake our
selves immediately to a serious Repentance, to make a sorrowful Confession of
it to our offended God, and solemnly renew our Resolution against it, that so
we may stop the growing evil betime, before it is capable of indangering our
final Apostasy.

III. TO our final perseverance, it is necessary that to prevent the like Falls
and Miscarriages for the future, we should endeavor to withdraw our Affections
from the Temptations of the World, but more especially from those Temptations
which were the Occasions of our Fall. For thus we are strictly prohibited to
set our affections upon things on the earth, Col. iii.21. to love the World and
the things that are in the World, Joh. i, ii.15. to lay up for our selves
treasures upon earth, Mat. vi.19. and it is the proper Character of a true
Christian to be crucified to the World, Gal. vi.14. and to converse as a
Stranger and a Pilgrim in it, Heb. xi.13. As on the contrary, to mind earthly
things, and to be lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, are made the
proper Characters of Infidels and Apostates, Phil. iii.19. compared with Tim.
ii. 3.4. And so inconsistent is an inordinate Affection to the World with our
perseverance in the Christian Warfare, that St. James expressly tells us, that
the friendship of the World is enmity with God, Jam. iv.4. and it is to the
Excess of our friendship to it that the Scripture frequently attributes our
Apostasy, Tim. ii.4.10. and the Apostle tells us, that they that will be rich,
that is, immoderately covet to be so, fall into temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction; and that the love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy vi.9,
10. From all which it is apparent, how necessary it is, in the accounts of
Christianity, in order to our perseverance, that we should endeavor to wean
and abstract our selves from the World.

FOR this world is the Magazine of all those Temptations by which our Virtue
and Innocence is importuned and assaulted; and it is either the Hope of some
worldly Pleasure, Profit or Honor that allures, or the Fear of some of the
contrary Evils which are incident to us in the Course of Religion that
affrights us from our Duty. Whilst therefore we immoderately love those Goods
and Evils which are the Solicitours of Vice, we are in very great danger of
being conquered and led captive by it. For it is not for the sake of sinning
that men sin, but for the sake of those Goods, or to avoid those Evils which
are appendent to their sinning or not sinning; and consequently, the more a man
loves those Goods which cling and adhere to a sinful Action, the more propense
he will be to the Commission of it; and the more he dreads those Evils which he
can most easily avoid by a sinful Action, the more prone and inclinable he will
be to it. Wherefore to secure our perseverance in this Warfare against sin, it
is absolutely necessary that we rectify our Opinion of the Goods and Evils of
this World, and moderate and abate our Affection toward them, especially
toward those that have been most prevalent with us. For the Temptation that
prevails upon us discovers the weak Side of our Nature, and instructs the Devil
what Good or Evil it is that is most apt to allure or affright us; and to be
sure that subtle Tempter, who has been so many thousand Years studying the
Arts of seducing us, will not fail to assault us again where he has been
already successful; and therefore it concerns us to fortify our selves there
where we have so much reason to expect the Enemy will assault us, and to
rectify our Opinions of and mortify our Affections to those things which have
already so much imposed upon our Virtue and Innocence. For it is our Imagination
that gives Life and Efficacy to the Charms and Terrors of the World, and
renders them so successful against us; we fancy that to be in them which is
not, and so are affected not so much with the things themselves as with the
false Representations we make of them.

FOR it is plain the Goods of the World are beholden to our selves for the
greatest part of those Beauties with which they tempt and allure us; and it is
our Fancy that gives the Paint and Fucus with which they charm and inamour our
Affections; and so for the Evils of the World, it is our own Imagination that
disguises them into such Bugs and Scare-crowes, and puts those ghastly Vizors on
them with which they fright and amaze us. If therefore we would but take care
to rectify our Opinions of them both, and to strip them out of their imaginary
Terrors and Allurements, we should thereby disarm them of their main Strength,
and render them much less able to seduce us for the future. And this methinks
we might easily do, if we would but fairly represent to our selves the present
State and Posture of our Affairs. For we are a sort of Beings, that are every
Moment travailing from hence to an eternal World, where an unexpressible
Happiness or Misery attends us; and all that we enjoy or suffer in this Life,
is only the Convenience or Inconvenience of a short Journey to a long Home, but
can have no other Influence upon our everlasting Condition, than as it is the
Occasion either of our Virtue or Vice, which are the only Goods and Evils that
will accompany us to Eternity, and make us happy or miserable there for ever.
But as for Poverty or Riches, Pain or Pleasure, Disgrace or Reputation, they
are things which probably within these ten or twenty Years will be as perfectly
indifferent to us as our last Nights Dream was when we awoke in the Morning.
And this, methinks, duly considered, were enough to render us very unconcerned
at any Good or Evil that can happen to us here. For what a mighty Matter is it
whether I fare well or ill for twenty or thirty Years, who when that is expired
must be happy or miserable for Millions of Millions of Ages; and what will
these little Goods or Evils signify to me, when my Body is in the Grave, and
my Soul in Eternity? When I am stripped into a naked Spirit, and set ashore upon
the invisible World, then all these things will be as if they never were, and
in the twinkling of an Eye I shall lose Sight of them for ever; and of all that
I enjoyed or suffered in this Life I shall have nothing remaining but my Virtue
or Vice, whose Issues will prove my eternal Happiness or Misery. Doubtless
would we but accustom our Minds to such Reflections as these, they would
effectually restrain us from the immoderate Love or Fear of the things of this
World, and reduce us to a constant and efficacious Persuasion, that there is no
Good in this World comparable to that of doing our Duty, nor any Evil incident
to us in this Life that is not infinitely less formidable than Sin. And when
once our Affection to this World, and our Opinion of the Goods and Evils of it,
are thus moderated and rectified, the Temptations to Sin will quite lose their
hold of us, and be no more able to fasten upon our Resolution. So that now we
may pass safely through them whilst they are sparkling about us, there being no
Tinder in our Breasts for them to catch fire and kindle upon. Now they will be
no longer capable to allure or affright us, those bosom Orators being silenced
that were wont to contend for them, and to magnify their Charms and Terrors;
and when we neither immoderately love nor fear them, 'twill be no hard matter
to defend our Virtue and Innocence against all their Assaults and Importunities.

IV. TO our final Perseverance, it is necessary that we should more curiously
search into the smaller Defects and Indecencies of our Nature in order to our
reforming and correcting them. Hence we are commanded to hate even the garments
spotted by the flesh, Jude 23. i. e. to take care of the Beginnings of Sin, of
any thing that has the least Spot or Infection of it; and accordingly we are
obliged not only to take care to rub out the greater Stains of our Nature, but
to be diligent that we may be found of our Lord in peace without spot and
blameless, 2 Pet. iii.14. i. e. to endeavor to reform those smaller and more
indiscernable Defects of our Nature, which though they do not totally stain,
yet very much spot and blemish it; that so at the coming of our Lord we may be
found not only sincere and upright, but, as near as may be, innocent and
blameless. For so, Phil. ii.15. we are bid to be blameless, harmless, and
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, i. e. to
endeavor so to demean our selves in this World as that we may appear not only
honest for the main, but, so near as is possible, spotless and unreproveable.
And indeed there is nothing does more frequently occasion men's final
Miscarriage in Religion, than their not being careful and diligent in this
matter. When they first enter into the Christian Warfare, they very
industriously set themselves against that Course of wilful Sin in which they
formerly lived, and this were wondrous well, if they did not stop here and go
no farther; but alas, in the mean time, while they are thus industriously
busied in subduing their old Sins, there are a great many lesser Flaws and
Defects in their Nature. which by a timely Care and Inspection they might
easily correct; but these they take no Notice of, but quietly permit them to
grow and increase, till at last they become as hurtful and dangerous to them as
their old Sins were, against which they have all this while so zealously
contended. As for Instance, when they first entered upon a Resolution of
Amendment, they were profane it may be, or sensual, or vehemently adicted to
Fraud and Oppression; and against these they opposed themselves with great Zeal
and Animosity; and so far they did well, but in the mean time perhaps there was
Pride and Ostentation, Envy and Peevishness, Self-will and Censoriousness
secretly budding and sprouting up in their Natures, all which they might have
easily cured by timely Applications; but alas! in the Heat of their Contest
against their other Sins, they never so much as minded or regarded these, but
even left them alone till they grew up into obstinate and inveterate Habits,
and became every whit as fatal and destructive to their Souls as those were
which they have been all this while subduing and mortifying. So that after all
they have only changed their Sins, and have been conjuring up one Devil while
they have been laying another; and whilst the Tide of their Wickedness has
been ebbing on this Shore, it has been flowing on the contrary, and as it has
sunk in Sensuality, it has swelled into Devilishness. Perhaps whilst you are
zealously carrying on your Warfare against your old Sins, you may find your
selves too apt to be tickled with Applause, and puffed with vain Ostentation;
have a Care now, that while you are starving one Vice, you do not pamper
another. For if you do not correct this little Irregularity of your Nature
betimes, 'twill soon be as dangerous and mischievous to you, as ever any of
those Vices were against which you are contending; 'twill by degrees so
insinuate into your good Intentions, and so sophisticate the Purity of them,
that at last you will intend nothing else but Applause; and so your whole
Religion will be converted into dead Show and empty Pageantry, and your
spiritual Warfare will prove only a passage out of Profaneness into Hypocrisy.
It may be whilst you are contending against those fleshly Inclinations by which
you have formerly been captivated, your Hearts will begin to swell with an
overweening Conceit of your own Virtue and Godliness, and as a Consequence of
that to entertain contemptuous and censorious Thoughts of your Brethren; beware
now, that whilst you are struggling with your old fleshly Lusts, you do not
overlook these little Defects and Indecencies of your Nature; lest while you
are conquering one Sort of sins, you be captivated by another. For if you do
not take care to nip them in their Buds, and to check these little Essays and
Beginnings of them, they will soon spring up into Habits of Pride and
Insolence, Rancour and Incharitableness, and so your Warfare against Sin will
be only a Transition from one Evil into another, from the Pollutions of the
Flesh into the Pollutions of the Spirit, and from the Nature of Beasts into the
Nature of Devils. Wherefore if you would be finally successful in the Christian
Warfare, you must take great Care that while you are contending with the
grosser and more inveterate Vices of your Nature, you do not neglect its lesser
Defects and Irregularities; for whilst they are lesser they may be easily
corrected, but if they are not, they will soon grow greater, and in the End
prove as dangerous as those you are now contending with. For every Vice is
small in the Beginning and easy to be cured, but if it be neglected, like a
Scratch in the Flesh, it will corrupt and rancle into a spreading Gangreen.

V. TO our Perseverance to the End in this our Christian Warfare, it is also
necessary that, so far as lawfully we can, we should live in close Communion
with the Church whereof we are Members. It Is true a particular Church may be so
corrupted, as that its Members may be obliged to disunite themselves from it.
For every man is obliged by Virtue of his being in any Society, not to agree to
any thing which tends to the apparent Ruin of it. Now the main End of
Christian Society being the Honor of God, and the Salvation of Souls, every
man that enters into it is thereby obliged in his own Station to advance this
End; and consequently as to join in all Acts of the Christian Society he is
united to, so far as they tend thereunto, so to refuse all such Acts of that
Society, if any such should be enjoined, as do apparently oppose and are
directly repugnant to it. So that if any Act that is apparently sinful, be
enjoined by the particular Church whereof I am a Member, as a necessary
Condition of my Communion with her, I am bound to abstain from it, for the sake
of the General End of Christian Society. As for Instance, suppose the Church
whereof I am a Member, require it as a Condition of my Communion, that I should
transgress any just Law of the Commonwealth whereof I am a Subject; in this
Case I am bound rather to desert that Churches Communion, than live in wilful
Disobedience to the Civil Authority. And this is the Case of those men, who
though they live in a Christian Commonwealth, have been Baptized into, and bred
up in the Communion of particular Congregations that contrary to Law have
separated themselves from the Established, National Church; for if in this
national Church there be nothing imposed on them by the Laws of the
Commonwealth that is apparently contradictory to the Laws of Christ, they are
bound in Conscience to desert those separate Congregations (allowing them to be
true Churches) and to join themselves with the Church National; and if they do
not, they are wilful Offenders against the Law of Christ, which requires us to
obey all humane Ordinances for the Lords sake. And again, supposing one
National Church to be subject to another, that which is subject is bound to
refuse the Communion of that which is superior, if it cannot enjoy it without
complying with Impositions that are apparently sinful. Which is evidently the
Case between us and the Church of Rome, supposing that de jure we were once her
Subjects and Members; for had we been so, we should doubtless never have
separated our selves from her, could we but have separated her Sins from her
Communion; could we have professed her Creed without implicitly believing all her
Cheats and Impostures, or submitted our selves to her Guides without apparent
Danger of being misled by them into the pit of Destruction, or joined with her
public Services without worshipping of Creatures, or received her Sacraments
without practicing the grossest Superstitions and Idolatries. But when she had
made it necessary for us either to sin with or separate from her, we could have
no other honest Remedy but only to withdraw; and if in this our Separation
there had been a sinful Schism on either side, we could have appealed to Heaven
and Earth whose the Guilt of it was; theirs that forced us upon it, or ours
that were forced to it. But yet the Case of our Separation from the Church of
Rome, is vastly different from that of the Separation of private Members from
their own particular Churches. For we affirm that the Church of Rome is but a
particular Church, whose Authority extends no farther than to its own native
Members, and consequently has no more Power to impose Laws of Communion upon
us, than we have upon her; our particular Church being altogether as distinct
and independent from her, as she is from ours. So that though the Terms of
Communion she imposes upon her own Members were all of them lawful and
innocent, yet do they no more oblige us as we are Christians of the Church of
England, than the lawful Commands of the Great Mogul do, as we are Subjects of
the Kingdom of England.

BUT the Case of private members, whither of ours or any other particular
Church, is vastly different. For if we will allow particular Churches to be so
many formed Societies of Christians; (as we must do, or else degrade them into
so many confused multitudes) we must necessarily allow them to have a just
Authority (even as all other formed Societies have) over their own Members. And
that they have so, is evident not only from the Nature of the thing, but also
from Scripture, where the Bishops and Pastors of particular Churches are said
to be constituted by the Holy Ghost Overseers of their particular Flocks, Acts
xx.28. which word both in sacred and profane Writ denotes a ruling Power. And
accordingly these Overseers are elsewhere called ruling-Elders, Tim. i.5.17.
and the Subjects and Members of their Churches are required to obey them, as
those that have the Rule over them, Heb. xiii.17. and elsewhere the Apostle
exhorts them to know, i. e. submissively to own the Authority of those that
were over them in the Lord, These. i.5.12. By all which it is evident, that the
Members of particular Churches are by divine Institution subjected to the
Authority of their spiritual Governors, and obliged in all things to obey them,
wherein they are not countermanded by Christ himself. So that though one
particular Church may refuse the Impositions of another, and that not only as
they are sinful, but as they are Impositions, because the other has no lawful
Authority over it; yet is it by no means lawful for the Subjects of any
particular Church to disobey their Church-Governors in any lawful matter;
because being subjected to their Authority by Christ the supreme Head of the
Church-Catholick, they are obliged to submit to them as to his Substitutes and
Vicegerents in every thing which he has not antecedently prohibited. And if
rather than do so, they shall choose to revolt from the Communion of their
Church, they are Schismatics, or, which is the same thing, they are Rebels to
Christ's Authority in that particular Church they Revolt from. For what Faction
is in the State, that is Schism in the Church, viz. an unjust Opposition to
Authority; the one to Christ's civil Authority derived upon our Magistrates, the
other to his spiritual Authority derived upon our Bishops and Ecclesiastical
Governors.

IT IS true in some Cases, as I hinted before, withdrawing from the Communion of
a Church may be so far from being a Rebellion against Christ, that it may be an
Act of Duty and Obedience to him. For where Christ who is my supreme Lord, and
my Ecclesiastical Governors who are in Authority under him, command things that
are directly inconsistent, I am doubtless bound to obey him rather than them;
yea though their Commands are not inconsistent in themselves, yet if I am fully
persuaded they are, it is all one to me. Fot when I do what I falsely believe
Christ has forbidden, I am in Will as much a Rebel against his Authority, as
when I do what I truly believe he has forbidden. And so by not complying with
my spiritual Governors out of an innocent mispersuasion that what they command
is unlawful, I do formally and in Will as much obey Christ in so doing, as if
it were really unlawful. So that in short, when the Governors of the Church
whereof I am a Member do impose as the Conditions of my Communion, things that
are either unlawful in themselves, or that, after due Examination, I verily
believe are unlawful, I am bound in Obedience to the Authority of Christ,
rather to desert that Communion, than to comply with the Terms and Conditions
of it.

BUT since to desert the Communion of a Church is a matter of vast Moment, (as
I shall prove by and by) it ought not to be done without the greatest Caution
and Tenderness. For he that rejects sinful Terms of Communion without just
Enquiry and sufficient Examination, is formally as much a Schismatic, i. e. he
is as much a Rebel in Will to Christ's spiritual Authority in his Church
Delegates and Vicegerents, as he that rashly rejects innocent and lawful ones.
For had it been only the Sinfulness of the Condition that displeased him, he
would have made Conscience before he presumed to reject it, duly to inform
himself whether it were sinful or no; but by thus rejecting it at a venture,
without a due Enquiry into the nature of it, he plainly shows that 'twas not so
much the Sin that displeased him, as the Authority that imposed it; and that
'twas not his Conscience that took offense at it, but his Humor; and
consequently, that he would have had the same Dislike of it, though it had been
lawful and innocent. For Conscience being an act of the Judgment and Reason,
cannot be offended without Reason either real or apparent; and without making a
due Enquiry into the Nature of the thing we are offended at, we can have no
Reason that will either warrant or excuse our Offense.

NOW to a due Enquiry, it is necessary that we should impartially examine both
sides of the Question; and that while we are doing so, we should keep both our
Ears open to the Matter in Debate, and equally attend to what can be said for,
as well as to what can be said against it; and then that upon a full hearing of
both, we should determine, as near as we can, on which side the Truth lies,
without Favor or Affection. For he that enquires only what can be said against
the Matter he is offended at, does thereby give a plain Indication that he is
resolved to be offended at it right or wrong; and that the End of his Enquiry
is not so much to satisfy his Conscience, as to fortify his unreasonable
Prejudice. Wherefore before we do reject the Conditions of our Churches
Communion as sinful, we are obliged under the Penalty of wilful Schism
impartially to enquire what is to be said for as well as against them; and for
this End to apply our selves to our Spiritual Governors and Pastors, and
propose our Doubts to them, and attend to their Resolutions with an honest,
teachable Mind that is willing to be informed; and where we are capable of
judging, faithfully to peruse those Books and Arguments that make for the one
side as well as the other. For unless we do thus, its plain that we are biassed
by a factious Inclination, and that we have a great Mind to separate from the
Churches Communion. For if we were not prejudiced against her Authority by a
schismatical Temper of Mind, we should be as forward at least to consult what
may be said for her Impositions, as what is said against them.

BUT then if the Matters she imposes are such as a plain and illiterate
Communicant cannot judge of, nor comprehend the Force of the Reasons that make
for or against them, such Persons in such Cases are obliged humbly to acquiesce
in the Churches Authority, and not blindly to separate from her they know not
why. As for Instance, suppose the Matter imposed should be such a Form of
Government, or such Modes of Discipline, or Rights and Circumstances of Divine
Worship as carry no such apparent Evil in them, or express Contradiction to any
Command of our Savior as to enable an illiterate Christian rationally to
pronounce them unlawful, and whither they be unlawful or no is not to be
determined perhaps without some Skill in the Original Languages and the
critical Acceptations of Phrases, or Insight into Ecclesiastical History or
Metaphysical Nicities and Speculations; and it is by some of these that most of
the Controversies between us and our dissenting Brethren are to be judged and
decided. Now in such Matters as these, where he cannot judge for himself, what
should an unlearned Communicant do? Why this he knows well enough, that it is
his Duty in all lawful things to submit to the Governors of his Church, and
reverence Christ's Authority in them, but whether the abovenamed matters they
impose be lawful or no, he neither does nor can know. So that if upon the score
of those Impositions, he rejects the Churches Communion, he rejects it he knows
not why; and to avoid doing that which he does not know is a Sin, he refuses to
do that which he knows is a Duty. So that whether that which the Church imposes
be lawful or no, it is apparent Rebellion in him to refuse it; because for all
that he knows it is lawful, and though it should be unlawful, yet that cannot
be the Motive of his Noncompliance with it, who does not understand the
Reasons that make it so. He therefore that separates from the Communion of the
Church for Causes that he cannot judge of, must necessarily separate without
Cause or Reason; he can have neither true nor false Pretense for his
Separation; because the Arguments pro and con are beyond the Sphere of his
Cognizance; and consequently if he thereupon withdraw from the Churches
Communion, it is not because he cannot comply with her sinful Impositions, but
because he will not submit to her just Authority. Whereas by modestly
submitting our Judgment to the Churches, in Cases where we cannot judge for our
selves, we take an effectual Course to secure our Innocence. For though that
which the Church injoins us should be materially sinful, yet to us who neither
do nor can understand it to be so, it will be imputed only as an innocent
Error; because by following the Churches Reason where own cannot guide us, we
take the best Course we can not to be mistaken; and if we should be mistaken,
we have this to excuse us, that 'twas by following an Authority which God
himself has set over us; whereas if we are mistaken on the other side, we are
left altogether inexcusable.

BUT then there may be other Conditions of Church Communion, of whose
unlawfulness a Communicant may be very doubtful, though he be not confidently
persuaded of it; and what is to be done in this Case? To which I answer; First,
that it is doubtless our Duty not Rashly to determine any thing to be false or
unlawful which our spiritual Governors have determined to be true or lawful.
For we are bound by the Law of Christian Modesty, to conclude that they having
a larger Prospect of things than we, and greater Advantages of enquiring into
them, are far more capable Judges of what is true and lawful; and consequently
though we may possibly have some little Probability that their Opinion is false
or their Command unlawful, yet we ought not to determine it so, unless it be in
such plain and evident Cases as do not only outweigh the Probability of their
Opinions, but the Authority of them to. Wherefore in Cases of a doubtful
Nature, it is both modest and safe to subscribe to the Judgment of our
Superiors; because in so doing we have not only our own Ignorance to excuse,
but their Authority to warrant us; and if we should happen to be in the Wrong
through our Modesty and Humility, 'twill be safer for us than to be in the
Right through our Pride and Self-conceit. But perhaps the Probability of our
side may be so great, or at least seem so to us, that notwithstanding we give
all due Respect and Deference to her Authority, we cannot forbear doubting of
the Lawfulness of her Conditions of Communion. If so, then, Secondly, it is to
be considered that it is as much our Duty to Obey her Commands in things that
are lawful, as not to Obey them in things that are unlawful; and therefore if
we only doubt whether her Commands be lawful or no, our Doubt ought to make us
as fearful of disobeying as it does of obeying them, because the Danger of
sinning is on both sides equal. And therefore in this Case, wherein I am
necessitated to determine my self one way or the other, it is doubtless my Duty to
determine on that side which makes most for the Churches Security and Peace,
which next to the Honor of God and the Salvation of Souls ought to be
preferred above all things; and which consequently, if it be of any Weight with
me, must necessarily turn the Scale of my Choice when it is before in
Aequilibrio; and whither to obey or disobey be most for the Churches Peace, is
very easy to be determined.

THE Sum of all therefore is this, that it is our Duty to continue in strict
Obedience to, and Communion with that Particular Church whereof we are Members,
so long as it injoyns us nothing that is plainly and apparently sinful; that if
either we cannot judge of the Sinfulness or Lawfulness of her Conditions of
Communion, or do only doubt of their Lawfulness, we are obliged to submit to
her Judgment and Authority, and not to separate from her till upon an impartial
Enquiry into the Reasons of both sides, we are fully convinced that they are
sinful.

NOW that this is an indispensable Duty of our Religion, is evident not only
from the abovenamed Scriptures by which the Bishops of particular Churches are
constituted the Overseers and Governors of them, and the Subjects and Members
of those Churches are required to yield them Obedience; but also from those
Texts which forbid Divisions in the particular Churches, such as, 1 Cor. i.10,
I beseech you by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that there be no divisions
among you; and which bid us mark them that cause divisions among us and avoid
them, Romans xvi.17. and also which Schisms and Divisions to be Fruits of the
flesh, as particularly, 1 Cor. iii.3. and St. Jude xix. and in a word, which
require us to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
Ephesians. iv.3. to be of one mind, 2 Cor. xiii.11. and to stand fast in one Spirit,
with one Mind, Phil. i.27. all which was spoke to Christians as they were
Members of particular Churches, to oblige them by no means to dissent and
separate from those Churches, unless they were forced to it by just and
manifest Reasons; and methinks it is a most pathetical Conjuration of the
Apostle, If there be any Consolution in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like minded, being of one accord, and of one mind, 2 Phil. 1, 2. which
Exhortation he gives them as they were a particular Corporation of Christians
under Epaphroditus their Head and Bishop by whom he sent this Epistle to them.
The sense of all which is, to oblige us not to disunite our selves from the
Church of which we are Members, so long as we are permitted to continue in her
Communion without doing any thing that is apparently unlawful. Or if we suppose
those Divisions which the Apostle speaks of and forbids, to be meant of
Factions within the Church without actual Separation, then much more is
Separation which is the highest Faction and Breach of Unity to be looked upon as
wicked and unlawful. So that for men to separate from the Churches Communion
upon little Piques, uncertain Scruples, and blind Prejudices, is a very great
and dangerous Sin against the Gospel; it is a manifest Violation of the Laws of
Union, and an open Rebellion against Christ's Authority in his Church. And being
so, it is no Wonder that in the purest Ages of Christianity 'twas branded with
such an infamous Character. For thus in the 31 Canon of the Apostles, it is
called Ambition and Tyranny, and condemned by Ignatius, the Disciple of St.
John, as the (...), or Original of Evils, Ep. ad smyrn. as a Sin that shuts men
out of the Kingdom of Heaven, Ep. ad Philad. and by the African Code it is
styled a destructive, sacrilegious Sin, Con. Carth, etc. Can. 100. and St.
Cyprian makes it to be more Heinous than the Sin of the Lapsi that offered
Sacrifice to Idols to avoid persecution, and to be such a Sin as martyrdom it
self would not expiate, de Unit. Eccles. and Dionysius Alexandrinus affirms
that to suffer martyrdom rather than make a Schism in the Church, is as
Glorious an Act as to die refusing to offer Sacrifice to Idols, Eusebius. Eccl.
Hist. lib. 6. And as they thus decry Schism so on the contrary they extol
Union, as the Nurse of Piety, the Fence of Religion, the Quintessence and
Extract of all Christian Virtue.

AND indeed it is to the Unity of the members of the Church among themselves,
that the Scripture attributes their Growth and Emprovement in Piety and Virtue.
For thus the Apostle tells us not only that Charity (or a mutual Agreement
among Church Members) edifies, 1 Cor. viii.1. but also assures us that the
whole Church or Collection of Members becomes an holy Temple and an Habitation
of God, by being (...) compacted and closely united together in all its Parts,
Ephesians. ii.21, 22. and Ephesians. iv.16. he tells us, that the Church increases or
improves unto the edifying it self in love by being closely compacted and
united in all its parts and members; and Col. ii.19. he tells us, that it is not
only from its Union with Christ, and those nourishing Influences that are
thereby conveyed from him, that the Church increases with the increase of God,
but also from its being knit together or firmly united in all its Parts. And if
Union be so necessary to the Growth and Perfection of the Church, it can be no
less necessary to the Improvement of each particular Member of it. For,

1. Schisms and unnecessary Breaches of Church Communion do naturally sour the
Tempers of men, and render them peevish and uncharitable toward one another.
For the separating Party must in their own Vindication be forced to accuse
those they separate from of something that may be foul enough to justify their
Separation; and what they want in Reality they must make up in Pretense;
otherwise they will be looked upon as peevish and obstinate Schismatics; and
then the Party they separate from, will be sure to deem itself injured, and in
its own Defense be forced to recriminate, and this will alarm the Separatists
into greater Heats and Animosities, and so like two Flints dashed together,
they will be continually sparkling and spitting fire at one another, till they
have kindled the quarrel into an inquenchable Flame. Whereas had the Dividers
but continued their Communion, all this might have been prevented, and they
might have easily continued their Charity, though they had retained the
Opinions upon which they separated. For had they but exercised that Modesty and
Goodness as not to prefer their own private Sentiments before the Reason and
Peace of the whole Church, they would either have kept their Opinions to
themselves, or at least not have advanced them into Principles of Separation;
and so by continuing in Communion with that Party of the Church from whom they
dissented in Opinion, they would have declared that they judged their Errors to
be tolerable. For by not separating from them, they would have plainly
manifested that they saw Reason enough to unite upon the score of those Points
in which they were agreed, but none to disunite upon the score of these in
which they differed; and consequently that they had a great deal of Reason to
love, but none to hate and persecute one another; and whilst they mutually
retained this good Opinion of one another, it is very unlikely that their little
Differences should cause any great Breaches in their Charity. Schism therefore
being so destructive to our Charity, which is one of the leading Virtues of our
Religion, must needs have a very malevolent Aspect upon our Perseverance. For
he that from a charitable Temper, relapses into a spiteful and rancorous one,
is apostatised from one half of the Religion of a Christian, and has exchanged
one of the fairest Graces of a Saint, for one of the blackest Characters of a
Devil. But then

2. Schisms or unnecessary Breaches of Church Communion do naturally lead to
the foulest Hypocrisies. For he that separates from a Church is a very bad man,
if he has not a great Opinion of, and Zeal for those things upon which he
separates; which Zeal of his, when once he is actually separated, will be much
more inflamed, and that both by the Opposition of the Church he is separated
from, and the Instigation of the Sect he is separated to; and so by Degrees
that holy Fervor which should animate him in the plain and unquestionable
Duties of Religion, will blaze into a fierce Contention for those little
Opinions that constitute the Sect he is engaged in. For our Nature being finite
and limited in all its Operations, it is impossible we should operate diverse
ways at once with equal Force and Vigor; but whatsoever Time and Attention we
bestow upon one thing, we must necessarily substract from another. Now whilst
we continue in a peaceable Communion with the Church, we have no other use for
our Zeal, but to inspire our Devotions, to quicken our Virtues, and to fight
against our Sins with it, and this all men agree is the best Use it can be put
to; but when once we are entered into a schismatical Separation, we shall find
other Employment for it; namely, to quarrel at Ecclesiastical Constitutions, to
wrangle about Modes and Circumstances of Worship, and contend for our trifling
Speculations and Opinions. Which must necessarily weaken it in its nobler
Operations, and render it more remiss and indifferent in the great and
indispensible Duties of Religion; and whilst it is thus impertinently busied in
picking Straws, and contending about Mint and Cummin, to be sure it must more
or less neglect the great and weighty things of the Law; and so proportionably
as it grows warmer and warmer about little Opinions and Circumstances of
Religion, it will be continually waxing cooler and cooler in the necessary and
essential Duties of it, till at last it is wholly degenerated into Peevishness
and Faction, and dwindled away into a fierce Contention about Trifles. That
this is the natural Effect of Schism appears by too many woeful Experiments. For
how many Instances of men are there among our selves, who had once an honest
Zeal for the Life and Substance of Religion, and made great Conscience of
living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, but afterward
becoming Bigots to such a Sect or Party, have diverted the Stream of their Zeal
into another Channel, where its irregular Current has only made a Noise, and
filled the world with a loud and turbulent Clamor about little things, but as
to those great and important Duties upon which their Happiness depends has
been profoundly mute and indifferent; and so their Religion like an Hectic
Body, has by degrees been consumed by its own Heats, whilst that Zeal and
Fervor which should move and animate it has been converted into its Disease,
and wholly evaporated into Faction and Turbulency; and whilst their Zeal is
thus misimployed about the little Trifles of their Sect, and they are ready to
start at an innocent Ceremony, and to swoon at the sight of an indifferent Mode
and Appendage of Religion, as if they were afraid lest it should infect them at
a distance, they can swallow Camels though they strain at these Gnats, and
glibly digest the grossest Immoralities.

3. And lastly, Schisms and unnecessary Breaches of Church Communion do
naturally lead to downright Irreligion. For when once a man is departed from an
established Church without a just Warrant, there is nothing can confine or set
Shores to him, he has no Principles that can stay him any where, or set any
Measures of changing to him. For when upon a mere Humor or Fancy he has run
from the Church to such a Sect, what should hinder him from running from that
Sect to another, and so on from Sect to Sect, till he has run himself out of
all Religion? He is rolling down a steep Hill, and has no Principles to stay
him, so that it is impossible to determine whither he will go, or where he will
stop; he may perhaps stay at such an Opinion, but if he does, it is by chance,
and if he does not, he will be endlesly rolling from one Opinion to another,
and shifting his Church as often as his Almanac. For Schism is a large
Labyrinth, that naturally divides and subdivides into infinite Paths and
Allies, wherein a man may wander to Eternity, and the farther he goes the more
he may lose himself; and then when he has wandered a while out of one wild
Opinion into another, and still perceives that the farther he goes, the more he
is dissatisfied, it is a thousand to one if he does not at last suspect and
question all Religion, as if the whole were an intricate maze of absurd or
doubtful Opinions, contrived on purpose to amuse men's Minds, and entangle them
in endless Perplexities. For the Schismatic, as I showed before, does commonly
place a great Part of his Religion in that Opinion upon which he divides and
separates; so that if once he be dissatisfied with this, as in all probability
he will quickly be, having begun already to ring Changes, he will be under a
great Temptation to mistrust the whole Religion to be as great an Imposture as
he finds this darling Opinion is; especially after he has run through several
Sets of Opinions, and finds them at last to be all Delusions. For as weak
Heads, when they perceive the Battlements shake, are apt to suspect that the
Foundations are infirm; so weak Understandings will be ready to suspect even
the fundamental Principles of Religion, when once they perceive those darling
Notions totter which they have confidently presumed to superstruct upon it.
Upon this Account therefore I make no doubt, but that the Atheism of this
present Age, is very much owing to its Sects and Divisions. For how many woeful
Examples have we of persons who had once a great deal of Zeal for and
Satisfaction in Religion, that upon their causless Defection from the Churches
Communion have run from Sect to Sect, and from one extravagant Opinion to
another, till being at last convinced of the Cheats and Impostures of them all,
they have discarded Religion it self, and made their last Resort into Atheism
and Infidelity? Since therefore Schism has so many Mischiefs attending it, and
such as do manifestly endanger our Perseverance in Religion, it highly concerns
us, as we would hold out to the End in the Course of our Christian Warfare, to
keep close to the Communion of the Church.

VI. TO our final Perseverance in the Christian Warfare, it is also necessary
that we should not stint our Progress in Religion (out of a fond Opinion that
we are good enough already) to any determinate Degrees or Measures of Goodness.
For thus we are enjoined not only to have Grace, but still to be growing in it,
2 Pet. iii.18. and not only to do the work of the Lord, but to abound in the
doing it, 1 Cor. xv.58. and not only to walk in all wel-pleasing to God, but to
abound in so doing more and more, 1 These. iv.1. to forget what is behind, i. e.
the Degrees of Virtue and Goodness we have already attained, and to be still
pressing forward to the mark of our high calling, Phil. iii.13, 14. The sense
of all which is, that we should not limit our selves to any present
Seize, out of a slothful Opinion that we are good enough already, but
that we should still be proceeding on to farther and farther Degrees of
Perfection. For Holiness is every where enjoined in the Gospel in unlimited and
indefinite Measures, and our Progress in it has no other Boundary than the
farthermost Degree of possible Perfection. An Injunction which will keep us for
ever sufficiently employed, and oblige us to Eternity to be still aspiring
beyond our present Seize; and the Neglect of this is doubtless the
Occasion of many a Man's final Miscarriage. They aim at no more than what is
absolutely necessary to remove them from the Brink of eternal Perdition, and if
they can but so far prevail against their Sin, as to arrive at the lowermost
Degree of Sincere Obedience, and but just pass the Line which separates between
a bad and good State, that so if they die as they are, they may hope to escape
Hell and arrive at some Degree of Happiness, they think they have very fairly
acquitted themselves. But now besides that that Line which parts those two
States of Sin and Grace is not so easily discernable, but that you may very
probably be deceived, and imagine that you are got over it into the State of
Grace, whilst you are yet upon the Frontiers of the Dominion of Sin, and so may
perish at last at the very Mouth of your Harbor; besides that it is a fearful
Sign that you are yet in your Sins, that you design no farther but just to
escape that everlasting Ruin that attends them, which plainly shows that the
Fear of Hell is the Soul of your Religion, and that there is not the least
Degree of true Love to God intermingled with it, without which your Religion
will be altogether insignificant; besides all this I say, while you rest in
such an imperfect State of Goodness, you dwell in the next Neighborhood to a
sinful State, and so are in continual danger of returning thither again. For
how is it possible you should be safe, while you stay upon the Brink of that
miserable State out of which you are but just emerg'd and recovered, and have
so many strong Inclinations within you, concurring with the numberless
Temptations without you, to thrust you headlong back again into it? So that if
you would be secure, it is not sufficient for you just to get out of your
sinful State, and stay there, but you must still be removing farther and
farther from it, by proceeding on still to farther Degrees of Perfection. For
you must consider that there is vast Distance between a State of sincere, and
of confirmed Goodness, and that all the while you are passing on from the one
to the other, you are more or less in Danger of relapsing. For you have been
sincerely good, ever since your first Entrance into a firm and hearty
Resolution of Amendment; but alas since that, how many times have you been in
Danger of relapsing into your old sinful Courses again? What strong Contentions
have there been between your Flesh and your Spirit, your bad Inclinations, and
your pious Resolutions? and though the later has been most commonly
victorious, yet how often has it been yielding, yea, how often has it been
vanquished? Insomuch that if you had not by a quick Repentance revived it
immediately, it had been dead long since, and you had been as much enslaved to
your Lusts as ever. And from these dangers you will never be wholly free, till
you have utterly extinguished your vicious Inclinations, and inwrought all the
Virtues of Religion into your Natures; and then you will be arrived to that
confirmed State of Goodness, from which it will be morally impossible for you
to revolt. If therefore you would secure your Perseverance to the End, beware
you do not limit your selves in the Way; for though if you die but just
sincerely good, you shall certainly escape Hell; yet in all probability you
will not be long sincerely good, unless you be something more, that is, unless
you proceed in the Degrees of Virtue, and do more and more suppress your evil,
and improve your good Dispositions and Inclinations. For so long as there
remains in you any Lust to evil, you will be in Danger of being betrayed by it;
and the stronger that Lust is, the more it threatens your destruction. So that
you can never be safe, so long as you have an Enemy alive in your Breast, and
whilst you rest in any Attainment on this side the confirmed State of Virtue,
in which there is an utter Extinction of all evil Inclinations, you are more or
less in Danger, proportionably as you are more or less distant from that happy
Period.

VII. TO our final Perseverance, it is also necessary that we should frequently
entertain our selves with the prospect of our Mortality, and endeavor to
compose our selves beforehand into a good Posture of dying. For thus we are
called upon in this our militant State to consider our later end, Deuteronomy.
xxxii.29. and by the Examples of the best Men are invited to number our days
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, Psalm xc.12. and to wait till our
change comes, Job xiv.14. to which End we are put in mind that here we have no
abiding City, Heb. xiii.14. and that it is appointed for all men once to die,
Heb. ix.27. and that our life is even as a vapor, that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away, James iv.14. and to this purpose the Apostle
applies this Consideration, 1 Cor. vii.29, 30, 31. Now this I say, brethren,
that is, of our Abode and Continuance here, upon which he exhorts us to compose
our selves to a great Indifferency as to the things of this World, it remains
that both they that have wives be as though they had none, and they that weep
as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and
they that buy as though they possessed not, and they that use this world as not
abusing it, for the fashion of this world passes away, i. e. since your Time
here is very short, endeavor beforehand to loosen your selves from this
World, and to put your selves into a fit Posture of leaving it; for it is but a
short Scene that will quickly be shifted, and then there will an eternal State
of things succeed.

AND indeed since to die well, is the last Act and final Consummation of our
Christian Warfare, it must needs highly concern us to arm and prepare our
selves for it beforehand, lest we lose the blessed Prize by stumbling just at
the Goal, and after a long Voyage miscarry for ever within Sight of Harbor.
For in the hour of Death we throw our last Cast for an Eternity of Happiness or
Misery, and how much are we concerned to throw that well, upon which so vast a
Stake depends? O! it is a serious thing to die, to pass this dark Entry of
Eternity, through which as we go right or wrong we are made or undone for ever.
For to carry us right through, it is not a few deathbed Sorrows, or good
Wishes, a few extorted Promises, or forced Resolutions, or frightful Prayers,
or Lord have Mercies upon us, will serve the turn; O! no, it is an expensive
Passage, which we shall never be able to defray, unless we carry along with us
a large Stock of spiritual Preparations. We shall have need of a strong and
active Faith, of a Mind well furnished with wise Considerations, of a deep, a
large and a tried Repentance, an unrestrained Charity, a confirmed Patience, a
profound Submission to the Will of God, and a well-grounded Hope of a blessed
Eternity. For without all these together, we shall be very ill-accoutred to
die, and run a dreadful Hazard of miscarrying for ever. And these are such
things as do not usually spring up like Mushromes in a Night, or in the few
disturbed Moments of a dying Time, but do ask a much larger and serener Season
to grow and ripen in. So that if we mean to die well, and so come off
victoriously in this last Act of our spiritual Warfare, we must now while we
are well be frequently entertaining our Meditations in the Charnel-house, and
read Lectures to our selves upon the Skeletons and Deaths-heads there, those
Emblems and Representations of our approaching Mortality, and from them take
such lively Pictures of the King of Terrors, as may render his grim Visage and
fearful Addresses so familiar to us, as that our Thoughts may be beforehand
accustomed to the manner of his Approaches; with what an Army of Diseases he is
wont to lay Siege to the Fort of our Life, how in Despite of all the
Resistances of Nature he plants and quarters them in our Veins or our Arteries,
our Stomachs or our Bowels, and from thence infests us all over with continual
Anguish and Pain; how when he has tired and exhausted us with his continued
Batteries, and worn out our Strength with a succession of wearisom Nights to
sorrowful Days, he at last storms the Soul out of all the Outworks of Nature,
and forces it to retire into the Heart; and how when he has marked us for dead
with a Baptism of clammy and fatal Sweats, he summons our weeping Friends to
assist him to grieve and vex us with their parting Kisses and sorrowful Adieus;
and how at length when he is weary of Tormenting us any more, he rushes into
our Hearts and with a few Mortal Pangs and Convulsions, tears the Soul from
thence, and turns it out to seek its Fortune in the wide World of Spirits,
where it is either seized on by Devils, and carried away to their dark Prisons
of Sorrow and Despair, there to languish out its life in a dismal Expectation
of that dreadful Day wherein it must change its bad Condition for a worse; or
be conducted by Angels to some blessed Abode, there to remain in unspeakable
Pleasure and Tranquillity, till it is Crowned with a glorious Resurrection. Now
since it is most certain that we must all one time or other experience these
things, but most uncertain how soon; how much does it concern us to think of
them beforehand, and to forecast such Provisions and Preparations for them, as
that whenever they happen we may not be surprised. For besides that the
frequent Meditation of death will familiarize its Terrors to us, so that
whenever it comes, our Minds which have been so long accustomed to converse
with it, will be much less startled and amazed at it; besides that it will wean
us from the inordinate Desire and over-eager Prosecution of the things of this
World, which, as I told you before, are the Snares with which our Vices do too
often entangle us; besides all this, I say, it will put us upon laying in a
Store of spiritual Provisions against that great day of Expense. For he that
often considers the dreadful Approaches, the concomitant Terrors, and the
momentous Issues and Consequents of Death, must be strangely stupefied if he be
not thereby vigorously excited to fore-arm and fortify himself with all those
Graces and Defenses that are necessary to render it easy, safe and prosperous.

VIII. To our final perseverance in the Christian Warfare, it is also necessary
that in order to the putting our selves into a good Posture to die, we should
discharge our Consciences of all the Relics and Remains of our past guilt.
For so we are commanded to take care that our hearts be sprinkled from an evil
conscience, Heb. x.22. and to hold faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy i.19.
and to make this our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world, 2
Cor. i.12. in a word, to live in all good conscience, Acts xxiii.1. and to have
a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward men, Acts xxiv.16. Which
though they are General Duties, do necessarily imply this Particular, that we
should very nicely and curiously examine our Consciences, those faithful Records
and Registers of our Actions, and wherever we find the least Item of an
uncancel'd Guilt, immediately cross it out by a hearty Sorrow for and moral
Revocation of it. For notwithstanding we may have in the general repented of
all our past Sins, yet there are some Siins, which, notwithstanding we react no
more, do leave a lasting Guilt upon the Mind, which nothing can cancel but our
actual revoking and unsinning them. As supposing that I have heretofore either
by my bad Counsels or Example seduced other men into wicked Courses; it is not
sufficient for the Expiation of my Fault, that I my self abstain from those
wicked Courses for the future, but I must endeavor to undo the Mischief which
I have done to others by them, and by a solemn Recantation of my past Follies,
by Persuasion and good Counsel, and the Application of all other pious and
prudent Means, endeavor to reduce those whom I have formerly perverted. For
till I have done this, I wilfully permit the mischievous Effect of my Sin to
remain; and if when I have wounded another, I suffer him to perish without
taking any care of his Cure, I am guilty of his Murder though I never wound him
more. Suppose again, that I have injured another by any malicious Slander or
Calumny; it is not enough to acquit me of the Guilt of it, that I cease to
scandalize him for the future, but I must also endeavor by a free Retractation
to vindicate his injured Name from the ill Surmises of those to whom I have
asperst him; for so long as his Reputation suffers through my not Retracting
the Calumnies I have cast upon it, I wilfully persist to defame and calumniate
him, and so long the Guilt of it must stick and abide upon my Conscience. Once
more, suppose I have injured another in his Estate, either by Theft, or Fraud,
or Oppression, it will not be sufficient to acquit me, that for the future I
forbear defrauding, forcing, or stealing from him any more, but, if it be in my
Power, I must make Restitution of all that I have wrongfully deprived him of;
and that to himself, if he be living, or if not, to those that succeed him in
his Rights, and for want of such, to the Poor, who by Gods Donation have the
Propriety of all such Wefts and Strays as have no other Owner surviving. For
it is certain that my wrongful Seizure of what is another Man's, does not
alienate his Right to it, so that he has the same Right to it while I keep it
from him, as he had at first when I took it from him; and consequently till I
restore it back to him, I continue to wrong him of it, and my detaining it is a
continued Repetition of that Fraud, or Theft, or Oppression by which I
wrongfully seized it; and whilst I thus continue the Sin, it is impossible but
the Guilt of it must still abide upon me. In these Cases therefore it concerns
us to be very nice and curious in examining our Accounts, to see if there be
any of these Scores yet uncancel'd, any of these bad Effects of our Sin yet
remaining. For if any such matter appear in our Accounts, it concerns us as
much as our everlasting Interest amounts to, to use all present Care and
Diligence to discharge it, that so before Death summons us to give up our
Accounts to the great Auditor of the World, all Scores between him and us may
be even'd and adjusted. And indeed if we would be safe, it vastly imports us to
leave as little as may be to do upon a Deathbed; for that is most commonly a
very improper State for religious Action; since, for all we know, we may be
distracted in it by a Fever, or stupefied by an Apoplexy, or deprived of the
Use of Reason by the insufferable Torments of a Stone; either of which will
render us incapable of every thing, but dying. Or if neither of these should
happen, yet to be sure a dying State will bring Work enough with it; Sorrows
and Care enough, Fears and Impatiencies enough, to exercise all our Virtue, and
employ all our Reason. So that if we carry with us to our Deathbed any Item or
Relic of uncancel'd Guilt, it is a thousand to one but in the Hurry of dying
we shall leave it uncancel'd, and be arrested for it by the Divine Justice when
we come into Eternity. Wherefore, as we would prevent this fatal Issue of our
Christian Warfare, it concerns us now we are well, to make a diligent
Inspection into our Consciences, to see if there yet remains any old Reckonings
of Guilt undischarged by us; and if there be, not to give rest to our Eyes nor
slumber to our Eyelids, till by an actual unsinning and Revocation of the
Facts, we have totally crossed and discharged them. But then because many of
these may slip out of our Mind, and so be past Recovery,

IX. TO the happy Conclusion of this our Christian Warfare, it is also
necessary that to Compensate, so far as we are able, for these Relics of
Guilt in us, we should take care to redeem the time we have formerly misspent in
sinful Courses, by being doubly diligent in the Exercise of all the contrary
Virtues, and the doing all the contrary Good we are able. For of all the
outward Blessings that God affords us, our Time is incomparably the most
precious and inestimable; and therefore though he gives us his other Blessings
in great Variety, and provides for us a plentiful Choice of Meats, Drinks and
Raiment, yet in the Distribution of our Time he seems to be more sparing and
streight-handed; for he gives it not to us in Rivers, but Drop by Drop and
Minute after Minute, so that we can never enjoy two Moments together, but
whenever he gives us one, he always takes away another. And yet, good God!
what Wast do we make of these precious Drops of which thou art so nice and
sparing? How great a Part of it do we consume in our Childhood upon the
indifferent Vanities of Nuts and Rattles, and afterward upon the much more
ridiculous and unreasonable ones of ous vicious, profuse, and extravagant
appetites? So that by that time we come to a serious Prosecution of the great
End of our Beings, the main Part of our time is usually elapsed beyond
revocation. How much therefore does it concern us, after we have so prodigally
squandered away the greatest Part of the Treasure of our Time, to make the best
Improvement of the small Remainder? that so we may at least Morally recover,
that which is Physically irrecoverable. For though we cannot cause the past
Minutes we have ill spent to be present again, yet we can redouble our
Diligence for the future, and thereby render every one Minute to come
equivalent to every two that are past. For by a double diligence we may live as
much in one Day, as we can in two by a single, and consequently by doubly
improving that Part of our time which is yet good and to come, we may morally
retrieve that Part which is lost and gone.

THIS therefore the Gospel requires at our hands, that after we have lived out
a great Part of our Time to no Purpose, we should from thenceforth live much in
a little while, and retrieve our past Negligence by our future Diligence, and
redeem the Time we have spent upon our Lusts, by exerting the contrary Virtues
more vigorously for the future; that the more profane we have been for the
time past, the more devout we should be for the time to come; that the more we
have abounded heretofore in Frauds and Oppressions, the more we should abound
hereafter in Charity and Alms; that the more industrious we have been to seduce
and debauch men, the more zealous we should be to reduce and reclaim them; and
by our future Candor and Charitable Construction of men, endeavor to
compensate for the Malice of our past Slanders and Defamations. Thus Ephesians.
iv.28. Let him that stole, steal no more; ay but that is not enough, but he
must also endeavor to redeem his past Thefts by a more vigorous Exercise of
the contrary Virtue for the future; but rather let him labor, working with his
own hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.
So also, Dan. iv.27. break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor, i. e. whereas for the Time past the Course of thy
Life has very much abounded with Cruelty and Injustice, do thou now endeavor
to redeem the Guilt of it, for so the Hebrew Verb signifies, by exerting more
vigorously the contrary Virtues, viz. of Justice to all, and of Mercy to the
poor and afflicted. And to this Purpose St. Paul's Example is proposed to our
Imitation, who, because for the Time past he had been a great Persecutor of
Christianity, did for the future labor more abundantly than any other Apostle
to advance and propagate it, 1 Cor. xv.9, 10. The Observance of which Rule is
highly necessary to the reducing this our Warfare to a prosperous Issue. For,
as I told you before, there are many Sins which after we have forsaken the
Practice of them, do stick such a guilt upon the Conscience, as without our
undoing them so far as we are able, is not to be wiped off; such as wicked
Counsel, malicious Detraction, and unjust Gain, all which we are bound, so far
as it is in our Power, not only to avoid, but actually to revoke. But alas!
there are many of these which in a long Course of Sin are utterly forgotten by
us, and consequently are past Revocation, and in this Case all we can do to
take off the Guilt of them, is in the general Course of our Lives to abound in
the Practice of the contrary Virtues, and to do the utmost Service we are able
to the Souls and good Names and Bodies of men. For Charity, says the Apostle,
shall cover a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. iv.8. that is, when it appears by the
Abundance of our Charity, that we would abolish and repair all the Injuries we
have done, if it were in our Power, God in this Case will accept the Will for
the Deed, and deal as mercifully by us as if we had actually done it. For if it
appear in his Sight that we would do it if we could, we are in his Account as
truly obedient to him as if we had actually performed it, and consequently
shall be dealt with by the same Proportions of Mercy. But it is only an
extraordinary Charity that can evidence this; since what is ordinary we are
obliged to though we had no past Injuries to abolish; but to ensure our
Reconciliation with God, it is requisite that we should evidence to him our
sincere willingness, to do not only what we should have been obliged to if we
had not been injurious, but also what we are obliged to since we have been
injurious. Now as actual Reparation, so far as we are able, is necessary to
evidence this, when we remember the Injuries we have done, so an extraordinary
Charity is no less necessary to evidence this, when we have forgotten them. And
this I suppose is the meaning of that Parallel Passage of St. James, c. v. v.
20. he that converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, i. e. by such an illustrious
Act of Charity to the Soul of his Brother, he shall obtain Pardon of God for
many of those forgotten Injuries which he has formerly done, and is now no
otherwise able to repair. So that if we would make sure Work of our Christian
Warfare, and ascertain its being finally Crowned with Success, as in general we
must endeavor to redeem the past Time we have spent in vicious Courses by
abounding in the Practice of the contrary Virtues; so in particular, if for the
time past we have lived in any of those injurious Courses which do naturally
fix a more lasting Guilt upon the Mind, we must take care not only to repair,
so far as we are able, those Injuries we remember, but also to wipe off the
Guilt of those we have forgotten by an extraordinary Charity and Beneficence,
by laying hold of all Opportunities to do Good, and endeavoring in our several
Stations, according as God has enabled us, to reduce the Souls, relieve the
Bodies, and vindicate the Reputation of our Brethren.

X. AND lastly, To our final Perseverance in well-doing, it is also necessary
that we should labor after a Rational and wel-grounded Assurance of Heaven. I
put this in the last Place, because it is usually the last attained, and is not
to be presently expected and caught at as soon as we are entered into a
religious State. For there are a great many Stages of Religion to be past,
before we can modestly expect to arrive at Assurance. In the Beginning of our
Religion, when we are just recovered out of a vicious State, we cannot but be
sensible, if we do at all understand our selves, that we are as yet in a great
deal of Danger, and do border so very near upon that bad State we are escaped
from, that it is almost impossible to distinguish whether we are in or out of
it. For though we are fully purposed and resolved against it, yet we cannot
well divine what will be the Issue of it. Our Resolution is yet so young, so
raw and unexperienced, and besieged with so many powerful counter-striving
Inclinations, that we cannot confide in it without great Folly and Presumption.
For till sufficient Trial has been made of it, for all that we know, it may
prove to be only a Godly Mood, or a short Lucid Interval between the raving
Fits of our Lust and extravagant Affections, which in a few days perhaps may
return again, and utterly alienate and distract us from all our sober Counsels,
and Purposes. And if it should so happen, that which we now look upon as our
Cure and Recovery, will prove but an Intermission of our Disease. And when for
sometime we have tried our Resolution, and found that has bravely resisted
those Temptations that have hitherto assaulted it, yet we cannot presently be
reasonably assured of it, considering the fickleness and Inconstancy of our
Nature. For it may be it has not been yet assaulted on the weak Side, or it
has not been nicked with a seasonable Temptation, or it may be we may be more
remiss and careless another time, or more vehemently inclined to a vicious
Compliance; and then those Temptations which we have hitherto conquered, may
captivate and subdue us. And if it thus happen, that which we now look upon as
an everlasting Breach between us and our Lusts, may prove only a Pet or short
Distaste, and like the Fallings out of Lovers end in the renewing of Love. And
till we have made some considerable Progress in the mortification of our sinful
Inclinations, and the Acquisition of their contrary Habits, our Religion will
have so many Flaws, Defects and Imperfections in it, as will give us great
Reason, if we have any modesty in us, to be very fearful and jealous of it. But
since without Sincerity in Religion we can have no Title to Heaven, it hence
follows that without a clear Sense of our Sincerity, we can have no Assurance
of our Title to it; and such a clear Sense as is necessary to found such an
Assurance on, is not to be acquired, you see, without a thorough Trial of our
Resolution in a long and vigorous Course of Religion. So that for men to be
immediately snatching at Assurance, as soon as ever they are entered into a good
Life, argues them not to be so sensible, as they should be, of their own
Imperfection and Frailty; they ought in Modesty to expect a while, and not
conclude too soon for themselves, till they have made a through Trial of their
Resolution; and in the mean time to strive on, in Hope that by the Blessing of
God concurring with their Endeavors, they shall at last attain such a certain
Sense and Feeling of their own Sincerity, as will be sufficient to infer a firm
and rational Assurance. For Assurance being the Top of Christian Attainment, we
must ascend to it gradually, by the intermediate Staves and Rounds of a tried
and lasting Obedience, and not leap up in an Instant before we have taken all
the Steps and Degrees that lead thither.

BUT though we ought not to be too forward in our Assurance, yet we are bound
to labor after it in a due and regular Way; that is, to persist in our
Obedience till we have reduced our inward and outward Motions to such a Degree
of Conformity to the Standard of the Gospel, as that upon comparing our selves
with it, we may be able without Flattery or Presumption to conclude our own
Sincerity and Vprightness. I know there is a much shorter Passage to Assurance,
which some of late have pretended to; and that is, by certain unaccountable
Incomes and Manifestations of Gods Spirit, who, as they pretend, does
immediately whisper and reveal to them their Title and Interest in Heaven. But
this alas! is too much like the North-east Passage to the Indies, which is
shorter indeed, if it could be found, but so very dangerous, that I doubt there
are but few that attempt it but miscarry, and it is well if they do not finally
perish in the Discovery. Not that I do in the least doubt but God does many
times suggest and whisper unspeakable Comforts and Assurances to the Minds of
good men; but then it is to be considered that this is an arbitrarious Gift,
which he seldom if ever bestows but in extraordinary Cases, when it is necessary
to encourage us to some great Work, or to support us under some extraordinary
Suffering. For he is a wise and careful Father of his Children, and knows it is
much more necessary for us to be good, than to be ravished and transported; and
that such high Cordials are neither proper nor safe for us but in great
Extremities; and therefore for us to expect that he should make them our
ordinary Food and Entertainment is an Argument of our Childish Ignorance and
Presumption. But though such immediate Whispers and Revelations may serve to
good Purposes in a Pinch of Extremity, yet are they by no means to be built
upon as the Foundations of our ordinary, standing Assurance. For so long as
there is an evil Spirit without, and a disordered Fancy within us, that can
imitate these Whispers, we shall be continually liable, so long as we put
Confidence in them, to all the Cheats and Impostures of natural and Diabolical
Enthusiasm, and unavoidably mistake many an Injection of the Devil, and many a
warm Flush of Fancy, or brisk Fermentation of melancholy Humor, for a Whisper
and Testimony of the spirit of God, and by this means be often lulled into
false Confidences and Assurances, which like Golden Dreams will vanish when we
awake, and leave us miserably disappointed. That Assurance therefore which we
are to aim at, must be founded in the Testimony of a good Conscience, and
inferred from the Sense of our own Integrity and Uprightness.

AND this we are commanded to endeavor after; so Heb. x.22. we are bid to draw
near unto God, (...), in Confidence, or full assurance of faith, that is, in a
firm Persuasion of Gods Love to us and our Interest in his Promises; which
Persuasion is to be founded upon an inward Sense of our having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water; and
accordingly Heb. vi.11. to be diligent in good works, to the full assurance of
hope unto the end, i. e. to be so diligent in our Duty as that we may thereby
acquire such a full Assurance of our Reward as may enable us to continue and
hold out to the End. For so St. John tells us, that it is by the Integrity of
our Virtue, and particularly of our love to one another, that we are to assure
our hearts before God, 1 John iii.14, 19. for, says he v.21. if our hearts
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God; and for this purpose,
among others, the same Apostle tells us he wrote this Catholic Epistle, that
true Christians might know and be assured that they had eternal life, 1 John
v.13.

FROM all which it is evident, that it is our Duty to labor after such an
Assurance of Heaven, as naturally arises from the clear and certain Sense of
our Sincerity toward God, and the firm Belief of the Promise of eternal Life,
to which our Sincerity intitles us. For when we are so far improved in
Religion, as that upon an impartial Surveigh of our selves we can feel our own
Integrity, and sensibly perceive that our Intention is pure, our Resolution
fixed, and our Heart entirely devoted to God, we may from thence most certainly
infer our Title and Interest to the Promise of Heaven. So that to the obtaining
this Assurance, all that we have to do is, so far to purify our Intentions
from sinister Aims, and subdue our bad Inclination to our Resolution of
Obedience, as that when ever we reflect upon and compare our selves with the
Rule, our Conscience may be able without any Diffidence to pronounce us
sincere; and then we may as certainly conclude our Interest in Heaven, as we
can that Gods Promises are true; and if after we are thus far improved in
Religion, we still remain unassured, it proceeds not from the Want of
sufficient Evidence, but either from a melancholy Temper, or a weak Faith, or a
misinformed Conscience; and whichsoever of these is the Cause of it, when that
is once removed, we shall as plainly feel our own Sincerity, and therein our
Interest in Heaven, as we do now our bodily Passions. And having once attained
this Assurance, 'twill animate our Hearts with an Heroic Courage against all
Temptations, and carry us on with unspeakable Alacrity through all the
remaining Stages of our Duty; it will invigorate our Endeavors, and wing our
Activity, and make us all Life and Spirit in the Exercises of our holy
Religion. And as when the Christian Army, after a tedious march toward the
Land of Canaan, came within view of the holy City, and beheld afar off the
Towers and Turrets of Jerusalem, they were so Ecstacied with Joy that they
made the Heavens ring with triumphant Shouts and Acclamations, and as if that
Sight had given new Souls to them, ran on upon their Enemies with a Courage
that forced Victory wherever they came; so when a good Man after a long
Progress from one Degree of Virtue to another, is got so far as that from a
certain Sense and Feeling of his own Sincerity he can discern the new
Jerusalem above, and his own Interest in it, that blessed Sight will fill him
with so much Joy, Courage and Alacrity, that no Temptation for the future will
be able to withstand or interrupt him. So that his Conscience will be always
ringing with Acclamations of Victory, and the remainder of his March will be
all a Triumphal Progress to him; and when he comes to the Conclusion of it, to
die, and pass the Gate of this blessed City, the firm Assurance which he has
of Admittance, will dispel the Fears, sweeten the Troubles, and assuage the
Pangs and Agonies of the dolorous Passage. So that he will die not only with
Peace, but with Joy, and go away into Eternity with Hallelujahs in his Mouth.
If therefore we mean to bring this our spiritual Warfare to a happy Conclusion,
it concerns us now while we have Opportunity, to labor after a wise and
well-grounded Assurance of Heaven.

SECT. VI. Containing certain Motives to Press men to the Practice of these
Duties of Perseverance in the Christian Warfare.
HAVING in the foregoing Section described all those Duties which appertain to
the last Part of our Christian Warfare, to wit, final Perseverance; and shown
how effectually they all contribute thereunto, I shall now according to my
former Method, conclude with some Motives to press and persuade men to the
Practice of them; all which I shall deduce from the Consideration of the great
and urgent Necessity of our final Perseverance, to which those Duties are such
necessary Helps and Means. For unless we take in the Assistance of these
Duties, in all Probability we shall never be able to hold out to the End; and
unless we persevere to the End, we are guilty of the most fatal and mischievous
piece of Folly in the World. For Consider,

1. If after we have made some Progress in Religion, we wilfully relapse, we
shall go back much faster than ever we have proceeded.

2. If once we totally relapse, we shall thereby forfeit all the Fruit of our
past Labor.

3. We shall forfeit the Fruit of our Labor after we have undergone the
greatest Difficulty of it.

4. We shall not only forfeit the Fruit of our past Labor, but also render our
Recovery more hazardous and difficult than ever.

5. We shall not only render our future Recovery more difficult, but also
plunge our selves for the present into a far more Guilty and Criminal Condition
than ever.

6. We shall not only render our selves for the present more guilty, but as a
certain Consequence of that, Expose our selves, if we die in our Apostasy, to a
Deeper and more Dreadful Ruin,

I. CONSIDER, when once we have wilfully relapsed, unless we immediately
recover, we shall go much faster back, than ever we went forward. For in the
Beginning of our religious Progress, we are fain to sail for a great while
against Wind and Tide, against a strong Gale of Temptation from without, and a
rapid Stream of Inclination from within, and while we do thus, we must be
contented to get our Ground by Inches, and move forward by slow and insensible
Degrees; but in all our wilful Apostacies, we are carried on secundo flumine,
with a full Drift of Temptation and Inclination. So that if when once we have
wilfully sinned we do not immediately check our selves by Repentance, in all
Probability we shall be driven farther back in a Day, than we shall be able to
get forward in a Week. For your Progress in Religion lying up Hill, but your
Apostasy down, you must expect when once you are falling to descend much faster
than ever you ascended, and to get far sooner to the Bottom again than you can
to the Top, though you should happen to fall just in the midway, and have no
farther to the one than to the other. For it is hardly to be imagined what
Strength a bad Inclination gets by a short Repast and Gratification; how when
it has been almost pined away by a long Abstinence, a Taste of sinful Pleasure
will raise and revive it, and render it as brisk and vigorous as ever; insomuch
that it usually requires a great many Acts of Mortification, to re-extinguish
that Life and Strength it acquires in one short Gratification. For as the
fierce Tiger after a long Confinement will lie down tamely in his Den, and by
Degrees loose all his Fierceness and grow manageable and obsequious, but let
him take but one warm Draught of Blood and his old savage Nature immediately
revives, and he grows as cruel and outrageous as ever; just so it is with our
wicked Inclinations, which being reduced from their Excesses, and kept under
the close Confinement of a holy Resolution, will by Degrees grow tame and
gentle, and forget the alluring Relishes of Sin, but if once we suffer them to
break loose again, and to come at those sinful Pleasures from which they have
been a long while alienated, they will soon recover their natural Wildness, and
become as headstrong and violent as ever. Wherefore it mightily concerns us to
have a great Care of all wilful Apostacies; for to be sure your first Slip will
vehemently incline you to a second, and that more vehemently to a third, and so
like men that are running headlong down Hill, the farther you go the more you
will be pressed forward by your own Weight, and the harder 'twill be for you to
stop and recover your selves. So that if you do not immediately stop, you will
by a few Days Sin lose back all the Ground you have got by many a Years
Warfare; you will pull down more of your Religion by one wilful Sin, than you
will be able to repair again by many a virtuous Action; and like some prodigal
Drudges spend more in one mad Frolic, than you have earned by many a hard Days
Labor. And if you do thus, it is impossible you should ever improve; for what
you do in a Week, you will undo again in a Day, and so instead of pressing
forward, you will dance in a Circle, and always end where you begun. So that
unless you go on and persevere in well-doing, all your Strife and Warfare
against Sin will be but like rolling of a Sisyphus his Stone, which after you
have been a long while raising to the Top of the Hill, will in a moment tumble
down again upon you; so that either you must undergo the same Pains to raise it
again, or lie down under it, and tamely suffer your selves to be crushed into
eternal Ruin by it.

II. CONSIDER, if after we have made some Progress in Religion we totally
Relapse, we thereby forfeit the Fruit of all our past Labor. For so God
himself by the Prophet pronounces in the Case, Ezekiel. xviii.24. When the
Righteous turns away from his Righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does
according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? all
his Righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, in the trespass
that he has trespassed, and in the sin that he has sinned, in them shall he
die, i. e. how good soever he may have been for the Time past, if he does not
persevere to the End, but wilfully relapse into Folly and Wickedness, all the
Virtue he has exercised, and all the Good he has done, shall be quite struck
off from his Accounts, and never so much as mentioned to his Benefit and
Advantage, but in that Wickedness wherein he is fallen he shall as certainly
perish as if all his Life had been a continued Act or uninterrupted Course of
Iniquity. So also, Heb. x.38. if any shall draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. And indeed this is a most necessary Effect of our Apostasy;
for by falling off from our Christian Courese, we put our selves back into the
same State and Condition wherein we were before we entered upon it; and the
Effect of all those good things which we did from the time we entered upon to
the Time we deserted it, will be so voided and abolished, that there will not
remain the least Trace or Footstep of it in our Natures, but our Will will
become as obstinate again, our affections and Appetites as wild and extravagant
as if we had all long permitted them to run on in an uninterrupted Course of
Iniquity. And having thus exinguisht all the good Effects of our past Warfare,
and rendered by our wilful Apostasy our Natures as corrupt and depraved as
ever, we shall thereby be exposed again to the Wrath and Displeasure of God For
Gods Love and Hatred are unvariably determined to the same Grounds and Reasons,
and herein consists their Immutability, not that he always loves or always
hates the same persons, out of a unreasonable Prejudice to the other, but that
he always loves and always hates them for the same Reasons; and he has
expressly declared taht Goodness and Wickedness are the contrary Reasons of this
his Contrary affection to his Creatures; which if it be, 'twill hence
necessarilly follow, that as his Hatred must convert into Love to us when from
wicked we become good, so his Love must convert into Hatred of us when from
good we degenerate into wicked. Which Alteration of his Affection toward us,
proceeds not from any change in his Nature but from a change in ours; he always
proceeds upon steady and unchangeable Priniciples, and is for ever fixed and
constant to the Reasons of his Love and Hatred; which he could not be, if he
did not alter his Affection to us when the Reason of it is altered, if he did
not abominate us when he sees us fallen and degenerated from that State of
Goodness for teh sake of which he loved us and took pleasure in us. So that by
wilfully retreating from our religious Progress, we do not only Extinguish all
those good Effects which it had produced in our Natures, not only revive those
inveterate Lusts we had almost mortified, and blast those tender Graces which
we had therein acquired and improved, but as a Consequence of this, we run out
of Gods Arms and Embraces; and throw our selves headlong from those glorious
Hopes to which we have been all this while advancing with so much Labor and
Difficulty. What a Madness therefore is it for men to think of retreating that
have once actually engaged in the Christian Warfare, to surrender themselves
back into Captivity to their Lusts, after they have fought so many Combats
against, and obtained so many Victories over them! O consider but the great
Pains you have been at, the many Prayers and Tears, Abstinencies and
Self-denials, Struggles and Convertion with your selves, that it has cost you
to retrieve your selves from the Dominion of Sin and the just Vengeance of God;
and is it not a thousand Pities that all this should prove lost Labor in the
End, and be rebder'd as fruitless and insignificant to us as if it had never
been? that after you have taken so much Pains to stem the difficult Tide, and
are at last got within fight of Shore, you should now faint and yield to the
Fury of it, and suffer your selves to be born down by it again into that Ocean
of Sin and Guilt out of which you were so safely recovered? Wherefore as you
would not render your albour in vain in the Lord, and utterly defeat your
selves of all the Fruit of your Religious Endeavors, be still persuaded to
struggle and contend, to strive and press forward to the mark of your
high-calling. For if now you slacken or remit your Endeavourse, yield to the
Current of Temptation, you will soon be driven down by it again as far from the
Love of God and from the Hope of HEaven, as ever you were in the most
degenerate State of your Natures.

III. CONSIDER that if by wilfully sinning we retreat from our Christian
Warfare, we shall forfeit the Fruit of our Labor after we have undergon the
greatest Difficulty of it. For, as I showed above, the main Difficulty of the
Christian Warfare lies in the Entrance of it, and this I suppose you to have
already past. You have already endured those sharep Pangs and Throws that are
wont to accompany the Birth of a new Resolution; you have undergon the hard
Penance of a deep and through Consideration, the sharp Stings and Remorses of
a solemn and sorrowful Repentance; you have forced your most Importunate
Inclinations, and withstood the most violent Counter-struggling of a perverse
and denegerate Nature; you have Conquered your Will in the Height of all its
Obstinacy and Resistance, and Rescued it from the Arms of your Lusts when 'twas
most inslaved and captivated by them; all this you did, if you did any thing to
any purpose, when you first entered upon this holy Walfare. And ever since, you
have been breaking the Strength of your evil Inclinations, and conquering the
Antipathies of your Nature to your Religion; in which if you have made any
Progress, you must by this Time have broken the Heart of the Difficulty of your
Warfare, and have much less Opposition to contend with than ever. So that now
in all Probability, there is nothing so difficult between you and Heaven, as
that which you have already engaged with and surmounted; and will you now turn
your backs upon your Enemy, when his main Strength is spent, and you have
already sustained the most violent Shocks of his Power? If you had retreated at
the first Onset, when your Sin was seated in its Dominion, and you were yet but
raising your Forces and arming your Resolution against it, it had been much
more excusable; for then you had the sharpest Part of your Conflict to undergo
being to contend with a flusht and a victorious Enemy, who having as yet all
his Strength about him, could not fail to put your Courage to a mighty Trial.
But now to retreat, when you are past the worst, and have gotten above half Way
through; when you have pulled down your Lust from its Throne and Dominion, and
so far subdued it to your Religion and your Reason that you have henceforward
no more to do but to pursue a Victory, which though you got with a great deal
of Toil, you may finish with a great deal of Ease and Pleasure; now, I say, to
retreat in such a prosperous Juncture, and give up the blessed Prize which you
have been so long contending for, what desperate Madness is it! If you had
never begun this Warfare, or yielded in the first Conflict of it, what a deal
of Pains might you have saved? How many Prayers and Tears, Struglings and
Contentions with your selves might you have escaped and avoided, and at last
been in as good a Condition, if not a better, than that wherein your Apostasy
will certainly leave you? And when a man has been so long taking Heaven by
Storm and Violence, when he has broken through so many Oppositions to come at
it, and in Despite of all the Darts of Temptation from without, and of all the
Weights and Pressures of Inclination from within, he is gotten up as it were to
the Top of the Scaling-Ladder, has laid hands on the Battlements of Heaven, and
is ready to leap in and take Possession of the Joys of it, what a Madness is it
for him now to let go his Hold and tumble headlong down again into that Abyss
of Sin and Misery out of which he had recovered himself with so much Labor and
Difficulty! Especially considering

IV. THAT by this our Relapse we shall not only forfeit the Fruit of our past
Labor, but also render our Recovery more hazardous and difficult than ever.
For what the Apostle pronounces concerning Apostates from Christianity, is in a
great Measure applicable to those who having engaged in the Christian Warfare,
fall off from it again to their old sinful Courses; it is impossible, i. e.
it is extremely difficult, for those that were once enlightened, and have tasted
of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the World to come; if they fall
away, to renew them again to repentance, Heb. vi.4, 5, 6. For besides that by
falling from his first Repentance, a man grieves and chases the Holy Spirit
from him, without whose Aid he can neither stand when he is up, nor recover
when he is fallen; and having Chased him away, he cannot well expect that he will
be so ready to return and cooperate with him after he has treated him so
rudely by quenching his Motions, unraveling his Workmanship, and extinguishing
all those heavenly Effects which his Grace had produced in his Soul. For how
can this blessed Assistant of Souls but take it in great Disdain to be thus
mocked and disappointed, when he had been so industriously laboring for a
Wretches Good, to lift him out of the Mire wherein he was sunk and perishing;
and when he had succeeded so far in his Labor as to help him quite out, and
was washing and cleansing his polluted Spirit and dressing it for the Embraces
of the Father of spirits, to see this Wretch turn back after all, and plung
himself headlong into the Mire again, how can he but resent such an ungrateful
Disappointment of his Labor with unspeakable Grief and Indignation? And if
upon such Resentment he should, as he justly may, wholly retire from him, and
leave him forever to wallow in his own Hearts Lust, his Condition will not be
only dangerous, but desperate. What the blessed Spirit will do in this Case, I
cannot certainly determine, because he may do as he pleases, being totally
released by the Sinners Apostasy from all Obligation of Promise. But it makes
my Heart ache to think, how much Reason there is to fear that he will utterly
forsake and abandon him, and not throw away any more of his Grace upon a Wretch
on whom he has already spent so much to no purpose. And if the heinous Affront
which the blessed Spirit receives by your Apostasy should put him upon this
Resolution, you are damned above-ground, and everlastingly forsaken of all
Hopes of Recovery. But besides all this, (which one would think should be
sufficient to startle any sober Man from making such a desperate Experiment) by
falling off from your Repentance, you must needs be supposed to offer a mighty
Violence to your Consciences; which having been already awakened into a through
Sense of your past Sins, must necessarily reflect upon your present Apostasy
with unspeakable Horror and Affrightment; which if it does not presently scare
ye back again to Repentance, will put ye upon more desperate Courses than ever.
For now if your Conscience will not be quiet, you have no other Remedy but to
ruffle with it, and out-brave its Horrors by being more courageously wicked;
and as those barbarous Parents that sacrificed their Children to Moloch were
fain to make Noises round the burning Idol with Drums and Timbrels to drown
their dying Shrieks and Groans, least they should move them to Compassion; so
when by your wilful Relapses you have sacrificed your Conscience to your Lust,
and it begins to Shriek out from among those Flames of Guilt whereinto you have
cast it, you have no other Remedy, unless you repent immediately, but to make a
Tophet round about it, and drown its Out cries in Excesses of Riot; to put your
selves into a tumultuous Hurry of Wickedness and Folly, that you may not hear
those ill-boding Shrieks within, and sear over the Wounds of your Conscience
with a thick Custom of Sinning, that they may neither bleed nor smart. So that
if once you turn Recreant to your Christian Warfare, you will be forced, in
your own Defense, to plung your selves deeper into Sin than ever. For now you
must sin not only to greatifie your Lusts, but to stupifie your Conscience, and
this last you can never do without being excessively wicked. You must now be
puny Sinners no longer, if ever you intend to sin quietly, but resolve to turn
Heroes in Iniquity, and out-sin your natural Sense of Good and Evil. In order
whereunto you must give your wounded Spirit Gash after Gash, and follow the
Blow till you have left it past feeling; you must heap on Loads of Guilt upon
your Conscience till with the continued Pressure you have rendered it callous
and insensible; and when by this means you have sunk your selves deeper into
Sin than ever (as you will doubtless soon do) how much more difficult and
hazardous must your Recovery be? For now you will need much more Assistance
than ever you did in your first Repentance, and have much less Reason to expect
it. So that though I dare not say your Condition will be desperate; yet I must
tell ye 'twill be so fearfully dangerous, that unless God out of a peculiar
Mercy to ye, awake ye by some extraordinary providence, and at the same time
cooperate with ye by an extraordinary Grace, you must certainly miscarry for
ever.

V. CONSIDER that by your deserting of the Christian Warfare, you will not only
render your future Recovery more difficult, but you will also plung your selves
for the present into a far more guilty and criminal Condition than ever. For
thus St. Peter determines in the Case, 2 Pet. ii.20, 21. if after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the later
end is worse with them than the beginning. For it had been better for them not
to have known the way of righteousness; then after they have known it, to turn
from the holy commandment; that is, by relapsing into those sinful Pollutions
out of which they had been rescued by the Belief and Knowledge of Christianity,
they have rendered themselves much more guilty, than they were before when they
were Infidels; so that if they had never been acquainted with the Gospel, nor
taken one Step in the Paths of its holy Commandments, it had been much better
for them, and God would have been much less angry and displeased with them. For
by our Apostasy into a wicked Life, we do not only return back into as bad at
least, if not a worse Condition than ever; but,

First, We do also make void all those Operations of the Spirit of God, by
which we were so effectually persuaded to undertake, and hitherto to prosecute
the Christian Warfare. By relapsing into a state of Sin again, we wilfully undo
all that he has been doing, we revive those Lusts which he has been
mortifying, and root up those Graces which he has been planting and watering
within us; and when with great Contrivance and Industry he has dressed and
cultivavated our Nature, plucked up the Weeds of it and planted it with the
Flowers of Heaven, we wilfully spoil and lay it wast again, and turn his
growing Sharon into a barren Wilderness. So that besides all that Guilt which
arises from those sinful Courses whereinto we are relapst, we are now become
guilty of the greatest Outrage to the Spirit of God; we are guilty of
destroying the dearest Fruits of his Labor, of laying wast his Enclosures,
quenching his Motions; extinguishing his Graces, and strangling all those
heavenly Effects which he by his powerful Goodness had produced in our Natures.
And what a black Aggravation of our Guilt must it be, thus to baffle and
disappoint the Spirit of God? But then

Secondly, As by our Apostasy we offer the rudest Affront to the Holy Spirit,
so we commit the greatest Violence both upon our Conscience and Experience. For
in all Apostacies we sin with an awakened Conscience, with the Convictions of
our Guilt glaring in our Eyes, and are fain to contend and struggle with our
own Mind, before we can break through those Checks and Restraints it lays upon
us, which must needs be a great Aggravation of our Guilt. For the more light
and persuasion a man sins against, the more of Will and Malice there is in his
Sin, and consequently the more of Guilt. For what can be more Malicious, than
for a man to dare and defy his own Convictions, and charge into the very Mouth
of them, while they are spitting fire and roaring everlasting Ruin against him?
This plainly shows him to be acted by a desperate Resolution, when for the sake
of his Lusts he dares confront the Terrors of his Conscience, and rather than
be barred the Enjoyment of them, he will plunge himself headlong into a
foreseen Ruin, and leap after them into Hell with his Eyes open. And yet thus
we do in all our wilful Apostacies; we sin against the quickest Sense of our
Danger, the loudest Warnings of our Conscience, and the clearest Convictions of
our Reason; which being all most horrid Aggravations, must needs swell up our
Guilt to a monstrous Proportion. Neither do we sin only against our Conscience,
but also against our Experience. For it is to be supposed that we have made
some Proof and Trial of Religion, and having done so, we must needs be sensible
that there is nothing in it but what is reasonable and practicable and highly
for our Good; nothing but what tends to the Tranquillity of our Minds, the Peace
of our Consciences, and the Perfection of our Natures; and being thoroughly
assured of all this, and that not so much by Discourse as by our own Sense and
Experience, what a horrid Baseness would it be, if notwithstanding this we
should renounce and desert it? If we had never tried it, we might have urged
our Ignorance or Want of Experience as an Apology for our Refusal to submit to
it; we might have pretended that for Want of a more intimate Acquaintance with
it, we looked upon its Commands as impossible, or at least as very difficult and
altogether fruitless and ungrateful to humane Nature, and that if we had once
complied with it, we must have presently renounced every thing that is pleasant
and desirable, and from thenceforth have been contented to sigh away our Lives
in unsufferable Severities and a melancholy Retirement from all the Joys and
Festivities of humane Conversation; for such frightful Representations men that
are unexperienced in Religion, are apt to make of it; which though it be far
from justifying, may in some Measure extenuate their Enmity to it. But you that
have tried Religion, must needs have experienced that all this is false; that
its Commands are easy enough to a willing Mind, and that the many Advantages
they bring with them do abundantly compensate for their Difficulty; that they
are so far from barring men any innocent Pleasure, or Comfort of humane Life,
that they purify the Pleasures of it, and render them more grateful and
generous; that besides this, they bring mighty Pleasures of their own along
with them, the Pleasures of a glorious Hope, a serene Mind, a calm and
undisturbed Conscience, which are such as do far out-relish the most studied
and artificial Luxuries; all this you cannot but know, if you have made any
considerable Trial of a sober and wel-advised Religion. So that if now you
Apostatize, you will not only affront your Conscience, but your Experience too;
and the past Sense you have had of the Goodness of Religion, will rise up in
Judgment against ye, and for ever silence all the Excuses you can urge for your
selves, and leave ye nothing to say, but that you were sick of your Ease and
tired with the Refreshments of Religion. But then

Thirdly, As your Apostasy will be a grievous Affront to the Spirit of God and
to your own Conscience and Experience, so 'twill be one of the foulest
Dishonours that you can cast upon Religion. If you had never been engaged in
the Christian Warfare, the Honor of Religion could never have been so nearly
touched by your wicked Courses, and all considering Men would have attributed
your Enmity to it, to your Ignorance and want of Experience, and never have
thought the worse of it when they saw it so contemptuously treated by one that
was never acquainted with it. But if now you revolt into wicked Courses after
you have made Trial of it, what will the World say? Look ye, here is one that
has made an Experiment of the Religion you so much celebrate, and which you
extol and cry up for such a pleasant and amiable thing; if it were what you
pretend, how comes it to pass that after so long Trial and Experience of it,
this man should now at last renounce and forsake it? Which is such an
Objection, as can be no otherwise solved but by demonstrating the man whose
Apostasy started it, to be forsaken and abandoned of his own Reason. For if
upon the Trial he has made of Religion, he had experienced it to be that good
and grateful thing it is represented, it is not to be imagined he would ever
have revolted from it, had he been capable to deliberate of his own Choices and
Actions. And how can they that are Strangers to Religion forbear suspecting the
Goodness of it, when they see a man, after Trial, and in his right Senses,
declare by his Actions that Vice is better and more eligible than Virtue, and
do behold the Pleasures of Sin preferred before the Joys and Satisfactions of
Religion, by one that has made a through Experiment of them both? So that by
Apostatising into sinful Courses after a through Trial of Religion, we take an
effectual Course to defame and scandalize it, to render it a stone of stumbling
and a rock of offense to those that have had but little or no Acquaintance with
it; and if by our Example any should be disheartened either from entering into
or proceeding in the Christian Warfare, their Blood will be one day required at
our Hands, and so we shall raise a most fearful Cry upon ourselves, and have
not only the Spirit of God and our own Conscience and Experience, but also the
Blood of all those Souls who have stumbled at our Apostasy lifting up their
Cries together to the Tribunal of God for a dire and speedy Vengeance against
us.

VI. CONSIDER, if after you have made some Progress in Religion you revolt into
sinful Courses, you will not only render your selves for the present more
guilty, but, as a Consequence of that, you will certainly expose your selves,
if you die before your Recovery, to a deeper and more dreadful Ruin. For this
we may depend upon, that the Judge of all the World will do righteously, and
consequently, that as on the one hand he will proportion his Rewards to our
Services, so on the other he will measure his Punishments by our Guilts and
Demerits; and if he thus proceed (as he most certainly will) how horrible is it
to think of the black and dismal Fate that hangs over the Heads of Apostates,
whose Guilt being aggravated by those abovenamed Circumstances to such a
prodigious Bulk and Magnitude, must be supposed to draw after it a Punishment
proportionable? And if so, then doubtless the Portion of Apostates among wicked
and miserable Spirits will be the most wretched and deplorable. For besides
those supernumerary Stripes they must expect to receive from God, as being
Servants that have known their Masters Will, and experienced the Goodness of
it, and yet have finally refused to comply with it, their reflections on their
own Apostasy, and the Folly and Madness of it will doubtless gall and torment
them a thousand times more than all the other Stings of their Conscience
together. For how must it inrage them against themselves, to ruminate on their
own Follies, as they are wandering through the Infernal Shades! O desperate
Creatures! from what glorious Hopes have we precipitated our selves into this
dismal State! We had once got a fair Way onwards to Heaven, and were arived
within Sight of its blessed Shores: we had shaken off our Lusts, mastered our
Inclinations and subdued our Wills to the Will of God; and in so doing had
conquered the most difficult Part of our Voyage; we had weathered the cross
Winds of Temptation from without, and stem'd the Tide of corrupt Nature within,
so that had we but bore up courageously a little farther, we that are now
howling among damned Ghosts, might have been triumphing with blessed Spirits.
But O abominable Fools and Traitors to our selves! after all the successful
Pains we had taken to be happy, we have shipwrack'd our Souls at the Mouth of
our Harbor; and to gratify a base Lust, have leapt headlong from the Brinks
of the Rivers of Pleasure, into this Lake of fire and Brimstone. And have we
thus undone our selves, thus madly, thus without Pretense or Temptation! O!
cursed be our Folly, cursed be our Lusts, and for ever cursed be we for
harboring and entertaining them! Thus will these miserable People incessantly
rave against themselves, and with dire Reflections on their desperate Follies
for ever inrage and multiply their own Torments. So that were I descending to
the bottomless Pit, and had but so much Time before I came there, as to make
one Prayer more in my own Behalf, next to that of being wholly delivered
thence, I know none I should sooner pitch upon, than this, O Lord deliver me
from that Portion of Hell, which thou have reserved for Apostates.

SO that if now that we have so far engaged our selves in the Christian
Warfare, we should be so mad as to retreat into our old sinful Courses, it had
been a thousand times better for us that we had never engaged in it at all. For
unless we repent of our Retreat, and come on again, we have taken a great deal
of Pains in Religion to no other Purpose, but only to to treasure up to our
selves wrath against the day of wrath, and heat the Furnace of our future
Torment yet seven times hotter. Wherefore since the Matter is now reduced to
this Issue, that if we revolt from our Christian Warfare we shall not only
defeat our selves of all the Fruit of our past Labor and Contentions, but also
inhance our future Punishment; so that we must either resolve to win Heaven by
our Perseverance, or sink our selves into the neithermost Hell by our Apostasy;
let us pull up our Courage, and mangre all Temptations to the contrary,
continue steadfast and immovable in our Christian Resolution, remembering what
the Captain of our Salvation has promised* Rev. iii.21. To him that overcomes,
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am sat
down with my Father in his Throne.

CHAP. V. Containing some short Directions for the more profitable reading the
preceding Discourse, and also for the Conduct and regular Exercise of our
Closet Religion in all the different States of the Christian Life; together
with Forms of private Devotion fitted to each State.
IN the foregoing Chapter I have endeavored a full Account of all those
instrumental Duties of Christianity by which we are to acquire, improve and
perfect the principal Virtues of it, in the Perfection of which Virtues Heaven
which is the great End of Christianity consists. And for the more distinct
management thereof, I considered men under a threefold State; first as entering
into the Christian Life; secondly as actually engaged in the Course of it;
thirdly as improving toward Perfection by Perseverance in it; and gave a
distinct account of all those Instrumental Duties that are proper to each of
these States. And now that what has been said in that and the preceding
Chapters may have its due Effect upon the Readers Mind, I have thought fit to
reduce it to Practice by directing men,

First, how to read and apply the several parts of it to their own particular
States;

Secondly, By furnishing them with some short Rules for the more profitable
Exercise of their private Religion in each of those different States, together
with Forms of private Devotion fitted to each State.

I. AS to the first of these, it is to be considered, that to the making men
sincere and hearty Christians, it is highly necessary that they should have a
right understanding, First, of the Nature of the great and chief End which
Christianity proposes to them; Secondly, of the Means by which that End is to
be obtained; Thirdly, of the natural Tendency of all the Virtues of
Christianity toward this blessed End, and of the contrary Tendency of the
opposite Vices toward their eternal Misery and Ruin. Of all which I have
endeavored to give an Account in the three first Chapters of this Book.
Wherefore I would advise the Reader,

1. Carefully and seriously to peruse those Chapters wherein (because I have
been sometimes forced by the sublimity of my Argument to discourse a little
more abstrusely than in any of the following Parts) it will be necessary for
him to employ more of his Thoughts and Consideration, and not to content
himself with a slight and cursory Perusal. And when by a serious Consideration
of what has been there discoursed, his Mind is fully convinced what a kind of
Heaven he is to expect hereafter, what kinds of Means are necessary to obtain
it, how naturally all the Virtues of Religion do raise up men's Souls to Heaven,
and how all the contrary Vices do as naturally sink and press them down to
Hell, it is to be hoped he will be fully persuaded of the indispensible
Necessity of entering into the Christian Life; which if he be, I would advise
him,

2. Seriously to read over and consider the first and second Sections of the
fourth Chapter, wherein are contained the several Duties which are proper to
his State of Entrance into the Christian Life, and also proper Arguments and
Motives to engage him to the Practice of them; which if he would read to good
Effect, he must by no means content himself with a single Perusal, but read
them over at least once a week whilst he continues in that State, till he fully
comprehends the Meaning and Use of all those Duties and the Force and Cogency
of those, Arguments; which if he do, it is to be hoped he will at last be
reduced to a through and wel-weighed Resolution of forsaking his Sins and
actually engaging in the Christian Life. Which being done I would advise him,

3. With the same Care and Frequency to peruse the third and fourth Sections of
the fourth Chapter, wherein are contained all the several Duties proper to this
second State of actual Engagement in the Christian Life, as also sundry
Arguments or Motives to press and enforce them; and when by the Assistance of
these Duties he has continued for some time faithful and constant to his good
Resolution,

4. Together with the third and fourth Section, let him often peruse and
consider the fifth and sixth, wherein are contained the Duties appertaining to
the third State of Emprovement and Perseverance in the Christian Life, together
with some Considerations to enforce the Practice of them. All which I would
earnestly persuade the pious Reader to read and consider over and over again,
till his Mind is fully instructed in the Nature and Use of each Duty, and has
thoroughly digested the Force and Evidence of every Argument. And this may
suffice for the first thing proposed concerning the profitable Method of
reading this practical Treatise.

II. AS for the second Part of it, which is that which I mainly design in this
Chapter, viz. the Rules and Directions for the private Exercise of our Religion
in each State of the Christian Life, together with the Forms of private Prayer
fitted for each, take them in their following Order.

Directions for the more profitable Exercise of our private Religion in the
State of our Entrance into the Christian Life.
In the Morning before you go into the World, enter into your Closet, and there
consider with your self a while the miserable State you have reduced your self
to by your past sinful Courses, the absolute Necessity of your forsaking them,
and the possibility of your Recovery if your heartily endeavor it; and then
adress your self to God in this following Prayer.

O Most glorious and eternal God, thou art the fountain of Beings, the Father
of Angels and Men, the righteous and almighty Governor of Heaven and Earth;
from thy Throne thou beholdest all the Children of men, and their most secret
Actions are open and naked to thy alseeing Eye; and such is the Purity of thy
Nature that thou love Righteousness and hate Iniquity wheresoever thou
beholdest it; with what Face then can I, a most miserable polluted Wretch,
appear in thy presence, who by the past course of my Wickedness and Rebellion
against thee, have not only rendered my self guilty and justly obnoxious to thy
eternal Displeasure, but have also contracted such obstinate Dispositions and
Inclinations to sin on, as without thy Grace and Assistance I shall never be
able to conquer! O desperate, vile and ungrateful Wretch that I have been! I
have renounced the God of my Being, and the Fountain of my Mercies; I have
despised thy Goodness, trampled upon thy Authority, mocked and abused thy
Patience and long suffering, and in Particular I must confess, to my own Shame
and Confusion, I have been woefully guilty of. Here make a particular Confession
of all those sinful Courses you have lived in, together with all their
aggravating Circumstances of Impudence, Obstinacy and Ingratitude, etc.
And now by these my manifold Abominations I have utterly undone my self,
unless thou take pity upon me. I confess I have forfeited my soul into thy
hands, and if thou so please thou may justly cast me away from thy
Presence and make me a dire Example of thy Vengeance for ever. But I know O
Lord, that thou desire not the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should
repent and live; and upon the Propitiation of thine own Sons blood, thou have
declared thy self willing to receive returning Prodigals, and to be heartily
reconciled to them, notwithstanding all their past Provocations. O that I could
return, that I could but shake off those corrupt Inclinations which detain my
wretched soul in Captivity! I am willing to contribute toward it whatsoever I
am able, but alas without thee all that I can do will be utterly ineffectual.
Wherefore for thy tender Mercies sake, for thy dear Sons and my Saviors sake,
have pity upon a miserable Wretch, that without thy helping hand is lost for
ever. And since thou have given me thy Gospel as an outward means to save and
recover me, O do thou enable me by thy blessed Spirit heartily to believe and
thoroughly to consider it. For which end I beseech thee to remove all sinful
Prejudices from my Mind, that so I may impartially weigh those Evidences thou
have given me of the Truth of it; and do thou suggest them to my Mind with such
a clear and convincing Light, as that they may at last conquer my Infidelity,
and beget in me a firm and lively Faith. And forasmuch as my mind is vain and
roving, and utterly averse to all serious Considerations, O do thou who art the
Father of Spirits and can turn the Hearts of men which way thou please,
inspire good Thoughts into me and imprint them upon me with such a Power and
Efficacy, as that my wandering Mind may be reduced by them to a through
Consideration, and my stubborn Will to a firm Resolution of Amendment.
Particularly I beseech thee to give me a right understanding of the urgent need
I have of a Savior, and of all those things which he has done and suffered,
and is still doing at thy right hand in order to the cleansing my guilty and
polluted Nature, and restoring me to thy Grace and Favor; that so hereby I may
be fully convinced how odious my Sins are in thy sight, how base and vile they
have rendered me, and at what a mighty Distance they have set me from thee, and
that being convinced of this I may put on a holy Shame and Confusion, and abhor
my self in dust and ashes before thee. Thou know, O Lord, it is not in my
power to soften this hard and unrelenting Heart and affect it with that Godly
sorrow which is requisite to work a true Repentance. O do thou smite it with
such a sharp and piercing sense of my Sins, as may cause the floods of
unfeigned Grief and Contrition to gush forth from it. Cause me to bleed for my
sins now, that I may not bleed for them for ever; and that having felt the
Smart and Anguish of them, I may utterly detest and abhor them, and never be
reconciled to them more. Thus do thou assist me, O good God, in the Exercise of
all these Duties, till thou have thoroughly conquered my Will by them, and
prepared it for a firm Resolution to forsake all ungodliness and worldly lusts
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. And now that
I am going into the world among those very Temptations that have hitherto so
miserably captivated and inslaved me, O let thy blessed Spirit be present with
me to keep my drousie Conscience awake, and arm me against them with his holy
Inspirations, that so those good Thoughts and Desires which thou have at
present excited in me, may stick fast upon my Soul in the midst of my worldly
Occasions, and never cease importuning my Conscience, Will and Affections, till
they have produced in me the happy Effect of a serious and hearty Repentance.
All which I most earnestly beseech of thee even for pity sake to a poor
perishing Soul, and for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name and words I
farther pray, Our Father, etc.

In the Evening when you find your self most sit for serious Thoughts, go into
your Closet again, and consider cooly with your self whether you are heartily
willing to part with every Sin, and particularly with your beloved Sin, and to
submit to every Duty, and even to those that are most contrary to your vicious
Inclination; if you are not (as it is very probable you will not for some time)
or if you find the least reason to suspect you are not, press your self anew
with such divine Reasons as are most apt to affect you, with the Hope of Heaven
and the Fear of Hell, with the love of God and of your Savior; represent your
Obstinacy to your self with all its Baseness and Disingenuity, Madness and
Folly, till you find your self affected with a sorrowful Sense of it, and then
offer up this following Prayer.

O Father of Mercies and God of all Grace and Consolation, who art a ready help
in time of need, look down upon me, I beseech thee, a miserable and forlorn
Wretch, that have wilfully sold my self Captive to the Devil, and am now
struggling to get loose from this my wretched Bondage into the glorious Liberty
of the Sons of God. I know, O Lord, that I am striving for my immortal Life,
and accordingly as I succeed I expect to be happy or miserable for ever. I have
seriously considered the Reasons on both sides, and am fully satisfied in my
mind that there is infinitely more Force in thy Promises and Threats, than in
all the Difficulties of my Duty and the Pleasures of my sin. But after all
this, I find a law in my Members warring against the law in my Mind, a perverse
Will that rejects the counsels of my Reason, that makes obstinate Reservations
of some beloved Sins, and Exceptions to some particular Duties in despite of
all the persuasion of my Reason and Religion. So that after all my Endeavors I
am still detained in Captivity to the law of sin that is in my Members, and am
not able to incline my self to an entire Resolution of Amendment. O wretched
man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of Sin and Death! I know, O
Lord, though I am weak and impotent, and of my self unable to shake off the
Chains and Fetters of my Lusts, yet thy Grace is abundantly sufficient to
rescue and deliver me from them; and thou have promised to assist with it my
honest Endeavors, and crown them with a blessed Success. Wherefore for thy
Truth and Mercies sake* suffer not thy poor Creature who with pitiful and
bemoaning Looks cries out for help to thee, to spend himself in weary and
fruitless Struglings against this violent Torrent of my sinful Nature, which
without thy aid will quickly overcome my poor Endeavors and drive me down into
eternal Perdition. My sole Dependence is upon thee, my Hope of Success is
wholly in thee, help, Lord, help or else I perish; stretch forth thy powerful
Arm to my sinking Soul, and let not this Deep swallow me up; but do thou so
quicken my faint Endeavors, so strengthen my weak and doubting Faith, so
enliven my cold and languid Considerations, so clear up my Convictions of my
need of a Savior and of the Danger and Odiousness of my Sins, and thereby so
increase my penitential Sorrows and Remorses, as that by all these means
together my obstinate Will may at last be conquered, and effectually persuaded
to part with every Sin, be it never so dear to me, and to comply with every
Duty, be it never so cross to my vile Inclinations. Then shall I freely resign
up my self unto thee, and with a firm Resolution devote all my Powers to thy
Service. And that I may do so, and by so doing be reconciled to thee, O my
offended God, before I go hence and be no more seen, receive me I beseech thee
into thy protection this Night, that I may yet see the light of another Day,
and have a longer space to finish my Repentance. All which I humbly implore
even for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name and words I farther pray, Our
Father, etc.

If upon searching your own Heart, you find that after you have fairly
represented to your self what sinful Pleasures you must part with, what Duties
you must submit to, and what Difficulties you must engage with, you are willing
without any Reserve or Exception to submit your self to God, beware you be not
too hasty to form your Resolution, but take some little time to try your self;
see whether you will continue to morrow of the same mind you are in now, and if
then you perceive you have reason to suspect your self, try a little longer,
and at the present endeavor as much as in you lies to confirm and settle your
self in the good Mind you are in, by pressing and urging your self with all
those Arguments of your Religion by which you have been thus far convinced and
persuaded; and while you are thus trying your self, instead of the former, let
this be your Evening Prayer, O Blessed Lord and most merciful Father, thou art
a God hearing Prayer and to thee shall all flesh come; I admire thy Goodness, I
adore thy Grace, that after so many heinous provocations I have given thee for
which thou might have justly shut thine ears against me for ever, thou have
heard my Cries and pitied my Misery, and thus far contributed toward my
Recovery. I acknowledge it is by thy Grace that I am what I am, that this
stubborn Heart begins at last to relent, this perverse Will to bow and stoop,
these lewd Affections to hunger and thirst after Righteousness; that now at
last my foolish soul is persuaded to part with those sins which are its Plagues
and Infelicities, and to embrace those blessed Duties by which thou have
designed to raise me to immortal Glory. By these good Beginnings thou have
given me some Reason to hope for a happy Success upon my poor Endeavors.
Praised be thy Grace, I am at present heartily willing to be thine, and were I
but sure to continue thus minded and disposed, I would immediately make over my
Heart and Will to thee by the most solemn Engagement. But, O Lord, I am afraid
of my self, I dread my own Inconstancy, and thou know I have too much Reason
for it. I have mocked thee too often already with my deceitful Promises and
Engagements; I have sinned and then promised Amendment, I have promised
Amendment and then sinned again, as if all that I meant by my Promises, were
only to ask leave of thee to sin against thee anew. Now after so many
Falsifications I would not for all the World deal treacherously with thee any
more; wherefore before I solemnly resign and devote my self to thee by a new
Purpose and Engagement, I desire to make some farther Trial of my own
Stedfastness, to see whether this present Inclination of my Will be the effect
of Passion or a settled Judgment. In the mean time therefore I do most humbly
beseech thee to be present with me in all my ways, and continually to influence
my Mind with thy Grace and Spirit; to strengthen my Faith, to fix my
Consideration, to persuade my Will, and feed and cherish these my holy Desires
with good Thoughts and Inspirations, that so I may remain steadfast and
immovable, and no Temptation whatsoever may be able to alter the Temper of my
mind or divert it from its good Inclination; and that having had a sufficient
Experience of the fixed Disposition of my Soul to obey thee, I may devote my
self to thee with a cheerful Heart and an assured Hope of my own Sincerity and
Constancy. O Lord hear and help me for thy Mercies sake, and for Jesus Christ
his sake, in whose most perfect Form of Prayer I farther pray, Our Father, etc.



If after a sufficient Trial of your self, you find you are constantly inclined
to submit to God, to part with every Sin and comply with every Duty, consider
that now it is high time for you to devote your self to God, and what abundant
Reason you have for it, and what a powerful Obligation you must lay upon your
self by so doing; and when you have seriously considered these things, give up
your self to God in this following Form of Prayer, which for the greater
Sanction and more awful Solemnity of your good Resolution, you would do well to
repeat at the next Sacrament.

O Most merciful Father, so infinite is the Goodness of thy Nature, that thou
art always ready to pity and relieve the poor and needy, and to extend thy
timely Succors to us helpless Sinners whenever we cry unto thee. Of the
truth whereof thou have given me, who am the vilest of Sinners, a most sensible
Proof and Experiment. For not long ago I was so dead in Trespasses and Sins,
that, had not thou took pity upon me and quickened me by thy Grace, I had dyed
for ever; my Understanding was so blind that I saw not my Danger, my Conscience
so seared that I felt not my Guilt, my Will so inslaved to my Lusts that I
could not endure to think of parting with them; but now, blessed be thy Grace
which first excited my Endeavors and has hitherto prospered them, I do not
only see the Danger my Sins have exposed me to, and sensibly feel the Guilt of
them, but am freely willing to renounce them for ever, and to part even with
those darling Lusts that have heretofore been as dear to me as my right Eye.
And now, O Lord, I am come before thee, and I hope with a truly Loyal and
sincere Heart, to offer up my Soul and Body to thee, and vow an everlasting
Obedience to thy blessed Will. For Jesus sake refuse not this poor Oblation,
which though it be infinitely unworthy of thine Acceptance, is the best thing I
am able to present thee. To thee; O glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, I do from henceforth eternally devote my self and all my Faculties. [
When you renew your Vow in the Sacrament, add
And here at the Table of my blessed Savior, and upon these sacred Memorials
of his Wounds and Blood] I utterly abjure all known and wilful Sins and
Rebellions, and particularly all such as have been heretofore most dear to me;
faithfully promising by thy gracious Assistance from henceforth to observe thy
Law without any Reserve or Exception. This in the Sincerity of my Soul I do
here vow to thy divine Majesty, and however I may be hereafter tempted I will
never wilfully depart from it or from any Part of it, so help me O my God for
Jesus Christ his sake, in whose own words I farther pray, Our Father, etc.

Directions for the more profitable Exercise of our private Religion in the
state of our actual Engagement in the Christian Life.
When you go into your Closet in the Morning, consider seriously with your self
the solemn Engagement you lie under; what a crying guilt it would be to violate
it, what Madness and Folly to recede from it, after you have taken so much
pains to reduce your self to it, what mighty Reasons you have to persist in it,
and what powerful Assistance is promised you, if you be not wanting to your
self; and then offer up this following Prayer, O Eternal God, who art the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and do through him bestow so many good and
perfect Gifts upon thy Creatures, I desire for ever to remember and adore thy
Goodness toward me, whom thou have snatched as a Firebrand out of the Fire,
and at length reduced to a serious Purpose of Amendment after a long and
obstinate Course of Disobedience, in which if I had still persisted I must have
perished everlastingly. O blessed be thy great Name, that after so many years
Rebellion against thee, for which I have long ago deserved to be banished into
utter Darkness, I do yet behold the light of another Day, and am allowed a
farther Space to repent and execute my Purpose of Amendment. And now, O Lord,
as thou have wrought my Will into a good Resolution in despite of all the
corrupt Inclinations of my Nature, leave not I beseech thee thy Workmanship
unfinished, but by the mighty Operation of thy Grace excite and enable me
faithfully to perform what I have so seriously resolved. It is a mighty Work
that I have undertaken, to cleanse a base polluted Nature, and root up all its
filthy Lusts and Affections, and plant it with all the heavenly Dispositions,
and improve them into everlasting Happiness; and thou know what strong
Oppositions will be made against me, and with what powerful Temptations I must
struggle throughout the whole Course of my future Endeavor. So that unless
thou will still go along with me, and still quicken and animate me by thy
blessed Spirit, my Work is so great, and my Strength so little, that it will be
in vain for me to proceed any farther. These importunate Temptations that
surround me will quickly conquer my present Resolution, and I shall do, as I
have too often done already, resolve and sin, and sin and resolve, and so
increase my Guilt by the Treachery of my Vows and Engagements. Wherefore, for
Jesus Christ his sake, withdraw not thy self from me, but continue to assist my
weak Endeavors by thy powerful Grace, till thou have crowned them with a
perfect Victory. For which End, I beseech thee inspire me more and more with
Patience and Constancy of Mind, that I may stand fast in my good Resolution in
despite of all Temptations to the contrary. Suggest to my Mind those holy
Examples thou have set before me, especially that of my blessed Savior and
incline my Heart to copy and imitate them. Direct me to some wise and faithful
Guide, that may be willing and able to assist me in all my spiritual
Necessities; and by frequently exciting me to dedicate my Actions to thee, do
thou purify my Intentions from sinful and from carnal Aims, that so I may
always live to thy Glory. And since thou art present with me wherever I am, and
do always behold me whatsoever I am doing, O do thou inspire me with such a
strong continual and actual Sense of it, as may be a constant Check to my
sinful Inclinations, and render me afraid of offending thee. Let thy blessed
Spirit be my constant Monitor, to put me in mind to consider my Ways, and
frequently to examine my Actions, that so whenever I go astray I may be
immediately convinced of it, and by my speedy Repentance recover my self before
I have wandered too far from my Duty. And grant I beseech thee that the sense
of my past Failings may still render me more watchful and circumspect for the
future; that whenever I have been carelessly or wilfully faulty, I may from
thenceforth be more cautious of my Actions, and more vigilant against the
Temptations that betrayed me. And that I may not run my self unnecessarily into
Temptation for the future, preserve me, O Lord, from sloth and idleness, and
from intermedling with matters that do not belong to me, and do thou still put
me in mind to do my own Business, and to be faithful and diligent in the State
and Calling wherein thou have placed me. And that I may always serve thee with
Freedom and Alacrity, remove from me I beseech thee all unprofitable Sadness
and Melancholy, and help me to acquire an equal Tranquillity of Mind, and a
becoming Cheerfulness of Spirit. For which end, Good Lord, do thou inspire me
with a lively Sense and earnest Expectation of that blissful State toward
which I am traveling; that having this glorious Prospect always in my Eye, I
may go on with Joy and Triumph over all the Difficulties and Temptations that
oppose me. And that by all these means I may be more and more strengthened and
confirmed in the good Resolution I have made, do thou stir up my slothful mind
to a dilligent Attendance on thy public Ordinances, that so in the solemn
Assemblies of thy Saints I may constantly hear thy Word with Reverence and
Attention, offer up my Prayers with Fervency and Devotion, and approach thy
Table with all that Humility and Love, Gratitude and Resignation of Soul that
becomes this solemn Remembrance and Representation of my dying Savior. In
these things, and whatsoever else is needful to secure my Resolution of
Obedience, assist me, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thy self
and eternal Spirit be rendered all Honor Glory and Power from his time forth
and for evermore.



After this Prayer bethink your self a little what Temptations you are like to
meet with in the ensuing Business of the Day, and briefly recollect those
powerful Arguments which the Gospel urges to fortify you against them, and
apply them particularly to the Sin or Sins you are most inclined to, and then
renew your Resolution to God in the following Prayer.

O God who art my Hope and Strength, upon whose Aid and Assistance I depend,
look down I beseech thee upon a poor helpless Creature, who am going forth into
a busy World that is full of Snares and Temptations. Blessed be thy Name, my
Heart continues still resolved upon a through Course of Amendment; and
therefore here in thy dreadful Presence I do again most solemnly promise and
engage my self, that whatsoever Temptations I meet with this Day, I will not
wilfully commit any Sin, no not the Sin I am most inclined to; nor omit any
Duty, how contrary soever it may be too my Nature; and that I will faithfully
endeavor to keep such a constant Guard upon my self, as that I may not be
surprised and overtaken through my own Inadvertence and Vnwariness. But this, O
Lord, I promise not out of any Confidence in my own Strength, but in Dependence
upon thee, and in Hope that out of thy tender Pity to a poor impotent Wretch
thou will not be wanting to me in any necessary Assistance, but that either
thou will remove from me all great and importunate Temptations, or enable me by
thy Grace to repel and vanquish them; and this I do most earnestly beseech, in
the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ, with whose Prayer I conclude this my
morning Sacrifice, Our Father, etc.

In the Evening when you find your self best disposed for religious Exercise,
set apart such Portions of your Time as you can conveniently spare from your
necessary Refreshment and Diversion, to call your self to Account concerning
the Actions of the Day; and enquire whether they have been agreeable to your
Morning Promise and Resolution; and upon Enquiry you will find either that you
have faithfully discharged what you promised, or that you have sinned unawares
or through Carelessness and Self-neglect, or that you have sinned wilfully and
against your own Conscience.

If upon Enquiry it appear that you have been faithful to your Morning
Engagement, represent to your self the great Reason you have to rejoice in it,
and to praise God for it, and then offer up this following Thanksgiving.

BLessed be thy Name, O most gracious and merciful Father, for those great and
numberless Favors which from time to time thou have heaped upon me, who am
less than the least of all thy Mercies; particularly for the signal Mercies of
this Day, for that thou have not shut thine Ears against my Prayers, nor
withdrawn thy self from me, but have accompanied me with thy Grace through all
those Snares and Temptations to which I have been exposed. Praised be thy Name,
that thou have not suffered me to be tempted above what I was able, that thou
have so powerfully assisted me against those Temptations I have been engaged
with, and by putting so many good Thoughts into my Mind, have strengthened my
Resolution and rendered it so successful and victorious. It Is to thy Grace that
I owe all the good I have done, and it is by thy Aid that I have escaped all the
evils I have been tempted to; wherefore not unto me, O Lord, not unto my
Strength or Endeavors, but unto thy Name be all the Glory and Praise of this
days Deliverance and Preservation. O never let the Remembrance of this thy
Goodness toward me depart from my Mind, but let it kindle in me such a
grateful Sense, as may more and more incite me to love and obey thee and depend
upon thee for the future. And as thou have been pleased to conduct me safely by
thy Grace through all the Dangers and Temptations of the Day, so do thou take
me into thy Care and Protection this Night, and grant that I may awake in the
Morning with a Heart so inflamed with the Remembrance of thy Goodness, and so
encouraged with this Days success, and so indeared to the Practice of Virtue by
the growing Delights and Pleasures of it, as that I may persist in my religious
Course with greater Courage and Alacrity; and this I humbly beg for Jesus
Christ's sake, in whose name and words I farther pray, Our Father, etc.

If upon Enquiry you find that you have been failing in your Duty, or that you
have done any evil Action through mere Heedlessness or Surprise, endeavor to
affect your self with a sorrowful Sense of your own Folly, Weakness and
Carelessness, and then conclude with this Form of Humiliation, O Most blessed
Lord God, who art infinitely glorious in thy own Righteousness and Holiness,
and do for ever will and act according to thy own Nature which is the most
perfect Law and Pattern of Goodness. To thy spotless Nature no Evil can
approach, who art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; with what Confidence
then can such a polluted Creature as I am appear in thy Presence, how can I
lift up my guilty Eyes to thy Throne, who to my past Rebellions, which have
been more in number than the hairs on my Head, have this day added so many
sinful Failings and Defects, that, should thou be severe to mark what I do
amiss, were sufficient to kindle thy Displeasure against me! 'Twas but this
Morning that I engaged my self to thee, not only to abstain from all wilful and
deliberate Sins, but also to set a watch upon my Mouth and Actions that I might
not offend thee unawares; but to my Shame I must acknowledge, I have been
woefully careless and remiss, having this Day suffered my self through my own
Inadvertency to be surprised into such Actions as nothing can render pittiable
or excusable in thy Sight but the miserable Frailty and Weakness of my Nature.
What shall I say unto thee, O thou Judge of all the Earth! I am guilty, I am
guilty, and have nothing to plead for my self but the Blood of Jesus, that
all-sufficient Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. O Lord, I do
earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry for these my Misdoings, the Remembrance
of them is grievous unto me, the Burden of them is intolerable; have mercy
upon me, have mercy upon me, most merciful Father, and for Jesus Christ his
sake forgive me all that is past, and grant that the Sense of these my
Miscarriages, may render me more careful and vigilant for the future. And let
thy blessed Spirit be always present with my Mind, to recollect my
Distractions, and awake my Considerations, and warn me of my Dangers, that I
may no more be surprised by sudden Temptations, nor hurried into evil Actions
by unexpected Hopes or Fears; but do thou so subdue my lower Appetites to my
Will, my Will to my Understanding, and my Understanding to thy Spirit, as that
under his blessed Conduct, I may for the future be prepared against all
Temptations, and furnished to every good work. And now, O Lord, let not the
Failings I have been guilty of this Day, deprive me of thy gracious Protection
this Night, but grant that after a safe and comfortable Repose, I may awake in
the Morning with such a sorrowful Sense of them, as may for the future oblige
me to be more watchful and resolute against them. All which I beg for Jesus
Christ his sake, with whose Prayer I conclude this my evening Sacrifice, Our
Father, etc.



If upon Enquiry it appear that you have committed any wilful, deliberate Sin,
endeavor to affect your self with Horror, Shame and Compunction for it, by
representing to your Conscience the monstrous Foulness and Ingratitude, the
deep Malignity and desperate Madness of your own Action; and then conclude with
this Form of particular Repentance.

O Thou most dreadful Majesty of Heaven and Earth, who hate Iniquity, and
have proclaimed from Heaven thy fierce Indignation against all Unrighteousness
and Ungodliness of men, look down I beseech thee upon me, a vile and guilty
Wretch, who stand here arraigned at thy Tribunal by my own Conscience, and am
so confounded with the sense of my Sin, and of thy just Displeasure against me,
that I tremble to draw near unto thee, and yet I dare not stay from thee. I
acknowledge my self unworthy, infinitely unworthy, to come before thee, and am
prompted by my own Horror and Shame to hide my self from thee, but yet I know I
must come or I must perish. And therefore here, O Lord, I cast my self at thy
Feet, and if thou shall think meet to tread upon me, and to spurn me from thy
Presence for ever, I must own that thou art just and righteous in all thy Ways.
For thou have been wonderfully good beyond what I could modestly have wished, or
am able to express; thou tookest pity upon me when I was all wounded and
polluted and weltring in my Blood, when I was sleeping securely upon the brink
of Perdition, and had scarce any Sense or Feeling of my Guilt and Misery; in
this woeful plight did thou visit my poor Soul, and with thy preventing Grace
awake me to a sense of my Danger, and effectually warn me to flee from the
wrath to come. And now when thou had brought me to my self, and to a through
Resolution of Amendment, and my Soul was in a fair way of Recovery, like an
ungrateful Wretch as I am, I have flown in the Face of my Physician, I have
abused his Goodness, and baffled his Grace, and wilfully and deliberately torn
open my Wounds again. And this I have done most treacherously, as well as
ungratefully, not only against all the Obligations of thy Goodness, but also
against my own repeated Vows and Engagements. For 'twas but this Morning that I
solemnly renewed to thee my Promise of Obedience, and therein vowed not to
offend thee wilfully upon any Temptation whatsoever; but O vile Traitor that I
am, both to thee and to my own Soul, I have by Here name the sinful Act you
have committed.
most base basely falsified this my Engagement; and this I did with the most
unpardonable Circumstance, even against the Dissuasions of thy Grace, the
Checks of my Conscience, and the fairest Warnings of my Danger. Had I done it
Ignorantly or unawares or under a Surprise, it had been pittiable; but, O my
Guilt, my Guilt, 'twas knowingly, wilfully, basely, and maliciously that I did
this evil in thy sight; whereby I have forfeited my Soul, my Innocence and thy
Love, and have got nothing in exchange but the Pleasure of a Minute, and a
lasting Shame and Repentance. O vile Wretch, O desperate Fool that I am, what
have I done! whither am I fallen! I have grieved thy Spirit, contemned thy
Authority, trampled on thy Goodness, and wounded my own Conscience, and by one
base Act have thrown my self headlong from all those glorious Hopes whereunto
thou had raised me. And now, O God, what can I say in my own behalf, my Sin
being so great, my Folly so utterly inexcusable! O I am ashamed, I am ashamed
of my self, I lament and abhor the Madness and Wickedness of my own Choice; and
O that it were in my power to recall it! But woe is me it is past into Act, and
by that Act my Innocence is already stained, my Soul forfeited, and it is no
more in my Power to undo what I have done, than to recall the Hours of
yesterday. What then shall I do, or whether shall I turn my self! It Is against
thee, O Lord, against thee I have sinned, and now I have none but thee to flee
to. I have nothing of my own to plead in my own behalf, my Conscience condemns
me, and my Sin, my Sin, cries aloud against me; so that unless thou will be
pleased to listen to the interceding Blood of thy Son, and to consult thine own
Bowels and Compassions, and from thence to fetch Arguments of Mercy. I am
undone for ever by my own Folly. Wherefore for Jesus Christ his sake, for thy
own Goodness and Mercies sake, have pity, have pity upon me, heal my Soul, for
I have sinned against thee; be merciful to my Sin, for it is great. Thou have
promised to receive returning Sinners, to blot out their Iniquities, and to
heal their Backslidings. I desire O Lord to return unto thee, I hate and
renounce my Sin, and do here abhor my self for it in Dust and Ashes before
thee. Wherefore for thy Praise sake, O try me this once more, and do not
presently cast me away from thy Presence nor take thy holy Spirit from me, but
restrain me by his Grace from all presumptuous Sins, and suffer them not to
have Dominion over me. And quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake, that for the
future I may watch more carefully, resist more vigorously, and walk more
circumspectly than I have hitherto done. And that from henceforth I may be
entirely devoted to thee, and serve thee without Interruption, do thou so
confirm me by thy Grace in my holy Resolution, as that I may choose rather to
die than to offend thee any more. And now, O Lord, though by my Rebellion
against thee this Day, I have rendered my self most unworthy of thy fatherly
Care and Protection, yet I beseech thee to watch over me this Night for good,
and give me a safe Repose in the Arms of thy Providence, that I may have yet a
farther Space to repent of mine Iniquity. And grant, I beseech thee, that when
I awake in the Morning, I may be warned by the woeful Remembrance of this Days
Fall, to take more Care of my Steps, and to shun or refuse those Snares and
Temptations that lie all around me. All which I do most humbly and earnestly
beg of thee, even for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name and words I farther
pray, Our Father, etc.

Directions for the Exercise of our private Religion in the state of our
Progress and Improvement in the Christian Life, with Forms of private Devotion
fitted for this State.
When you enter into your Closet in the Morning, endeavor to affect your self
with Gratitude and Thankfulness to God for his Grace, by representing to your
self the Danger and Misery of that sinful State out of which you are recovered,
and the great Incapacity you were in to recover without his Assistance* and
then make this thankful Acknowledgment to him, O Most gracious and most
merciful Father, thou art a liberal Benefactor to thy Creation, a never-failing
Friend to Mankind, and a most tender Lover of Souls, for whose everlasting
Welfare thou have been always consulting, and have left no method of Love
unattempted, to rescue them from Sin and Misery. O blessed, for ever blessed,
be thy great Name for the Experience I have had of this thy fatherly Goodness.
I am a monument of thy Goodness, a living Instance and Wonder of thy Mercy, for
me have thou quickened who was dead in Trespasses and Sins, and who had long ago
perished in mine Iniquities had thou not been infinitely patient and long
suffering. I had forfeited my Soul to thee, and thou might justly have cut
me off, and given me my Portion with Hypocrites, and considering how I provoked
thee to it by my daily Rebellions, I cannot but admire thy Forbearance toward
me. But that thou should not only forbear me, but follow me with thy
Kindness, and never cease importuning me to return to my Duty and Happiness
till thou had conquered me by thy Gracious Persuasions, O incomparable Love!
O amazing Goodness! never to be sufficiently admired and adored! Wherefore
praised, for ever praised, be thy Grace, which has redeemed my Life from
eternal Death, and my Soul from the neathermost Hell; which has rescued me
from the Snare of the Devil, and the pernicious Bondage of my Lusts, and
implanted in my Nature these heavenly Graces and Dispositions, and hitherto
improved and advanced them toward my eternal Happiness. This, O my God, all
this, I owe to thy free and undeserved Goodness, that I that was dead am now
alive, that I that was lost am found, that I that was a slave to my Lusts am
made free from Sin, and translated into the glorious Liberty of the sons of
God, is purely the Effect of thy free Grace, and to be entirely ascribed to thy
all-powerful Goodness. Go on, O Lord, go on, I beseech thee, and perfect thine
own Work, that so the Glory of it may be for ever redounding to thee; and that
as I have been hitherto a signal Instance of thy Goodness, so I may be an happy
Instrument of thy Praise to eternal Ages. And grant, I beseech thee, that the
sense of thy unspeakble Kindness toward me, may so captivate my Soul and all
my Faculties, as that I may be most entirely thine; as that my Reason and Will,
my Fear and Hope, and Love and Desire may from henceforth be all resigned up to
thee, and for ever devoted to the Honor and Worship of thy infinite Glories
and Perfections; and this I most humbly beg for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom
with thy self and thy eternal Spirit be rendered all Honor, Glory and Power
from this time forth and for evermore. Amen.



After this Thanksgiving, consider briefly with your self the indispensible
Necessity of your Perseverance to the End, and how not only vain and fruitless,
but also hurtful and mischievous to you all your past Labor in Religion will
be without it; and then conclude your morning Devotion with this Prayer for
Perseverance.

O God, who art unchangeably holy and blessed, who art the same yesterday, to
day and for ever, and do never swerve or vary from the essential Goodness and
Purity of thy own Nature, look down I beseech thee upon me, a fickle, weak and
mutable Creature, whom thou have redeemed to thy self, and hitherto conducted
by thy Grace and Spirit. Thou know, O Lord, the Weakness of my Nature, and
how unable I am without thy Strength and Assistance to finish the Race which
thou have set before me; thou know what Temptations I must struggle with,
and what Difficulties I must yet overcome, before I am seized of the blessed
Prize I am contending for, wherefore, since thou have hitherto been my constant
Support and Defense, forsake me not now for thy Names sake, but as thou have
begun a good Work in me, so I beseech thee to finish and complete it; to uphold
my feeble Soul by thy free Spirit under all Temptations and Difficulties, that
so by patient continuance in well-doing, I may seek for, and at last obtain,
honor* and glory, immortality and eternal life. For which end, O Lord,
preserve me from being over-confident of my own Abilities, and inspire me with
a holy Jealousy of my self, that whilst I stand I may take heed lest I fall.
And if at any time I should be so base, and so unhappy, as to offend thee
wilfully (which I beseech thee to prevent for thy Mercy and Compassion sake) O
suffer me not to sleep in my Sin, but recall me instantly by the Checks of my
Conscience, and the Convictions of thy Spirit, lest while I add Sin to Sin, and
one degree of Wickedness to another, my Lusts should regain their Dominion over
me, and thou should be angry with me and reject me from thy Covenant for
ever. And that I may every Day serve thee more freely and steadfastly, wean me,
I beseech thee, more and more from those Temptations to Sin that are round
about me, and give me such a true understanding of the Nature of all the Goods
and Evils of this World, as that neither the Flatteries of the one, nor the
Terrors of the other, may ever be able to withdraw me from my Duty. And lest
while I am mortifying my old Sins, I should carelessly permit new ones to spring
up in my Nature, good God, do thou mind me to search and try my own Heart, and
take a severe Account even of the smallest Defects and Imperfections within me;
that so I may correct and reform them in time, before they are improved into
inveterate Habits. And grant that I may be always so sensible of my own
Imperfection, as that I may never rest in any present Attainment, but may still
be pressing forward to the mark of my high calling in Jesus Christ. Suggest to
me, I beseech thee, frequent Thoughts of my Mortality, that so, while I have
Time and Opportunity, I may be preparing for my Departure hence, and making
provision for a dying hour. In order whereunto, assist me, O Lord, I beseech
thee, strictly to examine and review my past sinful Courses, that so if there be
any remains of Guilt abiding upon my Conscience, I may purge them away by
proper Acts of Repentance, before I go hence and be no more seen. And grant
that as I have formerly abounded in Sin, so I may now redeem that precious Time
I have lost, by abounding in the contrary Virtues; that so, as far as in me
lies, I may revoke and undo the multitude of my past Sins, by doing all the
Good I am able for the future. And that I may hold out and persevere to the
end, preserve and continue me in the Communion of thy Church, and suffer me not
to be led away by the errors of the wicked and to fall from my own
stedfastness. And finally I beseech thee to grant that in the use of these
blessed Means, I may so far prevail over the Infirmities and Corruptions of my
Nature, as that at last I may have a clear and certain Feeling of my own
Integrity and Vprightness toward thee; that so being from thence assured of
thy Love, and of my Title to eternal Happiness, I may run the ways of thy
commandments more cheerfully, and at last finish my Course with unspeakable
joy. And now, O Lord, I resign my self to thee, take me I beseech thee into thy
Care and Protection this Day, preserve me from all Evil, but especially from
Sin, and quicken me by thy Spirit unto every good work, that so I may serve
thee with a free and cheerful Mind, and make it my meat and drink to do thy
blessed will. All which I humbly beg for Jesus Christ his sake in whose Name
and Mediation I further pray, Our Father, etc.

In the Evening, when you enter into your Closet, consider what is the present
Frame and Temper of your Mind; and upon Enquiry you will perceive, either that
through the present Prevalency of your corrupt Nature, you are averse to divine
Offices, or that through bodily Infirmity, you are indisposed to them, or that
through Worldly-mindedness and Vanity of Spirit you are cold and apt to be
distracted in them, or lastly, that your Heart is very much enlarged, and your
Mind and Affections vigorously disposed toward divine and heavenly things.

If upon Enquiry you find that through the present Prevalency of your corrupt
Nature you are averse to divine Offices, endeavor to affect your self with
Shame and Sorrow for it, by representing to your Mind the great Impiety and
Baseness, the monstrous Folly and Ingratitude of this your present Temper, and
then offer up this following Prayer.

O My most gracious God and most kind and merciful Father, thou art the best
Friend I have in all the World, and have shown a thousand times more Love to me
than ever I showed to my self; but after all the vast and most indearing
Obligations thou have laid upon me, this vile and ungrateful Heart of mine
still retains some Dregs of its ancient Enmity against thee. Had I but the
common Sense and Ingenuity of a Man in me, how could I think of thee without
Raptures of Love; how could I draw near unto thee without Transports of Delight
and Complacency! But, vile and ungrateful that I am, I can think of all thy
Goodness with cold and frozen Affections, and can come into thy Presence not
only with Indifference but Reluctance. Good God what am I made of! what an
insensible Soul do I carry about me! O I am ashamed of my self, I am confounded
with the sense of my own Baseness; and yet, woe is me, I cannot help it. I
strive to shake off this Clog of my corrupt Nature, but still it hangs upon me,
and sinks and weighs down my Soul as often as it is aspiring toward thee. O my
God, have pity upon me, deliver me from this Body of Sin, ease my weary and
heavy laden Soul of this grievous Burden under which it labors and groans,
and suffer not this spark of divine Life which thou have kindled in me to be
oppressed and extinguished by it; but so cherish it, I beseech thee, with the
continual Influences of thy Grace, as that it may, at length it may, break
through all this Rubbish that suppresses it, and finally rise into a glorious
Flame. Then shall I always approach thee with Joy, and breath up my Soul to
thee in every Prayer; then shall my Heart be firmly united to thee in a devout
and cheerful Affection, and my Prayers shall come up as incense before thee,
and breathe a sweet smelling savor into thy Nostrils. Hear me therefore, O my
God, I beseech thee, and strengthen me with all might in the inward man, that
for the future I may contend more vigorously and successfully against these
vile Inclinations of my Nature which do so miserably hamper and depress my
soul, that so at last I may be a conqueror and more than a conqueror through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

If through any bodily Infirmity, such as Melancholy, Weariness, Drousiness or
Sickness you find your self indisposed to divine Offices, endeavor to quicken
your sluggish Mind with the Consideration of some one of the most moving
Arguments of your Religion, such as the Love of God and of your Savior, the
Majesty of Gods Presence in which you are, or the blessed Immortality you hope
for; and then address your self to God in this following Prayer.

O Blessed God, thou art a most pure and active Spirit, who do always move
with an uncontrolable Freedom, and art never hindered or wearied in thy
Operations; have pity upon me, I beseech thee, thy poor infirm Creature, who am
cumbred with this Body of death, and so deprest by its manifold Frailties, that
I cannot lift up my Heart unto thee. Thou know, O Lord, my spirit is willing
though my flesh is weak; my laboring Soul aspires toward thee, it stretches
forth the Wings of its Desires toward thee, and would fain mount up above all
earthly things and unite it self with thee in eternal Love; but alas! its
Fervours are dampt, and its Endeavors tired by this clog of Flesh that hangs
upon it, and perpetually sinks and weighs it down again. O my God, draw near
unto me, and touch my Mind with such a powerful sense of thee, as in despite
of these my bodily Indispositions may attract and draw up my Soul unto thee.
And if it be thy blessed will, release me from these fleshly Encumbrances, and
fit my Body to my Mind, that I may serve thee, as I desire to do with a fervent
and a cheerful Spirit. But if it shall seem good in thine Eyes to leave me
struggling under these bodily Oppressions, Lord give me Patience and Submission
to thy heavenly Will; that so when I cannot approach thee with that Pleasure
and Satisfaction I desire, I may be heartily content to serve thee upon any
Terms, and that what I want of Vigor and Cheerfulness in my Religion, I may
make up in Truth and in Reality. And O let the Sense of these my present
Indispositions cause me more vehemently to long after that free and blessed
State, wherein with fixed and steady Thoughts, with flagrant Love and an entire
Devotion of Soul, I shall for ever worship, praise and glorify thy name, Amen.

If through present Worldly-mindedness, or Vanity of Spirit, you find your self
cold and apt to be distracted in your Religious Offices, endeavor to stir up
your Affections by representing to your self the Greatness and Urgency of your
spiritual Wants, the Vanity of all outward things, and the Reality and Fullness
of heavenly Enjoyments. And do what you can to recollect your wandering
Thoughts, by setting your self in the Presence of the great God, to whose
All-seeing Eye every Thought and Motion of your Soul is open and naked. And
when by thus doing, you have composed your Mind into a more serious Frame,
present this following Prayer.

O Thou ever blessed Majesty, who fillest Heaven and Earth with thy Presence,
and art always listening to the Supplications of a world of Creatures that hang
upon thee; open, I beseech thee, thine Ears of Mercy to me, who am unfit and
unworthy to approach thee; who by setting my Affections upon things below, and
plunging my self into the Cares and Pleasures of this Life, have estranged and
alienated my Mind from thee, and lost that delightful Relish of thee, with
which I was wont to draw near unto thee. And now that I am retired from the
World to converse with thee, and spread my wants and my desires before thee,
those worldly Cares and Delights with which I have been too too conversant, are
importunately thrusting themselves upon me, to divert my Thoughts, distract my
Intentions, and carry away my Affections from thee; by reason whereof my Mind
wanders, my Hope droops, and my Desires are frozen, and whilst I am drawing
near thee with my lips, my heart is running away from thee. O my God have pity
upon me, pluck my Soul out of this deep mire, quicken, raise and spiritualize
these my grovelling Affections. Possess this Heart, which opens it self to thy
gracious Influences, with such a strong and vigorous Love to thee, as may lift
me up above all earthly things, and continually carry forth my Soul in vehement
Desires after thee; that so I may always approach thee with a joyful Heart,
being glad to leave the company of all other things to go to thee, my God, my
exceeding Joy. Give me a sober, diligent and collected spirit, that is neither
choked with Cares, nor scattered with Levity, nor discomposed with Passion,
nor estranged from thee with sinful Prejudice or Inadvertency; but fix it fast
to thy self with the Indissoluble Bands of an active Love and pregnant
Devotion; that so whenever I prostrate my self before thee, I may presently be
born away far above all these sensible Goods in a high Admiration of thee, and
a passionate Longing after thee. And now, O Lord, while I am addressing to
thee, gather in I beseech thee my wandering Thoughts, and fix and stay them
upon thy self. And O do thou touch my cold and earthy Desires with an
outstretched Ray from thy self, and cause them to rise and flame up to thee in
Fervours answerable to my pressing Wants, that I may so ask as that I may
receive, so seek as that I may find, so knock as that it may be opened unto me,
through Jesus Christ my blessed Lord and Redeemer, Amen.

If after this you find your Heart is very much enlarged, and your Mind and
Affections vigorously disposed toward God and heavenly things, fix your Mind a
little while upon the Beauty and Excellency of his Nature, or upon some of the
most affecting Instances of his Love, or upon the blessed State above, and then
go on with this following Prayer.

O Thou most excellent Being, thou infinitely amiable and adorable Majesty,
thou Pattern of Beauty, and Standard of Goodness, who art glorious beyond all
Praise, and do out-reach all Wonder, and comprehend all perfection; blessed
be thy Name, thou have touched my soul with a lively sense of thy Glory; I feel
it shining through me, and like an active Flame insinuating into my Heart; it
fires my Love, cherishes my Hope, wings my Devotion, and diffuses a vital
Warmth over all my Faculties; it raises me up into a heavenly State, and fills
me with joy unspeakable and full of glory; it captivates every thought into
Obedience to thy Will, and brings every Power of my soul into Subjection to
thee. Blessed be thy Name, thou have conquered me by thy Love, and I resign my
self to thee with a cheerful Heart. I am entirely thine, I am thy Servant,
truly I am thy Servant, and in this Title I glory more than in all the Honors
of the World. But though I am highly advanced and exalted by serving thee, yet
thou art so infinitely happy in the boundless perfections of thy own Nature,
that thou can reap no other Advantage from it but only the pleasure of seeing
thy poor Creature blessed and made happy by it. What then shall I render unto
thee, O thou Joy of my Life, thou Treasure of my Love, thou supreme Felicity of
my Nature! Alas, I have nothing but my self to give thee, nothing but this poor
Heart, that burns with Love to thee, that pants and breaths after thee, and
desires above all things in the world to be eternally united to thee in perfect
Love. If I had ten thousand Hearts to love thee, ten thousand Tongues to praise
thee, I would devote them all to thee, as freely and cheerfully as I do my
self. For whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee. O God, thou art my God, and my Portion for ever. In thee I
am blessed, and in the Light of thy Countenance I rejoice more than in all the
Joys and Pleasures of the World. I am ravished with thy Beauty, I admire thy
Love, and from the bottom of my Soul adore thy Wisdom and Goodness. My heart is
ready, O Lord, my Heart is ready, I will sing and give praise. Awake up my
Glory, awake all the Powers of my Soul, I my self will awake and celebrate thy
praises. Praised be the God of Glory, praised be the God of Love, praised be
the Father of Mercies, praised be the best Friend of Souls, for thy Goodness
reaches to the heavens, thy Glory shines throughout the Creation, and thy Mercy
is spread over all thy works. Who can comprehend thine infinite Beauties, who
can rehearse thy noble Acts, who can show forth all thy Praise! I do confess my
Thoughts are infinitely too short, my Affections too narrow, my Expressions too
scanty, to comprehend and sufficiently admire and celebrate thy Glory. But, O
my God, thou know that I love thee, and, blessed be thy Name, I feel
infinite reasons so to do. O that I could love thee more, that I could love
thee but as much as Angels and glorified Spirits do, who yet cannot love thee
as much as thou deservest, because thou deservest to be beloved infinitely. But
my soul thirsts for thee, and longs after thee. O when shall I be admitted into
thy blessed Presence, there to see, and admire, and love, and adore thee for
ever! when shall I shake off this clog of sinful Mortality, that sinks and
depresses me, and flee to those happy Regions of perfect Love, where I shall
continually feed upon thee with inexpressible Delight, and be filled with a
strong and everlasting Sense of thy goodness. O thou that art the beginner and
finisher of every good work, be pleased to assist my holy Endeavors, to
withdraw my Mind more and more from these sensible things, that it may have a
clearer sight of its heavenly Country from whence it came, and whither it
desires to return; that so having my Eye always fixed on that blessed recompense
of reward, I may live above this World, and in despite of all its Terrors and
Allurements, persevere to the end in a steady and even Course of Obedience. And
now, O Lord, since thou have been graciously pleased to inspire my Mind with
these delightful Thoughts of thee, and to enlarge my Heart with such sweet
Transports of Love to thee; grant, I beseech thee, that they may not only
please, but better me; that they may lift me up above all the Temptations of
this World, and revive my Strength, and quicken my Endeavors, and compose my
distrustful Heart into a steadfast Dependence upon thee, that so I may be
fruitful in all good works, and my heart may be established unblameable in
holiness before thee, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.

After you have used one or more of the foregoing Prayers, according as they
suit with the present Temper of your Mind, take a short view of your Defects
and Imperfections, and especially of those that cleave most to your Nature; and
briefly represent to your Mind the intrinsic Evil and Vileness of them, and
how they clog your Religion, blemish your Nature, and obstruct your Happiness,
and then conclude with the following Prayer for Growth in Grace.

O God who art the most excellent Nature, the Perfection of all Beauty, and the
Fountain of all Graces, who do infallibly understand what is best to be
chosen, and invariably choose by the best and purest Reason; look down, I
beseech thee, upon me thy poor defective Creature, who am ashamed of my self to
see how unlike thee I am; how I am laden with Imperfections, and how after all
my religious Endeavors, my Nature is still vitiated with unreasonable Lusts
and Affections; how much Vanity and Impertinence there yet remains in my Mind,
how much Perverseness in my Will, how much spiritual and carnal Iniquity in my
Affections and Appetites. Lord, I have been long a contending with this corrupt
Nature, and yet upon all Occasions I find my self too too prone to be Here name
the particular Infirmities that stick closest to your Nature.
Woe is me, even my fairest Graces have their Spots and Blemishes, my purest
Dispositions their sinful Intermixtures, and my best Works their Flaws and
Imperfections. O my God, have pity upon me, who here lie sighing at thy Feet,
under a miserable diseased Nature; and as thou have begun the blessed Cure in
me, so for Christ his sake I beseech thee to complete it; that being entirely
recovered, and raised up unto newness of Life, I may, in the perfect Health and
Vigor of my Soul, serve and glorify thee for ever. For which end, I beseech
thee, confirm me more and more in the Belief of those immortal Pleasures beyond
the Grave, which thou have treasured up for those that love and obey thee; that
by the strength of a lively Faith, and vigorous Hope, my Soul may be raised
above this World, and learn to despise and trample upon all its gilded
Vanities, whenever they present themselves either to allure or to terrify me
from pursuing the heavenly Enjoyments. Excite in me such a vehement Thirst
after those Rivers of Pleasures above, as may every day render me more cool and
indifferent toward earthly things, more contented and satisfied under all the
Events and Issues of thy Providence, and more active and vigorous in my
heavenly Calling. And I beseech thee to inspire me with such clear and lively
Apprehensions of thy essential Beauties and Perfections, and of thy bountiful
Love and boundless Benevolence to all thy Creatures, as may every day more and
more raise and improve my Love to thee; that this being the great Spring and
Principle of all my Actions, may continually excite me to a cheerful Obedience
to thy Will, and a vigorous Imitation of thy Perfections. O cause me to love
thee for thy self, and Religion for thee, and the Instruments of Religion in
order to thy Glory and my own Happiness; that so founding my Content upon thee,
and the blessed Interests of a virtuous Life, I may grow in Grace, and be rich
in good Works, and go on with a satisfied and triumphant Spirit from
Imperfection to Strength, from Acts to Habits, and from Habits to Confirmation
in Grace; and may be still more and more confirmed in all the heavenly Graces,
till they are finally consummated into everlasting Glory. And when, by thy
Grace and Assistance, I have perfectly conquered the corrupt Nature within, and
the Temptations without me, and am arrived into the State of everlasting
Triumph, I will lay all my Victories at thy Feet, and with Palms in my hand,
and Halelujahs on my lips, celebrate thy praises to Eternity. Hear me, O my
God, in this and whatever else thou know to be needful for me, even for
Jesus Christ his sake, in whose Name and Words I further pray, Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

