CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For discovering and apprehending some Rebels lately in Arms in
the West and their Resetters.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, His Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and
severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as by the nature of the Monarchy devolved upon Us by God Almighty
alone, and by the inherent Privilege and Prerogative of the Imperial Crown of
this Our Ancient Kingdom, We are sufficiently Empowered to take such Courses
and Methods, as according to the Circumstances of the Times wherein We are
Stated, may best secure Our Royal Government, and Our Innocent and Peaceable
subjects: As also by the Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Our Kingdom, All
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords, and Baillies of Regalities, and Baillieries, and
their Deputs are obliged when any Rebellious, and Disorderly People appear
openly in any of their Jurisdictions, to Convocat Our Lieges, and to raise the
Huy and Cry against: them, and never leave the following and pursuing of them,
till they be chasd out of the said jurisdictions, and to take and apprehend
them, and ^^^^g them in, and present them to Justice; And that the Heretors,
Commons, and generally all Our Lieges are (...) to concur with them. In which,
if they fail, as in that which is their duty, We must take such other (...) as
may most effectually secure Our Royal Government, and good Subjects. Yet it is
undeniable, that (...) many years, great numbers of Armed Rebels, have most
insolently, and rebelliously gathered themselves together, and have not only
Marched up and down Our Western Shires of Cliadisdale, and other Shires besouth
the River of Forth, But have assaulted and Murdered severals belonging to Our
Forces, burnt Our Laws, and Excommunicatted Our Sacred Person. And of late, in
the Month of June last, about two hundredth Arme^ Rebels have presumed, to the
great contempt of Our Authority, to March openly through several of the said
Shires for many days together, threating the Orthodox Clergy, and Murdering Our
Soldiers, and have at last, (when they found it convenient) disappeared, being
certainly and undenyably Harbored, and Reset by the Inhab^tants of these
Shires, without sufficient diligence done by the Sheriffs, and Inhabitants of
the said Shires, either for dissipating them, or for discovering their
Resetters, and bringing them to Justice; By which preparative (i^ allowed) all
Rebels may safely Rise in Arms, and yet be secure. We therefore, with Advice of
Our Privy Council, Do hereby Command and Charge Our Sheriffs, Stewarts, and
others in the several Shires forsaid, as they will be answerable upon their
duty, and higheset peril (with whom We Command the Heretors and Common^ to
concur) To apprehend, and bring into Justice the Persons of the said Rebels,
who appeared openly in the said Shires, and to discover to Us, and Our Privy
Council, betwixt and the fifteenth day of August next, all such as did Reset
and Intercommon with them, With Certification, that if they fail, We will for
preserving the public Peace, and Our good Subjcts, take such other effectual
Courses, as in Our Royal Prudence We shall find most ^t for preventing
Rebellions, and secureing the publ^ck Peace in the Shires above mentioned. And
to the effect O^r Pleasure in the Premises may be known to all Our Lieges. Our
Will is Herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and whole
remanent Market Crosses of the head Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, on
this side of the Water of F^rth, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make publication of Our Pleasure in the Premises, that all
Persons concerned may have notice thereof, and give punctual obedience thereto.
And We ordain the sheriffs of the said Shires to cause forth with publish this
Our Proclamation, at the several Market Crosses within their respective Shires
and Paroch Kirks, and the Ministers of the respective Parochs, to read the same
from their Pulpits upon a Sabbath day, after Divine Service.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty and second day of July, 1684.
and of Our Reign the thirtie^h and six Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti
Concilii. WILL PATERSON, Cls. Secreti Concilii.

Edinburg, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM, 1684.


