HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT


JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, To our Lion, King at Arms, and his Brethren bernulds, Macers of
our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, As We
being obliged by the vast Preparations of the States of Holland, to put this
Our Ancient Kingdom in a condition of Defense, as well for the Securing of Our
Own Honor, as the Protecting the Lives and Estates of all Our Leidge People;
Therefore, We with Advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby peremptorily Require
and Command, the whole heretors, Liferenters, and Wodsetters, and the Factors
and Chamberlains of such as are Minors, out of the Kingdom, or otherwise
necessarily absent, To Conveen their best horses and Arms, and to be
Rendezvouzed, under the Command, and at the Respective places Ofets after
mentioned, viz. The Shire of Nithisdale and Stewartry of Annandale, at the Town
of Dumsreis, the fifteenth of October instant, under the Command of the Duke of
Queensberry; The Shire of Wigtoun, the said day at Dumsreis, under the Command
of the Earl of Galloway, and in his absence the Lord of Logan; the Stewartry
of Kirkcudbright, the said day and Place, under the Command of the Discount of
Kenmure, or the Laired of Lagg The Bailliary of Cunninghame, the said day at
Glasgow, under the Command of the Lord Montgomery; The Baislaries of Kile and
Carrist, the said day and place, under the Command of the Earl of Cassils; The
Shire of Renfrew, at the said Town, the twelfth day of October instant, under
the Command of the Earl of Dundonald; The Shire of Lanerk; the said day and
place, under the Command of the Duke of Hamilton, and in his absence, Lord John
Hamilton his Son; The Shire of Dumbartoun, the said day and place, under the
command of the Earl of Glencairn; The Shire of Tiviotdale, at Edinburgh, the
tenth day of October instant, under the command of the Earl of Lothian and the
Lord New-bootle; The Shire of Berwick, the said day and place under the Command
of Sir. Archibald Cockburn of Lantoun Barronet; The Shires of Forest and
Peebles, the said day and place, under the Command of the Land of Drumelzier;
The Shire of East- Lothain, the said day and place, under the Command of the
Lord Yester; The Shire of Mid- Lothian, the said day and Place, under the
Command of the Earl of Lauderdale; The Shire of West- Lothian, Stirling and
Clackmannan, at Stirling, the said teenth day instant, under the Command of the
Earl of Mar; The Shires of Fife and Kinross, the said day, at the Town of
Burnt-Island, under the Command of the Earl of Belcarras; The Western Division
of Perth-shire, at Stirling, the foresaid tenth instant, under the Command of
David Discount of Stormonth; The Eastern Division of that Shire, the foresaid
day and place, under the Command of the Lord Murray: The Shire of Forsar, at
the Burgh of Strivling, the twelfth instant under the Command of the Earl of
Southesk: The Shire of Merns, at the Burgh of Perth, the fifteenth instant,
under the Command of the Lord Keith; Marshals part of Aberdene, at Brichen or
Forsar, the fifteenth instant, under the Command of the Earl of Kintore: The
rest of the Shire of Aberdene, with the Shire of Bamsf, the said day and place,
under the Command of the Duke of Gordon: All Betwirt Spay and Ness, at the
Burgh of Brichen, twentieth second instant under the Command of the Lord
Duffus: The Shires of Ross and Caithness, at the Burgh of Elgin, the twenty
fourth instant, under the Command of the Master of Tarbat: And hereby Requires
and Commands the Earl of Caithness to Levy two hundred Foot, out of the Shire
of Caithness, in place of the Militia of the said Shire, sifficiently Armed and
provided with fourteen days Loan, which is to be proportionably said on by the
Commissioners of Supply of the said Shire, upon all persons liable in Dutreik
of the Militia, and with these to march to the head of Lochness, betwixt and
the twenty ninth instant: As likewise, Requires and commands the Lord Down,
forthwith to Rendezvous the Foot-Militia, betwixt Spey and Ness, and to make a
Detachment of the third part thereof, provided with fourteen days Loan, which
is to be imposed and proportioned upon these liable in manner above-exprest,
and with these to march to Lochness, betwixt and the twenty ninth instant. As
likewise, Requires the Lord Strathnaver to Levy two hundred Men in place of the
Militia of Sutherland, and to March forthwith to the head of Lochness, with
fourteen days Loan, which is to be laid on the proportioned on the said Shire,
in manner above mentioned; And this besides and without prejudice to the
proportions of Men, formerly-Ordered by Our Council, to be Rendezvouzed, and
Levied by those of Our Mobility and Centry, having interest in Our highlands;
with Certification to such as shall fail herein, the shall be punished as
absents from Our host, conform to Our Laws and Acts of Parliament. And Ordains
all the said Commanders, and all under their respective Commands, to remain at
the respective above mentioned places, till further Order from Our Council. And
for the security of all persons concerned in this Our Service, We Do hereby by
virtue of Our Royal Prerogative, Discharge all personal Execution for any civil
cause or Debt, against any Person, who comes out to our host, in obedience to
this Our Royal Command, and that during their attending the same: And to the
end Our Pleasure in the Premissers may be made public and known, Our Will is,
and we charge you strictly and Command, the incontinent, these Our Letters
seen, ye pass the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and whole remnant Mercat-Crosses
at the head Burghs of the Shires of the Kingdom, and other places needful, and
there, in Our Royal Dame and Authority, make open Proclamation of the
Premises, that all Persons concerned may have notice thereof, and give
punctual and exact obedience thereto, as they will be answerable at their
highest peril.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the third day of October, 1688. And of
our Reign the fourth Year. Per Actum Deminorum Secreti Concilii. WILL PATERSON,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.

