A PEACEABLE PLEA FOR UNION and PEACE, In an Expostulatory Address both to the
Conformist and Nonconformist.

BEING AN APPENDIX TO A LATE DISCOURSE OF Superstition, etc.

By W. S.

There will come a time, when Three words uttered with Charity and Meekness,
shall receive a far more blessed reward, than three thousand Volumes written
with disdainful sharpness of wit. Hooker, Preface to Ecclesiastical Polity.
LONDON, Printed by J. M. for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

A PEACEABLE PLEA FOR Union and Peace, etc.
THERE was not long since, published a small Tract, entitled, A Discourse of
Superstition, the design of which was, to vindicate the Church of England from
that imputation, and to represent the inoffensiveness of her Rites and
Ceremonies; so as no suspicion of her being Popishly affected, may reasonably
arise from her present Establishments. This was managed with respect to the
Times as they then were, when yet the heats between the Conformist and the
Nonconformist, (who both pretend to an equal Zeal against Popery) were great
enough, and a Reconciliation doubtful.

The scene is since altered. We both have been awakened and alarmed by our
common Enemy, and it has been generally believed, that no denomination of
Protestants has reason to expect indemnity, or may presume of safety upon the
prevalence of the Romish interest. And who would not have. thought, that an
appearance of so great danger would have united the minds of men, would have
cooled their heats and softened their spirits, and have molded us to a mutual
agreement, and a better understanding of the common interests of the Reformed
Religion?

But alas! Our common Dangers have not begot in us a common sense. We do not
hasten to a closure and accommodation: A great part of men retain the same
eagerness (not to say virulence) of spirit, as if they had rather perish
asunder, than be saved together. As if they inherited the enmity of Eteocles
and Polynices, and resolved that their very flames should not mix if
Persecution should overtake them. Recriminations are bandied to and fro. The
Confor-mist is Popishly affected and advances toward Rome, is a Socinian and a
Pelagian, and any thing that is naught. The Nonconformist is a Rebel and a
Traitor, ungovernable and unfit for humane society. From the rashness of some
particular men, or from well-meant words unhappily distorted, a whole party is
concluded, and fierce men represent their Adversaries with all imaginable
disadvantage.

And what will now heal us? Will disputing put us in joint again? Will writing
one against another compose and settle the minds of men? Let men use their own
discretion. I blame not those who vindicate themselves, and argue for the
satisfaction of others, if in a spirit of meekness they seek to restore their
Brother, whom they conceive overtaken in an error. But for my own part, when I
observe how hardly any thing can be so well and firmly said, but presently an
Answer is prepared against it; how few men are altered in their opinions, or
sweetened in their tempers, by what comes from an adverse party; I much fear the
disputacity of these Times is not the most likely means to put an end to our
present controversies. Yea I do with some difficulty satisfy my self, that this
well-intended script (how far soever it is removed from all sowrness and
frowardness) is fit to be exposed. And were it not in great measure extorted by
the importunity of a Friend, who having got a sight of these few lines, was
earnest to have them Printed, it should longer be considered (though the
substance of it has for some good while lain by me) whether probability of
success will warrant its being made public.

Sure I am, I mean well to the Peace and Union of all good men, and to the
prosperity of this Church. Sure I am, I have no design to embitter any man's
spirit, or make him more angry than he is already. I will not dispute the Case
of Conformity. I must be thought to believe it lawful, (for if I did not think
so, I would not practice it.) Our Worship as it is established by law, is (I
think) free from Superstition. Our Doctrine as expressed in our Articles, is
not (so far as I can discern) Popish, nor such to which an honest man may not
with a good Conscience subscribe: But instead of arguing and disputing any
farther, and so perhaps exasperating and making the breach wider; I will exhort
and beseech in all sincerity and plainness, but as free from passion and
bitterness as I am able to attemper my style.

And first, To you my Reverend Brethren of the Conformable Clergy (for I assume
not the boldness to teach my Governors and superiors) I will with your good
leave thus address my self: If any thing may be done on our parts to reduce
Dissenters to our Communion, with a great zeal to Peace and Unity let it be
done.

When we charge them for separating from us, we declare, That we think they
would do wiser and better if they would return and incorporate with us.
Consider we then with our selves: Are there any prudent arts that may influence
upon the gaining of them? There must be a great difference put between our
complying with them, and that compliance to which we would persuade them. We
boast not of our privilege, as being under the protection of the laws, and
thereby expecting (without making any steps of accommodation toward them) that
others should come over to us. But we plead, That because of our obligation to
the Laws, we cannot to the neglect of our duty comply with Dissenters.
Wherefore what uses to be said in matters of liberty and private right, viz.
That both parties must yield somewhat to each other, in order to an happy
closure and a lasting peace; this must by no means be urged in this case. If
the N. Csts can satisfy their Consciences to come over to us, in obedience to
the Law, they will do well. (If they cannot, I urge them not to go against their
Consciences as will again appear.) But we who have declared our belief of the
lawfulness of Conformity, and who have undertaken the practice of it, cannot
fall off to them, unless we change our opinion, and acknowledge our mistake in
the principles upon which we have hitherto practiced. I shall then be
peevishly, and not without some ill design upon my good intentions,
misrepresented, if any thing I am now saying, be thus construed; that we may
juggle or falter in matters of Conformity, that we may balk our duty, and be
false to the obligations we have brought upon our selves, that thus becoming
all things to all men we may gain some. For, besides that this is no probable
course to beget in any that dissent from us, a greater veneration of us, or our
party and way; so will it be doing evil that good may come of it, and will lay
a greater stumbling block than it will remove.

But when I speak of yielding and complying as far as we can, in order to the
reduction of those of the separation; I mean, whatever may be done by the
regularness of our conversations, by the prudence of our correspondencies, by
the obligingness of our behavior, by our great care that we do not tempt any
disaffected men, to entertain any prejudices against our Conformity for our
person's sake, as we study Union and as we love Peace all this become us. Stand
we our ground, be we true to our undertakings and practice as we have promised;
where we are bound up by a Law, as we are honest and conscientious men we must
obey. But throughout the course of our lives, if we can reasonably think that
any thing we say or do, will probably more alienate those who are already
prejudiced from joining with us, with all the circumspection and wariness
imaginable take we heed to our selves; so let us live, that we may all with a
good Conscience say, It is not my fault that there are so many Non-conformists.

By what I now say, I do not accuse my Brethren, but it is notoriously known
many do; and though there are many calumnies and slanders fastened upon the
Conformable Clergy, in design to disgrace Conformity it self; yet I thought it
would look like partiality to give all the caution on the other side. Therefore
with you my Brethren I have taken some liberty, and they who are friends to
peace will take it well. Many of you have written worthily, and with great
learning in defense of the Church of England, but with no great success, as to
the reduction of those of another persuasion. Shall we try if sweetness of
temper, if integrity of life, if the unblameableness of our manners may have a
better effect? Surely the wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God. We
may not think to revile or rail them into that Conformity into which they have
not yet been argued. At the worst, whatever some of them may deserve to hear;
we must consider what is fit for us to speak. Our deportment toward them, may
not be with such condescensions as may signify any distrust of our cause, then
shall we by the use of the means, disable our selves from obtaining our end,
and no methods of prudence will so direct us. But if it would be happy for us,
as Brethren to dwell together in unity; If the divisions that are among us,
weaken and expose us to the designs of those who would ruin us both; then is it
pious and Religious, then is it safe and prudent, worthy of men, of Christians,
of Protestants, of peaceable Sons of a peaceable Church, to do all that in us
lies to gain our Brethren, at least to take thus much care of our selves, that
no indiscretions on our part increase the number of Non-conformists.

And now Secondly, I apply my self to you who differ from us.

At your hands, Beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (for in him the
love we bear to all that would but seem to be born of him, it is not the sea of
your gall and bitterness that shall ever drown) I have no great Cause to look
for other, than the self same portion and lot, which your manner has been
hitherto to lay on them that concur not in opinion and sentence with you. These
are almost the first words of Mr. Hookers Preface to his Ecclesiastical Polity;
which I therefore use, not because I would prejudge and at first conclude you
full of gall and bitterness, but because I would fain express alike candor and
meekness toward you. Believe it as you see cause, yet give me leave to say, I
have an unfeigned value for the persons of many of you. It is not (I thank God)
the arrogance of my mind that tempts me to think I can persuade better than
others, but in the midst of our warm debates, and arguings, and disputings, my
hearty zeal to the prosperity of the Church of England inclines me to imagine
that somewhat else still remains to be done toward a firm and happy Union.
Wherefore Men and Brethren suffer me to vent my thoughts, and when I have
spoken say your pleasures.

And I will begin boldly with you.

1. First, If any of you can with a good Conscience Conform, for Gods sake, for
the Churches sake, for Peace sake show your selves men of Conscience; and if it
be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men, and yield
obedience to your lawful Governors. Laugh not at this supposition. I judge you
not. But you cannot be ignorant, that many thus think of diverse of you. Many of
your party have bred your Sons to that Conformity which your selves refuse. A
practice which has sometimes been thus interpreted. Not Burges Rejoinder. p. 4.
a few of those Ministers which refused Conformity in their own persons, do
quietly suffer it in their own Sons: which is Argument sufficient to prove,
that they do not think so ill of these Ceremonies as their Books speak, seeing
they love the Salvation of their own Children as they ought. By some other
approaches that many of you have sometimes made to the Lay part of conformity,
it has been imagined that if Policy and Humane considerations did not keep you
at a distance, you could come nearer to us. God knows your hearts, not I. I
censure none of you as Hypocrites in this matter, yet give me leave to make the
supposition. Separate not from us, if you can Conform. We will not inquire into
the reasons of your former aversness. It will be a glorious piece of
self-denial to recede from your former mistakes. Your reputation cannot be so
much hazarded by changing your practice, as your Conscience must be
dissatisfied by standing out in opposition to those Laws, to which yet you can
yield obedience. If any of you, between God and your own souls believe it
lawful; answer it if you can to your own thoughts; Why do you break the Laws,
and forsake the Church, and maintain a Separation, if with a good Conscience
you could come over to us?

2. If in truth you are not satisfied (as in the judgment of Charity it seems)
if there be any thing in our Communion because of which you decline coming up
close to us: yet as you are Christian men, and hope to be saved by the Gospel
of peace, suffer me to be thus far earnest with you. Though you cannot go so
far as we, in obedience to Ecclesiastical Laws, yet out of Religion to God, out
of Loyalty to your Prince (whose Grace and favor you have often and long felt)
as you love Peace and would approve your selves conscientious Men, separate no
farther from us than you needs must. Let every soul of you be subject to the
higher powers, as far as you can with a good and a fafe Conscience. And now my
Brethren, I beseech you say: Can you not come to Church? Can you not join with
our Public Prayers, and can you not hear us Preach? If there be some few of
you, that think our Prayers superstitious, yet this is manifest, there are
great Numbers of you (both Preachers and Hearers) that have often joined with
us: And why can you not do so still? Is necessity laid upon you? Will woe be to
you? Do you verily. think you should displease God, if you should Preach before
we begin, or after we have done? What if it be a little inconvenient? Would you
not have it believed, that you have run many Hazards and submitted to many
inconveniences to keep a good Conscience; and why may not this be added to the
number? Must you needs altogether withdraw the people of our Parishes from us?
There was more modesty among you since 1662. and some of you cannot yet be
persuaded to keep up your priva^e Meetings at the same hours when the rest of
the Parish are at Church. I offer it to your Conscience as you are men of
peace, and profess a desire to comply with the Laws as far as you can, that you
would consider of this matter. Delight not in going as far as is possible from
us. If it be not unlawful to come to Church, I beseech you consider whether it
be not unlawful to stay away.

3. If it must be thus, let me solicit you with another question; whatever
obligations you that were in employment at or before 1662. may pretend, that
having put your hand to the plough, you cannot look back; yet can you think it
excusable to train up a number of young men, and to prepare them to succeed
you, and act your part when you shall go off the stage? Was it not enough that
you have been connived at (whatever some of you talk of persecution) and that
the Laws have been much remitted toward your own persons, but you must take
care to propagate the separation to the next generation? What! is there
necessity laid upon you for this too? You have spoken much of your numbers that
have been laid aside, but how many of them are dead within this eighteen years
last past, and yet you uphold your party, and breed up a race of future
Malcontents, that might as honestly and creditably have diverted to other
employments. Yea when any of you dye, the survivors are as busy in choosing a
successor to his Congregation, as if you thought it a great piece of Religion
to keep people from returning to our Church. I must confess I cannot see how
these are the ways of Peace. If the Church of England be a true Church, if the
way of Salvation be plainly taught in our Pulpits (pardon me if I do not set as
high a value upon our Preaching, as some of you despise it) it is beyond my
shallow capacity to know how to pronounce a Blessing upon you, under the notion
of peacemakers.

4. You would fain preserve the reputation of godly and conscientious men. You
Preach not for covetousness or filthy lucre's sake. If temporal respects had
swayed most with you, you would not have lost your Livings. You Preach
principally out of Charity to the souls of men, and the Salvation of many
thousand souls are concerned in the continuance of your separated Meetings.
Well! I upbraid you not. I hope you mean well. Yet with the same modesty and
meekness, I ask again, Why do you choose to crowd into the City and great Towns?
at least why do you not out of your public banks (for such it is believed you
have) provide for those corners of the Country, some whereof are far from
Church, and many have less assiduous preaching than is in the City. I press not
these things so far, nor with that acrimony, as peradvenrure some would. But I
take leave to add a consideration or two more.

5. Make no objections against Conformity, but such as really dissatisfie you
against it. Multiply not scruples for pomp or number. Make as candid and
favorable interpretations of things, as you desire should be made to you, if
your way were established. Talk not of a Divine Warrant or Command, for every
circumstance of worship, when you know, that the Directory will as little bear
such arguing as the Liturgy. When Presbyterians and Independents both must have
recourse to general Rules of Scripture, as well as Episcopal men. If you cannot
bear with things, because in your conceit they might be better ordered, there
will never be a way of worship so complete and pure, but some scrupulous minds
will separate from it, under pretense of greater purity. Why cannot you as well
use the old Translations as the Singing Psalms? Why can you not declare your
Assent and Consent to use that Form of Service, which you could use if you were
not to Assent to it? Whatever is tolerable in your own opinion, bear with it
for peace sake. If you think you could compile a better Liturgy, or order the
worship of God to more edification (which if ever you should have leave to do,
you must expect that all men will not be of your mind, but exceptions and
dissatisfactions will arise against you) yet remember you are not Governors,
you are not to give laws in this thing, but to take and submit to them.
Wherefore out of reverence to your Governors, take things in the best sense.
We urge you not, to strain your Consciences to do that which you are fully
persuaded is a Sin. (That is a calumny which some of you would unjustly fasten
upon us, as if we were Patrons of blind obedience and implicit Faith, and
taught men to go against their Conscience.) But yet neither do you pretend
Conscience where Conscience is not in the case. Deal fairly and bona fide in
all that you urge as causes of your separation, and those scruples which you
can indeed conquer, lay them aside and disturb not the peace of the Church with
them.

6. Let me say one thing more to you. You are greatly mistaken, if you think it
adds any real advantage to your cause, to expose our persons so liberally as
some of you do. For what good Argument is this against your Conformity, because
the Incumbent of the next Parish is not so good a man as he should be? Nay,
rather is there more need that such good men as you desire to be reputed,
should get into employment, that the Nation may not be overrun with bad
principles and licentious practices. There is little got by recriminating. You
have heard how the excellent Prince Charles the First, would not allow such a
kind of Answer to the Century-writer. If we were really as bad as some of your
party would represent us, yet still these are but the faults of particular men:
no sufficient blemishes to the Establishments of our Church, nor sufficient
reasons to encourage you in your separation. I study to avoid disputing, and
therefore I take not upon me to prove, that we are not Popishly affected, nor
Socinians; which yet I think I could prove. I think also your candor (upon
considering our Articles and Liturgy) may induce you to have a better opinion
of all the Clergymen in England, whom you can think honest and conscientious,
and true to the Subscriptions they have made, and the Prayers they use. As to
failures in our manners, though I am willing to hope they are not so great or
many, as the exaggerations of envious men would insinuate, yet I wish they were
fewer. I insist not on this plea, that if you were without sin, you might
better throw stones at us. Yet this I say, Nothing of this nature can be a
sufficient cause of your separation.

But I ask you no more questions, nor will I be farther troublesome to you.
What remains shall be in common directed to both parties.

We have on both sides disputed, and preached, and printed, and bewailed
Divisions, and pleaded for Peace, and acknowledged how desirable Union is: And
still we have looked for Peace but no good comes. We are not yet of one heart
and one soul. Nor is there any great appearance of our being of one way. Come
now: Let us pray for one another. We all pretend to Christianity. We call Jesus
Christ our Lord, and by the merits of the same Savior we hope for that one
common Salvation which he has purchased; and to enjoy it together in the same
Heavens. And if it should please God to suffer a foreign Religion to prevail
upon us, no great doubt but we should be all Gibellins and in the same common
danger. Shall we love and pray one for another. Let us believe that Church
divisions are very deplorable, and if that be any motive to our Prayers, I will
offer it in the words of Mr. Baxter.

If the Scriptures were conscionably Christian Concord. ad finem.
observed, men would take Church division for a greater sin than Adultery or
Theft. Mutiniers and Divisions do more infallibly destroy an Army, than almost
any other fault or weakness. And therefore all Generals punish Mutineers with
death, as well as flat Traitors. I confess ten or twelve years ago, I wondered
often to find both Scripture and almost all the Voluminous writings of the
Fathers, in every age to be filled with Exclamations against Church dividers.
But now I know a little better the reason of it, and how prone even godly
zealous Men (especially young unexperienced Christians) are to it, and of what
desperate consequence it is. Our union is our strength and beauty. Commonly
they that divide for the bringing in any inferior truth or practice, do but
destroy that Truth and Piety that was there before. I like not him that will
cure the Headache by cutting the throat. No Master, no Law, no profession was
ever more merciful, gentle, meek, more for unity, love and concord, than the
Master, law and profession of Christians. Oh that the Lord would speedily arise
and stir up in all his people in the world, so mighty a zeal for Unity and
sanctity, that those Blessed Twins might conjunctly flourish, which thrive so
ill when they are divided. And that the true Saints of Christ may once taste
that sweetness, which such a blessed state of the Church would afford. However
the friends of Peace and holiness shall taste of it.

True it is, if we regard iniquity in our hearts God will not hear our Prayers.
If we pray for Peace, and harbor within our own souls revenge and spite, and
ill will: If a spirit of contradiction rule in us at the same time, when we
bewail the Divisions of the times: If we do not all that is possible, as much
as lies in us, toward living peaceably, our Prayers will be very idle and
ineffectual. But when we have well considered the state of this Church and
Nation, when we are thoroughly resolved to use our utmost diligence; then pray
we to the God that makes men to be of one mind in an house, pray we to the
Author of peace and lover of concord that he would teach us how we may keep the
Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

And Oh that we could live to see the time when as Brethren we might dwell
together in Unity! Oh that it were not too much, to hope for so much of heaven
in this world! How should I rejoice to discern the first dawnings of so happy a
day! Welcome, gladly welcome would be the least appearance of Peace, the very
first approaches toward Unity. I read indeed that Abraham against hope
believed in hope, but he had the assurance of a particular promise to make him
strong in the Faith. But I should flatter my self and dream, if I should
promise much in this thing. Men abound too much in their one sense, men divide
themselves from the whole, and consider what would singly gratify themselves,
not what would be best for the whole body.

Wherefore, though I am willing (as I have used some of the first words of Mr.
Hooker's Preface, so) to conclude with the last words of the same Preface; yet
I am heartily sorry that I cannot use them as my own words. That good Man had a
Charity as vast as his Learning, and was willing to hope the best. But length
of time which spends some humors, has made our distempers rather the more
incurable. Yet I will use his words, that I may put good men and lovers of
Peace, in mind to pray, that the time may once come when we may say as he:

Our trust in the Almighty is, that with us Contentions are now at the highest
flote, and that the day will come (for what cause of despair is there) when the
passions of former enmity being allayed, we shall with ten times redoubled
tokens of our unfeigned reconciled love, show our selves each toward other the
same, which Joseph and the Brethren of Joseph were at the time of their
enterview in Egypt. Our comfortable expectation and most thirsty desire
whereof, what man soever among you shall any way help to satisfy, (as we truly
hope, there is no one amongst you but some way or other will) the Blessings of
the God of Peace, both in this world and in the world to come, be upon him,
more than the Stars of the Firmament in number.

FINIS.

