A LETTER FROM A FRIEND in the NORTH TO HIS FRIEND in the WEST, Concerning the
ELECTING of Parliament Men.
SIR,
YOurs sent by Mr. Z. I received, wherein you are pleased, to communicate to
me, your Sense of the present Affairs, and your Opinion and Resolution
concerning the choice of fit Members to serve in the next Parliament: I am
sorry, so good a Friend, and one who so lately seemed to abhor the carriage of
some hot heads, should again, and so quickly suffer your self to be deluded, as
to think any who are Enemies to the Established Religion, can at this time, be
the only fit Men to serve as Members of Parliament. Neither could I have
believed this (of one of your deep Judgment, and who so lately told me, you
never desired to see Presbytery in the Saddle; that you highly honored his
Majesty, and seemed well satisfied in the Church of England, and hoped we
should shortly all unite in maintenance of the Protestant Religion) had I not
received it from your own Pen. I have, as you desired me, impartially
considered, and duly weighed the several Reasons you offer for the Choice of
such Men as you call Sound Protestants, but no great Friends to the Church of
England. And to deal plainly with you, do not find my self thereby at all
inclined to the Choice of any such Men; but rather am confirmed in the quite
contrary Opinion, and declare sincerely that I think none so fit to serve in
this Parliament, as the Sober and Sound Church of England Men, and that as for
other, so not the least, for those very reasons you in your Letters seem to
argue the quite contrary.

First, You say, that it was chiefly upon their account and in favor of the
Church of England, that the late Parliament was so suddenly Prorogued, and
afterward Dissolved: and that the Dissenters did highly resent such
Proceedings, with some other unhansome Reflections upon his Majesty. Now
supposing this was the real Cause of the late Prorogation (which yet you are
not certain of, nor will I so much as guess at) in my opinion, this is a
sufficient reason, that none are fit to be chosen, but such as are Sober Church
Men; unless those whom the King (free I hope from all suspicion of Popery, or
from having any correspondence with the late King) has thought the chief Men,
who by their heats and unseasonable divisions in the House, retard our Affairs
and hinder his Majesty from the vigorous Prosecution of the War, for the
Reduction of Ireland, and bringing down the haughty Frenchman, shall be thought
the only fit Men to serve in Parliament. Sir, you cannot forget what you and
others, so lately discoursed of, declaring the necessity of the speedy and firm
uniting of all Protestants, and that forgetting all our former unhappy feuds
and animosities, fomented by the Papists, we should all jointly assist the King
against all his Enemies whatsoever, which yet is evident can never be done, but
by a good and full Agreement of the King and Parliament; which is not likely to
continue long, if only such Men must be chosen, as you your self confess, His
Majesty is somewhat displeased at. How His Majesty carried himself, and what he
has done for this Nation and the Protestant Religion, is evident to all the
World; and not long ago, a little before the last Session, you seemed highly
satisfied in all his Proceedings; nor can I forget what cheerful Apprehensions
you had of his happy Reign, with hands lift up, thanking God that now we had
got a true Protestant King, and one that did really design the good of his
Subjects, and would never go about to deprive his People of any of their just
and legal Privileges. Nor can you (I think) instance in any thing, wherein he
seems to have changed his mind, or in the least to deviate from his first
Measures of securing the Protestant Interest, and making the Nation happy;
setting his Heart upon reconciling all our differences, and by all means
endeavoring to unite all his Protestant Subjects. And is this the Gratitude we
owe to the glorious Instrument, of our late great deliverance from Popery and
Arbitrary Power? and do we then to requite his Care, and the many Dangers he
already has and is still ready, to expose his Royal Person to, for our safety,
choose such to serve in his great Councils, as we think are Enemies to that
Church, which he daily finds, and has more then once publicly declared the
chiefest Support of the Protestant Cause? and shall any whom he has so
willingly indulged, and is ready (if it stand with the Safety of the Nation) to
indulge further, make no other use of their Liberty, then by choosing such to
represent them, as are ready to wrest from his Majesty any of his undoubted
Prerogatives, or any part of that Regal Power, which by the Laws of this Nation
is inherent in the Crown? or shall they refuse to make choice of any Church of
England Men to serve in Parliament, because his Majesty looks upon them as his
best Friends, and such as are likely to uphold Monarchy, in all his just and
ancient Rights, who yet (let me tell you) are no less careful, then those you
recommend, as the only Patriots, to keep it within its due Bounds, and
according to the ancient and fundamental Laws of this Nation, which oblige the
King to Rule, and the People to Obey in such sort, and no otherwise, then by
Law they are directed? either therefore you must confess you are jealous of the
King, and dare no longer trust him, as not designing the good of his People,
for which you neither have, nor I Am sure, can offer the least show of reason;
or else you will wisely make choice of such, as he is likely to agree with, and
exclude such Men as you speak of, in that (as you say) 'twas upon their account
chiefly that the Parliament was at first Prorogued, and soon afterward
Dissolved, since where there is the same cause, we in reason, may suspect the
same effect.

Secondly, As little am I moved by your second Reasons, That many of the Church
of England Men, are King James's Men, or too great Friends to the Court Party;
for as to the first, we cannot dive into Men's hearts and picklock their
Thoughts, nor infallibly say who will prove true and who false; but if the
Actions of Men are as Rules to judge Men by, I cannot see but that those very
Men you recommend as the only fit Men to serve in Parliament, were the only Men
that complied with King James's in several unjust and illegal Proceedings, and
by their several Addresses did promise so to do. And though as you say, some
Men of the Church of England, are so far King James's Men, as not to take the
Oaths of Allegiance to their present Majesty's, and that not a few of her
Communion, even in Parliament were against the imposing the said Oaths, and
that such Men as you recommend and intend to choose, were those who chiefly
promoted them: yet I doubt not, but that many, nay, most of those very Men who
scrupled those Oaths, and yet refuse to take them, will prove as quiet and as
serviceable in their Places as any of those who at first set it on foot, and I
can assure you that those amongst us, who in Parliament opposed the said Oaths,
and some other Things, since they have been enacted, have exhorted and
persuaded all their Neighbors and Tenants near them, to take the said Oaths,
and to live in all loyal and due Obedience to their Majesty's: And those who
have taken them, who are the greatest part, both by their Purse, and by
exposing their Persons to War and Dangers, are as ready and as willing to
contribute to the Reduction of Ireland, and pulling down the French, as any Men
whatsoever, though they had wished the said Oaths had not been so rigorously
imposed, but that those who were quiet, and were likely so to remain, might
have been dealt more favorably with, than I am apt to think was by some Men in
that Act designed. Yea, it remains a Question to this Day, whether the King has
got any more Friends by that Act than he had before, etc. However, there are
Men enough of the Church of England who freely took the same Oaths, and will as
faithfully keep them, as any of those Persons you endeavor to recommend, and
so are not to be rejected upon any such Pretense. As to the other Part of the
Objection, their being too great Bigots to the Court Party, not to mention how
impartial his Majesty has been in distributing Places at Court or elsewhere,
and how willing many of those you recommend (upon pretense of being Patriots)
are to engross all Places of Trust and Profit; I cannot imagine why any Man
should be thought unfit to serve his Country, because he is true to his King;
as if the Court and the Countries Interest were like the Juglers Glass, wherein
the Angel and the Devil by turns went down as soon as the other got up. Indeed
where a Prince apparently designs the Subversion of our Government, and the
introducing of Arbitrary and Despotical Power, as some of late have
endeavored: Those who are Favorites and active Courtiers under such Princes,
are but justly suspected as Tools to serve his Purpose, and ought not to be
entrusted with the Peoples Liberties; but as the Case now stands, the Court,
the Camp, and the Country are but one and the same thing, they are all
embarked in the same Cause, they have all one common Enemy, and are all
equally engaged in one War, and have all the same Interest. Nor will you, I
dare say, affirm, that he that is true to the King, is therefore unfit to be
his Subjects Representative, in that (and you lately said no less) it is evident
his Majesty designs the Good and Welfare of his People as much, I had almost
said more than his own, and would make us Happy, if we can but be content to be
so. What some peevish Men would have I cannot tell, nay, can they tell
themselves? Of so wrestless a Spirit are some of this Nation, that I think what
Q. Eliz. said of the Puritans in her Days, is too true of them, viz. Such are
the restless Spirits of those Factious Men, that no Quiet can be expected from
them. How lately have I heard some of that Party you recommend, declare
solemnly, that had they but such and such Privileges granted, were but such
and such Laws repealed, and were they permitted to serve God in that way, which
seemed best to their Consciences, how happy they should think themselves, how
quiet, how peaceable, how content they should live under such a Government? yet
when all this, and more is freely granted them, they remain as unsatisfied as
before, and are still wayward and out of Humor, though they know not at what:
Nor should you ask them, could they readily say what would please them, or at
least how long. What you add concerning the Carriage of some men in Places of
Trust, at the Landing of the late D. of M. is nothing to the purpose, since
what they then acted was out of Principles of honest and true English Loyalty;
and had the late King been as true to them as they were to him, they would have
had no Cause to repent of what they then so willingly acted. However, whether
they that took Commission from a King in possession of the Crown, and as his
Subjects, fought against those who opposed him, and were by the Supreme
Authority of the Nation declared Rebels; or they, who in Compliance to the same
King, sat in open Courts with professed Papists, and such as had no legal
Commission, and who by their several Addresses, did give Thanks, and promised
to stand by him, and assist him with their Lives and Fortunes, even then when
he was exercising the Dispensing Power, and had declared no Person fit for any
Office or Employment, who would not uphold his unbounded Sovereignty, thereby
robbing his People of their Fundamental Right, be the fitter Men to serve in
Parliament, I leave to you or any sober Protestant to determine. And now
perchance you expect I should say something in answer to the old Business you
are so large upon, the persecuting Spirit of the Church of England. But I
thought the last time you and I were together, you had been fully satisfied in
that Point, and had a good Opinion of the Church of England, and laid the Fault
where it really was. However, I do not think this any reason to dissuade me
from choosing such Men at this time, since I do not believe they will ever go
about to trouble the Dissenters; nor am I acquainted with any sober Church of
England Man, that is at all displeased with that Liberty which Authority has
been pleased to allow them, unless it be for this reason, that you and others
are so forward to choose them to serve in Parliament, which, in plain terms, is
not Persecution, but the Preservation of our ancient Government by Kings and
Queens. And I am sure no sober Church of England Man thinks much that Men are
suffered to enjoy their Consciences, and have distinct and separate Meetings,
till they can be convinced of the Truth of what is taught and practiced in this
Church; but yet they are not willing that Men be permitted to undermine the
Government, pull down Episcopacy, or deprive them of their ancient Right of
Sitting and Voting as Peers of the Realm, and which will be the next Work, of
rendering the Monarch unsafe, or at least so to fetter and shackle him, as he
shall be unable to help us, or defend himself; And assure your self, it is upon
this account, and not from any Spirit of Persecution, or a Desire of depriving
the Dissenters of any just and safe Liberty; that we endeavor to choose such
Men as are of the Church of England's Communion. I had thought to have added
some Reasons which induce us to make choice of such men as are no Enemies to
the established Religion, but I see I have already exceeded the Bounds of an
Epistle, and so will only add three or four Queries, which if you duly and
impartially consider, I hope you will change your Opinion; and both in point of
Prudence and Interest, and as an Argument of that Trust and Confidence you
justly repose in his Sacred Majesty, you will persuade all in your Parts, to
make choice of such as are Friends, or at least no professed Enemies to the
Church of England: who happily agreeing with his Majesty, you and I may in a
short time see the great Affairs of Peace and War brought to a happy Issue, to
the beating down our Foes, the putting an end to the Expense and Charge we at
present are necessarily at, the removing all our Fears and Jealousies, and
settling the Kingdom in a firm and lasting Peace.

Q. 1. Whether the King is not tied by his Coronation Oath, to maintain and
uphold the Church of England, as by Law established?

Q. 2. Whether a Disagreement between the King and Parliament be not of
dangerous Consequence, advancing the French and Popish Interest, and tending to
the utter Ruin of the Protestant Religion?

Q. 3. Whether the choosing such Men for Members to serve in this Parliament,
as are Enemies to that Church which his Majesty Esteems the chiefest support of
the Protestant Church, and which he has often, and lately declared to stand
by, be not a probable, yea, an inevitable Way to beget such a fatal
Disagreement?

Q. 4. Whether they that endeavor to choose such Men, must not answer to God
for all the Evils and Mischiefs which will be the unavoidable Consequence of
such a Disagreement?

In return to your pious Wishes, I beseech God to open our Eyes, that we may at
this Day discern the Things that belong to our Peace, that through Passion or
Prejudice they may no longer be hid from us, which shall be the constant Prayer
of Yours to command,

T. S.

FINIS.

