THE HISTORY OF THE AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND. FROM The Restoration of King Charles
the 2d. in the year 1660. And of the late great Revolution in that Kingdom.
WITH A particular account of the Extraordinary Occurrences which happened
thereupon, and the Transactions of the CONVENTION and PARLIAMENT to Midsomer,
1690. With a full Account of the Settling of the Church Government there.
Together with the Act at Large for the Establishing of it.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the sign of the Temple near Temple Bar
in Fleet Street, 1690.

TO THE Right Honorable JANE Countess of SUTHERLAND.
Madam,
IT was the Custom in former Ages when Offerings were made to various Deities,
that the Adorer made choice of that same Numen, to which he thought his
Oblation would be most Grateful. The same reason encourages this Address to
your Ladyship, in hopes the Subject of it will be acceptable to a Personage so
eminently famed, for being so highly concerned in the late Miraculous
Revolution, and your assisting the Deliverance of these Oppressed Nations. To
you therefore Madam, this Compendium appeals, as an accomplished judge of Truth
where 'ere you find it, or in what ever dress.

It Is true Madam, the Present is but inconsiderable as is the Quality of the
Presenter. But Persons in your Station look down as well as upward? Which if
your Ladyship shall vouchsafe to do with an Eye of favor upon this unworthy
Offering, it is the chief Happiness aspired to by

Madam Your Ladyships most faithful and most Humble Servant. T. S.

TO THE READER.
PRovidence overrules all Things: but never any Act of Providence, so strange
and so surprising, as the great Revolution that so lately happened in the two
Kingdoms, of England and Scotland. A Revolution not to be paralleled in
History, but seasonable to the British Monarchy, the Glory whereof was almost
brought to Ruin and Destruction. Nor was it to be admired that the desire of
such a Change should reach so far as Scotland, where the causes were the same,
and the cries of Oppressions were no less loud then in England. For it is too
evident that all the Laws, Privileges and Rights of the Kingdom of Scotland
had under the late Raigns, been not only encroached upon, but subverted and
Overthrown. In regard that by the gradual enlargements of the Prerogative,
beyond what was allowed by the Laws of the Constitution, and the Statutes of
the Realm, the Legal and Regular Monarchy of the Nation, was swelled into an
Arbitrary and Despotic Power. So that all the Franchises and Rights, which by
Original Contracts and Subsequent Laws were reserved unto the People, were
either overthrown or precariously enjoyed.

No wonder then it was, that as well the Scots and the English sought for
speedy Redress, and to be freed as well from Spiritual Bondage as Temporal
Slavery. Which at length they obtained by the auspicious Conduct, and Generous
Advance of his Present Majesty to their Relief. A Story certainly that cannot
be otherwise then most grateful to Posterity, as being accompanied with such
Variety of circumstances, such unparalled Success, and the General Advantage
of all Europe. It was no easy Thing to reduce into Order a Chaos of
Government, so dismally mangled and confused, which being so great a Work and
brought to so much Perfection in so short a Time, as it shows the Extraordinary
Zeal and Prudence of the Artificers; so did it no less magnify the Influences
that governed and directed all their Actions. Insomuch that it may be said of
the Most Illustrious King WILLIAM, what Suetonius says of the Famous and Best
of the Roman Emperors Vespasian; Rebellione Trium Principum et caede incertum,
et quari vagum Imperium, suscepit firmavitque Gens Nassovia. Popery and
Idolatry now droop, and the Protestant Religion enjoys a general Freedom under
a truly Protestant Defender. Under whose Auspicious Government soon might these
two Nations be happy, had we not so many Disturbers of Israel amongst us,
though it was not well known what they repined and grumbled at, till this late
detection of complicated Conspiracy for the Restoration of Popery and Tyranny.

In short there has already an account been given of our deliverance in
England; This is a Prospect of the same Deliverance in Scotland, the one no
less conducible to be known then the Other: especially to those who are
desirous to observe the Coherences and Concatenations of Providence.

I will not say it is a structure embellished with the flourishes of Eloquence,
as being only designed for plainness and exactness; wherein I may he bold to
say that diligence has been observed, as to compile it in the best manner and
method, that the Truth of Collection could any way claim as due to it. And
being laid upon so solid a foundation, however it fares of it self, it may
serve to give Light to politer Pens, when they shall be at leisure to be more
accurate. Though there is no question to be made, but that many will be as
willing to see the naked Rasters of a History, as to view the covered Frame,
though Japanned over never so curiously.

The History of the Affairs, and late Revolution in Scotland; from the Year
1660. to this present Year 1690.
WHEN Charles II. was restored in the Year 1660. to his ancient Dominions, from
which he had been for some time kept out by the Civil Wars, the Joy was no less
cordial and universal in Scotland then in England: And it may be said, the
extraordinary favor of Heaven did so second the Constancy of the Scottish
Nation's Love to a Prince so long wished for, that their great Persuasions of
his singular Endowments, without regard to the wary Cautions of scrupulous
Prudence, were the only measures of their Concessions. They established his
Prerogative to be absolute and uncontrollable in the choice of all Officers of
State, Counselors and Judges; and in and over all matters of Peace, War,
Leagues, Conventions and Parliaments, with a distinct Exclusion of all
Exceptions. They added to his Revenue above double of what he formerly
possessed. They declared his ordering and disposal of Trade with Foreign
Nations, and the laying Restraints and Impositions upon Foreign Imported
Commodities, to belong to his Majesty and his Successors, as an undoubted
Prerogative of the Crown. And that it might appear that they placed the
Security of all their Interests more in the confidence of His Majesty's
Goodness, than on the firmest provision of their best Laws; though the Parliament
in 1641. was held by King Charles I. then present in person, and many Acts were
there passed, and subscribed by him, for the settling their Religion and
Liberties with all the Authority of Judgment, that long and well-weigh'd
Experience could furnish; yet because their Luster seemed to be somewhat
eclipsed by the harsh remembrance of some previous Contentions, wherein it was
their misfortune to have His Majesty differing from them, at one blow they
annulled that Parliament, and without any other reason or distinction,
rescinded all its Proceedings. Lastly, to testify their unparalled
Submission and Resignation to the King's Pleasure, and how that, according to
the usual Flattery of those times, all that was dearest to them was to him
surrendered; although the Nation, since its first restoration from Popery, had
in a manner continually opposed Prelacy; and after having ejected it with the
most rigid Exclusions, had for many years enjoyed a Church Constitution and
Ministry, which at last was highly commendable, for the advancing of true
Knowledge and Piety, and in the worst of Times appeared the fairest Bulwark of
Monarchy, yet out of compliance to the King's Will, the Parliament consented,
and the People silently acquiesced in the unexpected overthrow of Presbytery,
and the re-establishment of Prelacy; not that the consequences of the
Alteration, which afterward ensued, were unforeseen; but in short, because that
to a King so acceptable to them, and to whom they had already given all things,
they could refuse nothing.

This was the Posture of Affairs in Scotland soon after the Restoration of
Charles II. at what time the Earl of M. was the first who was honored with the
King's Commission, wherein he bestirred himself with extraordinary vigor; but
over-hastning, as the Cause is given, and over-prizing his Work, he rendered
himself at length obnoxious; so that upon the mutual Jealousies between the
Duke, tho then but Earl of L. whom he caused to be sentenced incapable of
public Trust, L. got the Advantage, and managing it personally at Court, by a
crafty insinuation of the Earl of M's Disdain of his unworthy Practices, which
perhaps at that time were thought good Services at Court, in a short time
prevailed to M's Overthrow; and shaping a course less obnoxious to Envy,
obtained his Commission to be given to the Earl of Rothes, whom L. accompanied
from Court into Scotland, in order to concluding the Parliament then sitting.

In the last Sessions of which Parliament it was, that by L's Industry, an
humble Tender was made of Twenty Thousand Foot and Two Thousand Horse, to be in
readiness as they should be called for by the King, to march to any part of his
Dominions of England, Scotland or Ireland for the suppressing of any Foreign
Invasion, Intestin Trouble or Insurrection, or for any other Service wherein
the King's Honor, Authority or Greatness might be concerned; which though it
were looked upon as too superfluous in the Expression, and too suspicious in
the Distinctions; yet such was the Style and Humor of those times, as easily
shrouded it from particular notice. But what L. who was the chief Contriver of
it, intended by it, succeeding time sufficiently discovered.

For now the Parliament being Dissolved, the new-erected Bishops, finding
themselves so numerously guarded, and Authorized by the Laws so lately made,
drove on like Jehu's, during the years 64, 65, and 66. enforcing Conformity at
such a rate, that in all probability, had not the Earl of Twedale and Sir
Robert Murray stepped in for the Relief of the oppressed Dissenters, the whole
Kingdom might have been reduced to great extremities, through the Tumults
excited and Tragedies acted in those years.

In the year 1669. L. himself was made the King's Commissioner, a Grandeur
which he had long aimed at, from the Date of which Commission the Scots are
said to calculate the date of all the ensuing mischiefs that caused the same
Revolution in that Kingdom, as in England: For having undertaken to make the
King's Power Absolute and Arbitrary in Scotland, he strained the Royal
Prerogative to all the Excesses imaginable. Coming therefore into Scotland, he
assumed to himself a lawless Administration of Affairs, which no doubt was
readily granted him to exercise, upon the large Promises he had made; and
apprehending more the control of other Men's Officious meddling, then
distrusting his own Abilities, he took particular care and caution to make
himself his Majesty's Sole Informer, as well as his Sole Secretary; and by that
means, not only upon pretense of the King's Prerogative, the Affairs of
Scotland were disposed of in the Court of England, without any notice taken of
the King's Council in Scotland; but strict Observation was also made of all
Scottishmen that came to the English Court; and to attempt an Addsess, or
Access to his Majesty, otherwise then by L's means, was to hazard his perpetual
Resentment. By these ways he made himself the only significant person of the
whole Scottish Nation; and in Scotland it self procured to himself that
Sovereign Authority, as to name the Privy Counselors, to place and remove the
Lords of the Session and Exchequer, to grant Gifts and Pensions, to levy and
disband Armies, to appoint General Officers, and to transact all matters of
Importance, as he thought good to advise and direct. Nor was he less
industrious in minding his own Business, which was to enrich Himself, his
Kindred and Favorites; and where the Law gave any stop, the Kings Prerogative
made way. In all which, as there is a necessity to make use of Force and
Violence, to which Law must of necessity yield, those breaches of the Law were
attended with most violent Oppressions of the People, Monopolies and Rapes upon
their Privileges, and other dreadful Miseries, the Concomitants of Tyrannic
Rule; which occasioning loud Complaints without redress, drive the Oppressed to
Insurrection and Rebellion; many times wished for by some Tyrants that they may
have an opportunity to destroy. Insomuch that the Rebellion which was quelled
at Bothwel-Bridge, was deemed to be a piece of L's Matchiavilianism, having by
his cruel Oppressions of those People, drawn them to seek their own Redress, to
the end they might be ruined by their ill Success; which the severity of their
Persecution after the Defeat sufficiently justified.

In short, The chiefest and most deserving Glories of L's Administration, as
they were represented to the King, were, Ignorant and insufficient Judges, for
the most part a light and base Coin imposed upon the Nation, Gifts of Wards and
Marriages, General Gifts of the Pains of Penal Statutes, the Accumulation of
Great Offices upon single Persons, and those of no Merit, Gifts of the
Reversions of Offices, Invasions upon Liberty and Property by the procuring of
private Letters; unnecessary, long and frequent Adjournments of Parliament,
mismanagement and profusion of the Revenue, and the excessive greatness of a
State-Minister, to the exclusion of all others from free Application to the
King; by some of which he did the Kings, by others his own and his Friends
Business, tho the People suffered all this while.

But that which L. most valued himself upon, was his obtaining a Confirmation
of the Kings Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Causes within the Kingdom
of Scotland; and by virtue of that Act, the ordering of the External Government
and Policy of the Church, as properly belonging to him and his Successors; and
the procuring a new Act of Militia, ordaining that all Persons that should be
therein enrolled, should be particularly reserved for that Employment; and that
the Officers and Soldiers should take the Oaths of Allegiance, which in
Scotland comprehends that of Supremacy; Which being done in the Year 1672. when
the Cabal at Court for the advancement of Popery and Arbitrary Power was in its
Ascendent, and Matters were come to a manifest Crisis, was a shrewd Argument,
that L. was deep in the Plot.

Nor was his Administration in Church Affairs less grievous and terrible to the
Nation. For that after the extreme Distress, where into the Episcopal
Persecutions had brought the Country, had moved the Compassion of some more
moderate Persons to obtain for it the ease of a small Indulgence in 1669. L. in
1670. commands Conformity again, prohibiting Praying to God in any Meeting, or
Preaching without License under Forfeitures of Life and Confiscation of Goods:
And by other Acts enjoining all the Kings Subjects to keep to their own
Churches, and to make discoveries upon Oath of what Conventicles they knew, and
what Words they heard spoken therein, under the pains of Banishment and
Imprisonment. All which the People looked upon to be a Tyranny beyond that of
the Inquisition.

Nor is it in the last place to be omitted, that he had also enlarged the Power
of the Lords of the Articles, to the subversion of the Rights and Privileges
of the Parliament. So that his Administration was not only Cruel and
Tyrannical, but he had in a manner over-turn'd the whole Frame of the Scotch
Government. However, after he had thus served and assisted in the Popish and
Arbitrary Designs then on Foot, both to his own Infamy, and greatly to the
depopulation of his Country; yet because he demurred to act on still for the
eradication of Protestantism, and erecting Popery to be the National Religion,
he was discharged from his Ministry and Offices, and grew despised and
contemned in his Person.

And then it was that the D. of York retiring into Scotland, from the Dangers
that threatened him in England, built upon the Foundations that L. had laid;
and driving on in the concerns of Popery and Slavery with his wonted Phaetonic
Fury, thought to have completed his Work, but made way for the following
Revolution.

So soon as the Duke got into Scotland, a Parliament was summoned, and great
Industry used to choose the Commons, to cajole some of the Lords, and to make
D. Hamilton believe, and trust the Court for the future. And so soon as the
Parliament sat, the Duke of York entered as his Brothers Commissioner without
any regard to the Laws of the Realm, or the Qualifications necessary for taking
the Oaths. However his Brothers Indulgence bore him out, and when he was in, he
obtains the succession of the Crown to be confirmed by an Act, and gets a Test
passed, by which all were to swear, not to endeavor to alter the Government
either in Churh or State; and all such as refused to take it, to lose their
Employments.

This Test was generally disliked, as not conformable to the Scotch Confession
of Faith; several of the Scotch Synods rejected it, and many of the Laity
refused it. Among the rest the E. of Argyle declined the taking it, unless he
might make his own Explanation of the sense and meaning in which he took it.
Which being at first allowed him by the Duke and his Party, yet afterward when
he had delivered in his Explantion, which was no more then what the Privy
Council were forced to do for the satisfaction of the People; The Duke having a
particular Animosity to his Person, and resolved to remove him out of the way
as a Grand Obstacle to his Designs, caused his Interpretation to be scanned and
sifted to that degree, with a particular encouragement to his Advocates to try
whether it might not be wrested to Treason, that at length a latent piece of
High Treason was found in it, upon which he was Indicted, Arraigned and
Condemned, and had been put to death, had he not made his escape out of
Edinborough Castle.

Popery then began to triumph barefaced in Scotland to that degree, that
Mass-Houses were publicly erected both in Edinborough, and diverse other Towns
and Cities of that Realm, while the Protestant Non-conformists were every where
punished with the utmost severity. And such was the Dukes inveterate hatred of
those People, that in his public Declarations he stigmatized them as a sort of
Caitiffs not fit for Human Converse; and scrupled not to testify his
Resolutions to eradicate them for refusing to conform to his Will and Pleasure,
as the Pests of Mankind: Affirming withal, that it would never be well with
Scotland till all the Country on this side the Forth were made a Hunting Field.
Which Rigorous, and indeed Inhuman Proceedings in leaving these poor People at
the Mercy of his Soldiers, to be not only disturbed in the Exercise of their
Divine Worship, but to be Arraigned and Condemned by Military Judges, without
any Form or Process of Law, wholly alienated the Affections of a great part of
the Scotch Nation from his Person and Government. But the Duke encompassed with
a standing Force, and encouraged by his continued Success in carrying all
things before him, thought he could meet with no Obstruction which he could not
Conquer, and therefore resolved to remove what ever Impediments that he found
in his way. Which run him upon that no less Impolitick, then unjust and violent
Prosecution of the E. of Argyle; for the taking away of whose Life, he could
find no other pretense, but his refusal to take an insnaring Test, which the
generality of the Clergy and Laity refused: For if the whole Body of Refusers
had had but one Neck; he might have cut it off for the same Reason, as well as
the single Head of the Earl. Many others also were prosecuted and condemned at
the same rate, for Crimes made such for their Destruction, rather then that
they were really so. The citing Sir John Scot of Ancrum, and bringing him
before the Council upon pretense of Treasonable Words alleged against him by
an avowed Enemy; and which had certainly done his business, considering he was
looked upon as a true Lover of his Country, had he not been so fortunate as to
have four or five Persons of great Worth and Credit by, when the Words were
pretended to have been spoken, who cleared and acquitted him: The seizing and
putting to the Torture one Hamilton, merely because he was of the contrary
Party, and consequently barely suspected; who nevertheless after his enduring
his Torments, with an extraordinary Patience, was at length acquitted, and
declared Innocent by the Justice Court; The putting under Bail or in Prison
almost all the Honest Protestant Worthy Gentlemen, or forcing them to abscond,
or withdraw out of the Kingdom, of whom the Lord Melvil was one, who never
could be induced to act in public under the Government of the Duke, but was
forced to abandon his Relations and Native Country, and fly into Holland,
where, and in Germany he remained seven Years; The sending away of above sixty
Men at one time to be sold as Slaves in Virginy, for no other Crime but their
being apprehended at Conventicles; and the ordering a Vessel at another time to
be sunk in the Sea, to the drowning of above fifty Persons, against whom there
was no other charge; but their Integrity to God and the Protestant Religion,
were among others, sufficient Instances of Arbitrary Tyranny, enough to provoke
an utter detestation of the Authors of the farther Miseries and Depopulations
intended against those that remained.

It would be too tedious to make a Collection of the Violences and Oppressions
of those Times; and therefore let the following Epitome suffice to show the
wicked ways, by which Popery and Tyranny labor to establish themselves. For
during those Years, which were the severest Years of Arbritrary Power that ever
Scotland felt, tho Informing were a Trade then more encouraged then in the
Reign of Tyberius; yet Multitudes were arraigned without Informer or Accuser,
and whosoever appeared not upon Citation, were treated as Criminals.

Many of all Ranks were seized, and detained Months and Years, without any
signification of the cause of their Imprisonment. However, if the least shadow
could be found to prosecute such as mislik'd their Arbitrary Courses, the
ruling Grandees precipitated their Process, not allowing them time or means to
vindicate their Innocence.

Inquisiitors were sent to all the Prisons, and Citizens Houses, to examine
whom they pleased, upon the most intricate Questions of Church and
State-Government; and if they refused to answer, or gave dissatisfactory
Answers, it was enough for the foundation of an Indictment. Others being seized
in the Crowd at Executions, and some while they were visiting the Imprisoned,
were condemned and executed for refusing to justify the severities of the
grand Movers, and disowning their Dagon of Non-resistance.

Spies were frequently sent to Prisons, Cities and Countries, who by
dissembling their dissatisfaction at the Exorbitances of the Government, drew
forth Words from the most wary, and so became fit Witnesses to take away their
Lives.

The Judges themselves were active to suborn Witnesses against the Lives,
Estates and Honors of Worthy Peers and Patriots; and often made use of Jurors
and evidence, that could not purge themselves of Prejudice and Partiality.

Many were indicted, tried, condemned and executed all in one day; and when
intercession has been made for some time to prepare for Death, the Answer was,
They should have no time to prepare for Heaven, for that Hell was too good for
them. Some they hanged early in the Morning to prevent the Peoples observation
of their Cruelty; and many times Drums were ordered to be beat about the
Scaffold, lest the Spectators should hear the dying Words of those that
suffered.

Some were twice sentenced; first to have their Ears cut off, and then
reexamin'd and sentenced to death.

I omit their imposing of Illegal Oaths, and packing of Juries: But what could
be more perfidious, then when some People had made a Candid Confession upon
security of the public Faith, the Kings Honor, and the Act and Oath of the
Council, that such their Confession should not prejudice them; yet afterward
to bring the same Confession, and give it in upon Oath against them?

Lastly, Finding that Forms of Law and Trials were too slow and troublesome to
bring about their Popish Designs, which required more have; and perceiving
likewise that public Executions tended but the more to confirm and multiply
the Lovers of Religion and Liberty, rather then to diminish and deter; the D.
and his Council found out a more compendious way of sending out their
Soldiers, who were empowr'd to challenge and examine whom they pleased, and to
tender them Oaths which were required by no Law, and to punish such by present
Death, who refused to swear, or refused to answer their insnaring Questions;
which Bloody Commissions were so faithfully executed, that within a few Weeks
above fifty Persons were murdered after this manner, without Trial or
Conviction.

No wonder then, seeing that by such Oppressions as these, the Ancient Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom were not only invaded, but an open attempt made for
their utter subversion, that a People exasperated by exorbitant Oppression, and
deprived the exercise of their beloved Religion, took those Methods which they
thought might prove most successful to deliver them, not only from bodily
Bondage, but the Thraldom of their Consciences.

Understanding therefore which course the Nobility and Gentry of England
steered, they thought it their best way to lay hold of the Opportunity, and
follow the same. To which purpose as many of the Nobility and Gentry of
Scotland attended His Highness the Prince of Orange in his Expedition for
England; so there were others that met him at London, in order to make their
Addresses to him, according to the Pattern of the English.

And now the People in Scotland perceiving, or at least full of hopes that
their Deliverance was at hand, as in all sudden Revolutions, before there can
be a settlement of those Disorders occasioned by the causes of the Revolution,
the same Accidents fell out in Edinborough, as happened in London. It being the
custom of the common Sort, in those Interstitiums of Regular Rule, to assume to
themselves a kind of Carnival Liberty to indulge their two Passions of Joy and
Revenge in the General Confusion, which is the Rabbles Holiday.

Thus as in England, no sooner had King James's Steers-men forsook the Helm of
Government, for fear of perishing in the Storm, but the Mobile in Edinborough
entered upon the Stage. But the stress of their Fury fell upon the Pope and the
Papists, which was not a little incensed by the Students of Edinborough
College, who mixing themselves with the Rabble to fortify their Power,
notwithstanding all the care that was taken to prevent it, effected their
Design. To which purpose an Effigies of the Pope being ready prepared, was
brought to the Market Cross of the City, so soon as Daylight was shut in, and
blown up in the Air above four Stories high; which made many believe that riper
Heads then those of Boys were concerned in the Action; many People being
pleased with the counterseit show of what they could wish were done in reality.

Two days after, as if they had be-thought themselves that they had not done
legally, to burn the Pope before due conviction, they went to the Parliament
House, crying out No Papist, No Papist, as they passt by the Guard; and getting
into the House, the chief of the Multitude taking their places, to retrieve and
justify their mistake, they arraigned his Holiness before his Judges, and gave
him in charge to a Jury, who brought him in Guilty; upon which he was sentenced
to be burnt, and so the oversight being made good, they declared for a Free
Parliament. Nor did these Tumults cease for many days among the Boys, who at
another time got up to the Market Cross, proclaimed a Free Parliament, and
offered two thousand pounds for Melfords Head.

And then it was, that upon the 25th of December his Holiness was burnt in a
true orderly manner by the Students themselves, marching with their Swords in
their Hands, every Classis under their particular Captain, and the College Mace
carried before them by the Under-Porter, bare, the Haut-boys playing all the
while; besides the Honor which the Privy Council and City Magistrates did them
to be Spectators of their Show.

But in the attempt of the Multitude the next day upon the Abbey, which is the
Kings House, wherein there was at that time a Popish Chapel, they had at first
but course Entertainment: For the Chancellor of Scotland, tho he found
Edinborough too hot to hold him; yet such was his Kindness, being himself a
Papist, for the Popish Relics which he left behind, that he gave particular
order to one Captain Wallace to defend the Abbey with his Company; which the
Captain with a true Papistical Zeal, readily undertook to do. So that when the
Boys went thither, tho without any other Arms then their Links and Battoons,
upon their pressing too close upon him, the Captain ordered his Men to let fly
among 'em; so that many were wounded, and some died of their Wounds. Of which,
complaint being made to the Council, they sent six Heralds to command Wallace
and his Men to lay down their Arms, and surrender themselves and the Guard of
the Place, to the Magistrates of the City: But the Heralds were answered in the
same Language with the Boys. Thereupon the Council ordered a sufficient number
of the Trained Bands to remove him by force; who accordingly fell upon Wallace,
and constrained both him and his Men to betake themselves to flight. And then
it was that the Boys to revenge the loss of their Mates, broke in pell-mell
into the Abbey, and burnt all that they found in the Chapel, fired the Jesuits
College, the Popish Printing House, the Abbey Church; and in a word, all that
they found in the Papists Houses, in the Suburbs and Cannigate; sparing nothing
but what was purloyn'd away by such as bore them Company, with a design to
plunder.

During these Extravagances in Edinborough, the Chancellor of Scotland had
withdrawn himself to Castle-Drummond, but not thinking himself safe there, he
resolved for France; and with that resolution, with all the secrecy
imaginable, himself in Woman's Habit, and his Wife in Man's Apparel upon the
10th of December got on board a Vessel bound from the Frith of Castle-Drummond,
and was just under Sale with a fair Wind. At what time a certain Person on
Horseback, riding by Kirkalden, where the Seamen used to walk, called to them,
and informed them, That there was a good Prize in the Ship which they saw under
Sale, meaning the Chancellor of Scotland: Thereupon about six and thirty common
Seamen, commanded by one Wilson, that had been a Buccaneer in Jamaica,
furnished themselves with Muskets, and having got a light Boat, without any
Provision, only a little Brandy, and without any otder from any Magistrate, set
sail immediately, and coming up with the Ship that Night, boarded her, and
inquired for the Chancellor, who was at first denied to be in the Ship; but
after some little search, they found Him and his Lady in the disguise already
mentioned. Upon which they brought the Ship back, and carried the Prisoners,
together with one Nicholson a Priest, and Regent of the College at Glasgow, to
the Prison of Kirkaldy, from whence the Council ordered the Chancellor to be
removed to Sterling Castle.

The face of Affairs being thus altered in Scotland, as well as in England,
there was only a Council of the prime Persons of that Kingdom to watch over the
safety of the Nation at such a Ticklish Conjuncture.

Nevertheless they took care that several Personages of the highest rank in the
Kingdom of Scotland, and most eminent for their Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, should be in a readiness in England to make their Address to the most
Excellent of Princes, his Highness the Prince of Orange, so soon as he arrived
in London.

This was the least Deference that could be expected they should give to a
Prince, who by a particular Declaration to the People of that Kingdom, had
signified his Resolutions to be no less careful to restore the Laws and
Liberties of Scotland, and to maintain the Protestant Religion there, then he
was to pursue the ends of his Declaration to the people of England.

Nor is the recital of that Declaration to be here omitted, as being so full
and generally satisfactory to all the good People of Scotland, that there was
nothing more welcome to their Ears, nor any thing next under God, wherein they
more entirely placed the Assurances of their Deliverance; more espcially when
they saw it attended with an armed Force under the Conduct of Prudence and
Fortitude to make it good. The Declaration it self ran thus:

The Declaration of His Highness William Henry, by the Grace of God Prince of
Orange, etc. of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms for preserving of
the Protestant Religion, and for Restoring the Laws and Liberties of the
ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
IT is both certain and evident to all men, that the public Peace and
Happiness of any State or Kingdom cannot be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties and Customs, established by the Lawful Authority in it, are openly
Transgressed and Annulled: More especially, where the alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law, is endeavored to be
introduced: Upon which those who are most immediately concerned in it, are
indespensably bound to endeavor to preserve and maintain the Established Laws,
Liberties and Customs; and above all, the Religion and Worship of God, that is
Established amongst them: And to take such an effectual care, that the
Inhabitants of the said State or Kingdom, may neither be deprived of their
Religion, nor of their Civil Rights. Which is so much the more necessary,
because the Greatness and Security both of Kings, Royal Families, and of all
such as are in Authority, as well as the Happiness of their Subjects and People
depend, in a most especial manner, upon the exact Observation and Maintenance
of these their Laws, Liberty: and Customs.

Upon these grounds it is, that We cannot any longer forbear to declare, That
to Our great Regret, We see that those Counselors, who have now the chief
Credit with the King, have no other Design, but to overturn the Religion, Laws
and Liberties of those Realms; and to subject them in all things relating to
their Consciences, Liberties and Properties, to Arbitrary Government; and that
not only by secret and indirect ways, but in such an open and undisguised
manner, that their Designs are now become visible to all that consider them.

And indeed the lamentable Effects of an Arbitrary Power and of Evil Counsels
are so manifest in the deplorable State of the Kingdom of Scotland, that both
our Reason and Conscience do prompt us to an Abhorrence of them. For when We
consider the sad Condition of that Nation, though always affectionate to the
Royal Family, and governed for many Ages by Laws made by the Authority of their
Kings, and of the Estates of Parliament, and by common Customs, is reduced to
by endeavors that have been used to change the Constitution of the Monarchy
Regulate by Laws, into a a Despotick and Arbitrary Power; which does evidently
appear, not only by the actings of Evil Counselors in Power, but by the
deliberate and express public Declarations, bearing that the King is an
Absolute Monarch, to whom Obedience ought to be given in all things without
reserve, thereby to make way to introduce what Religion they please, without so
much as the necessity of the Consent of the Nation by their Estates in
Parliament. Whilst We consider and ponder these things, as We cannot but be
touched with a tender Sense of those Miseries, so the giving such Remedy to
them, as may be proper, and may answer the expectation of all good Men, and
true Protestants, is the great thing which We propose to our selves in this
undertaking; the Equity whereof will be justified to the World, if what has
been acted at the instigation of those Evil Counselors be further impartially
weighed.

It is well known that the Laws, Privileges and Rights of the Kingdom have
been overturned to the great prejudice of King and People, whilst thus, all
Foundation of Confidence and Trust is removed. And it is no less known what
have been the arbitrary Procedures of an incroaching Privy Council; for
although by the Laws enacted by the Authority of King and Parliament, it is
expressly prohibited, that the Popish Religion should be professed, or Seminary
Priests suffered within the Kingdom; or that the Children of any Noblemen or
Gentlemen should be sent'abroad to be Educated in Popish Colleges; yet have
these Evil Counselors ordered or suffered young Noblemen to be taken from
their Relations, and to be sent abroad to be instructed in Jesuits Colleges,
and have likewise caused Schools to be erected under the conduct of Popish
Priests, and that in the Capital City of the Kingdom.

In an open contempt also of the known Laws of the Kingdom, Papists are put
into Places of highest Trust both Civil and Military, and entrusted with all
the Forts and Magazines. The Rights and Privileges of the Royal Boroughs, the
third Estate of Parliament, having as many Deputies in it as all the Shires in
the Kingdom, are taken away, and they hindered in the free Election of their
Magistrates and Town-Councils, to the manifest Violation of their Charters,
Established by Law and immemorial Possession. And all this is done by mere
Arbitrary Power, without any Citation, Trial or Sentence.

And whereas no Nation whatsoever can subsist without the Administration of
good and impartial Justice, upon which Men's Lives and Liberties, their Honors
and Estates depend, yet those Evil Counselors have subjected these to an
Arbitrary and Despotick Power: having turned out Judges, who by Law ought to
continue during their Life or their good Behavior, because they would not
conform themselves to their Intentions, and put others in their Places, who
they believe would be more compliant, and that without any regard to their
Abilities; by which it evidently appears that those Evil Counselors design to
render themselves the absolute Masters of the Lives, Honors and Estates of the
Subjects, without being restrained by any Rule or Law.

By the influence of the same Evil Counselors has a most exorbitant Power
been exercised in imposing Bonds and Oaths upon whole Shires without any Law or
Act of Parliament; in permitting Free Quarters to the Soldiers, although they
had a sufficient Establishment for their Pay, whereby the Kingdom was doubly
burdened without any redress; in Imprisoning Gentlemen without any, so much as
alleged, Reason, forcing many to accuse and witness against themselves,
imposing arbitrary Fines, frighting and harassing many parts of the Country
with Intercommoning and Justice-Aires, making some incur the forfeiture of Life
and Fortune for the most general and harmless Converse, even with their nearest
Relations outlawed: And thus bringing a Consternation upon a great part of the
Kingdom, which when Outlawries and Intercommonings went out against multitudes
upon the slenderest pretexts, was involved so Universally in that danger, that
those Counselors themselves were so obnoxious as to find it necessary to have
Pardons and Indemnities, whilst the poor People were left to mercy; impowring
Officers and Soldiers to act upon the Subjects living in quiet and full peace,
the greatest Barbarities, in destroying them by Hanging, Shooting and Drowning
them, without any form of Law, or respect to Age or Sex, not giving some of
them time to pray to God for mercy; and this for no other reason, because they
would not answer or satisfy them in such Questions as they proposed to them
without any Warrant of Law, and against the common Interest of Mankind, which
frees all Men from being obliged to discover their secret thoughts. Besides a
great many other Violences and Oppressions, to which that poor Nation has been
exposed, without any hope of having an end put to them, or to have relief from
them.

And that the Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings of those Evil Counselors might
be justified and supported, such a Declaration has been procured by them, as
strikes at the Root of the Government, and overturns the most sacred Rights of
it, in making all Parliaments unnecessary, and taking away all Defenses of
Religion, Liberty and Property, by an assumed and asserted Absolute Power, to
which Obedience is required without reserve; which every good Christian is
persuaded to be due to God Almighty alone, all whose Commandments are always
just and good.

These Evil Counselors have used their utmost endeavors to abolish the Penal
Laws, excluding all who are Protestants from public Trust, which give too
great a Check to their Designs. For the accomplishing of this, a Liberty has
been granted to Dissenters, but such an one, as that the continuance thereof is
plainly insinuated to depend upon their hearty concurrence for Abolishing the
abovementioned Penal Laws, the only Legal Defense of their Religion; although
the Dissenters have just cause of Distrust, when they call to mind how some
hundreds of their Ministers were driven out of their Churches without either
Accusation or Citation: The filling of many whole places with Ignorant and
Scandalous Persons, has been one great occasion of all those Miseries which
that Country for a long time has groaned under. And Dissenters have but small
ground to rest on any present ease founded upon a Proclamation, which may be
recalled every hour, and which in the first and second Editions of it gave no
relief to them, especially considering that not many Months before, the
greatest of the forementioned Severities and Barbarities had been exercised
upon them.

But to crown all, there are great and violent presumptions inducing us to
believe that those Evil Counselors, in order to the carrying on of their ill
Designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more time for the effecting of
them, for the encouraging of their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all
good Subjects, have published, That the Queen has brought forth a Son, though
there have appeared both during the Queens pretended Bigness, and in the manner
in which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible grounds of suspicion,
that not only We our selves, but all the good Subjects of those Kingdoms do
vehemently suspect that the pretended Prince was never born by the Queen. And
it is notoriously known to all the World, that many both doubted of the Queens
Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there was not any one thing
done to satisfy them, or to put an end to their Doubts.

And since our dearest and most entirely beloved Consort, the Princess, and
likewise We our selves have so great an interest in this matter, and such a
Right as all the World knows to the Succession of these Kingdoms, which those
Men have attempted to violate, for preventing of all redress of Miseries, by
the lawful Successors of the Crown, Educated by the good Providence of God, in
the true profession of the Protestant Religion, We cannot excuse our selves
from espousing the true interest of these Nations in matters of such high
consequence, and from contributing all that lies in Us, for the defense of the
Laws and Liberties thereof, the maintaining of the Protestant Religion in them,
and the securing the People in the enjoyment of their just Rights.

But that Our Intentions may be so manifest that no person may doubt or pretend
to doubt thereof, to excuse themselves from concurring with us in this just
Design, for the Universal Good of the Nation. We do Declare that the freeing
that Kingdom from all hazard of Popery and Arbitrary Power for the future, and
the delivering it from what at the present does expose it to both, the settling
of it by Parliament, upon such a solid Basis as to its Religious and Civil
concerns, as may most effectually redress all the abovementioned Grievances,
are the true Reasons of our present undertaking as to that Nation.

And therefore We persuade Our selves that Our Endeavors to give the best
Assistance We can for the Relief of so distressed a Kingdom, shall not only not
be misconstrued, but shall also be accompanied with a cheerful and universal
Concurrence of the whole Nation, that even those who have been Instruments for
the enslaving of it, will now show their dislike of what they have done, by
their timous and seasonable diligence for its rescue: And that if any shall not
give us that Assistance which their Conscience to God, and their Respect to
their Country oblige them to, they shall be justly charged with all the Evils
that may be the effects of such a want of their Duty.

And as We Our selves desire to trust to the Almighty God alone for the Success
of Our Arms, so we expect all good Men, that they will apply themselves most
earnestly to him for his blessing upon Our Endeavors, that so they may tend to
the Glory of his Great Name, to the Establishment of the Reformed Churches, and
to the Peace and Happiness of that Kingdom.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court in the Hague, the Tenth of
October, in the Year of our Lord 1688. William Henry Prince of Orange. By His
Highnesses special Command, C. HVYGENS.

So soon as this Declaration came to be divulged in Scotland, the Generality of
the Nation soon concurred to join against the common Adversaries of their Laws
and Religion, and to throw themselves into the Protection of the most generous
of Princes, whom they saw more sollicitous for their welfare and prosperity,
then mindful of the Hazards into which he engaged his Person to redeem them
from the Yoke of their Oppressors.

His Highness therefore being arriy'd at St. James's, the Scotch Nobility and
Gentry waited upon him upon the Seventh of January, being the day by his
Highness appointed for them to attend him. So soon as they came, his Highness
made them a short Speech to let them know,

That the only reason which induced him to undergo so great an undertaking,
was, that he saw the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdoms overturned, and the
Protestant Religion in imminent danger; and therefore seeing there were in Town
so many Noblemen and Gentlemen, he had called them together, that he might have
their Advice, what was to be done for securing the Protestant Religion, and
restoring their Laws and Liberties, according to his Declaration.

So soon as his Highness retired, the Lords and Gentlemen went to the Council
Chamber at Whitehall, and after they had chosen Duke Hamilton their President,
they fell into Debate what Advice was fit to be given to his Highness upon
those weighty Proposals which he had made them; and after some hours
Deliberation, they agreed upon the Heads of what they intended; and appointed
the Clerks, together with their Assistants, to draw up in writing what the
Assembly thought expedient to propound to his Highness, and to bring it to
their next Meeting in the Afternoon.

The next day being Tuesday, the eighth of January, the writing was brought
into the Assembly of Lords and Gentlemen; and after some time spent in
considering the fittest way to convene a General Meeting of the Estates of
Scotland; at length they agreeed, and appointed the Advice to be written fair
over, according to the Amendments. But as they were about to depart for that
time, the Earl of Arran proposed to the rest as his Advice, That they should
move the Prince of Orange to desire the King to return and call a Free
Parliament, as being the best way to secure the Protestant Religion and
Property, and to heal all Breaches; which seemed to dissatisfie the whole
Meeting, even Duke Hamilton himself though he were Father to the Earl. But the
Assembly breaking up, there was then no farther notice taken of it.

The next day being Wednesday the ninth of January, they met again in the
Council Chamber; at what time Sir Patrick Hume, remembering the Proposal made by
the Earl of Arran, desired to know if there was any person present who would
second it. But no body appearing to do it, he said, That what the Earl had
proposed was evidently opposite and injurious to his Highness the Prince of
Orange's Undertaking, his Declaration, and his good Intentions of preserving
the Protestant Religion, and of restoring their Laws and Liberties therein
expressed, and further desired the Meeting to declare the same to be their
Opinion of it. The Lord Cardross seconded Sir Patrick Humes's Motion; but then
it was answered by Duke Hamilton, President of the Assembly, That their
business was to prepare an Advice to be tendered to the Prince; and the Advice
being then ready to be put to the Vote, there was no need that the Assembly
should give their Opinion of the Earls Proposal, which neither before nor after
Sir Patrick's Motion any of the Company had pretended to own or second, so that
it was quite out of doors; besides that, the Vote of the Assembly upon the
Advice brought in by their Order, would sufficiently decare their Opinion;
which being seconded by the Earl of Sutherland and the Lord Cardoss, Sir
Patrick acquiesced in it; and so the Assembly unanimously Voted the following
Advice.

To His Highness the Prince of Orange.
WE the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland, assembled at your
Highness's Desire, in this extraordinary Conjuncture do give your Highness our
humble and hearty Thanks for your pious and generous. Undertaking for
preserving of the Protestant Religion, and restoring the Laws and Liberties of
these Kingdoms.

In order to the attaining these ends, our humble Advice and Desire is, That
Your Highness take upon You the Administration of all Affairs both Civil and
Military; the Disposal of all the Public Revenues, and Fortresses of the
Kingdom of Scotland, and the doing every thing that is necessary for the
Preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom, until a general Meeting of the States
of the Nation, which we humbly desire your Highness to call, to be holden at
Edinborough the Fourteenth day of March next, by your Letters or Proclamation,
to be published at the Market Cross of Edinborough, and other Head Boroughs of
the several Shires and Stewarties, as sufficient Information to all concerned,
and according to the Custom of the Kingdom. And that the publication of these
your Letters, or Proclamation, be by the Sheriffs or Steward-Clerks, for the
Freeholders, who have the value of Lands, holden according to Law, for making
Elections; and by the Town-Clerks of the several Boroughs, for the meeting of
the Burgesses of the respective Royal Boroughs to make their Elections at least
fifteen days before the meeting of the Estates at Edinborough. And the
respective Clerks to make Intimation thereof, at least ten days before the
meeting of the Elections: And that the whole Elections and Members of the said
meeting at Edinborough, qualified as above expressed, be Protestants, without
any other exception or limitation whatsoever, to deliberate and resolve what is
to be done for securing the Protestant Religion, and restoring the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, according to Your Highness's Declaration. Dated at
the Council Chamger in Whitehall the Tenth day of January, 1689.

This Advice being subscribed by above Thirty Lords, and Fourscore Gentlemen,
was presented, they being all present, by Duke Hamilton their President at St.
James 's, to his Highness the Prince of Orange, who returned them Thanks for
the Trust which they had reposed in him, but desired some time to consider upon
so important an Affair.

Upon the Fourteenth of January His Highness met the same Lords and Gentlemen
again at St. James's, at what time he thus delivered himself:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN pursuance of your Avice, I will until the Meeting of the States in March
next, give such Orders concerning the Affairs of Scotland, as are necessary for
the calling of the said Meeting, for preserving of the peace, the applying of
the public Revenue to the most pressing Uses, and putting the Fortresses into
the hands of persons in whom the Nation can have just confidence. And I do
further assure you, that you will always find me ready to concur with you in
every thing that may be found necessary for the securing the Protestant
Religion, and restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Nation.

At the same time the Eal of Crawfourd made it his Suit to His Highness, that
himself, the Earl of Louthian, and others, who came to Town since the Advice
was presented, might have the Liberty to subscribe it also; which was done
accordingly.

This Answer of his Highness gave great satisfaction to the Lords and
Gentlemen, who tendered the Advice; so that every thing being prepared in order
to the Elections, and the several Members being returned according to the
Methods prescribed, the Convention, consisting of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons of the Kingdom of Scotland, assembled at Edinborough the
Fourteenth day of March, all in one House, according to the custom of that
Realm. The Bishop of Edinborough said Prayers, in which he prayed to God to
have compassion upon King James, wherein he did well, had he not gone on with
his Supplications to restore him; however it showed the Temper of the Man. Upon
the choosing of their President and Clerks, the Bishops and some others were
for the Marquis of Aihol to have been President, but Duke Hamilton carried it
by Forty Voices.

The first thing they took into consideration was, the security and safety of
their Sitting, in regard the City of Edinborough where they sat, was then at
the mercy of the Canon of the Castle, which was in the hands of the D. of
Gourdon, a Roman Patholick. Thereupon they passed an Act,

That in regard the Duke of Gourdon, and some others of the Popish Religion
under him, entrusted with the keeping of the Castle of Edinborough, were not
qualified by the Law of this Kingdom, they did therefore grant a Warrant to the
Earls of Lothian and Tweddale, to repair immediately to the Castle of
Edinborough, and require both Him and others of his Persuasion there, in the
Name of the States of the Kingdom, to remove out of the said Castle within
twenty four Hours after the Intimation, and to leave the charge thereof to the
next Commanding Officer, being a Protestant. And he and they doing the same,
the Estates gave assurance, that he and they were and should be exonerated and
secured as to any thing they have acted in that, or any other Station contrary
to Law, as being Papists.

While those Lords were doing their duty in pursuance of the Act of the
Convention, the Meeting of Estates went on, and in the first place named a
Committee of Elections, consisting of Fifteen; that is to say, five out of each
State. This gave an occasion to a debate, Whither the Lords Spiritual were a
distinct Estate, or only a part of the same Estate with the Lords Temporal? But
in regard the House inclined to the Negative, the debate was let fall. However
by the naming of this Committee, the people began to make a Judgment of the
Meeting; for that of Fifteen which were of it, at least twelve were shrewdly
supposed to be inclined to follow the methods of England; besides that the
Houses rejecting a Protestation made against the Earl of Argyle 's sitting
among them, till his fathers Attainder should be reversed, was no small
confirmation of what the people conjectured. But nothing more availed to give
the people a true notion of the Noble designs of the Meeting, then the
following Speech, which was spoken by a Member at the opening of the
Convention; which being so well received as it was, was a clear evidence that
they were not met to favor the Interest of King James.

WE are now, said the Gentleman, called together by His Highness the Prince of
Orange, to Consult and deliberate what methods will be most proper to secure
our Religion, Laws and Liberties; in Order to which the first thing that will
fall under our consideration, is the settling the Sovereign Power.

I take it for granted that you are fully convinced, that King James the
seventh, by his many violations of the Fundamental Laws, by his endeavoring to
establish a Despotic and Arbitrary Power, and introduce Popery (though he
himself had confirmed all the Laws that were enacted in favor of the
Protestant Religion) has left us at a time when we needed his Protection most.
The Eyes of all Europe are upon us, and it is in our power to make our selves
and our Posterity either happy or miserable, by making a choice either to call
back K. James, and hazard once more all that men account dear, to his Mercy, or
to settle the Government on some other, under whom we may live peaceable lives,
without the perpetual Terror of being swallowed up by Popery and Arbitrary
Government, which all good Men hoped were now banished; and yet behold a new
offspring is sprung up, which eagerly pleads for both, under the mistaken
names of Duty and Allegiance. It Is strange that any man can be so far
degenerate as to prefer Slavery to Liberty, and that they should be so much in
Love with chains, that when they were fairly shaken off, they should run
furiously to find them again. As if the Ottoman and French Government were so
charming in our Country, that we cannot live without it, though we have so
lately groaned under the dismal burden of it. And it might have been supposed
that even they who had been instrumental in the Enslaving their Fellow
brethren, and were grown fat with sucking the Nations Blood, would have taken
another method to reconcile themselves then by persuading us to purchase their
safety, at so vast an expense as the ruin of more than three parts of the
Nation.

If we do but a little reflect upon the motives, which those men, blinded by
self Interest, make use of to delude the Nation into a security, that wanted
but very little of proving fatal to it, and compare them with the strong
reasons we have to persuade us from being so imposed on, they will be found so
weak and impertinent, that we may judge it next to impossibility, to suffer our
selves to be twice deceived. But if the experience of our former Miseries (the
very thoughts of renewing which, cause all good men to tremble) has not made us
wiser; and be not of Efficacy enough to deter us from venturing another
Shipwreck, and exposing all again to the disposal of the Roman Catholics, it is
more then probable that God has abandoned us to believe strong Delusions.

They will eadeavour to persuade us that Kings are exempted from punishment
here on Earth, and that nothing they do can be quarrelled by their Subjects,
which indeed might be urged among the Turks, who reserve nothing from the power
of their Sultans, and where it is death to dispute his Commands though never so
Arbitrary and Tyrannical. But with what impudence can such siuff be imposed
upon us, who never admit our Kings to the Government, till they swear to Rule
us according to Law and no otherwise? The Laws are the only security we have
for our Lives and properties, which if our Sovereigns break, Subjects cannot be
blamed, for making use of the ordinary means to preserve them; and since that
cannot be done without withdrawing Obedience from such a Magistrate as goes
about to destroy them, such an Act cannot be said to punish, because we take
nothing from him to which he has a just claim, but only shun the occasion of
making our selves miserable. The Speculative Doctrine of Passive Obedience has
done too much mischief among us, and what has befallen the King may be justly
attributed to it, for the believing he might do what he pleased without
Opposition, encouraged him to take those measures which have drawn all these
Misfortunes upon him.

Others are so fond as to believe they may be secure in calling back the King,
provided they so limit him, that it may not be in his power to hurt them. But
what Restrictions of our contrivance can bind the King? For most certainly they
can never be voluntarily condescended to; and what is constrained and done by
force, the Law declares to be null and void; to the assistance of which the
Popes dispencing Power being joined, would quickly blow up those Sampsons
Cords, and the Royal power would again revive with all its luster and vigor.

In the next place the King is of a Religion, that in a famous Council has
Decreed, That there is no Faith to be kept with Heretics, much less with
Subjects whom the King looks upon as so many Rebels, and will not miss to treat
them as such, when ever they give him the Opportunity of doing it. Then we may
lament our Miseries, but it will not be in our power to remedy them: For a
Prince of Orange will not be always ready to rescue us, with such vast Expense,
and so great hazard to his Person.

Again, What Argument has the King given us, since he left us, that he will be
more faithful in observing his Word and Oaths then hitherto he has been? Does
he not in a Letter lately Printed here, expressly say he has Ruled so as to give
no occasion of Complaint to his Subjects? Is not the same Letter signed by one
who sacrificed both his Honor and his Conscience to Interest, whose pernicious
and headstrong Counsels posted him to his Ruin, though all that has been done
cannot make him sensible of it? Is K. James the seventh, by breathing the
French Air, become less a Bigot to Popery? It were a Dream to fancy it. For so
long as the Vatican Thunders out Excommunications against all that use not
their utmost endeavors to extirpate Heresy, a Roman Catholic must have no
Religion at all, if they be not terrible to him.

But say they, the Peace of the Nation cannot be otherwise secured, nor
Factions and Divisions be extinguished but by calling in the King. But what
Factions do you observe but what they themselves foment on purpose to disturb
our Harmony? All which would immediately dye if the Government were settled on
those who best deserved. For then if these Fops continued still fond of Tyranny
and Popery they would be chastized as disturbers of the public Peace. If the
King return we must burst out into a flame, and England that has already
declared will quickly be upon us, an Enemy too Potent and too numerous for us,
although we were united; besides that we cut off all hopes of a Union with that
Nation, and deprive our selves of an unspeakable Advantage, which would redound
to all sorts of people, and would be the only means to support an impoverisht
and sinking Nation.

The happy Success the Prince 's Enterprise has met with, has made a
considerable alteration in the Affairs of Europe. For thereby the Great Enemy
of the Protestants, and even of Christianity it self, is so far humbled as from
a proud insulting Enemy to become a Suppliant for Peace, well foreseeing that
if England join with those other Princes whom his Insolence, Cruelty and
Avarice have so justly Armed against him, his ruin is inevitable.

Lastly, I beseech you consider what persons they are that would instill this
poison into ye. Either such as postponing the Common Good of the Nation, are
wholly acted by Self-Interest, considering that in a Government where Justice
and Mercy equally flows, Virtue and Merit, not Villainy will be rewarded. Or
such as being ignorant of the Nature of Government, never examined what
measures the Law of Nature and Nations have set to Men's Obedience. Or such as
have been Instrumental toward the enslaving their Country, and are afraid, if
they be called to an Account, that they must be brought to condign Punishment.
If such cannot succeed in their designs, they hope at least to be overlookt in
the General Confusion: and if Heaven fail them, they summon Hell to their Aid:
Not that Love to their Prince, but Interest drives those Criminals to such
Attempts; so that it is no wonder they take so much pains to sow Division among
us. But no person of Wit and Judgment, nor any good Man truly Protestant, will
suffer himself to be so grossly imposed upon by such Firebrands, who would build
their future Imaginary Greatness on the Ruin of our Religion, Laws and
Country.

Being thus settled to their business, for the greater security of their
Sitting, because of the vast concourse of People from all parts of the Kingdom,
who were generally armed; it was thought requisite, for the prevention of
tumult and disorder, to Command all persons from the Town that were not
Inhabitants, or Retainers to the Members of the Convention.

In the mean time the Lords having acquitted themselves of their Commission,
the following Paper was sent from the Duke of Gourdon, and read the next day in
the Meeting, wherein he gave them to understand.

That he was willing to comply with the Commission he received by the Earls of
Lothian and Tweddale, as to his removal from the Castle of Edinborough; though
he could not do so as a Papist, that being dangerous, and he not convicted. For
that he hoped that his being in Employment, without taking the Test, contrary
to an Act of Parliament, was no Conviction of Popery. To this he added.

That he had received not long ago a Letter from the Prince of Orange, desiring
he would leave the Castle; which he promised to do, but expected some
reasonable things to be first granted to himself and Garrison.

He hoped he had not merited so ill of his Country, as that he might not be
trusted with the Castle, until a Return came to that Letter which he expected
every Hour. But if that could not be granted barely on his promise not to
molest or harm any Person, especially those of that Illustrious Assembly. He
proffered Hostages of Bayl to the value of Twenty Thousand Pound Sterling for
his Peaceable Deportment.

Otherwise he expected before his removal, First, a General Indemnity for
himself and Friends, both Protestants and Papists; as likewise absolute
security for their Lives and Fortunes in time coming, and assurance the same
should be ratified in the next Parliament. Secondly, Security for all
Protestants in the Garrison, who design to stay in it, to continue in their
Employments; and for himself, and those who should go out with him, either
Protestants or Papists, to go beyond Sea, or to remain within the Kingdom, as
their occasions should lead them. Lastly, That the Garrison should be paid off
all bygone Arrears, and have Liberty to dispose of their Goods within the
Castle as they pleased.

The Convention was quick in their Reply, and agreed upon certain Resolves,
which were sent away forthwith to the Duke, to this effect;

That the Meeting of Estates having considered the Paper given in and
subscribed by the Duke of Gourdon, in Answer to their Order, did declare, That
it was not the Mind of the Meeting, that the Dukes officiating as Governor of
the Castle of Edinborough, or any other Employment, or his quitting his command
at that time should import any acknowledgment or Conviction against him, or
those under his Command of his or their being Papists.

That it was likewise resolved, That the Covention would not allow of the Dukes
keeping the Castle upon Promise, Bail or Hostages, until he got a Return of the
Letter written by him to the Prince of Orange.

Then it was farther Resolved, That the Indemnity offered by the Meeting of
the Estates should only extend to those belonging to the Garrison, and their
Servants either Protestants or Papists; that the Persons who were to have the
benefit of the said Indemnity should be named expressly, if the Duke desired
it; and that the Indemnity to be granted by the Meeting should have a Clause
Inserted, that it should be ratified in the next Parliament.

And as to the last Article, It was moreover Resolved, That those of the
Garrison who were pleased to retire with the Duke, should have leave either to
go out of the Kingdom or stay in it as they should think fit, and should have
Liberty to dispose of their Goods and have safe Conduct granted them for that
Effect, if the same were desired before the dissolution of the Meeting of the
Estates. But that they should not take out with them any Arms, Ammunition or
Store, but what they should make out to belong properly to themselves.

And lastly, That it was agreed by the Convention, That the Officers and
Soldiers should be paid their Arrears; Nevertheless, that the Meeting refused
to give them Assurance of their being continued in Employment.

But notwithstanding these Condescentions, (for the Convention was willing to
have bin rid of such a suspicious Neighbor at any Honorable rate) the Duke of
Gourdon who was not ignorant of their Fears, returned an Answer to these
Resolves so full of new and Extravagant Demands, that the Convention was fully
satisfied, that the Duke was only trifling with them, as he had done with His
Majesty of England, to gain time: For King William and Queen Mary had bin
Proclaimed at London ever since the Thirteenth of February before. So that the
Convention perceiving the Dukes design, which was to keep off in expectation of
some Attempts which would be made in Scotland in behalf of the late King James,
and of which he was desirous to see the Issue, They ordered the Heralds, with
the usual Solemnities, to Summon him to surrender the Castle, under the Penalty
of Treason, and to proclaim him Traitor in case of refusal; and to forbid all
people to have any Correspondence with him. Which was accordingly performed,
and Orders also given to block up the Castle.

Soon after a Letter was delivered to the Convention, by one Crane, who went
under the Notion of a servant to the late Queen in France. But the Lord
President acquainted the Members at the same time, that there was a Letter also
from His Majesty of England. Upon which a Debate arose about the reading of the
Letters; at what time the Earl of Lothian moved, That since they were met at
the Desire of his Majesty of England, they ought to give his Letter the
Precedence; which being put to the Vote was carried in the affirmative; and the
King of England 's Letter was read, the Contents of which were as follow:

The Direction was,

To the Meeting of the Estates of Scotland.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE are very sensible of the Kindness and Concern, which your Nation has
evidenced toward Us and Our Undertaking for the preservation of your Religion
and Liberty, which were in such imminent Danger. Neither can we in the least
doubt of your Considence in Us, after having seen how far so many of your
Nobility and Gentry have owned our Declaration, countenancing and concurring
with us in our Endeavors, and desiring Us, that We would take upon us the
Administration of Affairs Civil and Military, and to call a Meeting of the
Estates, for securing the Protestant Religion, and the Ancient Laws and
Liberties of that Kingdom; which accordingly we have done.

Now it lies on You to enter upon such Consultations as are most probable to
settle You on sure and lasting foundations; which We hope you will set about
with all convenient speed, with regard to the public Good, and to the General
Interest and Inclinations of the People; that after so much Trouble and great
Suffering they may live happily and in Peace; and that you may lay aside all
Animosities and Factions that may impede so good a Work.

We were glad to find that so many of the Nobility and Gentry, when here in
London, were so much inclined to a Union of both Kingdoms, and that they did
look upon it as one of the best means for procuring the Happiness of both
Nations, and settling of a lasting Peace among them; which would be
advantageous to Both, they living in the same Island, having the same Language,
and the same common Interest of Religion and Liberty; especially at this
Juncture, when the Enemies of both are so restless, endeavoring to make and
increase Jealousies and Divisions, which they will be ready to improve to their
own Advantage and the Ruin of Britain. We being of the same Opinion, as to the
usefulness of this Union, and having nothing so much before our Eyes as the
Glory of God, Establishing the Reformed Religion, and the Peace and Happiness
of these Nations, are resolved to use Our Utmost Endeavors in advancing every
thing that may conduce to the effectuating the same. So we hid you Heartily
Farewell. From our Court at Hampton the seventh day of March, 1689.

His Majesty's Letter being thus read, the next debate was whither the late
King James 's Letter should be read or no. And here to remove all Heats and
disputes, the Lord Lothian again stepped up and propounded an Expedient, to which
the House agreed, That is to say, that before the reading of it, they should
pass an Act, which should be subscribed by all the Members, That

For as much as there was a Letter from King James the Seventh, presented to
the Meeting of the Estates, That they before the Opening thereof declared and
Enacted, That notwithstanding of any thing that might be contained in that
Letter, for dissolving them or impeding their Procedure, yet that they were a
Free and Lawful Meeting of the Estates, and would continue undissolved, until
they had settled and secured the Protestant Religion, the Government, Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom.


This Act was signed by the whole Meeting, except only six or seven; and then
the following Letter was opened and read, overwritten,

James Rex.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHereas we have been informed that You the Peers and Representatives of the
Shires and Boroughs of that our Ancient Kingdom, who are to meet together at
our good Town of Edinborough, some time in this Instant March by the Usurped
Authority of the Prince of Orange, We think fit to let you know, That we have
at all times relied upon the Faithfulness and Affection of You our Ancient
People, so much that in our greatest Misfortunes heretofore, we had recourse to
your Assistance, and that with good success to our Affairs: So now again we
require of you to support our Royal Interest, expecting from you what becomes
Loyal and Faithful Subjects, Generous and Honest Men, that will neither suffer
your selves to be cajoled nor frighted into any Action misbecoming true-hearted
Scotchmen. And that to support the Honor of the Nation, you will contemn the
base Example of Disloyal Men, and Eternize your names by a Loyalty suitable to
the many Professions you have made to us; in doing whereof you will choose the
safest part, since thereby you will evite the danger you must needs undergo;
the Infamy and Disgrace you must bring upon your selves in this World, and the
Condemnation due to the Rebellious in the Next; and you will likewise have the
Opportunity to secure to your selves and your Posterity the gracious Promises
which we have so often made of securing your Religion, Laws, Properties and
Rights, which we are still resolved to perform as soon as it is possible for us
to meet you safely in a Parliament of our Ancient Kingdom. In the mean time
fear not to declare for Us your Lawful Sovereign, veraign, who will not fail on
our part to give you such speedy and powerful Assistance, as shall not only
enable you to defend your selves from any Foreign Attempt, but put you in a
Condition to assert our Right against our Enemies, who have depressed the same
by the blackest of Usurpations, the most unjust, as well as most unnatural of
all Attempts, which the Almighty God may for a time permit, and let the Wicked
prosper, yet then must bring Confusion upon such Workers of Iniquity. We
farther let you know, that we will pardon all such as shall return to their
Duty, before the last day of this Month Inclusive; and that we will punish with
the Rigor of our Laws all such as shall stand out in Rebellion against Us or
our Authority. So not doubting that you will declare for us, and suppress
whatever may oppose our Interest, and that you will send some of your number to
us with an Account of your diligence and the Posture of our Affairs, We bid you
Heartily Farewell.

Given on Board the St. Michael, March the First, 1689. By His Majesty's
Command. Melfort.


This Letter being directed to Persons at that time sitting, who either lay
under the Ignominy of his Attainders, or had else severely otherwise suffered
either themselves or their nearest Relations the dilacerating stripes of his
Tyrannical severity could not so soon forget the anguish of their Sufferings as
to be sugared up into a Reconciliation, by the fair Promises of a Person that
had lost the Reputation of being true to his Public Word. Besides that there
was so little Majesty in the Style of the Letter altogether precarious, and
answerable to the Lowness of his Condition, only like a plant at the latter end
of Autumn putting forth some fruitless Buds of vain Assurances: So that as the
one altogether slighted it, so those that were most inclined to favor it were
altogether out of Countenance to see the Vanity of such an unseasonable
Secretary Rhetoric. A Committee therefore was appointed to draw up an Answer
to the King of England's Letter, but no man so much as moved for an Answer to
that of King James; only the Man that brought it, begged a Pass to go to him in
Ireland, where he landed the Twelfth of March, at the Port of Kingsale; the
Messenger offering Security not to carry to him any Letters or Papers from any
Person whatsoever. But neither would that be granted; on the other side he was
first secured, then enlarged upon Bail, till at length, not thinking him worth
the keeping, they dismissed him with a Pass instead of an Answer. Nor indeed
could King James expect better, if he may be thought to hope for better, who
had no more significant a Messenger to send to a Convention of Estates of a
Kingdom, than something like a Gentleman Usher to his Queen.

While the Answer to His Majesty's Letter was drawing, the Meeting fell upon
other Business, and ordered a Proclamation to be issue forth for bringing in
the Arrears of the Public Revenue. The first draught of this Proclamation did
not please, purporting, That the Money was to be employed for raising Forces
for securing the Protestant Religion; however after some debate, it was agreed
that the Alteration should be made by leaving out the Words, For Raising
Forces, and so it passed.

This Proclamation was the more requisite to be one of their first
Considerations, in regard of the great occasion which then they had to secure
themselves, and beleaguer the Castle which still held out, to which purpose
they were forced to make use of the City Trained Bands, and the Country
Militia, which could not well be dismissed without pay or a Generous Gratuity.

But then in pursuance of the main Affair which they were upon, of Addressing
themselves to the King, they thought it but requisite, as a forerunner of what
themselves intended to give their Approbation of the Address and Proceedings of
the Nobility and Gentry that had been at London, and had there made it their
Request to His Highness, then Prince of Orange to take upon him the
Administration of the Government; which was done with that Respect which the
Occasion and Quality of the Persons Merited.

And to show that they were not in the mean time unmindful of the Distresses of
their Neighbors, upon reading some Letters from several Noblemen and Gentlemen
in Ireland craving Assistance of Arms and Ammunition, Four Thousand Muskets,
Two Thousand Fuzee's, and Six Hundred Barrels of Gunpowder were ordered to be
bought and sent away.

At the same time the Meeting was informed that Viscount Dundee, had stolen the
opportunity of a Conference with the Duke of Gourdon at the Postern Gate of the
Castle, notwithstanding that the Convention had forbid all correspondence with
him under the Penalty of Treason; more over that Dundee who now came no more to
the Convention, was seen near the City with about fifty Horse. This somewhat
alarumed the Convention, so that they immediately ordered him to be summoned;
but understanding that he was Marched Westward toward Linlithgow, which was the
Road to Sterling, and fearing least he might have some design to surprise that
Castle, which commands the Pass of Communication between the Northern and
Southern parts of Scotland they ordered a Major with fourscore Horse to follow
him; and the Earl of Mar, who was then Governor of Sterling Castle, was sent
away by their Order to secure that Important Garrison, against any Attempt or
surprise. And well knowing that small sparks many times kindle violent
Conflagrations, therefore that they might be in a Posture to make opposition
where ever the flame brake out, they ordered all persons from sixteen to sixty
to be in a readiness to take Arms when the Convention should find it requisite
for the public safety. Several suspected Officers of the Militia, were turned
out, and others put in their places; and Sir Patrick Hume, who was excepted out
of the late Kings Indemnity, ordered to command the Militia Horse of his
Country: And farther, that eight hundred Men should be Levied and Armed under
the command of the Lord Leven; which was no sooner intimated, but the Men came
in within two hours time. Great care was also taken for the Western Countries
that lie next to Ireland, where as in all other parts orders were directed for
dis-arming the Papists, and settling the Militia in trusty Hands.

But notwithstanding all this care and vigilance, and the extraordinary Unity
of the generality of the Nation, the adherers to King James were not without
hopes of having another game to play for their lost stakes. Which made Dundee
still dance about the Country like a Winter Exhalation to entice unwary
followers; which made the Duke of Gourdon, farther perhaps encouraged by some
bouncing Promises from Ireland, to send, as he called them his last Proposals,
and withal a Monitory Letter to the Convention, minding them to what Honors
and Dignities K. James's Predecessors had advanced most or many of them to; and
what marks of Royal Favor and Bounty he had conferred upon them, and which
ought not to be forgot for the Errors and Miscarriages of poor four years
Reign; so that if they would allow him Liberty to go over into Ireland, he
would endeavor an Accommodation between King James and the Estates of the
Kingdom, to have Religion, Laws, Liberty and Property restored and established.
But both the Admonition of the Duke and his undertaking were rejected with that
scorn, that they would not suffer the Monitory to be entered in their Journals,
to signify that they had either received or read it. His demands were, An Act
of Indemnity for all Papists and Protestants that served under him in the
Castle, and for four or five Priests: That he might be secured against all
Strangers or Cameronians, by which he meant the Rabble, in and about the Town,
at his coming out, and that he might have a Guard of forty Horses for a safe
Convoy.

The Convention, though they slighted his Monitories, yet desirous to have the
Castle in their own hands, made answer to his demands, That they would give
security to himself and others in their lives and fortunes, so far as they had
acted as Papists; and that the Priests should have Passes to depart the
Kingdom, upon condition never to return again.

That he should have the Guard and Convoy he demanded till he were over the
water to Brunt-Island: And that a like number of Guards should Convoy him from
thence homeward, which should be disbanded within twenty four hours after his
Arrival, he giving security to live peaceably, and not to disturb the Peace of
the Kingdom.

But notwithstanding he had thus all in a manner granted him that he desired,
yet it seems upon certain intelligence of the late Kings Landing in Ireland, he
thought fit to linger a little longer; and therefore sent another message soon
after to the Convention, and the Magistrates of Edinborough, to acquaint them,
that King James was arrived in Ireland, and therefore he would not surrender
the Castle to the Estates, but would set up King James's Standard, and give the
usual Volleys of Cannon; which he desired them not to be afraid of, or offended
at: and accordingly he fired all his Cannon without Bullets, though to the
great terror of those that lay under the Mercy of his Bullets.

The Duke having thus laid aside all thoughts of surrender; the Besiegers went
on with their Approaches, and the besieged managed their defense the best they
could; though to give the Duke of Gourdon his due, he was so sparing to the
City that he did not do the City half the mischief he might have done;
notwithstanding that the besiegers threw their Bombs into the Castle, which
strangely dis-figured and ruined the Buildings within it. Nevertheless the Duke
made no show of Capitulation since his last Monitory message of the 23d. of May
till the 30th. of the same Month, at what time he beat a parley, and sent a
Letter to the Lord Ross, desiring to speak with him about some important
Affairs which he had to impart to his Lordship. With which the Council being
acquainted, gave leave to the Lord Ross to meet the Duke upon the Castle Hill,
but would not permit him to venture into the Castle; but the D. refused to meet
him there, alleging, that he could not come out of the Castle to speak or
treat with any Person. So that missing his design, whatever it were, he
pretended that the old Registers were damnifyed, and therefore desired they
might be removed. But that the Council refused, looking upon it as a
contrivance to linger away time, to get an opportunity to cover the Bartisons
and Roofs of the Houses with Earth; besides that in the removal of the
Registers, Letters and other things might be conveyed to and from the Duke,
advantages which they were resolved not to allow him. Till at length the Duke
finding himself straightened on every side, and having no hopes of relief, besides
that he destrusted the Soldiers in the Garrison, and saw the Trenches of the
Besiegers advanced very near the Walls of the Castle, as also dreading the
Mines which the besiegers had sunk under the Works, upon the 13th. of June beat
a parley, and hung out a White flag; but the Officer who commanded in the
Leaguer told him plainly, he would admit of no parley, unless it were to
surrender the Castle, in regard he had so often deluded them with so many
frivolous Treaties to no purpose. Upon which the Duke declared, that he would
surrender the Castle upon Honorable Terms; only he desired to know whither he
must Treat with the Officer commanding in the Leaguer, or with his Grace the
Lord Commissioner? This point being settled the Duke of Gourdon insisted to
have an Honorable capitulation; upon which Commissioners were sent up to Treat
with him; but while they were debating together with the Duke upon the terms
which he propounded, at first very high, and deemed by the Commissioners to be
unreasonable, a certain Person ran suddenly into the Castle during the Truce,
and delivered several Letters to the Duke, as it was supposed from Dundee, or
else the late King in Ireland. The Commissioners being informed of this Action,
require to have the Messenger delivered up to them; in regard that no man ought
to have come into the Castle upon such Errands without their consent. This the
Duke refused to do; alleging, That since the Person came to him, he was
obliged to protect him. Upon which the Treaty being broke off, the Garrison
fired both with their great and small snot all that night upon the City it
self, and every other way where they imagined they could do mischief: insomuch
that several persons were killed, others wounded, and some Houses were much
prejudiced by the Cannon.

But the next morning the Duke beat another Parley, and hung out a white Flag,
so that Commissioners were again sent to Treat with Him; and this Treaty had so
good an effect, that the Articles for the surrender of the Castle were agreed,
and confirmed by the Privy Council; to the great joy and satisfaction of all
good and honest men, but to the great trouble and grief of the disaffected
party, who trusted much to this strong place, as being thought impregnable.

Articles of Surrender, June 13th. 1689.

I. That Lieutenant-Collonel Windram, Lieutenant-Governour of the Castle, shall
submit himself to King William 's Pleasure, his Life being secured; And all the
rest of the Garrison shall have their Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes secured,
and Passes granted to those that will take Oaths not to bear Arms against the
present Government. II. The Garrison is allowed to march out with their Swords
and Baggage, belonging properly to themselves. III. That all the
Gentlemen-Volontiers, Servants, and others within the Garrison, shall have the
same Capitulation with the rest of the Garrison. IV. That all manner of Persons
shall have the Benefit of the first Article, who have kept Correspondence with
the Castle, and who have not been in Arms, and being at present at Edinburgh,
or in the same County, shall be Indemnified and have the benefit of this
Capitulation. V. That sick Soldiers shall have the Liberty to dispose of
themselves as they think best, they behaving themselves as becomes. VI. That
all the Officers, Gentlemen, Servants and Soldiers, shall have the same benefit
which others have, they Living peaceably. VII. A Considerable Post, within the
Castle, shall be immediately, how soon security is granted to the Garrison for
the above-written Articles, put in Possession of those Forces, under the
Command of Major General Lanier.
After these Articles were confirmed by the Privy Council, the Garrison marched
to the Hill before the Castle; where they laid down their Arms, and delivered
up the Keys of the Castle, many thousands of people being got in heaps together
to signify their joy in loud acclamations, and prayers for the preservation
and happiness of King William and Queen Mary; as being now assured to live
safely and quietly, and enjoy their Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties
during their prosperous Government. At the same time Three hundred Soldiers
under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Mackey and Major Somerville marched in
and took possession of the Castle; which was strangely battered and ruined
during the Siege by reason of the great Execution that was done by the Bombs.
It was said, that there was some difference between the Duke of Gourdon, the
Governor, and Lieutenant Colonel Windram, who was Deputy Governor of the
Castle; the Duke inclining to have delivered it up before, but Windram urging
still to hold it out. However at last the Duke and his party in the Garrison
prevailed, which hastened the surrender. Windram in the hurry was endeavoring
to have made his escape; but being discovered, was brought back to the Castle,
for which he had no small reason to bless his kind Stars for that if he should
have fallen into the hands of the Rabble, in all probability they would have
torn him to pieces; every body looking upon him as the cause that the Castle
held out so long, and of all the mischiefs that happened during the Seige. It was
also reported, that the Duke of Gourdon after the surrender of the Castle,
solemnly declared, that during the time of the Siege, he never received any
Letter from the late King.

During this Blokade and siege of the Castle, many affairs were transacted and
brought to perfection in Order to the settlement of the Government. Among other
things, the Convention appointed a Committee to draw up an Answer to the King
of Englands Letter, which being done, and the draught of it being read and
approved of by the House, it was signed by all the Members that were present,
except three Bishops, the rest of the Bishops having before withdrawn
themselves from the Convention. And as for some others that were not present
the Duke of Queensbury, the Marquess of Athol, and the Earl of Tweddale,
desired that the Letter might be sent to their Lodgings to be signed, in regard
their indisposition of body would not permit them to come to the House.

But though the three Bishops refused to approve of the Letter the day before,
yet the next day they agreed that the Lord Ross should be the bearer of it, to
present it to the King of England. At what time the Question being put whi- Sir
Patrick Hume of Polwart, might be admitted a Member of the House
notwithstanding his Attainder, the three Bishops left the House, so that after
they had unanimously Voted that Sir Patrick was duly chosen, and ought to sit
as a Member of the Convention, the House were forced to rise that Night without
prayers. This refusal of the Bishops to approve of the Letter occasion some of
the Members to call to mind a passage, when the Bishops in the beginning of the
Convention, vigorously opposed the Convention's approving of the Address of the
Nobility and Gentry at London to His Highness the Prince of Orange; upon which
one of the Members made this Observation: That it was no wonder the Bishops
opposed the approving the London Address, and refused to sign the Letter to the
King of England, since the House had been so unkind as not to approve of the
Bishops famous Address to the late King James.

The Paper being therefore agreed upon, without their consent, the Lord Ross
was made choice of to deliver to the King. It was called an Answer of the
Convention of Scotland, to the King of England's Letter in these Words.

May it please your Majesty,
AS Religion, Liberty and Law are the dearest Interests of Mankind, so the deep
sense of the great hazzards these were exposed to, must produce suitable Returns
from this Kingdom to your Majesty, whom in all sincerity and gratitude we
acknowledge to be under God, our great and seasonable Deliverer. And we
heartily congratulate, that as God has honored your Majesty to be an Eminent
instrument for the preservation of his Truth, so he has rewarded your
endeavors with success and blessed us with deliverance. We do likewise
acknowledge your Majesty's Goodness and care in accepting the Administration of
the Public Affairs of this Kingdom, and calling the Estates; and we return our
most dutiful Thanks to your Majesty's Gracious Letter. We intend to take every
part of it into our consideration; and we hope shortly by the Blessing of God,
to fall upon such Resolutions as may be acceptable to your Majesty, and may
secure the Protestant Religion, and establish the Government, Liberties and
Laws of the Kingdom upon solid Foundations, most agreeable to the interest and
genius of the Nation.

As to the Proposal of the Union, we doubt not but your Majesty will so settle
that matter, that there may be an equal Meeting and readiness in the
inclination of England. We hope the perfecting that great work, so often
attempted in vain, has been reserved to your Majesty. We have hither, and
shall avoid and lay aside all Animosities or Prejudice which may disturb or
impede the Unity and Considence of our Counsels; that as we design the public
good, so it may be done with the General Concourse and Approbation of the
Nation. In the mean time we humbly entreat the Continuation of your Majesty's
Care and Protection to us in all our Concerns, whereof the Kindness expressed
in your Royal Letter gives us full Assurance. We do pray the Almighty God who
has fitted and raised you up to be a Defense to the Protestant Religion, always
to protect and preserve your Majesty. Subscribed in our Name, the Estates of
the Kingdom of Scotland by our President.

Hamilton.


This Answer being thus dispatched away for England, the Convention judging it
most necessary in the first place to secure the Peace of the Kingdom against
all attempts of the disaffected Party and Favorers of the late Kings
Arbitrary designs, gave order to Sir John Hall, Mr. George Stirling, and Mr.
William Hamilton, or any two of them to see the Oath Administered to such as
had any Military office in and about Edinburough; and to bring in an Account of
such Arms as were in the several Garrisons. And whereas several persons were
seen coming Armed from the Borders of England, therefore the respective
Magistrates and Officers of the Militia in the Bordering Counties were ordered
to seize such persons in Arms, until they gave a good account of their
business; or if they could give no good account of themselves, that the
Magistrates or Officers who should seize such persons, should have their Horses
and Arms for their Reward.

At the same time also they gave their approbation of an Order given by the
Earl of Tweddale in January to William Drummond for the delivery of Forty
barrels of Powder, to Mr. Hamilton Merchant of Londonderry, for the use of the
Protestants in Ireland; and ordered farther that the President should have
power to dispatch such persons as he should judge necessary, either for
Ireland, or such other places as the Present exigency of affairs required. Nor
were they less vigilant in giving out their Commands for the securing all
suspected Persons, and keeping of strong Guards in Seaport Towns, and at all
the Bridges, Ferries and other Passes throughout the Kingdom.

With these debates fell in at the same time, a long consultation about giving
Orders in reference to the Militia, which took up some time for the naming of
Trusty Officers, and appointing places for the Musters within the several
Counties; and care was taken to provide that the Soldiers at those Musters
should continue six days together in the exercise of their Arms; and after
that should be ready to march upon notice given with twenty days Provision.

By this the month of March drew toward a conclusion, at what time the
President moved, that a Committee be named to consider the State of the
Government, and bring in their opinion for the settling of it. Which raised a
debate whither the matter should be first treated of in a Committee or not;
which was carried in the Affirmative.

After which the names of the Lords, Knights and Burgesses, that were to be of
this Committee were agreed upon according to the following List of the Nobility.

The Marq. of Athol E. of Argyle E. of Crawford E. of Sutherland Knights, Blare
Grant Scot of Hordin Pettiver Burgesses, Sir John Hall Sir John Dalrimple Sir
Charles Hacket Mr. William Hamilton E. of Louthian Viscount Tarbet Lord
Cardross Lord Melvin Dunbar of Grange Orminston Polward Sketmorley Mr. Fletcher
of Dund. Mr. Moore of Acre Mr. Anderson of Glasgow Mr. Smith of Perch
All which persons were selected into this great Committee by the plurality of
Fifty Four Voices, more then the fourth part of the Meeting.

When the President moved that this Committee might be named, and eight out of
every State were adjudged a competent number, the Bishops of which six were
then present, moved that they might have the Privilege of a State: but they
were answered, that that point was overruled, and they must join with the
Nobility. Then the Question was moved, whither every one of these three Bodies
or States, the Nobility, Knights and Burgesses should distinctly choose their
eight? but it was carried that every Member of the House should give in a List
of twenty four, being eight out of every State under their hands. and that
those that had the most Voices should be chosen; which fell to be the Lot of
the persons abovenamed.

These and some other like struglings of the Bishops against the stream, and
some other discontents which the Convention observed in their behavior, were
highly disgusted by the generality of Estates, insomuch that although they
began to have such a mistrust of them, that they made a particular Order, that
the Bishops in their Prayers should not mention or insinuate any thing against
their Acts or Proceedings.

And this disgust against the Bishops was heightened by another accident which
happened at the same time: for that while the Convention was Voting Major
General Mackay to be General, the Archbishop of Glasgow desired, That all the
Bishops might be excused, in regard the House was then upon a Military concern.
Upon which, one of the Members stood up and declared, that the Bishops had got
a new sight; but that he had seen Military Orders signed by the very same
Bishop. To which when the Archbishop replied, that the Case was different, for
that then he was Chairman of the Committee, the same Member made answer, That
he knew no difference in the Cafe, but only those Orders were then against
Protestant Dissenters, and the Order in question against Papists. And this was
one reason, that they who retained a Great Reverence for the Order, yet had no
kindness for the Persons who were then of it.

Upon the 30th. of March, the Grand Committee of Twenty four, agreed among
themselves the Throne to be vacant, but came to a Conclusion in nothing else.
Some there were who seemed to incline not to insist so much upon the Head of
Desertion or Abdication, but on that of Maladministration. Others there were
who seemed desirous that the Crown should not be confirmed by way of
Translation, but by succession to the Queen of England, and to the King, in the
Right of a Husband, only he to have the Adminstration during life. Others were
for conferring the Care with a Union of both Kingdoms. Others were first for
settling the Crown, and then for treating of the Union. But notwithstanding
this diversity of Opinions, at length, the Earls of Tweddale and Calender, and
Mr. Hugh Brown being added to the Committee, they came to an Agreement, and it
was referred to a Sub-Committee to draw up the Reasons for the Vacancy, which
being brought into the Grand Committee, the same were approved and passed with
a Nemine Contradicente.

Upon the Fourth of April the Reasons for declaring the Throne vacant were read
the last time in the House in the following Terms.

1. King James the Seventh being a professed Papist, did assume the Regal Power
and acted as a King, without ever taking the Oath required by the Law, whereby
every King at his Access to the Government is obliged to swear to maintain the
Protestant Religion, and to Rule the People according to the Laudable Laws.

2. That by the Advice of wicked and evil Counselors he had invaded the
Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal limited
Monarchy, to an Arbitrary Despotick Power; and by public Proclamation had
asserted an Absolute power to annul and disable all the Laws, and particularly
arraigning the Laws that established the Protestant Religion, by erecting
public Schools and Societies of the Jesuits, and not only allowing Mass to be
publicly said, but by converting Protestant Chapels and Churches to Public
Mass-Houses, contrary to express Laws against saying and hearing of Mass.

3. By disarming Protestants, while in the Interim he employed Papists in the
Places of greatest Trust, both Civil and Military; such as Chancellors,
Secretaries, Privy Counselors, Lords of Sessions; thrusting out Protestants to
make room for Papists; and by entrusting the Forts and Magazines of the Kingin
their Hands.

4. By allowing Popish books to be printed and dispersed by a Gift to a Popish
Printer to his Majesty's Household and Chapel contrary to the Laws.

5. By taking the Children of Noblemen and Gentlemen, sending and keeping them
abroad to be bred Papists, making great Funds and Donations to Popish Schools
and Colleges abroad, by bestowing Pensions upon Priests, and perverting
Protestants from their Religion, by offers of places and pensions.

6. By Imposing Oaths contrary to Law.

7. By giving Gifts and Grants for exacting Money without consent of
Parliament, or Convention of the Estates.

8. By Levying and keeping on foot a standing Army in time of Peace, without
consent of Parliament.

9. By employing Officers of the Army, as Judges through the Kingdom, and
imposing them where there were Heritable Offices and Jurisdictions; and by them
many of the Lieges were put to death Summarily, without Legal Trial, Jury or
Record.

10. By using inhuman Tortures, without any Evidence, and in Ordinary Crimes.

11. By imposing exorbitant Fines, to the value of the Parties Estates; in
exacting extravagant Bail; and by disposing of Fines and Forfeitures before any
Process or Conviction.

12. By causing to pursue and forfeit several persons upon old and obsolete
Laws, upon frivolous and weak pretenses, and upon lame and defective probation;
particularly the Earl of Argyle, to the Scandal and Reproach of the Justice of
the Nation.

13. By subverting the Right of the Royal Buroughs, the third of the Estates
in Parliament; imposing not only the Magistrates, but also the whole
Town-Council and Clerks, contrary to their Liberties and Express Charters,
without the pretense either of Sentence Surrender or Consent: and the
Commissioners in Parliament being chosen by these Magistrates and Councils, the
King might in effect as well nominate that entire Estate of Parliament: and
many of the said Magistrates put in by him were avowed Papists, and the
Buroughs forced to pay Money for Letters imposing these Illegal Magistrates
upon them.

14. By sending Letters to the Chief Courts of Justice, not only ordering the
Judges to stop and desist, sine dic, to determine Causes; but also ordering
them and Commanding them how to proceed in Causes depending before them,
contrary to the express Laws, and by changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts,
ad vitam aut culpam, and giving them Commissions ad been placitum, to dispose
them to compliance with Arbitrary Courses; and turning them out of their
Offices, when they did not comply; and particularly, those who in Parliament
opposed the abrogating the Laws made for security of the Protestant Religion.

15. By granting personal Protections of Civil Debts contrary to Law,
notwithstanding the Representation of the Privy Council to the contrary.

The said Reasons, upon reading, were debated one by one, which being done, the
following Declaration, as it was prepared and voted by the Grand Committee, was
also read to this effect.

That the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, did find and declare, That King
James the Seventh, being a Professed Papist did assume the Royal Power, and acted
as King without ever taking the Oath required by Law. And had by the Advice of
wicked and evil Counselors, invaded the Fundamental Constitutions of the
Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal Limited Monarchy to an Absolute and
Despotick Power; and had exercised the same to the subversion of the Protestant
Religion, and the violation of the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, inverting
all the Ends of Government; whereby he had forefaulted the Right of the Crown,
and the Throne was become Vacant.

The foregoing reasons and this Declaration being thus read and considered were
approved by the whole Convention, except Twelve, of which number seven were
Bishops, being all that were present.

Which being done, a Vote passed that an Act should be brought in by the
Committee, for settling the Crown upon William and Mary, King and Queen of
England, and to consider the Terms of the Destination of the Heirs to the
Crown: as also to prepare an instrument of Government to be offered with the
Crown for securing the people from the Grievances of the last Reigns.

When all the business of the day was over, one of the Bishops offered to say
Prayers, according to Custom. Upon which it was moved that King James being
then no longer King of Scotland, that the Bishop should be admonished not to
pray for him at his peril. Which the Bishop observing, to avoid the incurring a
penalty, very discreetly said only the Lords Prayer; and so the House adjourned.

The Convention having made this Progress, the Grand Committee for settling the
Government were ordered to proceed in perfecting the instrument which was set
on foot for that purpose, containing a Claim of the Peoples Rights, and a
Representation of such Grievances, as were thought proper to be redressed.

In the mean time a Proclamation issued forth for the Declaring William and
Mary King and Queen of England to be King and Queen of Scotland; and
accordingly upon the Eleventh of April, the same day that they were Crowned in
England, they were Proclaimed at the Market-Cross in Edinborough, with all the
joy and sincerity that could be expressed.

The Proclamation ran in this Form.

WHereas the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, by their Act of the Date of
these Presents, have Resolved that William and Mary King and Queen of England,
France and Ireland, be and be declared King and Queen of Scotland, to hold the
Crown of Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom of Scotland to them the said King
and Queen during their Lives, and the longest Liver of them, and that the sole
and full exercise of the Regal power be only in and exercised by the said King,
in the name of the said King and Queen, during their Joint Lives: As also the
Estates having Resolved and Enacted an Instrument of Government, or Claim of
Right to be presented with the offer of the Crown, to the said King and Queen,
they do Statute and Ordain. That William and Mary King and Queen of England,
France and Ireland, be accordingly forthwith Proclaimed King and Queen of
Scotland, at the Market Cross of Edinborough, by Lion King at Arms, or his
Deputy, his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and at the head Burghs of
all the Shires, Stewarties, Baillaries and Regalities within the Kingdom, by
Messengers at Arms.

And because the States did not think it sufficient to Proclaim William and
Mary King and Queen of Scotland, unless the Authority of James the seventh were
quite abolished in that Kingdom, they put forth another Proclamation against
the owning of the late King J. withal commanding public Prayers to be said for
King William and Queen Mary to this effect.

That the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland having Proclaimed and Declared
William and Mary King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, to be King and
Queen of Scotland, They have thought it also fit by public Proclamation to
certify the Subjects^ that none did presume to own or acknowledge the late
King James the seventh for their King, nor obey, accept or assist any
Commissions or Orders that might be emitted by him and that none did presume
upon their highest peril, by word, writing, in sermons, or in any other manner
or way to impugn or disown the Royal Authority of William and Mary, King and
Queen of Scotland: But that all the people should render their dutiful
obedience to their Majesty's; and that none should presume to misconsture the
Proceedings of the Estates, or to create jealousies, or misapprehensions of the
Actings of the Government, but that all the Ministers of the Gospel within the
Kingdom should publicly Pray for King William and Queen Mary, as King and Queen
of the Realm. And the Estates did farther require the Ministers within the city
of Edinborough, to read the Proclamation publicly from their Pulpits, upon the
next Sunday being the 14th. Instant at the end of their forenoons Sermon. And
the Ministers on this side of the river Tay, to read the same upon the Sunday
after that being the 21th. instant and those be North Tay, upon the 28th. of
April, under the pain of being deprived and losing their Benefices. Discharging
withal the Proclamation of the Council, dated September. 16th. 1686. to be read
any more in Churches. And the Estates did also farther prohibit and discharge
any injury to be offered by any person whatsoever to any Minister of the Gospel
either in Churches or Meeting Houses, who were presently in the Possession and
exercise of their ministry there, they behaving themselves as become them,
under the Present Government.

This Proclamation occasioned the Deprivation of several Ministers and the loss
of their Livings, for their contempt of the Commanding Authority. And so
obstinate they were in their contumacy, that being cited before the Committees
of the Convention, and afterward before the Privy Council, many of them not
only refused to pray for King William and Queen Mary, but some acknowledged,
that they had held correspondence and kept intelligence with Dundee. Which
dis-affection of the Ministers to their present Majesty's was more particularly
observed in the Diocese of Murray, of which one Dr. Hay was Bishop, a notable
stickler for the late King James, for which he was deprived not only of his
Bishopric, but of his Benefice of Elgen. In this Diocese there were some so
inveterate against the Government of the Estates, that when the Proclamation of
the Convention came to their hands instead of reading it they were so insolent
as to throw it into the fire; and yet in the foregoing Reigns, none so
rigorous, none greater persecutors of those that yielded not implicit
obedience to their Impositions, even to the ruin of the most worthy of their
Parishioners. And thus among others they served the Lord of Boody, a Gentleman
that never had been at Conventicle in his Life, nor ever absented himself from
his Parish Church, if in the Country and in health. Yet because his Lady, who
had labored long under a lingering disease which had brought her so low that she
could not stir abroad, was so unfortunate as not to be able to give her
attendance at Divine Service, the Gentleman by the Information and practices of
the Neighboring Clergy was fined in 2 Thousand pound sterling, almost to the
ruin of his Affairs and Family: and part of the Fine as it was said, bestowed
upon the Scotch College in Paris.

Nor was this dislike of the Proceedings of the Convention confined within the
Clergy only; there were other Malcontents that were laying the Foundations of
new Commotions, by holding correspondence with the late King in Ireland, from
whence they were in hopes of great Assistance. These Machinations were in part
discovered, by the seizing of one Brady and Grenoch, near Glasgow in his return
from Ireland. About him were taken several Letters and other Writings; more
particularly one Letter from the late King, and another from the E. of Melfort
to Viscount Dundee, and the E. of Belcarris, referring to Letters formerly
Written by them, and sent by one Sir Kennedy. The substance of the Letters
were, That the late King had forty Thousand men in Ireland, and that he would
speedily be in a condition to send them a formidable Assistance; that in the
mean time he could spare them five thousand foot, a hundred Horse, and a
hundred Dragoons, desiring them withal to send an exact account of the
Country, and how the Gentry and people stood affected. He also farther
required them to summon together as many of the Bishops and Burgesses as they
could, to hold a Convention in his Name. As for Melfort he was very crank in
the Letters telling his Friends, that he hoped to be merry with them once more
in Scotland, and to have his losses repaired out of the Estates of
Forefaulters; and declared that he would destroy all the Members of the
Convention; but as for the Commonalty, he was resolved to make them Gibeonites,
Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water, for the Roman Catholics the only
Israelites indeed. Upon reading these Letters the Lord Belcarris, Lord Lochore,
and Lieutenant Colonel Balfore were committed to prison, and others put to
find good security.

These fruitless designs and petty strugglings of a gasping Party did but serve
to make the Convention more vigilant, and to hasten the settlement of the
Kingdom: So that the Instrument, together with the Letters from the Estates to
their Majesty's, and the Instructions to the Commissioners being by this time
all ready, the E. of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and Sir John Dalrimple, the
Commissioners were sent away Post with a Tender of the Crown to King William
and Queen Mary. The Commissioners being arrived at London, upon the Eleventh of
May met in the Council Chamber at White Hall. From whence, being attended by
most of the Nobility and Gentry then about the City, they were conducted by Sir
Charles Cottrell, Master of the Ceremonies, to the Banqueting House, where
their Majesty's with a great Attendance of persons of Quality were prepared to
receive them, sitting on their Thrones under a Rich Canopy, and the Sword being
born before them by the Lord of Cardross. The Commissioners being entered,
after the Ceremony of a solemn Obeisance, the Earl of Argyle, before he
presented the Letter from the Meeting of the Estates, thus delivered himself.

May it please your Majesty.
IT cannot be unknown in how sad and deplorable a Condition the Kingdom of
Scotland was not many Months ago. The Liberty and Property of the Subject quite
destroyed, either upon pretense of Law without any Ground, or by such Laws as
were designed and calculated for inslaving us: Our Religion exposed and laid
open to be ruined by the Treachery of our Clergy, as well as by the compliance
of our Rulers. And so far had their Popish and Arbitrary designs run us, that
we were very nigh past hopes of a Recovery, when it pleased God to raise up
your Majesty to be the Glorious Instrument of Retrieving our Religion, Liberty
and Property from the very brink of Ruin.

It is from the Grateful and Dutiful sense and unexpected delivery, as well as
to the respect due to the blood of their ancient Monarchs, that the Estates of
Scotland have Commissionated us, to make an humble tender to your Majesty and
your Royal Consort, of that Crown and Kingdom, with the firm persuasion and
assurance of this rooted in their hearts. That the care of Religion, Liberty
and Property could be no where so well lodged, as in the hands of your
Majesty's, their great and Glorious deliverer.


After the Earl of Argyle had thus expressed himself, he presented to the King
the Letter following, which being delivered back again by His Majesty, was read
by Mr. Eliot, Secretary to the Commissioner, purporting

THat the settling of the Monarchy and ancient Government of the Kingdom,
admitting no delay, they did upon the Eleventh of April, Proclaim His Majesty
and His Royal Consort King and Queen of Scotland with so much unanimity, that
of the whole House there was not one contrary Vote, That they had nominated the
Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorly, and Sir John Dalrimple the
younger of Stair, in their Name to attend Their Majesty's with the cheerful
offer of the Crown, and humbly to present the Petition or Claim of Right of the
Subjects of the Kingdom: as also to represent some things found grievous to the
Nation, which they humbly entreated his Majesty to remedy by wholesome Laws in
the first Parliament. And in Testimony of his Majesty's and the Queens
Acceptance, they besought their Majesty's in the presence of the persons by
them sent, to swear and sign the Oath at the same time presented, which the Law
had appointed to be taken by their Kings and Queens at their Entry to their
Government, till such time as the Great Affair should allow that kingdom the
happiness of their presence in Order to Their Coronation.


That they were most sensible of His Majesty's Kindness and Fatherly care in
both his Kingdoms, in promoting their Union, which they hoped had been
preserved to be accomplished by him; that as both Kingdoms were united in one
Head and Sovereign, so they might become one Body Politic, one Nation to be
represented in one Parliament. And to testify their Readiness to comply with
the King in that matter, they had nominated Commissioners to treat the Terms of
one entire and perpetual Union betwixt the two Kingdoms, with reservation to
them of their Church Government, as it should be established at the Time of the
Union. Which Commissioners waited only for His Majesty's Approbation and Call,
to meet and treat with the Commissioners to be appointed for England, at what
time and place His Majesty should appoint. And that if any difficulty should
arise upon the Treaty, they did on their part refer the determination thereof
to His Majesty. Moreover that they did assure themselves from His Majesty's
Prudence and Goodness of a happy conclusion to that Important Affair, so that
the same might be agreed to, and ratified by His Majesty in the first
Parliament. That they did render likewise to His Majesty their most Dutiful
thanks for his gracious Letter brought them by the Lord R^ss (a Person well
affected to his Service, and for his Princely care in sending down those
Troops, which might in the mean time help to preserve them; and when the season
offered might be employed toward the Recovery of Ireland from that deplorable
Condition, and extreme danger, to which the Protestants were exposed.

Farther, That as it was the Interest of England to contribute to secure
Scotland from the Common danger, so they should not be wanting on their parts
to give their Assistance for the reducing of Ireland; that all Their Majesty's
Kingdoms might flourish in Peace and Truth under the Auspicious Influence of
their Happy Reigns.

The Letter, of which this was the full substance being thus read, the
Instrument of Government or the Claim of Right, together with the Paper of
Grievances, which the Estates desired might be redressed, and which were
afterward added to the Instrument, were presented to the King, and being
delivered back by his Majesty were read in Order by the Secretary.

Which Instrument of Government imported,

That whereas James the Seventh, being a professed Papist, did assume the Regal
Power, and act as a King, without ever taking the Oath required by Law, whereby
every King at his Access to the Government was obliged to swear to maintain the
Protestant Religion, and to Rule the People according to the Laudable Laws; and
by the Advice of wicked Counselors did invade the Fundamental Constitutions of
the Kingdom of Scotland, and altered it from a Legal limited Monarchy, to an
Arbitrary and Despotick Power; and in a public Proclamation asserted an
Absolute power to annul and disable all Laws; particularly by arraigning the
Laws establishing the Protestant Religion; and exerted that Power to the
subversion of the Protestant Religion, and to the Violation of the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom.

By erecting public Schools and Societies of the Jesuits, and not only
allowing Mass to be publicly said, but also converting Protestant Chapels and
Churches to Public Mass-Houses, contrary to the express Law against saying and
hearing of Mass.

By allowing Popish books to be printed and dis^^^sed by a Patent to a Popish
Printer, designing him Printer to his Majesty's Household, College and Chapel
contrary to Law.

By taking the Children of Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen, sending them
abroad to be bred Papists; and bestowing Pensions on Priests to pervert
Protestants from their Religion, by offers of Places and Preferments.

By disarming Protestants, while at the same time he employed Papists in Places
of greatest Trust, both Civil and Military, etc. and intrusting the Forts and
Magazines in their Hands.

By Imposing Oaths contrary to Law.

By exacting Money without consent of Parliament, or Convention of Estates.

By Levying and keeping up a standing Army in time of Peace, without consent of
Parliament, and maintaining them upon Free Quarter.

By employing the Officers of the Army, as Judges throughout the Kingdom; by
whom the Subjects were put to death without Legal Trial, Jury or Record.

By imposing ^^orbitant Fines to the value of the parties Estates, exacting
extravagant Bail, and disposing Fines and Forfeitures before any Process or
Conviction.

By imprisoning Persons without expressing the Reason, and delaying to bring
them to Trial.

By causing several persons to be prosecuted, and their Estates to be forfeited
upon stretches of old and forfeited Laws, upon weak and frivolous pretenses,
and upon lame and defective Proofs, as particularly the late Earl of Argyle, to
the Scandal of the Justice of the Nation.

By subverting the Rights of the Royal Buroughs, the Third Estate of
Parliament, imposing upon them not only Magistrates, but also the whole Town,
Council and Clerks, contrary to their Liberties and express Charters without
any pretense of Sentence, Surrender or Consent. So that the Commissioners to
Parliaments being chosen by the Magistrates and Councils, the King might in
effect as well nominate that entire Estate of Parliament: Besides that many of
the Magistrates by him put in, were Papists; and the Buroughs were forced to
pay Money for the Letters imposing those Illegal Magistrates upon them.

By sending Letters to the Chief Courts of Justice not only ordering the Judges
to stop sine die, but also commanding them how to proceed in cases depending
before them, contrary to the express Laws; and by changing the nature of the
Judges Patents ad vitam, or Culpam; into Commission de been placito, to dispose
them to a compliance to Arbitrary Courses, and turning them out of their
Offices if they refused to comply.

By granting personal Protections for Civil Debts contrary to Law.

All which were Miscarriages of King James utterly and directly contrary to the
known Laws, Freedoms and Statutes of the Realm of Scotland.

Upon which Grounds and Reasons the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland did find
and declare, That King James the Seventh, being a professed Papist, did assume
the Regal Power, etc. (as at the beginning) whereby he had forfeited the Right
of the Crown and the Throne was become vacant.

Therefore, in regard his Royal Highness, then Prince of Orange, since King of
England, whom it pleased God to make the glorious Instrument of delivering
these Kingdoms from Popery and Arbitrary Power, by advice of several Lords and
Gentlemen of the Scotch Nation then at London, did call the Estates of this
Kingdom to meet upon the Fourteenth of March last, in order to such an
Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not again be in
danger of being subverted. The said Estates being at that time assembled
accordingly in a full and free Representative of the Nation, taking into their
most serious Consideration, the best Means for attaining the Ends aforesaid,
did in the first place as their Ancestors in the like Cases had usually done,
for the Vindicating and Asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, declare,
That by the Law of Scotland, no Papist could be King or Queen of the Realm, nor
bear any Office whatever therein, nor that any Protestant Successor could
exercise the Regal power till he or they had sworn the Coronation Oath.

That all Proclamations asserting an Absolute Power to null and disable Laws, in
order to the Erecting Schools and Colleges for Jesuits; converting Protestant
Churches and Chapels into Mass-Houses, and the allowing Mass to be said.

That the allowing Popish Books to be printed and dispersed was contrary to Law.

That the taking the Children of Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, and keeping
them abroad to be bred Papists; the making Funds and Donations to Popish
Schools and Colleges, the bestowing Pensions on Priests, and the seducing
Protestants from their Religion by offers of places and preferments was
contrary to Law.

That the disarming of Protestants, and the employing Papists in the greatest
places of Trust both Civil and Military, etc. was contrary to the Law.

That the imposing an Oath without Authority of Parliament, was contrary to Law.

That the raising of Money without consent of Parliament or Convention, was
contrary to (...).

That the employing Officers of the Army as Judges, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the Imposing Extraordinary Fines, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the Imprisoning of persons without expressing the Reasons, etc. was the
same.

That the prosecuting and seizing Men's Estates as forfeited upon stretches of
old and obsolete Laws, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the nominating and Imposing Magistrates, etc. upon Borroughs, contrary to
their express Charters, was the same.

That the sending Letters to the Courts of Justice ordaining the Judges to
desist from determining of Causes, and ordaining them how to proceed in Causes
depending before them, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the granting of personal protections, etc. was the same.

That the forcing the Subjects to depose against themselves in Capital Causes,
however the punishment were restricted, was contrary to Law.

That the using Torture without Evidence, or in Ordinary Crimes was contrary to
Law.

That the sending of an Army in a Hostile manner into any part of the Kingdom,
in time of peace, and exacting Locality and free Quarter was the same.

That the charging the Subjects with Law-burroughs at the Kings instance, and
imposing Bonds without Authority of Parliament, and the suspending Advocates
for not appearing when Bonds were offered, was contrary to Law.

That the putting Garrisons into private Men's Houses in time of Peace without
Authority of Parliament was Illegal.

That the Opinions of the Lords of the Sessions in the two Cases following were
Illegal, viz. That the concerting the demand of supply for a forefaulted
person, although not given, was Treason. 2. That persons refusing to discover
their private thoughts in Relation to points of Treason, or other men's Actions,
are guilty of Treason.

That the fining Husbands for their Wives withdrawing from Church, was Illegal.

That Prelacy and Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters is
and has been a great and unsupportable burden to this Nation, and contrary to
the Inclinations of the Generality of the people, ever since the Reformation;
they having reformed Popery by Presbytery, and therefore ought to be abolished.

That it is the Right and Privilege of the Subject to protest for remedy of
Law, to the King and Parliament against Sentences pronounced by the Lords of
the Sessions, provided the same do not stop Execution of the said Sentences.

That it is the Right of the Subject to Petition the King, and that all
Prosecutions and Imprisonments for such petitioning are and were contrary to
Law.

Therefore for the redress of all Greivances, and for the amending,
strengthening and preserving the Laws, they claimed that Parliaments ought to
be frequently called and allowed to sit, and freedom of Speech and Debate
allowed the Members.

And then they farther claimed and insisted upon all and sundry the premises,
as their undoubted Rights and Liberties, and that no Declarations or
Proceedings to the prejudice of the people in any of the said premises ought
in any wise to be drawn hereafter in Example; but that all Forfeitures, Fines,
Loss of Offices, Imprisonments, Banishments, Prosecutions, Persecutions and
Rigorous Executions be considered and the Parties redressed.

To which demand of their Rights, and redress of their Grievances, they took
themselves to be encouraged by the King of England's Declaration for the
Kingdom of Scotland in October last, as being the only means for obtaining a
full Redress and Remedy therein.

Therefore, Forasmuch as they had an entire Confidence that His Majesty of
England would perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and would still
preserve them the violation of the Rights which they had asserted, and from all
other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws and Liberties.

The said Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland had resolved, That William and
Mary, King and Queen of England, be declared King and Queen of Scotland, to
hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom to them the said King and
Queen, during their Lives and the longest Liver of Them, and that the sole and
full Exercise of the Power be only in, and exercised by him the said King, in
the Names of the said King and Queen, during their Lives. And after their
decease, that the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom be to the
Heirs of the Body of the said Queen. Which failing to the Princess Ann of
Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; which also failing, to the Heirs of the
Body of the said William, King of England.

And then withal they prayed the said King and Queen to accept to same
accordingly.

It was also declared by the Instrument that the Oath hereafter mentioned
should be taken by all Protestants, by whom the Oath of Allegiance or any other
Oaths and Declarations might be required by Law instead of it; and that the
Oath of Allegiance, and all other Oaths and Declarations should be abrogated.

The Oath was but short, and conformable to that which was prescribed in
England.

I A. B Do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be faithful and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.

So soon as the Secretary had done reading the Instrument, an Address was also
read from the Estates of Scotland, Humbly desiring His Majesty, That for the
farther settling and securing the Protestant Religion, the Government, Laws and
Liberties of that Kingdom, and redressing the Grievances represented by them,
His Majesty would be pleased to turn their Meeting into a Parliament.

All these Papers being read in their Order, His Majesty was pleased to express
himself briefly to this effect.

That at his coming from Holland, he had a particular regard to Scotland, and
had emitted a Declaration for that Kingdom, as well as for England, which he
would make effectual to them. That he took it very kindly Scotland had
expressed so much Confidence in him, and should testify his sense of it in
every thing that might be for its Interest, and would be ready to redress all
Grievances and prevent the like for the future by good and wholesome Laws.

The latter part of these words are somewhat altered in another Relation of
this Important Ceremony, though much to the same effect.

That they should find him Willing to assist them in every thing that concerned
the Weal of that kingdom; by making what Laws should be necessary for the
security of their Religion, Property and Liberty, and to ease them of what
might be justly grievous to them.

When the King had made an end of speaking, the Coronation Oath was tendered to
their Majesty's, and distinctly pronounced word by word, by the Earl of Argyle,
while their Majesty's repeated the Sentences after him, holding up their Right
Hands all the while, according to the Custom of Scotland.

We William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, faithfully promise and swear
by this our Solemn Oath in presence of the Eternal God, that during the whole
Course of our Life, we will serve the same Eternal God to the uttermost of our
Power, according as he has required in his most Holy Word, revealed and
contained in the New and Old Testament; and according to the same Word shall
maintain the True Religion of Christ Jesus, the Preaching of his Holy Word, and
the due and Right Ministration of the Sacraments, now received and preached
within the Realm of Scotland; and shall abolish and gain-stand all false
Religion contrary to the same; and shall rule the People committed to our
Charge, according to the Will and Command of God, revealed in his above said
Word, and according to the Loveable Laws and Constitutions received in this
Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal God; and shall procure
to the Utmost of our Power to the Kirk of God, and whole Christian People true
and perfect peace in all time coming. That we shall preserve and keep inviolated
the Rights and Rents, with all just Privileges of the Crown of Scotland;
neither shall we transfer nor alienate the same. That we shall forbid and
repress in all Estates and degrees, Reif, Oppression and all kind of Wrong. And
we shall Command and procure that Justice and Equity in all Judgments be
kept to all persons without exception, as the Lord and Father of all Mercies
shall be merciful to Us. And we shall be careful to root out all Heretics and
Enemies to the True Worship of God, that shall be convicted by the True Kirk of
God of the aforesaid Crimes, out of our Lands and Empire of Scotland. And we
faithfully affirm the Things above-written by our Solemn Oath.

True it is, that the Estates of Scotland had authorized their Commissioners to
represent to His Majesty, in relation to the Clause in the Oath, about the
rooting out of Heretics, that the said Clause did not import the destroying of
Heretics; for that by the Law of Scotland no man was to be prosecuted for his
private Opinion; but that even obstinate and convicted Heretics were only to
be denounced or outlawed. Which being represented to His Majesty accordingly,
when he came to that Clause in the Oath, the King declared, That he did not
mean by those words, That he was under any Obligation to become a Persecutor:
To which the Commissioners made answer, That neither the meaning of the Oath
nor the Law of Scotland did import it. Whereupon the King replied, That he took
the Oath in that sense, and called for Witnesses of his so doing the
Commissioners and others there present. After which Their Majesty's concluded
the Solemnity by signing the Oath which they had taken.

The Names of the Commissioners which the Estates of Scotland had made Choice
of to treat concerning the Union between the two Kingdoms desired in the Letter
presented to the King by the Commissioners that delivered the Instrument of
Government, and tendered the Crown, and Oath to Their Majesty's, (for so far the
Estates had already proceeded in order to that great Affair) were, The Earls of
Argyle. Crawford Lowthian Annandale, and Tweddale The Lords, Ross Cardross and
Melvin Barons, Skelmorley Ormiston Blackbaronny Racebrigg Polwart Grant
Rickartown and Blaire


For the Buroughs, Sir John Hall, Sir J. Dalrimple Sir Char. Hacket Mr. Jam.
Ogilvie Provost Fletcher Mr. William Hamilton Mr. John Murray, and Provost Muire


It seems that before the Address was resolved upon for desiring His Majesty to
turn the Meeting of the Estates into a Parliament, there was some debate
whither the King should be addressed to that purpose, or else to call a new
Parliament. Many reasons were urged on both sides; but in regard that they who
were for the Address delivered, prevailed, the Reasons on that side were only
made public: By which it was alleged, That because that the present Meeting
of the Estates being assembled in a way wholly extraordinary, for securing the
Protestant Religion, and re-establishing the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom;
and they having declared the Throne Vacant, and having also lately conferred
and settled the Crown upon King William and Queen Mary according to the
Instrument made for that effect, and having likewise agreed upon the Grievances
which they expect to be redressed, they ought to be turned into a Parliament
for the Reasons following. First,

Because the turning of the Meeting into a Parliament, was absolutely necessary
for attaining the Ends for which it was called; it being evident, that although
the Estates had indeed happily laid the Foundations by the settlement they had
made, yet both the perfecting the Claim of Right, and the redressing the
Greivances complained of, did indispensably require a Parliament; and by the
same Argument of Necessity, the turning of the same Meeting into a Parliament;
in regard the perfecting of that begun work was not to be expected from other
hands, nor could they in their Circumstances look for it with any probability.
So that unless the States would incur the Censure, of beginning to build, but
not being able to finish, they could not leave the work unaccomplish'd.

2. Because their present Circumstances were manifestly such, as neither did
admit of the delay of calling a new Parliament, nor indeed did allow them to
hope that new Parliament would perfect the Work begun; the imminent threatening
of an Invasion from Ireland with the Jealousies and Distractions within the
Kingdom, being Arguments too palpable to refute the Conceit of calling a new
Parliament.

3. Because they had the practice of England for a good President, and as plain
necessity and Reason had hitherto obliged the Convention to tread in their
Footsteps; so those Motives were at present most cogent for their continuance.

To this it was objected that the thing could not be done by Law, seeing the
Estates assembled in their own Right, from absolute necessity; and having
already settled and surrendered the Government; they were defunct and
dissolved; and the King could no more turn the Meeting into a Parliament, than
he could at another time constitute a meeting of Men to be a Parliament without
a lawful Summons and the Peoples Choice: And moreover, That Commissioners for
Shires and Buroughs have only their Commissions in the Meeting of the Estates
and not in a Parliament. And as for the Case of England, that they had
Presidents, but Scotland had none.

To all which it was answered, to begin with the last part first, That Scotland
had Englands practice for a President, but that England it self had no
President, unless that of 1660. the lameest that ever was heard of; for that,
there having been a Meeting called without the King, and consisting only of a
House of Commons, when the King returned he added to it the House of Peers, and
turned it into a House of Peers without any Summons or other Formality. And
supposing that England might now allege that for a President, yet that
Parliament, 1660. had no President at all.

Secondly, That it was true, that the Estates by the surrender and settlement
were defunct, at least as to that point: Yet what could possibly hinder, why
the Estates who had made so great a settlement, That for to make all the work
effectual, King William should presently turn the Meeting into a Parliament:
For that certainly if the Estates had power (as no doubt they had) to mould and
confer the Government, as they had done, they had power to do this also, and
indeed that they could not do it without a visible neglect, especially seeing
that as yet neither the Instrument nor the Commissioners were dispatched.

Thirdly, Though this should be omitted, yet the same reason of State, and
invincible Necessity, the principal support of all their late proceedings, did
with the same force and Evidence, require that the Meeting should be turned
into a Parliament.

Fourthly, That their could be no defect alleged for the Commissions for
Shires and Buroughs, but what would more strengthen the Argument against what
was already done, than against what was craved to be done. But that in truth,
the Commissions were full enough beyond all exception.

Lastly, There could be no Treaty about the Union, without a Commission from
King and Parliament: So that unless the Treaty were turned into a Parliament,
the Treaty must for a long time be delayed and postpon'd.

By the event it was evident that these Reasons overcame all Obstructions in
this Affair: for that within a few days after their Majesty's had taken the
Coronation Oath, the King declared his pleasure for turning the Meeting of
Estates into a Parliament, and having nominated the Duke of Hamilton his
Commissioner, upon the last day of May signed his Commission.

And in regard that upon Their Majesty's Acceptance of the Crown, all
Commissions, Gifts and other Writs supscrib'd by the King were of necessity to
be docketed and countersigned by the Secretary of State, the King made choice
of the Lord Melvil for that Office, as being a Person that could never be
induced to act in the former Raigns. And in regard it was as necessary for him
to have an Advocate, he named Sir John Dalrimple, one of three Commissioners
for offer of the Crown, to that Employment.

Moreover because as King of Scotland, it was no less requisite for him to have
a standing Privy Council, His Majesty made choice of the following Persons to
act in that High Station.

Prince G. of Denm. D. of Hamilton Marq. of Douglass Marq. of Athol Earl of
Drumlanrigg E. of Argyle E. of Crawford E. of Arrol E. of Marshal E. of
Sutherland E. of Glencarn E. of Eglington E. of Cassels E. of Lowthian E. of
Annandale E. of Tweddale E. of Leven Earl of Dundannald E. of Kintore Lord
Yeasters L. Melvil L. Ross L. Cardross L. Carmichel L. Ruthen The Mast. of
Forbes The Mast. of Melvil Sir James Dalrimple of Staire Sir John Dalrimple Sir
John Melland Sir Hugh Campbil of Kaddal Skelmorley Polwart Lord of Grant
The Privy Council thus chosen made it their first business to take care for
the preservation of the Kingdom; for the disturbance of which they had
Intimation of several Machinations and Conspiracies. Insomuch that about the
beginning of June the Lord Tarbot's Son was seized, the Lord Levar, and the
Lord Dunmore committed to Custody, with some Ladies also of Quality. But while
the Privy Council were thus prying into the secrets of these dark designs, not
being able to make any perfect discovery, fifteen Men and two Women issued out
of the Castle of Edinborough, at that time not surrendered, the Men having their
Muskets Cockt and well charged with a brace of Bullets. But they were all taken
by the Guards that blockt up the Castle, except one Woman, that escaped through
the Noreloch, and brought to the Duke of Hamilton. About the Woman there was
taken a Packet of Letters, with many Keys, and particularly the Keys of the
outer Gate of the Castle, and the Key of the Postern Gate. Soon after the Woman
that made her escape was also taken with a great many more Letters. This
seasonable discovery was of great Importance. For thereby the Council came to
understand who they were that were most deeply concerned in the designs on foot
for overturning the Government, and the Methods and Instruments they made use
of to bring it to pass. Among the rest it was found out that many belonging to
the Law were concerned and several of the Ministers that refused to pray for
the King and the Queen. Among the Ladies, the Countess Dowager of Arrol was
seized and brought up a Prisoner to Edinborough, and committed upon this
occasion. A certain Messenger going in disguise like a Beggar to Viscount
Stormont's House, with a bag of Meal upon his Shoulders, after he had passed
several of the Sentinels, was at last stopped by one, who putting his hand into
the Bag among the Meal, found several Letters, and the sum of fifteen pound
Sterling in Gold. Those Letters discovered the Correspondent, and her Orders
for the distribution of the Gold among Dundee's Officers: So that the Lady and
the Gold were sent up to the Council, who committed the Countess to prison, and
ordered the Gold to be employed for the Service of King William.

In the midst of these Transactions of the Council, upon the 5th. of June, the
Duke of Hamilton acquainted the States with his having a Commission sent him
from the King, to represent His Majesty's person in the first Sessions of the
Approaching Parliament, and in reference to that particular briefly thus
delivered himself.

That His Majesty had been pleased to send him a Commission to represent his
Royal Person in the first Session; which he acknowledged to be an Honor far
above what he deserved, especially at such a time when the Importance and
Condition of His Majesty's Affairs in the Kingdom of Scotland required the
Greatest Trust from his Majesty's, and the greatest Faithfulness and Ability in
his Commissioner, which were otherwise necessary in so high a Station. And that
although the short advertisement of his Majesty's Pleasure therein, might give
him some difficulty in discharging the several duties incumbent on a person in
that High Character; yet such was the Zeal he had for His Majesty's Service,
and the Good of his Country, that he resolved to give all ready and cheerful
Obedience to His Majesty's Commands, and to omit nothing in his Power that
might advance His Honor and Interest, or contribute to the Peace and Security
of the Nation. That he had received His Majesty's Instructions for turning the
Meeting into a Parliament, and then to adjourn the Parliament to the
seventeenth of June, and after that to consent to the enacting of such Laws as
might not only redress the particular Articles of the Grievances, but to any
other Acts, which they should advise for securing the Religion, Peace, and
Happiness of the Nation.

The Duke having thus delivered himself, the Kings Commission was read,
together with the Letter from His Majesty, declaring His pleasure to turn them
into a Parliament: Which being done, the Commissioner acquainted the Estates
with the Kings farther pleasure, that the Earl of Crawford should preside in
the ensuing Session of his first Parliament. Upon which, the Earl came from the
Lords Bench to the Presidents Seat before the Throne, and made a Speech to the
Estates, and then moved that the Act for turning the Meeting into a Parliament
might be forthwith drawn. Upon which the Commissioner named the Earl of
Lowthian, Viscount Torbat, the Lord of Ormiston, Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart,
Mr. William Hamilton, and David Spence, to be of a Committee for drawing up the
Act; who thereupon presently withdrawing into the Inner House, after a little
time returned with the Act drawn up accordingly; which being read and debated,
was without delay both voted and approved, as follows.

The King and Queens Majesty's with Advice and Consent of the Estates of this
Kingdom at present assembled, Enact and Declare, That the three Estates now met
together the Fifth of June, 1689. Consisting of the Noblemen, Barons and
Burgesses, are a Lawful and Free Parliament, and are hereby declared, enacted
and adjudged to be such, and to all intents and purposes whatsoever,
notwithstanding the want of any new Writs or Proclamation for calling the same
or the want of any other Solemnity. And that all Acts and Statutes to be passed
therein shall be received, acknowledged and obeyed by the Subjects as Acts of
Parliament and Laws of this Kingdom. And it is hereby declared, That it shall
be High Treason for any Persons to disown, quarrel or impugn the Dignity and
Authority of this Parliament, upon any pretense whatever.

This Act being thus passed, and at the same time touched with the Scepter, the
President, by Command of the High Commissioner adjourned the Parliament to the
Seventeenth of June, being Twelve days.

Upon the Seventeenth of June the Parliament met, at what time the Commissioner
having ordered the Honors to be sent for from the Castle, Knighted Mr. William
Hamilton Advocate, and a Member of the Parliament.

After which the Commissioner acquainted the Parliament, That he had
Instructions from their Majesty's, about redressing the Greivance of the Lords
of the Articles, as formerly constituted; and that their Majesty's had ordered
him to condescend to the passing an Act for choosing Eight out of every Estate,
Lords, Barons and Burgesses, which with the Officers of State should prepare
Things for the Parliament. And that it should be always in the Power of the
Parliament, even of those things which the Committee should report, if they
should think sit so to do.

Thereupon an Act being drawn to that purpose, it was presented by the
Commissioner to the Earl of Crawford, President of the Parliament; who before
he gave it to the Clerks delivered himself to this Effect.

That in regard they were now in another Station than they were formerly, that
is to say, the Supreme Court of the Kingdom, and so happy in a Prince who
preferred the just Rights and Interests of his people to his own Prerogative,
and who craved nothing of them but what would make them happy, That they should
lay aside all Animosities and private differencies, and make the Public Good
the only motive and end of their Actings; which Things as they were always
necessary, so especially at that Juncture, when they had Religion, the
Government of the Church, and the Just Rights of the Subject to Establish, and
Greivances to Redress: That Christianity taught Verity, the King craved, and
the present Juncture made it indispensably necessary, and Gods blessing always
attended it. That the King had put it fully into their power to make such Laws
as might secure to them their Religion and Properties; wherein if they failed
it would be their own fault; that the Eyes of their Enemies were upon them,
waiting for their halting; and that nothing could encourage or strengthen them
more then Animosities and Divisions among themselves.

The President having thus spoken delivered in the Act to be Read. But then it
was moved by the Lord Ross, that before they went about to consider or Vote any
Act, that they should all Swear and Subscribe the Oath of Allegiance, and that
an Act should be made to that Intent. Which motion being approved, the Lord
Ross gave in the following draught of an Act in pursuance of what he had moved.

That the Estate of Parliament considering that Their Majesty's had accepted
the tender of the Crown of this Realm made to them, and had taken the Oath
appointed to be taken by all Kings and Queens of this Kingdom; therefore They
with the consent of Their Majesty's did Declare, Recognize and Assert Their
Royal Authority and Right thereto. And Ordered all the Members and Clerks of
Parliament, and all other Persons that at present are in, or shall happen to be
called hereafter to any place of public Trust Civil and Military to Swear and
Subscribe the Oath hereto subjoyned. And they hereby discharge and annual all
former Acts of Parliament appointing any other Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, Declarations, Tests, or Other public Oaths whatever, to be taken by
them henceforward, so as they appoint the same to be taken, except the Oath, de
Fideli Administratione.

To which the Oath subjoyned was this,

I A. B. Do Solemnly Swear in the Presence of God, That I shall bear Faith and
True Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.

This Act passed Nemine Contradicente, only that the Earl of Kincairden
withdrew; so that being thus passed and touched with the Scepter, all the
Members that were present took the Oath with uplifted hands; and then the
President administered it to the Clerks; and the next day they all subscribed it.

It was at the same time moved by the Earl of Cassils, that all the Clergy
should take the same Oath; but that was waved, till it were farther considered
what other persons, or whither all in the Kingdom should take the same; and so
that debate being laid aside, they all took the other Oath de Fideli
Administratione.

The next day, being the eighteenth of June, the whole House subscribed the
Oath; and such of the Members who were absent the day before, both swore and
subscribed it also. Which done they proceeded to Read the Act for redressing
the Grievance of the Lords of the Articles, which appointed a constant
Committee of Eight Persons out of every Estate, with the Officers of state, to
be in place of the Lords of the Articles. But this first draught of the Act did
no way please the Generality of the Parliament; insomuch that upon the 25th. of
June, the draught of the Act was again presented, and read with an Amendment,
that the Members of the Committees should be chosen by the Respective Estates;
the Noblemen out of the Nobility; the Barons from among the Barons; and the
Burgesses by the Burgess Estate. Which being agreed to, they came to a new
debate, Whither the Officers of State should be supernumerary in those
Committees? and after much arguing the Question being put to the Vote it was
carried in the Negative; and a Clause ordered to be added to the Act;
Declaring, That the Officers of State were not to be Members of the Committees,
unless they should be chosen. With which addition, the Act was again Read,
Voted and Approved, in the following terms.

Forasmuch as the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom did by their Vote of
the Seventh of April last, represent among other Grievances, that the Committee
of Parliament, called the Articles, was and is a great Grievance to the Nation,
and that there ought to be no Committees of Parliament, but such as are freely
chosen by the Estates to prepare motions and overtures that are first tabled in
the House. Therefore Their Majesty's with the Advice and Consent of the Estates
in Parliament do Enact and Declare, That it is the undoubted Privilege of the
three Estates in Parliament to nominate and appoint Committees of Parliament of
what number of Members they please, being equal of every Estate, and chosen by
the respective Estates; viz. The Noblemen by the Estate of the Noblemen; the
Barons by the Estate of the Barons; and the Burghers by the Estate of the
Buroughs, for preparing motions and Overtures that are first made in the House;
or that the House may treat, Vote and Conclude upon matters brought in plain
Parliament, without remitting them to any Committee if they think fit: Or that
the House may appoint plurality of Committees for Motions and Overtures that
need to be prepared or digested for them. Declaring hereby, That no Officers of
State are to be Members except they be chosen. And hereby rescinding the first
Act of the third Session of the first Parliament of King Charles the second,
and all other Laws and Customs establishing the manner of Election and Power
of any Committees of Parliament, so far as they are not conformable to this Act.

But when this Act was offered to be touched by the Scepter, the High
Commissioner signified to the House that their Vote not being in the terms of
the Instrument which he had received from the King, he could not give the Royal
Assent thereto, until he had acquainted His Majesty.

For the first Instructions to the High Commissioner were in these words.

You are to pass an Act for regulating the Articles to consist of twenty four
persons, besides the Officers of State, whereof Eight are to be chosen by the
Noblemen out of their Estate, Eight by the Barons, and Eight by the Buroughs
out of their Estates.

But this Concession was not thought sufficient, and it so much the more
displeased, because it was looked upon as a delay, to the satisfying the People
in the first and most important Grievance, for the redress of which they had so
solemnly stipulated with His Majesty. It was urged that by the ancient Records
of several Parliaments it appeared, that the Officers of State were so far from
being supernumerary in the Committees of the Articles, that they were not so
much as Elected into that trust, nor had any room allowed them there: though it
appeared by the same Records, that there were Members chosen by and out of the
respective Estates, sometimes in larger, sometimes in lesser numbers to
constitute such Estates: And although after the year 1567. Some of the Officers
of State were now and then by reason of their great Abilities, thought fit to
be chosen among others for Lords of the Articles, yet they were not Elected
into those Committees by virtue of their Offices, much less that they sat
there as persons supernumerary to those that were chosen. Besides that in the
37 Act, in the Eleventh year of James the sixth, where provision was made for
the number of those that were to constitute this Committee, it was only
Enacted, that the number of the Lords of the Articles should equal in each
Estate, and that the fewest out of each Estate should be six, and the greatest
number not above Ten. This was the state of the Court of Articles, as being
constituted at first for the ease of the Parliament, in the dispatch of
business, till through the Usurpations of the Kings of Scotland, especially
after their succession to the Crown of England, and the removal of their Royal
Residence thither, and through the officiousness of public Ministers to the
Prince, and their Treachery to their Country, it grew up at length to that
exorbitancy, that it became not only burthensom but intolerable. For by reason
of the Parliaments coming at last to commit the inspection into all affairs,
and preparing all remedies for Greivances into the hands of a few, and those
unchangeable during a whole Session, the late Monarchs of Scotland, obtained
such an opportunity to incroach upon the Jurisdiction of Parliaments and the
Liberties of the People, that they soon improved it to the eluding all the good
that the Kingdom was to expect from Parliaments, and making those that were
designed to be the means of the peoples safety, the instruments of their ruin.
For the accomplishment of which and the more easy rendering the Lords of the
Articles Vassals to the Monarchs will, and tools for executing his pleasure,
they first prevailed to have the Officers of State admitted into this
Committees as supernumerary, without being nominated and elected by the Estates
in Parliament, as having a right to sit there by virtue of their employments.
For King James the Sixth, being by the Adulation of the English brought over
entirely to their interest, as well as to their Opinions, and having a mind to
obtrude upon the Church of Scotland the English Ceremonies, in order to the
more easy effecting it, so wrought with the Parliament in the year 1617. part
by fair, and part by fowl means, that he brought them to allow the Officers of
state to sit as supernumeraries without being chosen into the Committee. And by
that means he forced those Innovations commonly known by the name of the five
Articles of Pearth, upon the Church of Scotland, having by those Supernumerary
Officers, not only so molded the Committee of Articles, as to pass and present
them, but thereby laid the Foundation of their being enacted in the House.

King Charles the First, quite overthrew the ancient Method of Elections of
that Committee. For whereas by ancient Law and Custom, the Lords were to Elect
the Lords, the Barons to choose Barons, and the Burghers the Burghers, he in his
Parliament, 1633. assumed a power to himself, with a right of consigning it
over to his Commissioner, to choose eight Bishops, whom he empowred to choose
eight Noblemen, restraining to the said Eight Noblemen and Bishops the power of
choosing eight Barons and as many Burghers, which together with the Officers of
State as Supernumeraries were to be the sole Lords of the Articles, exclusive
of all others; and in these was vested the sole Right and Liberty of bringing
in all Motions and Overtures for redressing of Wrongs, and of proposing means
and expedients for the relief and benefit of the Subject. Neither was it by the
practice of the late Raigns lawful for any Members that were not of that packt
Cabal, to make the least proposal or Motion for the repealing of an ill Law, or
the enacting of a good one.

For this Reason therefore it was that the Convention represented to the King
this Committee of Articles so great a Grievance to the Nation of Scotland, and
that they insisted so earnestly for ejecting the Supernumerary Officers of
State out of it, unless legally and fairly Chosen. And some there were who
urged that the very contending for the Officers of State to sit as
Supernumeraries in their Committees, without being elected into them by the
Estates in Parliament was both an Aspersion upon the Wisdom of the Parliament,
as if they knew not how to pay the respect and reverence due to those Officers,
till compelled to it, and a Reflection upon their Loyalty, as if no person
could be tender of His Majesty's Interest among the Committees of Parliament,
unless under the Influence of Honors and Emoluments.

The Parliament therefore having heard the Commissioners plea for not passing
the Act with their Amendments, ordered their Reasons for the passing it in that
Manner to be put in Writing, and the draught of a Letter to be sent to His
Majesty together with their Reasons, to be prepared and brought into the House
by the Committee for Redress of Grievances, which being done accordingly both
the one and the other were read and approved with some little alterations, and
so dispatched away for England.

His Majesty having received the Letter, and weighed the Reasons, was pleased
to give new Orders to his Commissioner. So that upon the Ninth of July his
Grace gave into the House a Letter to the Parliament, with the draught of an
Act for regulating the Articles in the terms of his Instructions in reference
to that Grievance, by which he was empowered to increase the number from Eight
to Eleven out of every Estate, besides the Supernumerary Officers of State; and
allowing the Parliament to Elect them every Month, or oftener as they thought
fit; and to consider of any Matter in Parliament though rejected in the Articles:
as deeming that since the Committee was now no more a constant Committee, he
had secured the Parliament from believing they could be packt or taken off by
the Court; and that the number being increased, from twenty four to thirty
three, he had removed all fears that eight Men could overruled three and
thirty. But the Parliament adherred to their first draught; and therefore
falling into the debate of the last draught given in by the Committee, they
read their own and that together, and stated the differences between both. But
could come to no resolution that day.

The next day being the 10th. of July, the Commissioner, hoping to put them off
from the further pursuit of this Affair, moved, that the settling Church
Government, and the Forfeitures might be taken into Consideration; but against
that some of the Members presently moved, That the Affair of the Committees
might be first adjusted; upon which a debate arose which continued for some
time. For by this some jealousies arose in the House, as if the Commissioners
had not gone according to their Instructions in the delivery of the Instrument
of Government to the King. Which caused the Earl of Argyle to make a request to
the House, That in regard he had been a Commissioner to make the Offer of the
Crown to their Majesty's, and had accordingly acquitted himself of his
Commission, but was then commanded into the Service of Their Majesty's against
the Rebels, and knew not when he should return, therefore that the Parliament
would declare their Approbation of what he had done in the Execution of his
Commission. But then it was moved, that before any such Approbation, a paper
might be read, containing certain Interrogatories to be put to the
Commissioners who were sent with the Tender of the Crown. Upon which it was
ordered, That the Instructions given in to those Commissioners should be
interrogated upon the Parliaments Instructions, or upon the Interrogatories
then given in. But before the point could be determined, the High Commissioner
ordered an Adjournment till the next day. In the Interim a great Discovery was
made public of a dangerous Conspiracy disclosed in a Letter bearing date the
Sixth of July, and directed to the High Commissioner, from one that subscribed
his name in Characters purporting.

That the same Night about Six of the Clock, he was informed of certain ill
inclined Persons, who assuredly designed some wicked Enterprise, what it was he
knew not; but that the particular Persons of which he had undoubted Intimation
were Winster, Scot, Dunbar at Leith, Innes, one Telster, one Wrywhart, with
many others, as by a subscribed Paper which some of them carried about them
would appear. That there was one Colonel Wilson, Butler, and Dunbar, with some
other English and Irish Officers lurking in Edinborough in Black friar Wine, as
also Captain Dowglass, Kelheads Brother, Lees Pringle, and several others of
which he was surely informed. With which he thought it his duty in Conscience
to acquaint his Grace. That they intended to put their design in Execution
within a day or two at farthest. He desired his Grace not to despise his
Advertisement, assuring him it was no story, as if neglected would be too sadly
experienced. That he was almost engaged himself, by which means he came to
understand the Truth, and left the whole to the Care of his Grace's wise
Determination.

Upon this Letter and Information; were apprehended and Imprisoned.

The Duke of Gourdon The Earl of Hume Lord Oxenford Lieutenant Colonel
Middleton Lieutenant Colonel Wilson Captain Dowglass Captain James Vawchap
Captain Dunbar Captain Butler Lord of Larg Gourdon the younger of Auchentrat
Mr. Forrester and Mr. Mill, Ministers.
With several others Officers, Soldiers, and Tradesmen of lesser note, to the
number of Eight and Thirty in all. It was given out at first that their design
was to have seized the Commissioner and Members of Parliament, and to have set
the City on Fire: but by their Examinations and Confessions it did not appear
that they had any farther design then to have entered into an Association to go
and join with Dundee. But let their design be what it would, the detection was
considerable, whereby so many desperate people were secured from doing
mischief, and the enemy disappointed of their succor. Nor is it to be wondered
that such dark contrivances should be so many times as they are, so strangely
discovered, seeing there is a fate hangs over the Head of all those that
conspire against Lawful and Just Authority.

This short Commotion being over, the Parliament met the next day being the
Eleventh of July, at what time His Majesty's Commissioner moved again, That
Church Government might be taken into Consideration. To which some of the
Members replied, That the State of the Nation was first to be settled, as being
that which would be a means to settle the other. And so they entered again upon
the Officers of State, whither to be of the Committee or No? which debate
continued long, but before it came to a result, the Earl of Argyle moved again
for an Act of Exoneration of His Commission: adding withal, that he was
willing to undergo the strictest scrutiny and examination that could be made.
Upon which it was urged by a Noble Member of the House, That if such an
Exoneration were desired by the persons concerned in that affair, he might have
the Liberty to propose some Interrogatories to the Commissioners before the Act
of Exoneration past. Upon that Motion His Grace desired first to see the
Interrogatories, and that the Instructions which were given the Commissioners
might be Read. Which being agreed to, His Grace made another Motion, That they
might be interrogated upon their instructions and no farther. But then it was
urged by some of the House that the interrogatories might be read; which was
granted. Upon which his Grace made a third Motion, that they might be asked
whether they had delivered the claim or Petition of Right, and other Papers in
the same order and method which the Estates had appointed? To that the Earl of
Argyle answered, that the Exoneration which he desired was only for himself;
and that he was willing to answer any proper interrogatories that could be made
to him on that head.

But then it was, that the Kings Advocate apprehending that the Motion aimed at
him, offered to acquit and clear himself of any thing that might be charged
upon him, as if he had not acted according to his Instructions, and Commission
given them by the Estates. Others insisted, that he might be interrogated upon
the Instructions given to the Commissoners. To which the Advocate made Answer,
That he had no reason to decline being interrogated upon those Instructions; in
regard that the Commission granted to them being their Warrant, if he had acted
according to that, he had sufficiently discharged himself of the Trust, by that
Commission reposed in him. But the debate continued so long upon this point,
that the farther dispute of it was adjourned till the next day.

Upon the twelfth of July the Earl of Argyle moved again that he might have his
Exoneration concerning his faithful discharge of his Commission. Upon which it
being urged, that the interrogatories, that had been given in the last day to
be put to the Commissioners from the Convention might be Read, in regard it was
alleged, that some of them had advised the presenting the Grievances after
their Majesty's had taken the Oath, contrary to the order of the Estates. But
then the Commissioner put in again, and renewed his Motion to the House for
taking the business of the Church Government into their consideration,
precedent to any other matter, as His Majesty had been pleased to signify to
them in his Gracious Letter. On the other side, the Earl of Argyle insisted
that his Exoneration might take place, in regard it had been first brought
before the House, and consequently ought to be first dispatched. This point was
insisted upon and argued by several Members; and at length the question being
put, Whether Church Government or the faithfulness and diligence of the
Commissioners should be first considered? It was carried by the plurality of
Voices, that the House should first proceed to consider of the Latter.

It was then moved, that the three Commissioners should withdraw out of the
House, and each of them should be called in, and examined separately upon the
discharge of their trust, which was agreed to; and after much debate upon the
method and manner of examining them, the Instructions were ordered to be read
again, together with the Act of the late Convention, empowring them to tender
the Crown. Which being done the debate was resumed; at what time it was urged
in behalf of the Lord Advocate, that the Commission to the three did bear, That
they should deliver the Petition of Right, and see the Oath taken, and declare
the Grievances; which implied the Order and Method which the Advocate had
advised them to follow.

To which it was answered on the other side, that the Instructions directed
them to deliver both the Petition of Right and the Grievances before the Oath.
But after much debate before they came to any resolution upon the matter, the
Commissioner ordered the House to be adjourned till the 17th. of July, nor was
any more done in this affair, that we find during this Sessions.

For the next day the Earl of Argyle, having obtained his Commission for Fire
and Sword against all that adhered to Dundee, or would not join with him in the
common defense of the Country, to secure it from the irruptions of Dundee,
began his journey Westward; carrying along with him some Troops of Horse and
several Detachments to join his own men and Followers, with several others in
that Country which were in a readiness to come into him upon his appearing in
those parts, to secure the Western Coasts, in case of any invasion from
Ireland, or any other Insurrections or Commotions on that side the Country.

Having therefore thus prosecuted in a continued series this same stiffly
contested business of the Committees as far as it would go, we must now return
back for account of several other transactions both before as well as during
this contention and after it was over.

Before there was nothing else done, but after the Parliament had sent away
their Reasons and their Letter in reference to the business of supernumerary
Officers, the draught of an Act was given into the House and read, that no
persons who were employed in the late Government and were grievous to the
Nation, or had shown their dissatisfaction to the happy Change, or had been
Retarders or Obstructers of the good designs of the late Meeting, should be
allowed to possess, or be admitted to any public Trust, Place or Employment of
any kind under their Majesty's within that Kingdom. But this Act likewise being
brought in the 26th. of June, met with several Remora's occasioned by certain
clauses, which some thought required explanation. Persons who had only shown
dissatisfaction, was thought too comprehensive and severe. Those who had been
obstructers and Retarders of the Good design of the Estates, was deemed too
liable to bad construction. And there were exceptions taken at the words
Grievous to the Nation, as being too restrictive, without a farther
interpretation. But at length upon the second of July, Explanations being added
in the Statutory part to every of the clauses excepted against the Act was
brought in and passed in the terms that follow.

The King and Queens Majesty, considering that the Estates of this Kingdom,
have by their Vote declared their sense and opinion, that such have in the
former evil Government been grievous to the Nation or have shown disaffection
to the happy Change by the blessing God now brought about; or have been
Retarders or Obstructors of the good designs of the said Estates in their
Meeting, are not fit to be employed in the management of the Affairs of this
Kingdom, do with the Advice and Consent of the Estates in Parliament now
Assembled, Statute and Ordain, that no persons of whatsoever rank or degree,
who in the said former evil Government have been grievous to the Nation, by
acting in the encroachments mentioned in the Articles of the Claim of Right,
which are declared to be contrary to Law; or have shown disaffection affection
to the happy Change by the Blessing of God now brought about, by acting in
opposition thereunto, since the time that the King and Queen now reigning were
Proclaimed; or who has been a Retarder or or Obstructor of the good designs of
the said Estates, viz. The securing the Protestant Religion, the settling the
Crown, the establishing the Rights of the Leiges, and redressing their
Grievances, by acting contrary to the good designs, since the time they became
public by Votes and Acts of the Meeting, be allowed to possess, or be admitted
into any public trust, place or employment of whatever kind under their
Majesty's in this Kingdom.

But whither it were that some persons in power thought themselves too deeply
within the reach of the Act, or for what other cause is unknown, neither would
this Statute be admitted to the touch of the Royal Scepter: So that instead of
a Living Law it only became a dead piece of Writing. Which was a surprise to
many that were concerned in the passing it, as well as to several others, that
were zealous for the King and the Kingdoms interest, that there should be men
found who could spy out any thing in this Statute which deserved to be
clamoured at, or was worthy to be complained of: more especially since every
line breathed forth that lenity and moderation, that it savoured rather of a
defect, then any excess of Justice, and that the utmost thereby designed was
only a disabling a few wicked men from ruining the Nation for the future, but
nothing of punishment for what they had done: for that there were none excepted
as to Life, only the few that were designed to be debarred from Offices, were
described and charactered after such a manner, that the very employing them
would dishonor their Majesty's and disgrace the Government.

Then a draught of an Act was brought in for abolishing of Prelacy, and all
superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbytery, and for the
abrogating all former Statutes establishing Prelacy and all others contrary to
the Act intended. Reserving to their Majesty's to settle the Presbyterian
Government in the way most agreeable to the peoples inclinations, and the Word
of God. Which being Read, the Commissioner desired he might see the Act to
consider of it against the next day.

The next day being the 3d. of July, the same Act was Read again, together with
the Act of Parliament, 1662. For the restoring of Prelacy; with the second Act
of the year 1633. and the fourth Act in the year 1681. Which were rescinded by
the Act intended, with some amendments in the Narrative part adjusting and
fitting it to that Article in the claim of Right to which it related; and the
following clause was added to the rescinding part, In so far Allenarly as those
rescinded Acts are inconsistent with the present Act, and do establish Prelacy,
or Superiority of Church Officers above Presbyters. In the next place the
Clause in the Act, reserving to their Majesty's and the Estates to settle the
Government of the Church was taken into Consideration, and it being agreed that
the Word Presbyterian, should be left out, the Commissioner moved that in the
room of the Words, To settle the Government of the Church, etc. the alteration
might be, to settle such a Government, etc. upon which a debate arose upon the
importance of those words, which was put off till the next day.

Then the Act was again brought in and Read with the amendments, and without
the paragraph of the rescinded Acts. And after some debate concerning the
Clause objected against, the settling and Government of the Church being
expressed in the terms following, That they with the Advice and Consent of this
Parliament will settle by Law that Church Governmenu in this Kingdom, which is
most agreeable to the Peoples Inclinations, the Act was put to the Vote and
Approved. And then the Act ran thus.

Whereas the Estates of this Kingdom in their Claim of Right, the Eleventh, of
April last, declared that Prelacy and Supremacy in any Office in the Church,
above Presbytery is and has been a great Grievance to this Nation, and contrary
to the inclinations of the people since the Reformation, they having reformed
from Popery by Presbyters, and therefore ought to be rescinded. Our Sovereign
Lord and Lady the King and Queens Majesty's do hereby abolish Prelacy, and
Superiority in any Office in the Church above Presbyters, in this Kingdom; and
hereby rescind, ease, and annul the First Act of the Second Session of the
First Parliament of King Charles the 2d. And the Second Act of the Third
Session, of the Second Parliament of King Charles the 2d. And the Fourth Act of
King Charles the 2d. and all other Acts, Statutes and Constitutions, in so far
allenarly, as they are inconsistent with this Act, and do establish Prelacy, or
the Superiority of Church Officers above Presbyters. And the King and Queens
Majesty's do declare, That They, with the advice of the Estates of this
Parliament will settle by Law that Church Government in this Kingdom, which is
most agreeable to the inclinations of the People. This Act was touched with the
Scepter the 12th. of July.

There was also another Act which had been made by another Parliament of K.
Charles the 2d. in the year sixty nine, whereby the Parliament did enact assert
and declare that the supreme Authothority and Supremacy over all persons, and
in all Ecclesiastical causes within the Kingdom of Scotland, by virtue of which
the ordering and disposal of the external Government of the Church, was
properly lodged in the King and His Successors as an inherent Right to the
Crown. This was looked upon to be such a Law that never any Law before gave a
greater power to a Prince; and the ill use of it in the Execution of King
Charle's power by the Bishops of Scotland, and by King James in claiming by it
a power to introduce Popery, made it so terrible to the Generality of the
Scotch Nation, that after the Estates had numbered it among the Chief of their
Grievances, the Parliament past an Act, immediately after that for abolishing
Prelacy, whereby they declared, That the first Act of the second Parliament of
King Charles the 2d. Entitled An Act asserting His Majesty's Supremacy over all
persons, and in all causes Ecclesiastical, was inconsistent with the
Establishment of the Church Government then desired. Therefore their Majesty's
with the Advice and Consent of the Estates in Parliament, did thereby rescind,
abrogate and annul the foresaid Act, and declared the same in all the Heads,
Articles and Clauses thereof to be of no force or effect in all time coming.

But notwithstanding this Act past without any contradiction, yet was it never
touched with the Scepter. Which was the more wondered at, in regard his
Majesty's instructions were express to his Commissioner in these words.

You are to pass an Act establishing that Church Government which is most
agreeable to the Inclinations of the people, rescinding the Act of Parliament
1669. and all other Acts inconsistent therewith.

There were two great things more in Agitation during this Session; the one was
the settling of the Church Government since Presbytery was abolished; and the
other, about admitting the Lords of the Session, and Electing the President of
the College of Justice.

As to the first there were two draughts brought into the House, and formed
into Acts for the consideration of the whole Parliament; the One by the Lord
Commissioner himself; and the other by the Lord Cardross.

The first which was presented by the High Commissioner the 22th. of July, ran
in these Words.

For as much as the King and Queens Majesty's and the Estates of Parliament, by
their Act of the first of July Instant, Abolishing Prelacy, etc. did declare,
That they would settle that Church Government which is most agreeable to the
Inclinations of the People; and considering that Church Government by General,
Provincial and Presbyterial Assemblies, with the Sessions of the Kirk, as it
was established by the first Act of the twelfth Parliament of King James the
sixth, holden in June 1592, is most agreeable to the Inclination of the people;
Therefore the King and Queens Majesty's, with the Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, revive and renew the said Act of Parliament in all the
Heads, Points and Articles thereof, with this express Declaration (That the
Necessity of Occasional Assemblies be first represented to His Majesty by
humble Supplication) And Statute and ordain, That it shall be lawful for the
Presbyters of this Church to admit Ministers upon presentation from the lawful
Patrons, or Jure de voluto, which shall happen hereafter, or into Churches
which fall not under Patronages, but were Mensal and Patrimonial Churches
belonging to the Bishops: and ordain all Ministers in this Kingdom to submit
and conform to the Church Government established by the foresaid Act, and to
take the Oath of Allegiance, under the pain of being deprived of their
Churches, and losing their Benefices.

And it is declared, That all Ministers that shall submit and conform to the
foresaid Church Government, and take the Oaths of Allegiance, without being
obliged to take any other Oath, shall enjoy their Churches and Benefices, etc.
in such manner and as freely as they ought or might have done before, by the
Act in the Year, 1592. and to do all and every thing which before pertain'd to
Presbyters, and were exercised by Bishops; except for Scandal or Insufficiency.
But in regard there were several Ministers deprived of their Benefices since
the Year 1662. for not conforming to Prelacy, and others since the Year, 1681.
for not taking the Test. Therefore seeing that now Prelacy is abolished, and
all Acts relating thereto, it is but reasonable that those Ministers should be
restored; Therefore the King and Queens Majesty's with the advice, etc. Ordain
the said Ministers etc. to be restored. And the King and Queens Majesty's and
Estates declare, That they will take care to provide those Ministers now
serving the Cure at the said Churches, with other Benefices, as occasion shall
offer; they submiting and confirming, etc. And it is farther declared, that
Intrants to the Ministry shall not be obliged to take any other Oaths at their
admission then that of Allegiance, and the Oath de Fideli.

And in regard that many Confusions and Scandalous Schisms have happened by
Ministers meddling in Matters of State, Their Majesty's with advice, etc. do
hereby discharge all Ministers of the Gospel to meddle with any State Affairs,
under pain of being held disaffected to the Government, and to be proceeded
against accordly. And declare, That the Jurisdiction of the Church consists
only in Preaching the Word of Jesus Christ, correcting of ill Manners by
Ecclesiastical Censures, and administration of the Sacraments, conformable to
the 69th. act of James 6. Parliament 6. And to prevent that nothing be treated
in the Church Judicatories that concern affairs of State or Civil matters, it
is declared that their Majesty's, if they think fit, may have always one
present, in all the Provincial and Presbyterial Assemblies (as they have their
Commissioner present in General Assemblies) to inhibit the proceeding in any
such affairs, if it should be offered at, until their Majesty's and Privy
Council be first acquainted therewith.

And for that there are many things to he settled in relation to the Discipline
of the Church, etc. their Majesty's declare that they with the advice, etc.
will enact such Rules as shall tend most to the curbing Vice and advancement of
true Piety and Religion, and the preservation of Peace and Unity.

Their Majesty's also, with the advice etc. rescind and annul the 1. Act of the
15. Parl. of King James the 6. for Prelates voting in Parliament, and the 2.
Act of the 18. Parl. of K. J. 6. for the Restor of Bishops; the 8. Act of 19.
Parl. of K. J. 6. about the Chapter of St. Andrews. The 6. Act of 20. Parl. of
K. J. 6. concerning the Jurisdiction given to Bishops. The 1. Act of 21. Parl.
of K. J. 6. concerning the Ratification of the Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow,
Anno 1610. and the 1. and 2. Acts of the 22. Parl. of K. J. 6. Anno 1617.
concerning the Archbishops and Restitution of Chapters; and the 1. Act of the
23. Parl. of K. J. 6. An. 1621. about the Ratification of the Articles of the
assembly of Perth. And all Acts and Constitutions whatever prejudicial to the
Church Government by General, Provincial and Presbyterial Assemblies and
Kirk-Sessions; or so far as they are in favor of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors or other Prelates whatever, etc. or in favor of the civil places and
power of Churchmen, their ruling and voting in Parliament etc. by virtue of
their Titles or any other pretense whatever, etc. And all other Acts
inconsistent with this present Act. Concluding with an appointment of the Time
and Places for the first meeting of the Presbyterial Assemblies; and empowring
them to choose their Moderator, with orders to give him the Oath of Allegiance,
and to return the Oath taken and subscribed, to the Clerks of the Privy Council.

The Act presented by the Lord Cardross, was the same for the settling the
Church Government by General Assembles, Presbyters and Provincial Synods: but
made no mention of rescinding the many Acts mentioned in the Lord Commissioners
draught. It was the same for restoring the deprived Ministers; but differed in
the addition of Clauses for sentencing and depriving all that gave not
Obedience to the Act against the owning the late King. It also made void all
Patronages and Presentations to Churches, an Intolerable servitude upon the
Church of God with all Laws made in favor of them, and particularly the 9th.
Act of the 1. Parl. of Charles the Second. Nevertheless that the Tithes of the
said Churches, whereof the Patronages were abolished, should belong to the
Patrons, and be inserted in their Infeoffments, in lieu of the said Patronages,
with the burden always of the Ministers Right and Stipend. There was also
another Clause for suspending all Ministers called Conform Ministers who
entered by and still continued under the Prelacy from the Exercise of any part
of the Presbyterian Government; only that they might continue to exercise their
Pastoral Charge within their respective Parishes, and hold their Kirk-Sessions
for Discipline therein, till farther order: Declaring in the last place that
their Majesty's and the Estates would with all convenience take the advice of
such Ministers as were known to be of the Presbyterian Persuasion, and by their
advice lay down such methods as should be judged most effectual for purging the
Church of all Scandalous Erroneous, insufficient and disaffected persons, and
providing for the particular Churches with able and well qualified Ministers,
and establishing the Exercise of the Presbyterian Government, according to the
true intent of the Act.

While the settling the Church Government was thus in debate an Address
presented from the Presbyterian Ministers and Professors to the Kings
Commissioner, was by him given into (...) House, and there read upon the (...)
of July.

Wherein, after they had made all due acknowledgements to God, and his Majesty
for their wonderful, and unexpected deliverance from the Great Oppressions
which they had suffered under the Cruelty and Ambition of the Prelacy of that
Kingdom; they humbly beseech the Commissioner, and the Estates of Parliament,
seeing the King had declared, and their Lordships with him had zealously
appeared for the Protestant Religion, That they would be graciously pleased by
their Civil Sanction to establish and ratify the late Confession of Faith,
with the larger and shorter Catechisms, which contained the Substance of the
Doctrine of the reformed Churches; the directory of Worship, and Presbyterial
Church Government, all agreeable to the Word of God, and formerly received by
the General Consent of the Nation. And in regard that Prelacy and all who had
entered under Prelacy, had been imposed upon the Church without her Consent, in
any of her free General Assemblies, and that Presbyterian Government could not
be safe in the hands of those who were of contrary Principles; therefore they
humbly petitioned, that the Church Government might be established in the hands
of such only, who by their former carriage and sufferings were known to be
sound Presbyterians, and well affected to His Majesty's Government, and that
those Ministers yet alive who were thrust from their Churches might be restored.

They also pray that they might be allowed by Civil Sanction to appoint
Visitations for the purging out of insufficient and scandalous Ministers; and
that Patronages which had their Rise from the most corrupt and latter times of
Christianism might be abolished, and the Church established upon its former
good foundations confirmed by many acts of Parliament, 1560.

And that all Acts ratifying Ceremonies and imposing Punishments upon
Presbyterians for Nonconformity, might be abolished; and lastly that their
Lordships would take care that learned sound and Godly men might be put into
the Universities and Seminaries of Learning; humbly submitting to their
Lordships wisdom the method of considering and effectuating these their desires.

But neither did either of the two draughts please, neither could the farther
consideration of the Address be at that time entered upon. For the House had
made an order the day before, by reason of a Letter from the King to the Privy
Council, and a Proclamation thereupon by them issued forth for opening the
Signet, not to proceed any farther in the affair of Church Government, till the
Letter and Proclamation were considered, that in the mean time there should be
a stopped put to the opening of the Signet. Only they were so far willing to
gratify the Addressers, that they Voted and approved an Act for restoring
Presbyterian Ministers to their Churches, which was presented by Sir William
Hamilton, To this effect;

That whereas in pursuance of the Claim of Right, Prelacy, etc. was abolished,
and that many Ministers of the Presbyterian persuasion since the first of
January 1661. had been deprived of their Churches, or banished for not
Conforming. Therefore their Majesty's with advice of the Estates ordained, that
those Ministers, should forthwith have free access to their Churches and
exercise the Ministry in those Parishes without any new call thereto; and enjoy
the benefits and stipends thereto belonging, with some reserve to the incumbent
of the last years rent as if the Churches were not vacant.

But then the business of the Lords of the Sessions coming on, the Question was
put, Whither the Nomination of the Lords of the Sessions made by His Majesty,
in case of a Total vacancy required the Authority of Parliament? And whither it
were requisite by the consitution of the College of Justice, that the
President of the Session should be Elected by the Lords of the Session? These
two Points occasioned a long debate, at the end of which the draught of an Act
was brought in declaring the methods of naming and admitting the Lords of the
Session; To this effect,

That by the Laws of the Kingdom, when the place of an Ordinary Lord of a
Session was vacant, it was to be supplied by the Kings nomination of a fit
person for the said Office, and presenting him to the rest of the Lords of the
Session, to be tried or rejected by them, but that then there was a total
vacancy, by reason of the happy Revolution, so that there could be no such
Trial by the Lords: in which case when such total vacancies fell out, the Lords
were either nominated by the King and Parliament jointly; or if they were
nominated by the King, and the Lords so nominated were admitted by the
Parliament. Therefore the Act was so drawn that their Majesty's would nominate
fit persons for the said Office and present them to the Parliament, to be tried
approved or rejected by them.

It was also farther ordained, That at all times hereafter when any such total
Vacancy should happen, that the nomination of the Lords of the Session should
be in the King and Queen for the time being, or in the Regent, during a
Minority, so they should be presented to the Parliament to be tried, etc. It
was also farther Enacted that there should be a Ratification by their Majesty's
of the 93. Act of the 6th. Parliament of K. J. the VI. concerning the Admission
of the Ordinary Lords of Session, and Reformation of abuses therein. And the
132 Act of the 12th. Parliament of King James the VI. concerning the
Jurisdiction, Presentation, Qualities and age of the Lords of the Session; in
all the heads, clauses and articles of it: as also of the clause contained in
the 93 Act of the 6th. Parliament of King James the VI. Declaring that the
President of the College of Justice should be Elected by the whole Senate.

This Act as it was drawn into form, was read again the next day, together with
the 93 Act of the 6th. Parliament, and the 132 Act of the 12th. Parliament of
King James the VI. to which the draught referred. And upon debate for a long
time, the Question being put, Whither the Vote of the House in reference to the
Act should be stated in the terms, of approve or not approve, Or of
Representing to His Majesty's, or not? It was carried that the Vote should be
put, approve or not approve; and then the question being put, Whither the Act
was Approved or not? It was carried in the affirmative.

The Parliament having proceeded thus far, thought fit in pursuance of their
Vote and Approbation of their Act, to make another Vote, that the stop put to
the Signet should be continued, and that an Order should be drawn up for that
purpose, till the High Commissioner should represent the whole matter to His
Majesty, and that he should be pleased to declare his farther pleasure.

But in the Height of this dispute the Parliament was adjourned upon the second
of August, to the eight of November next ensuing; and when that day approached
from the eighth of October to the twentieth of December following, and from
thence again to the first of March, which caused a long Cessation of
Parliamentary business. Having therefore thus brought the Parliament to the end
of their City Consultations, it may be time to look into the Field, the rather
because it was but a very little while before the adjournment of the
Parliament, that the rebellion of Scotland came to any thing like a Period.

The main disturbance after the happy Revolution, was raised by the Viscount of
Dundee, who as he began with small beginnings, so through the vigilance of the
Convention, and the Parliament after them, he never arrived at any number to
render him very formidable; only by lurking and roaming up and down in the
Fastnesses of the Highlands, he took his opportunities more like a Freebooter,
then an Enemy to commit petty mischiefs, that at length brought inglorious
ruin upon himself, and those that adhered to him.

At first he was said to be gone Northward, and that a Herald was sent after
him to summon him before the Convention, but he could not be met with. So that
because he refused to appear before the Convention, and for that he kept an
Armed Force about his own House, and corresponded with the D. of Gourdon, he
was upon the 30th. of March denounced a Rebel by the Vote of the whole Assembly.

Upon the Herald and the Trumpeters being sent after him, he sent a letter to
the President of the Convention, to excuse his absence and his not appearing;
seeming to wonder at it as an extraordinary thing, that a Trumpeter and a
Herald should be sent to summon a Man to lay down Arms, that was living
peaceably at his own House. That he did not think his person safe among so many
Enemies as he had in Edinburgh, and who as he was well assured, had laid their
designs to murder him, and therefore he hoped the Convention would discharge
such a groundless pursuit. That if they thought his appearance necessary, yet
it was impossible for him to attend with freedom and safety in regard of the
Men of War, and Foreign Troops that lay in his way. Concluding that if the
Convention could not be prevailed with to wave his appearance, yet that they
would delay it till his Lady was brought to bed, and offering in the mean
while, either to give his Parol or Security not to disturb the peace.

But notwithstanding this Letter, the next news that the Convention heard of
him was, that he was gone Northward with a part of Fourscore Horse, and
directed his March toward the Duke of Gourdons Country, where he was in hopes
to find more assistance, which caused the Convention to give Orders for a
considerable Force to make after him. His first act of Hostility was done
against the Town of Innerness, to the Inhabitants of which place he sent to
demand contribution, threatening them with Military execution unless they paid
it. But the neighboring Gentry gathering together a considerable Force got
into the Town, and constrained him to betake himself again to the Hills. After
this he attempted to have surprised the Town of Dundee, but he found them so
well prepared to receive him, that he was forced to draw off. After which two
unsuccessful attempts in a very dark night he entered St. Johnstons, and having
taking the two Lairds of Blaire and Pollock, two Gentlemen of Quality out of
their Beds, hastened back to his Fastnesses.

Several other attempts he made, and having increased his strength by the
addition of the Mackdonalds, Mackleans and others that came into his party, he
became above three thousand strong, and threatened to fall into the County of
Argyle. Of all which things the Convention had daily Intelligence, and
therefore ordered Major General Mackay with a considerable Force to hunt the
Rebel out of all his Lurking holes. The Earl of Argyle was also sent to secure
the Country of Argyle, and Colonel Ramsey and others to shut up other Passes
into the Highlands to prevent the daily Incursions of the Rebels, who lived
only upon the spoil of their Neighbors. Nor was the Major General less
Vigilant to follow the Rebels, watching all opportunities to get at them, and
dislodge them out of their Fastnesses either by Surprise or open Force. But as
it was found out afterward Dundee had still Intelligence out of the Kings Army
of all the Motions and Designs of the Major General; by which means Dundee
being continually forewarned, fled from one Hill to another, and from one Wood
to another to the great vexation and disappointment of the pursuers.

But this Conspiracy was about the middle of June luckily disclosed by the
surprise of a Footman, who carried several Letters which discovered the whole
Conspiracy, and all the Conspirators were soon after apprehended; who appeared
to be all Officers and Soldiers of the Scotch Regiment of Dragoons; among whom
the most considerable were Lieutenant Colonel Levingston, Captain Lieutenant
Creictown, Lieutenant Murray, and several others; of which there were some
confessed that the bottom of the design was to have betrayed the Army to Dundee,
and to have seized upon the Major General in his Tent; or at least to have gone
over to Dundee upon the first engagement that should have happened between Him
and the Rebels. For which being Tried by a Council of War, they all threw
themselves upon the Kings Mercy.

Much about the same time four or five hundred Irish commanded by Colonel
Cannon, Colonel Vanchap, Colonel Buchon and others, Landed in the Isle of Mull
to join Dundee. This re-inforcement was sent by the late King under a Convoy of
three French Men of War, two of Thirty five Guns apiece, and one of twenty
three, and were met by two Scotch Frigates, commanded by Captain Hamilton and
Captain Brown, who fought the Three French Men till they had neither powder nor
Shot left, and that the two Captains and most of their Men were killed or
disabled; so that they both fell into the Enemies hands; though Captain Browns
Ship was soon after re-taken by Captain Rook.

But notwithstanding this supply, Major General Mackay, being resolved to go
and find out the Enemy, directed his March as far as Lochaber, through the
County of Athol; as well in hopes to join a body of Fifteen Hundred Athol Men,
which as he was made believe would appear for him, so soon as he came into that
Country; as also to take in the Castle of Blair, where one Stuart of Belloghen
had planted some Athol Men for Dundee. To this purpose upon Saturday the 17th.
of July, he marched about sixteen Miles, and got through a narrow pass, where
three or four men could hardly go abreast. But by that time Intelligence was
brought him, that Dundee was near at hand, and ready to engage him about two
Miles from Blair Castle. Upon which he drew up his Men in Battalia, to the
number of between three and four thousand foot, two Troops of Horse, and two of
Dragoons. On the other side, Dundee came on with about six Thousand Foot, and a
Hundred Horse. The fight began between four and five in the Afternoon, and
lasted till very near Night. Both sides fought with great Courage and
Resolution for some time, till some of the Major Generals Regiments being
overpowred by the Enemy, and giving way, put some part of his forces into
Disorder, so that he was forced to draw off and retire toward Sterling, where
he arrived on Monday Night with a Body of Fifteen Hundred Men in very good
Order. Many Men were slain on both sides, but more of the Enemy; and that which
most of all augmented their Loss, was the Death of the Lord of Dundee, who was
slain with a shot which he received in his left Eye.

Many people believed that there was Treachery in this Business, more
especially from the Athol Men, of whom not above sixty came to the Major
General, of fifteen Hundred which he expected; and of those few that came to
his Assistance, some that were sent to bring Intelligence of the Enemies
Motions, instead of doing their Duty, went and gave the Rebels Advice of all
the Major General's Demarches.

Nevertheless, in some measure to retaliate this Misfortune, soon after the
Major General having received Intelligence, that a selected Party of the Rebels
to the number of five or six hundred Horse, Foot and Dragoons had a design to
fall upon St. Johnston's, to surprise the Stores and Provisions that lay there
for the supply of His Majesty's Forces, marched out from Sterling with a Party
of Horse and Dragoons, and happening to meet with the Rebels, gave them a total
Rout; killed and took the greatest number of them, and among the rest, Captain
Hacket, who commanded the Party.

Dundee being dead, the Earl of Dumferlin, and Colonel Cannon contended for the
chief Command, and sent into Ireland, for the late King to determine the
Contest; by whom it was decided for Colonel Cannon. Not so well done, as some
thought to prefer a stranger before a Native so considerable for his Title:
especially considering how natural it is for the Scots to adhere to the
Grandees of their own Country.

However Cannon hoping to supply that defect by gaining Reputation to his
Honor, resolved to signalize himself by some great Exploit. To which purpose
understanding that Lieutenant Colonel Cleeland lay at Donkel with the Earl of
Anguss's Regiment, consisting of Eight Hundred Men, came down from the Hills
upon him with all his force that made up the Number of between three and four
Thousand Men, besides the Addition of the Country. Cleeland observing the great
Disproportion between the Number of his own Party and the Rebels, took his
Ground the most advantagiously that the place would give leave, planting his
men behind Dikes and Ditches which he caused to be cast up, as also within the
Walls of the Marquess of Athol's House and Garden, and in the Church and
Steeple of the Town. The Highlanders came on in swarms, firing only once and
then running in with their Swords and Targets; but Cleelands men received them
so warmly, and plied them so fast with their small Shot, as they pressed on in
Throngs and Crowds, that few of the Defendants Bullets flew in vain. In the
heat of this Action Cleeland himself was wounded in the head and died
immediately. The Major of the Regiment was desparately wounded: nevertheless
the Soldiers were so far from being dismayed at the fall of their two chiefest
Officers, that they fought with so much the greater Courage, and behaved
themselves with that effectual Resolution, that after a hot dispute of three
Hours, the Rebels found themselves constrained to fly back to their Hills,
leaving a great number of Carcases behind them; insomuch that when some of the
Officers of the Rebels would have had them returned and given the Victors the
other Assault, they would not hear of it, crying out, they would not fight
against Men both Desperate and Mad. The common report was, that about three
hundred of the Rebels were slain, and not above thirty of Cleelands men in all;
and the next day some parties that were sent to the Assistance of those who had
fought so bravely, going out to scowre the Country, found several dead bodies
of the Rebels strewn about the Country, which made it believed that the
Slaughter of the Rebels was much greater than it was said to be.

This defeat of the whole Body of the Rebels created a great dislike of Colonel
Cannons conduct among the Highlanders, and so discouraged the whole Party, that
this defeat being given toward the latter end of August, by the tenth of
September the Lords of the Council had work enough to receive the Submissions
of the Highland Lairds, and Heads of Clanns, who came in and took the Benefit
of the Act of Indemnity: as did also the Earl of Callendar, Lord Duffus, and
Lord Levingston, who took the Oath of Allegiance and gave security for their
peaceable Behavior. And as for Colonel Cannon himself he lost his Reputation
among the Highlanders to that degree, that after he had long lain lurking about
Innerlochy, to no purpose, they told him to his Face they would not any longer
obey his Orders, as being a man that neither understood their Language, nor had
any Interest or Fortune in their Country; and in a few Nights after robbed him
of all he had; breaking open his Trunks, and taking away his Clothes and his
Money, not sparing his purse of Gold, wherein he had fourscore Louis d'Or, and
two and twenty Guinies. So that, after such bad Usage, he thought it his best
way to retreat into Ireland with all the Secrecy he could, not believing his
Life secure among such a barbarous and Thieving Generation of People, but for
all that he did not go.

All this while the common Course of Justice in the usual Trials at Law had
been at a stand, partly through the combustions occasioned by the Viscount of
Dundee, partly through the Parliaments insisting upon their privilege of
approving the persons nominated for Lords of the Sessions by the King, and the
Right of choosing the President, which they alleged was to be done by the
Members of the same Court. But the Troubles of the Rebellion being over, and
the Parliament before their Adjournment having sent to know the Kings Pleasure
in so weighty a Concern, his Majesty sent a Letter bearing date the First of
October, to his Privy Council, by whom all matters of State were now
transacted, signifying,

That whereas the Estates of Parliament had thought fit to stop the opening of
the Signet for some time, till he should signify his pleasure concerning the
Nomination of the Lords of the Session, therefore upon serious consideration of
the Matter, and the great Inconveniences that would arise to his Subject by so
long a surcease of Justice, he had resolved to make up a complete nomination of
the Lords of the Session, and to have the Signet opened that Justice might have
it is Course. To which purpose he required and authorized his Privy Council to
issue forth a Proclamation to certify the People, that the Sessions would sit
at the Ordinary time, being the first of November ensuing; declaring withal
that the Sessions should then sit and proceed in the Administration of Justice,
and for the dispatch of Processes renewed in His and the Queens name, and that
the Signet should be open at the same time for the expediting of all Summons
and Writs in common Form.

By the same Letter the Privy Council were ordered to give notice to the Lords
that had been formerly nominated, whose Oaths had been taken by the Earl of
Crawford, by His Majesty's special Order to give their Attendance for the
passing Bills of Suspension and all other Bills according to the common Form.

And whereas Sir James Dalrimple President of the College of Justice, and Sir
John Baird, whom the King had restored to his place, and Mr. Alexander Scomtown
of Marsington, had been tried as to their Qualifications required by the Acts
of Parliament, and were accordingly admitted, the Privy Council was therefore
commanded to appoint them or any two of them to examine the Qualifications of
the other persons nominated by His Majesty, and to admit them if they found
them qualified according to the Acts of Parliament.

In pursuance of this Letter a Proclamation was issued forth, and the Lord
Newbaith being called in before the Privy Council took the Oath of Allegiance
as one of the Lords of the Session, and at the same time both he, the Lords
Armstown, Crossrig and Mersington were ordered to attend the passing the Bills
of suspension, and the Lords Newbaith and Mersington appointed to examine the
rest of the Lords which had been nominated by the King. So that in a few days
before the end of October, the number of the Lords of the Session was fully
completed, and were,

The Lord Stairs President or Lord Chief Justice.

Lord Newbaith L. Mersington L. Holcraig L. Armstown L. Crossrig L. Arbruthel
L. Philiplaugh Lord Fountain-Hall L. Phesdo L. Presmennen L. Ranhillor L.
Anstrather L. Steenstown L. Revelrig.
About the Beginning of December ensuing the several Great Officers of State
received their Commissions.

For the great Seal, The Duke of Hamilton Earl of Argyle, and Earl of
Southerland.


For the Treasury, The Earl of Crawford Earl of Cassils Earl of Tweddale Lord
Ruthven Mr. of Melvin


For the Privy Seal, Lord Belhaven Master of Burleigh Sir Thomas Barnet of
Leighs Lord of Parkhay.


The Earl of Lowthian was made Justice General, or Supreme Judge of the
Criminal Court.

The Lord of Cesnoch, Lord Justice Clark, or Assistant to the Justice General;
and

Sir John Dalrimple was made Lord Advocate.

The Lords Aberuchel, Rankillor, Fountain-Hall, Phesdo and Crossrigg, were made
Commissioners of the Kings Justiciary.

Which Court being opened the first time since the Revolution upon the Twenty
seventh of January, the Earl of Lowthian expressed himself in a Learned Speech,
to this effect.

In the first place by way of Excuse, He acknowledged, That when he considered
the Hight Station wherein His Majesty had placed him, the greatness and weight
of the Affair, and his own want of Experience and many other unfitnesses,
nothing so much assured him as to see such persons, so eminent for their
Abilities, their Integrity and skill in the Laws and Constitutions of the
Kingdom, to be Assessors with him in the same Court.

That nothing could be of more Consequence toward the Establishment of the
Crown, the Peace and flourishing of the Nation, and calming the Minds of the
People, than the Assurance of Impartial Justice, which he was persuaded would
by the choice of their Lordships have the desired Effects.

He desired not to make reflections upon past Miscarriages, otherwise then as
to be a Beacon to keep men from making Shipwreck upon the same Rocks.

That the Corruptions of Mankind did often compel Justice it self to incline
more to severity then were to be wished, yet that it ought to be dispensed with
such Moderation, that the Sentence it self might convince the world, that there
was not wanting in it both Mercy and Favor.

That it was not the Goodness or Fertility of the Climate, nor the Goodness of
the Laws that made a Kingdom happy, but their passing through those impure
Channels whose Ambition, Luxury and Pride rendered them fit Tools for
Tyrannical Arbitrary Men, that was to be prevented. So that if their Lordships
did but make it their Duty, Honor and Interest to imitate their Religious,
Prudent, Valiant and just Prince and Deliverer, the Nation would be the most
happy in the World.

Insomuch that for his part, if he could be so Fortunate as to add but one
Grain to the Scale of Equity, he should esteem it his greatest Advantage, and
himself overpaid for all the pains he could ever he capable of.

This Speech of the Earl of Lothian, as it was received with a deserved
applause by the other Lords and Officers, so the Subjects of Scotland in
General quickly perceived the difference between the Arbitrary proceedings of
the late Reign, and the legal and easy administration of Justice since the
happy Revolution, and the late settlement of the justiciary here; a particular
instance of this may be seen in the permitting the Lady Castle-Haven to enter a
Protestation against a Decree even of the Lords of the Session, pronounced in a
case before their Lordships, betwixt the said Countess and the Lord Collington
her son in Law, wherein she declared her resolution to seek her remedy in the
next ensuing Session of Parliament; a Liberty which for many years before has
been disallowed and found impracticable by the Scottish Subjects.

But yet notwithstanding the many signal advantages accruing to this Kingdom by
the redress of those Grievances, under which they had for several years lay,
there were found several ill affected persons who both by public and private
practices, endeavored to disturb and bring into confusion the present well
settled Government.

About the beginning of February eighty nine, five Gentlemen of the Shire of
Angus were apprehended and brought away prisoners for committing a Riot, that
by the circumstances produced and proved against them, of an Insolence not
often paralleled. It seems they being at a Country Wedding, they amongst other
Healths, began and drank that of the late King, not at the same time omitting
some scandalous Reflections on the present management of Affairs; and not
content with their own crimes were resolved to force others of their Company to
a commission of the same, and accordingly drawing their Swords set them the to
refusers breasts, threatening immediate death without their compliance; their
names were Durham of Omaghie, Graham of Duntreath, with his two brothers, and
Guthrick of that Title; but being carried before the Privy Council, after a
full hearing, the two first were sentenced and adjudged, the one to pay one
hundred pounds, the other five hundred Marks, and to be imprisoned till the
payment thereof: And now his Majesty having in a Letter bearing date the
thirteenth of February, intimated his kind acceptance of the Lords of his Privy
Councils humble invitation, that His Majesty would be pleased to be present at
the next Session of Parliament, which was to be holden the first of March next
ensuing; he gives them many reiterated assurances of his Gracious designs and
resolutions to perfect the delivery of the Protestant Religion in general, from
the many dangers and encroachments it lay under, and in particular of the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland, but that upon mature consideration that the
many urgent and great matters that concerned the common good of the Protestant
interest throughout his Kingdoms and elsewhere, did indispensably require him
to meet his people of England in a Parliament, to be held on the twentieth day
of March, he thought fit to continue the adjournment of the Parliament of that
his ancient Kingdom to some longer time, and therefore required them to issue
out in his Majesty's name a Proclamation for the adjournment of the said
Parliament of Scotland, from the first to the eighteenth of March ensuing:
betwixt and which time he would endeavor to lay down such measures, and give
such instructions to his High Commissioner till his Affairs would permit his
own presence, as he doubted not would give satisfaction to his people;
graciously expressing to them that he should always prefer their safety to his
own quiet and repose. Assuring them that he esteemed the governing by Law, to
be the greatest and furest of his Prerogatives.

Upon the receipt of His Majesty's Gracious Letter, the Privy Council forthwith
issued their Proclamation in His Majesty's name to adjourn the Parliament, from
the first to the eighteenth of March following.

About this time one Strachan who was suspected to have held and carried on a
correspondence with the late King James, was apprehended at Greenock by a party
of the Earl of Argyle's Regiment, and brought Prisoner to Endinburgh; he was
examined before a Committee of the Privy Council, to whom after a promise of
his Life made to him, he confessed all that he knew of the matter: he owned he
was a Roman Catholic, and that he had lately come from Dublin with several
Letters, Commissions and Papers from the late King, which with other things he
had delivered to one Gourdon a Regent of Philosophy, in the College of
Glasgow. Gourdon thereupon by the application of the Earl of Argyle was
forthwith siezed and brought up to Town, and upon search there were several
Treasonable Papers and Commissions found about him, his contrivance to conceal
them was by sowing them up in the soles of his shoes, the directions were to
several suspected persons, and an order to apprehend them was immediately
issued forth. These Papers were thought to make an ample discovery of the late
Kings designs on the Kingdom of Scotland, and of most of the persons that were
to be made instruments for the bringing them about, nor were the public and
hostile endeavors of the Rebels less unfortunate or successful, than the
private intrigues and managements of some disaffected persons in this Kingdom.
For Sir Thomas Levingston about the latter end of this Month being advertised
that several Partys of the Rebels designed to Rendevouze about the Castle of
Erchless, belonging to the Chisholm of Strathglass, he presently orders a
detachment of seven Companies of Foot, of the Lord Strathnavers Regiment, two
of the Lord of Grants Regiment, two Companies out of the Garrisons of
Castlehead and Braan, with two Troops of Horse, all under the command of
Lieutenant Colonel Lumsdane to advance to Strathglass and Erchless, with
instructions to use Military Execution on all that opposed them, and because
the Castle of Erchless seemed to stand convenient for the settling a Garrison
which might overawe and restrain the incursions and Robberies of the
Highlanders, they were ordered to leave a sufficient number for that purpose,
and to make good the place: Upon the first approach of our Forces the Rebels
became shame-fac'd, and turned their backs flying with all the precipitancy
imaginable to the Hills, and their other Fastnesses leaving us a considerable
booty of all sorts of Provision, and Forage for Man and Horse, together with
some hundreds of Bolls of Oats, intended for the use of the Earl of Dumferling.
At our departure from hence there were left four Companies of Foot under the
command of Major Mackay; and now the time for the Sitting of the Parliament
drawing on, we had several flying discourses that the Honorable the Lord
Mellvill Secretary of State, was preparing hither from England under no less a
Character it is thought than Lord High Commissioner for the ensuing Sessions of
Parliament; though for sometimes seemed to hang in dispute between his Grace
Duke Hamilton, and his Lordship yet the speedy Arrival of his Lordship, put it
out of all doubt, and upon the opening of his Commission he was forthwith
Declared High Commissioner for the ensuing Session, and accordingly made his
entrance into the Town of Edinburgh with a Magnificence suitable to that
Character, being attended with the Nobility and Gentry, and the Kings Guards to
his lodging; after which Ceremonies the Council sat, where his Lordship
intimated His Majesty's pleasure to them to issue out a Proclamation for the
farther adjournment of the Parliament, from the eighteenth to the twenty
seventh of March instant, which was by proclamation adjourned accordingly.
About this time there were four promoted to the dignity of Earls of this
Kingdom, viz. The Lord Mellvin created Earl of Rith, Lieutenant General
Dowgiass, was created Earl of Dundee: Sir James Dalrimple of Stair Lord
President of the Sessions was made Earl of Hare, and Major General Mackay was
made Earl of --

The Lord High Commissioner with his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
about this time taking into their serious consideration, how much the good and
welfare of the Kingdom of Scotland, depended on the unanimous and wise Counsels
of the ensuing Parliament, thought fit about this time to issue out their
Orders for a day of Humiliation, and a general Fast, to be held and observed in
the South parts of Scotland, by all people both in Meeting Houses and Churches,
to send up their humble supplications and prayers for his blessing on the
proceedings of the ensuing Session, which was most Religiously and devoutly
observed in all places; and indeed considering the several distractions about
matters of Religion, in general and particularly about Church Government, that
had for many years by grievous fits broken out and raged in that Government, it
could not but provoke the most zealous prayers and wishes of that people, for
the prosperous agreement and good Resolurions of a Parliament, on which they
looked as resolved to settle matters as they should be found most agreeable and
suitable to the genius and inclination of that Kingdom.

The Rebels all this time received fresh disappointments every day, and their
Army still dwindled into small inconsiderable parties, several of their Friends
of Note forsook them, and the promises of recruits and assistance of Arms and
Ammunition failed them. Colonel Buchan had gone for Ireland a good while agone
from them, and though he had promised them speedily to return with sufficient
supplies, yet they could hear no news of him, several of the Highland Clans
refused to join with them, and amongst them Sir Donald mac Donald of Sclate,
who was a man of great interest among them. Several that were making their
escapes to Dublin to the late King were taken, on the Coast of the North of
Ireland; amongst which were two Sons of the Provost of Bell of Glasgow, one
Forrester a Clergyman, and one Dunbar that was Gunner in the Castle of
Edinburgh when it was summoned by the Estates, in the Names of their Majesty's
King William and Queen Mary, all these persons having been obnoxious to the
present Government last year by their Plots and Conspiracies to disturb the
peace, and raise War in the Kingdom, were apprehended and laid in Goal, and
being guarded up to Town by the Earl of Eglinton's Regiment of Horse were
brought before the Privy Council, and upon their promises of living peacefully
hereafter, and making what discoveries they could at present, they were by
their Lordships clemency bailed and set at liberty. The Countess Dowager of
Arrol who had been apprehended and sent Prisoner to Dumbarton Castle, upon an
accusation of her holding Treasonable correspondence with the late King James,
and others; their present Majesty's professed Enemies: was now also upon her
petition removed to Edinburgh Castle. The Lord Belcarras was bailed out also,
who was one that was taken in the North with the Lord Oliphant, and Auchintrat
all three Roman Catholics. Thus the Government by all the mild applications
and endeavors strove to reduce all parties that seemed disaffected to the
happy change that was wrought in this Kingdom, or at least to leave them
without excuse or complaint, that may or shall afterward be inflicted on them
for their obstinacy and wicked perseverance in any of their aforesaid crimes.

About the latter end of this month of March, and within three or four days of
the time appointed by his Majesty for the Sitting of the Parliament, His
Majesty was pleased to signify again by His Letter, His Royal Will and
Pleasure for the farther adjournment of the Parliament to the fifteenth day of
April next ensuing. The Letter was in substance to this purpose, That the
earnest desire he had of bringing all the counsels and deliberations of the
Parliament to a happy close, and as much to the general satisfaction as could
be, had prevailed with him upon mature considerations to defer the time of
their meeting for a small time, until some few businesses before them were so
prepared, and some interests so adjusted and disposed, as that the unity of
their Counsels thereafter might be an encouragement to all good men, and an
utter disappointment to those who were Enemies, as well to them as himself; and
who endeavored nothing more than to satisfy their vain hopes by some seeming
probabilities of breeding Divisions amongst them. That since the urgency of his
other Affairs had deprived him of the satisfaction of being himself amongst
them for the present, he had till a more favorable opportunity should present,
recommended to them the E. of Mellvill, from whose good qualifications he
doubted not of those methods that might remove the causes of their evils with
their effects, and from whose Wisdom he hoped they would find matters so
prepared for their consideration, as should bring his Subjects to that Concord
and Unity in his Service, as should make that Meeting be called the Happy and
Healing Parliament. Upon this Letter of his Majesty, the Privy Council
immediately issued their Proclamation for the adjournment of the Parliament to
the time aforesaid.

In the mean time our Army prosecuted the Rebels with vigor and continual
success; and Colonel Hill was by His Majesty's Commission Constituted Governor
of Innerlochy in Lochaber, and until such time that Lochaber were reduced, and
some Fortifications raised for the security of the Garrison in Innerlochy, he
had the Government of Dunstaffage conferred on him; he is extremely well
affected to their present Majesty's, and very exquisitely acquainted with all
the methods and ways of the Highlanders as well as the places, and it was hoped
that in a little time he should be able to give as good account of them, as
when he was Governor there before; and had there a Garrison of about eight
hundred men, having by his knowledge and industry reduced it to a regular
compliance with the Laws of the Kingdom.

His Grace Duke Hamilton was about this time made Lord President of His
Majesty's Council, and first Commissioner of the Great Seal, the Council having
by the majority of Votes put an end to some former disputes about signing
Warrants of Council, it being Voted now that the subscription of the President
alone should in all Orders and Warrants serve as fully as if they had all
Signed it. The Countess of Arrol having upon the proffer of the Council,
Liberty upon her Parol of Honor to be any where within ten Miles of Edinburgh,
would not agree to it which gave a just occasion to have a guard set upon her.
It Is the nature of some people to be peevish and stubborn even when they are
best used, they are uneasy in their natures and discontented for trifles, and
love to be clashing with Authority, we have seen very lately the least dislike
even of the known irregularities of the Government sufficient to give one an
apprehension of being indicted for High Treason, and as the sinfulness of one
Reign will not, nor ought to be made use of as a President for another to tread
the same steps, so I must be bold to say, that the abuse of Mercy in this,
ought to be as severely prosecuted against some sorts of people, as the abuse
of Justice in the other. The Highlanders upon the approach of the Summer
season, according to their usual Customs, were now preparing to make incursions
upon the borders, and forming themselves into a body of four or five hundred,
made a Descent upon Strathglass, and assaulted the Garrison of Erchless, which
was as I aforementioned, kept by about two hundred or less of the Lord of
Grants Regiment, but by the industry, courage and zeal of their old plague Sir
Thomas Levinstone, who commanded a considerable body of Horse and Foot at
Inverness, they were forced from a strong Hold they were possessed of, routed,
pursued and killed, and a considerable Booty of Cattle recovered, these Rebels
or rather Robbers or both, seeming even from their only pretending to assert
the interest of the late king, to partake by way of plague of his ill Fortune.

Though many people were dissatisfied with the several adjournments of the
Parliament from time to time from whose Meeting they doubted not of all the
satisfaction they had so long gaped after, yet now upon the certainty of His
Majesty's Resolutions to let them sit at the time appointed, all their fears
and scruples vanished in a moment; it being on all hands especially confirmed
that his Grace the Lord Commissioner had full and authentic instructions from
His Majesty to redress all Grievances, and to settle the Church Government as
it should appear most suitable to the Will of God expressed in his Word, and to
the inclinations and usage of the people. And they were much better assured of
this when at the opening of the Parliament they had fresh assurances of the
same, from his Majesty's own hand, in his Royal Letter dated at Kensington the
18th. of April, within a week after their Meeting. Wherein he assures them,
That it shall be their own fault if they had not all matters of Church and
State settled, now upon such sure and lasting Foundations, as may render them
reciprocally happy in one another during His Reign, and in all human
probability, secure from any the like encroachments they lay under for the
future.

And now the long expected day being come, the High Commissioner attended by a
splendid Train of Coaches of the Nobility and Gentry, and followed by His
Majesty's Life Guards, went from the Palace of Holy Rood House, about Eleven of
the Clock on the Fifteenth day of April, 1690. Where after the usual
Ceremonies, His Grace delivered himself in a most Elegant Speech to this
effect: -- That though the pressing Affairs of Ireland, requiring His Majesty's
personal Expedition thither had deprived them of the happiness of his Royal
presence as he intended, yet such was his regard to the inclinations of the
good Subjects of that his Ancient Kingdom, that he would no longer delay their
Meeting; to the end such a settlement might be established to that Nation, as
might be a real security to its most valuable concerns of True Religion and
Just Liberty: He put them in mind of the great things His Majesty had done
under God for the rescuing them by the eminent danger of his own person and
fortunes, from Popery and Slavery. That as his own Expedition and the necessary
Defense they were still to make against the remainder of their implacable
Enemies were immensly chargeable, so he did not doubt now of their ready
concurrence, in bearing their just parts in the Expense; especially since they
were assured that all their contributions would be expended for their own
security. That as at his first coming his chief aim and design was to relieve
them from the oppressions they groaned under, so he would be willing to pardon
all those that would live peaceably and quietly in their several stations. He
tells them at last, that nothing remains but that they (laying aside all
animosities and private disputes) unanimously fall on to the redressing bad,
and Enacting good Laws, to consider how the eyes of all Christendom are upon
them, expecting (in this juncture especially) mighty things from them, that now
it was fully in their own power to propose the surest remedies could be thought
on, for their future Peace and Happiness, and that his most gracious Majesty
was ready and willing to approve them.

The Earl of Crawford seconded the High Commissioner with a most florid and
pious Speech, wherein after he had set forth and demonstrated the wonderful
works of God in his so signal delivery of them, from that deluge of misery that
was just breaking in upon them, he earnestly presses them to a sincere
reliance on the protection of their Majesty's, and to evidence a true and
hearty zeal for his service, but above all he exhorts them to moderation in
their disputes, and unity in their Counsels, that their Enemies may never have
reason to ground their hopes on their divisions. And lastly he tell them that
though they have the misfortune to be at some distance from the person of His
Majesty, yet that he was assured they should ever find the influence and
comfortable warmth of his favors, and therefore if the result of their
Counsels were not happy to themselves, and of national advantage, he feared the
present opportunity of doing well, if neglected, would prove a heavy charge
against them in the day of their accounts. After the Parliament immediately
fell on business, and the first matters of moment that they insisted on were
the two Acts that were read and passed in the preceding Session of Parliament
but were not touched, viz. The Act about the Kings Supremacy; the second was
the Act to repeal and annul the Rescissory Act, which abolished Presbytery,
which Rescissory Act was made presently after King Charles the Seconds
Restoration, and the question being put after some small debate, Whether they
should be presently Touched or Voted afresh? It was carried they should be
presently touched, which were done accordingly.

About this time happened an odd adventure at Elgen about 30 miles from
Inverness, the business thus; 4 or 5 Gentlemen being in Company drinking and
making merry, among other discourses they happened to fall upon the times, and
some of them being persons not very well affected to the present Government, in
the heat of their Cups did not stick to express themselves according to their
inclinations, one was in great expectation of the late King James's speedy
return. Another very much doubted, one believed it feazible, another declared,
he thought it impossible for the late King to recover or make a Conquest of
Scotland again, at which expression one Thomas Tullock was so much enraged,
that upbraiding their diffidence with a great many reproaches, he took a Pistol
he had in his hand, and wished that that Pistol might be his death if he (the
late King James) did not return again, and be Master of all his own, and before
he could speak a word more the Pistol went off, and discharging it self into
his breast shot himself clean thorough the heart, which when related with all
its circumstances gave cause of astonishment not only to his own Company but to
all that heard it. The Parliament had had several warm debates of the freedom
that belonged to every of the Estates in Electing their several Members for
their Committees, and after much time on several days spent therein; it was
urged that the better to proceed in choosing of the said Committees, it was
necessary that the Act concerning the repealing the former Committee of
Parliament, commonly called the Articles, should be first sent for and
considered; in which Act it was agreed that the Officers of State might sit,
make Overtures and Proposals, and debate in the Committee, but not to Vote; now
the House looking on this as a grievance, had heretofore in the last Parliment
Voted and annulled the said Act, and agreed that in lieu thereof, the Bench of
Noblemen might choose the Officers of State, to be Members of the Committee
notwithstanding their being Ministers of State, which being a while argued was
at length carried by the Vote of the house, and approved of, and immediately
had the Royal assent. After which the Three Estates proceeded to the choice of
their several Committees, the Estate of Lords as customarily, withdrawing into
the inner Session house by themselves. The Estate of Barons continued in the
Parliament house, and the Estate of Buroughs retired to the Commissaries Bench
in the lower end of the Parliament house: Where after a considerable time they
chose their several Committees as follow.

Committee for Election and Freedom of Speech.
Noblemen. The Marquess of Dowglass. Earl of Eglingtown Lord Forrester Lord
Belhaven Lord Rollo
Barons. The Lord of Blackbarrony Lord of Cragivar Sir George Munro Sir
Andrew Agnew Lord of Dun
Buroughs. Sir John Hall Sir Robert Mellvill Mr. William Erskine Mr. John Ross
Mr. George Gourdon



Committee for the Supply.
Noblemen. Duke Hamilton Earl of Argyle Earl of Cassils Earl of Forfar Earl of
Tarras Earl of Kintore
Barons. Sir John Maitland Lord of Anstruthero Lord of Knocks Sir Thomas
Burnet Lord of Craigens Lord of Carrick
Buroughs. Mr. James Fletcher Mr. Alexander Gourdon Mr. James Lawder Mr. John
Cuthbert Mr. James Mardock Sir Patrick Murray



Committee for settling the Church Government.
Noblemen. The Earl of Crawford Earl of Southerland. Viscount of Arbathnet
Viscount of Stairs Lord Cardross Lord of Carmichel
Barons. Sir John Maxwell Sir Patrick Hume Lord of Brody Sir Archibald
Cockburn Sir John Munro of Fowlis Mr. Adam Gourdon of Dallfolly
Buroughs. Sir Thomas Stewart Mr. William Higgins Mr. James Smith Mr. John
Anderson Mr. James Kennet Mr. Patrick Mardock



Committee for Reducing of Forfaultures and restoring of Fines.
Noblemen. The Earl of Morton The Earl of Lothian The Earl of Leven Viscount of
Kenmuire Lord of Bluntire Lord Torpichen
Barons. Sir Robert Sinclare Lord of Garthland Lord of Grange Dumbar Lord of
Culloden Forbes Lord of Pitliver Lord of Rusco
Buroughs. Mr. James Smallet Lord of Lewchold Mr. John Murray Mr. Robert
Cleeland Mr. John Boswell Sir William Hamilton



Thus the Committees being settled and returned to their several places, the
high Commissioner (according to his privilege) appointed them to meet the next
day and so to adjourn from time to time in the intervals of Parliament.

The Rebels in the mean time though they were narrowly watched by their
Majesty's Forces, had yet made a shift to muster up fifteen hundred choice and
select men, and were come down and and encamped at the Foot of the Hills, near
Straithspey in the County of Murray, commanded in chief by General Buchan, and
Colonel Canon, and during their stay there had sent orders wherein they
resolved to burn and destroy all that would not come out, join with them and
assist them; of which Sir Thomas Levingstone having timely notice, without more
deliberation took along with him eight hundred Foot, six Troops of Dragoons and
two Troops of Horse, and with all convenient speed marched toward them, and
encamped that night near Brody, where he was forced to attend two whole days
the coming of his Baggage Horses. On the 30th. of April he received a very good
account of the Rebels Camp, numbers and posture, and resolving to take them
napping if possible; he immediately Decamps and Marching all that night, he
made a shift before the break of day to reach Ballagh Castle, from whence he
could easily discern the Enemies Camp by their Fires, and having received a
very good account of the nature of the ground and the danger of the Waters,
which run along the North side of the Enemies Camp, and perceiving a resolution
in his Soldiers to engage, suitable to his own inclinations he thought fit to
let them rest for half an hour and refresh themselves, then enquiring about the
Fords, for there were two, whereof one lay within two Musket shot of the Rebels
Camp, and guarded by a strong party of the Enemy; the other was near a mile up
the River, and left unregarded and secure by the Enemy. To this he forthwith
marches his Army, and in all imaginable silence passes without the least
opposition, having before left two hundred Firelocks which he had ordered, at a
convenient time to advance and fire briskly at that part of the Enemy that
stood to secure the other pass, on purpose to amuse them, as if the whole Army
was on that side coming to charge them, the project was so well laid, and so
carefully executed, that our Horse and Dragoons were upon them Pellmell before
they perceived them; so that being possessed with a pannick fear they could make
little or no resistance, but turned their backs and fled in all the confusion
imaginable. However our Horse and Dragoons pursued them so effectually that
they left above four hundred of them dead upon the spot, and had totally
destroyed them and put an end to their Rebellion, if a thick Fog had not put an
end to their pursuit. General Buchan and Colonel Cannon their two famous
Leaders were so heavily alarmed, that the first was glad to fly without so much
as Sword, Coat or Hat, and the other without more complement took his leave in
his Shirt; nor had the Earl of Dumferling been better Accommodated, but that by
some accidental business he had removed, and was called away to some other
quarter the day before; after our Armies return from the pursuit, Colonel
Levingstone received information that the Highlanders, General Buchan, had
detached a small party with several Officers of experience under the Command of
a Kinsman of his own, and had given them Orders to possess themselves of an old
Castle called Lethindey: our Commander thought fit to have it reduced, and
forthwith Leading on his men he presently Beleaguered the same. At the first
appearance the Garrison seemed inclined to a vigorous opposition, but our
Commander perceiving the ground proper, presently lodged a Mine under the Wall,
which the Enemy understanding they presently beat a parley, and surrendered
themselves at discretion to the Kings mercy.

It Is hardly credible that in all this Action we had not one man of all our
Army killed, and not above four or five wounded, and that but slightly neither,
we had about half a score Horses killed; and this was all the damage we
sustained in an action so important, we got all the Enemies Bag and Baggage,
their Provision, and great part of it was in Claret, Meal, etc. We took also
the Standard which was to have been set up for the late King James; a great
many of the Prisoners were men of note amongst them, the chief of them were
these.

Captain Allen Maclean. Captain John Maclean Lieutenant John Maclean Capt.
Lieut. Cullo Lieut. Halliburton Lieut. Middleton Lieut. Shewell Lieut.
Christian Lieut. Drummond Ensign Ray Ensign Dunbarr Ensign Macnaughton Capt.
Hutcheons Lieut. Beard Capt. James Buchan Capt. Brown Lieut. Searcher Lieut.
Braudy Lieut. Aughmouty Ensign Rose
Some of these were taken in the fight others in the Castle of Lethindey, they
were all sent up by strong Guards to Edinburgh and placed in the Tollbooth, and
the Canigate.

This Defeat as it is by the best judgments believed, has totally overthrown
all the measures of the Rebels for this ensuing Campaign, and indeed
considering they were the choicest of their men, and that they are in a rank
despair of any seasonable supplies from Ireland. It was thought this misfortune
would put them on a necessity of complying with the Government, and of living
peaceably hereafter. The greatest encouragement they had received of late, was
from the access of the Earl of Seaforth to them who had lately come from
Ireland, and made toward the North, but neither his Interest on one hand to
raise either men or money, nor his personal ability on the other was of such
significancy, as to encourage them to any great perseverance.

The Highlanders of Scotland are a sort of wretches that have no other
consideration of honor, friendship, obedience, or Government, then as by any
alteration of affairs, or revolution in the Government they can improve to
themselves an opportunity of Robbing and plundering their bordering Neighbors.
If there be any smack of religion amongst them, it is generally the Roman
Catholic persuasion, on which account any disaffected person that retired
among them was something likely to work to an inclination of assisting the late
King James, however it seems the Earl of Seaforth did not meet with that
encouragement and acceptance from them as he expected, for after many
Harangues, and consultations he held with them upon his confident assurance,
that the late King was preparing, nay had already shipped for their assistance
of men, money provisions, and ammunition, together with the Duke of Berwick his
son, and other brave Officers, after he had I say thought to decoy them with
all these sweetning words and fine Stories, one of the Ringleaders among the
Highlanders, that had a little more sense than the rest, boldly asked the Earl
what was become of King William's Army and Fleet in the mean time these
preparations were making and sending to them; to which the Earl as foolishly as
confidently replied, that King William's Fleet were all blocked up in their
Harbors by the French: an imposition so gross that the Highlanders ridiculed
and disdained the impertinence, and resented the abuse. The Earl of Seaforth
hereupon finding matters go very coldly for King James soon saw his error and
repented his undertaking, and being willing to make the best of a bad market,
made what intercession he could by his friends, to be received into the favor
of the Government, but as yet the Council or Parliament have determined nothing
concerning him.

And now the Parliament were very earnestly applying themselves to the settling
of the Church Government. They had already passed an Act in a preceding Session
of this Parliament, for the abolishing of Prelacy, and all Superiority of
Church Officers above Presbyters, this they did in pursuance of the claim of
right at their Majesty's first accession to the Crown of Scotland, they now
proceeded to an Act for the restoring those Presbyterians, who since the first
of January, one thousand six hundred and sixty one, had been thrust from their
Churches: the substance of the Act was this.

That whereas many Ministers of the Presbyterian persuasion since the year
aforesaid had been, for not conforming to Episcopacy, or Prelacy, and for not
complying with the corruptions of the times, either deprived of their Church,
and the benefits there hence accruing, or banished their Native Country for
the same. Therefore their Majesty's with advice and consent of the Estates of
Parliament assembled, ordain and appoint, that all those Presbyterian Ministers
aforesaid, or as many of them as are yet surviving, shall forthwith have free
access to their several respective Churches, that they may presently hereupon
in their said Churches exercise their several spiritual functions and Offices
in their said Parishes; not needing any new call thereto: and that they should
enjoy and receive the whole for the year one thousand six hundred and eighty
nine, and shall forthwith enter into their several Churches where they be
vacant, and where they are not vacant then they shall be declared to have right
and title only to half the benefits and stipends, which became due and were
payable at Michaelmas last, for the half year immediately preceding, betwixt
Whitsunday and Michaelmas, and that the present possessour shall have right to
the other half years benefits aforementioned payable for the Witsunday last
past: And by the force and authority of this Act, it is declared, that the
present incumbent without let, hindrance or opposition, shall forthwith give
way to the rightful Claimants aforesaid, and shall remove themselves, and upon
notice and intimation thereof shall desist from their Ministry in their said
Parishes, and the time allotted for their removal shall be betwixt the time of
the passing this Act, and Whitsunday next to come, that the Presbyterian
Ministers formerly excluded may peaceably enter and enjoy the same. This Act
was immediately put in execution and the Presbyterians that were yet living
took possession of their several Churches. --

This was no sooner done but the Parliament proceeded to consult about a
draught of an Act for the settlement of the Church Government, but the
Episcopal Clergy, now being sensible what would be the consequences of these
deliberations, and what they were likely to be reduced to, formed a Petition
forthwith, and with all convenient speed had it presented to the Parliament;
wherein they humbly Remonstrated to the 3 Estates, that whereas they submitted
to the Government of their present Majesty's, conformable to the Law of the
Land, they did humbly represent to and beseech his Majesty's High Commissioner
and the three Estates of Parliament assembled, that considering they had
already and would give assurance of their behavior, according to the duty of
faithful Ministers and peaceable Subjects under the present established
Government, they would be pleased to take them into their gracious
consideration, and secure to them that protection as to their lives and
fortunes as had been before promised to them, and whereas by an Act now
proposed and likely to pass by the application of the Presbyterian Ministers,
for the establishment of Presbyterian Church Government in this Kingdom, by
which all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and authority is so committed unto them
of the said Presbyterian persuasion, that thereby those said persons were made
Judges of their Life and Doctrine, they humbly represented that this was
positively prejudicial to that protection so often promised unto them, since
thereby they were not only deprived of all interest in the Ecclesiastical
Government, but upon every turn made liable to the scrutiny and censure of
those men, (as to matter of their Life and Doctrine) who might justly be
reputed their Enemies and parties, and consequently incapable of being their
Judges, that though they did not fear to stand the Test of an Inquisition into
their manners and abilities as to their function, yet they could not but look
on it as an hardship to be tried and adjudged by persons whose incapacities
they offered to prove were in all points superior to what was alleged against
them, that they thought the Presbyterian brethren would not be so unequitable
as to allow that now in their case, which for sometime they disputed and
disallowed in theirs, to wit, as to the Presbyterians refusing to pay
subjection in their Synods or Presbyters to any the Episcopal injunctions on
the account of their difference in opinion from them. That they heartily
grieved there had been no Ecclesiastical methods used for the healing those
breaches that have been made in the Church, on the account of difference in
opinion about Church Government, that they therefore did humbly beg that that
High and Honorable Court, as they respected the honor of God, and the
advancement of his holy Religion, would take into their gracious consideration,
to prepare such healing methods as may best in their great Wisdoms be thought
to tend toward the perfect reconciliation of those differences, which had so
long disturbed and broke the peace and unity of the ancient Church of that
Kingdom: and which now was likely to be oppressive to the Consciences and
Interests of so many of their Majesty's loyal Subjects, and zealous Professors
of the true Protestant Religion. This Petition was received and read in
Parliament but matters as to the settlement of the Church Government was too
far gone, for any extraordinary good consequence to the Episcopal Clergy from
it: about this time came a report which afterward proved a mistake, of the
death of Sir Evan Cameron of Locheal, which was said to happen in manner
following; The Rebels having agreed to send some considerable men of their
party to King James, to represent their condition, and lay before him the
necessity of sending some speedy supplies to them, or that otherwise they
should not continue in a condition to hold out any longer, amongst them there
arose a debate concerning fit persons to be sent, when Sir John Drummond of
Machany having said to Macdonald of Glengary, that they that were King James
his proselites were his ruin, which Glengary being affronted at, replied very
sharply to him calling him some base name, telling him withal he was as good a
Protestant as he was, whereupon they both drew, and Sir Evan Cameron coming
between them to part and reconcile them received an unfortunate wound in the
fray, which happened not to be mortal, as was reported.

The Parliament after some debates about considering an Act that was brought in
for Liberty of Speech, the D. of Hamilton brought in the proposals for a Supply
to be given to their Majesty's for the maintaining the Forces, etc. at last
they came to a resolution, that there should be a supply of seventy two
thousand pound granted to the use aforesaid and for the support of the
Government for this current year one thousand six hundred and ninety, to be
paid in two equal Moyeties, and that the first payments should be made at
Lammas, the other at Martimas next ensuing. And also thirty thousand pound
sterling, should be assessed and raised for the three ensuing years, and the
better to enable those that are obliged this current year, they are to have the
retention of the sixth part of their annual Rents for this present year; and
that all persons of all ranks, qualities and degrees should be obliged to pay
to this Assessement, and none to be exempted but those that received Alms.
There was also now a motion received and approven in the house, whereby it was
enacted that all Commissioners, Clerks, Receivers and Collectors of the supply
granted to their present Majesty's, should first be obliged to take the Oaths
of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, before they could be empowered to
act in their Offices. In the second of June happened an accident which had like
to have proved of very fatal consequence in the Town of Edinburgh, one Lendal
Captain of the main Guard that night, perceiving one Keill a Captain of the
Militia or Trained Bands of the Town, used him very uncivilly, giving him very
opprobrious Language, and taxing him with the beggarly appearance of him and
his Men, whereupon Keil being provoked, with a lusty Cane he had in his hand
struck Lendal to the ground, whereupon some other inferior Officers made up,
and laying hold of Kiel they presently made him prisoner and carried him
forthwith to the Main-Guard: Keil being a man well known and beloved in the
Town, had hundreds of the Mobile presently resorting with sticks and staves,
and threatening to pull down the Guard-house unless they did presently release
Keil; in the mean time comes up a Magistrate of the town and immediately got
Keil released, but the Gentlemen Mobs blood being up they would not be
satisfied without doing some injury to the Guard, which occasioned the
Soldiers to stand to their Arms, and to threaten extremity to any that would
dare to approach; all this however would not serve, but pressing on with
vigorous insolence on them, the Sentinels were obliged to defend themselves,
and happened to kill two of the daring Fellows, and wounded others, the
Magistrates hereupon went up to the Guard, and prevailed with them to go in and
keep themselves close; and in the mean time got two or three Companies of the
Earl of Levens Regiment, who were quartered in the Cannongate, to come up and
immediately shutting the City Gates, they in a little time cleared the streets,
and drove the Sparks into their Houses without further harm, though they were
obliged to keep Guards in many parts of the City, for that Night for fear of a
relapse. The Captains are both of them confined, and it is believed he that gave
the first provocation will be severely punished.

The Earl of Pearth had been long a Prisoner in the Castle of sterling, for his
high misdemeanors in the last Reign, together for his disaffection to the
present establishment and but now by the representation of the Earl of Crawford
it was mediated that he might have his liberty, provided he would procure the
coming back and safe return of the young Lord Drummond his Son, the Earl of
Wigtown and his brother, who during the Guardianship of him the said Earl of
Pearth, and the Earl of Melfort, were sent over Seas by their especial order,
on purpose to be bred up in the Romish superstition, and that the Earl of
Pearth should give allowable security to do so, as also for his peaceable
behavior, without plotting or conspiring against the present Government. And
now at last the long expected Act for settling of the Church Government came to
be passed and touched with the Scepter. Which is at large as follows.

An Act Ratifying the Confession of Faith; and Settling Presbyterian
Church Government in Scotland, In a Parliament at Edinburgh, the 7th. of June,
1690.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queens Majesty's, and Three Estates
of Parliament, Conceiving it to be their bound Duty, after the great
Deliverance that God has lately wrought for this Church and Kingdom: As first,
To settle and secure therein the true Protestant Religion, according to the
truth of Gods Word, as it has of a long time been professed within this Land;
as also, the Government of Christ's Church within this Nation, agreeable to the
Word of God, and most condusive to the advancement of true Piety and Godliness;
and the Establishing of Peace and Tranquillity within this Realm: And that by
an Article of the Claim of Right, it is Declared, That Prelacy, and the
Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters, is, and has been a
great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to this Nation, and contrary to
the Inclinations of the generality of the People, ever since the Reformation
(they having Reformed from Popery by Presbyters) and therefore ought to be
abolished. Likewise, by an Act of the last Sessions of this Parliament, Prelacy
is Abolished. Therefore their Majesty's with the Advice and Consent of the said
three Estates, do hereby Revive, Ratify, and perpetually Confirm all Laws,
Statutes, and Acts of Parliament, made against Popery and Papists; and for the
Maintenance and Preservation of the true Reformed protestant Religion; and for
the true Church of Christ within this Kingdom, in so far as they confirm the
same, or are made in favor thereof.

Likewise, they by these presents, Ratify and Establish the Confession of Faith
now read in their presence, and Voted and Aproved by them, as the Public and a
vowed Confession of this Church, containing the sum and substance of the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches; which confession of Faith is subjoyned to
this present Act. As also, they do Establish, Ratify and Confirm the
Presbyterian Church Government and Discipline: That is to say, the Government
of the Church by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General
Assemblies, Ratified and established by the 114 Act, Ja. 6. Parl. 12. Anno
1592. Entitled, Ratification of the Liberty of the true Kirk, etc. And
thereafter received by the General consent of this Nation, to be the only
Government of Christ's Church within this Kingdom; Reviving, Renewing, and
confirming the foresaid Act of Parliament, in the whole Heads thereof, except
that part of it relating to Patronages, which is hereafter to be taking into
Consideration, And Rescining, Annulling, and making void the Acts of Parliament
following, Act anent Restitution of Bishops, Ja. 6. Par. 18. Cap. 2. Act
Ratifying the Acts of the Assembly, 1610. Ja. 6. Par. 21. Cap. 1. Act anent the
Election of Archbishops and Bishops, Ja. 6. Par. 22. Cap. 1. Act Entitled,
Ratification of the five Articles of the General Assembly at Pearth, Jam. 6.
Par. 23. Cha. 1 Act Entitled. For the Restitution and Re-stablishment of the
ancient Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops, Cha. 2. Par. 1.
Sess. 2. Act, 1st. Act anent the Constitution of a National Synod. Chapter 2. Par.
1. Sess. 3. Act 5. Act against such as refuse to Depone against Delinquents,
Charles 2. Par. 2. Sess. 2. Act Entitled, Act Acknowledging and an Asserting
the Right of Succession to the Imperial Crown of Scotland, Chapter 2. Par. 3. Act.
2. Act Entitled, Act anent Religion and the Test, Chapter 2. Par. 3. Act. 6. With
all other Acts, Laws, Statues, Ordinances and Proclamations, and that in so far
allenary as the said Acts and others generally and particularly
abovementioned, are contrary, or prejudicial to, inconsistent with, or
derogatory from the Protestant Religion, and Presbyterian Government, now
Established; and Allowing and declaring, That the Church Government be
Established in the hands of, and exercised by, these Prebyterian Ministers, who
were Outed since the first of January 1661. for Nonconformity to Prelacy, or
not complying with the Courses of the Time, and are now Restored by the late
Act of Parliament, and such Ministers and Elders only, as they have admitted,
or received, or shall hereafter admit, or receive: And also, that all the said
Presbyterian Ministers have, and shall have Right to the Maintenance, Rights,
and other Privileges by Law provided, to the Ministers of Christ's Church,
within this Kingdom, as they are, or shall be Legally admitted to particular
Churches.

Likewise, in pursuance of the Premises, Their Majesty's, do hereby appoint
the first meeting of the General Assembly of this Church as above Established,
to be at Edinburgh, the third Thursday of October next to come, in this instant
year, 1690. And because many conform Ministers either have deserted, or were
removed from Preaching in their Churches preceding the thirteenth day of April,
1689. And others were Deprived, for not giving Obedience to the Act of the
Estates made the said 13 of April 1689. Entitled, a Proclamation, against the
owning of the late K. J. and appointing public Prayers for King William and
Queen Mary. Therefore, Their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent foresaid, do
hereby Declare, all the Churches, either deserted, or from which the
Conform-Ministers were Removed or Deprived, as is said, to be vacant, and that
the Presbyterian Ministers exercising their Ministry, within any of these
Parishes, (or where the last Incumbent is dead) by the Desire or Consent of the
Paroch, shall continue their Possession, and have Right to the Benefices and
Stipends, according to their Entry in the year 1689, and in the time coming, ay
while the Church, as now Establish, take further Course therewith. And to the
Effect, the Disorders that have happened in this Church, may be Redressed. Their
Majesty's, with Advice and Consent foresaid, do hereby allow the General
Meeting, and Representatives of the foresaid Presbyterian Ministers and Elders,
in whose hands, the Exercise of the Church Government is Established, either by
themselves, or by such Ministers and Elders, as shall be appointed and
Authorized Visitors by them according to the Custom and Practice of
Presbyterian Government, throughout the whole Kingdom, and several parts
thereof, to try and purge out, all insufficient, Negligent, Scandalous and
Erroneous Ministers, by due course of Ecclesiastical Process, and Censures. And
likewise, for Redressing all other Church-Disorders. And farther. It is hereby
provided, that whatsoever Minister, being Convened before the said General
Meeting, and Representatives of the Presbyterian Ministers and Elders, or the
Visitors to be Appointed by them, shall either prove Contumacious in not
appearing, or be found Guilty, and shall be therefore Censured whether by
Suspension, or Deposition, they shall Ipso Facto be Suspended from, or Deprived
of their Stipends and Benefices. And Ordains this Act to be Printed and
Published. Extracted out of the Records of Parliament, by me

Th. Burnet, Cls. Reg.

Thus after so much disorder, so much Tyranny and Oppression in a Kingdom, the
ill successes of Rebellion, and the Return of Law and Justice into their
ancient Channel, one would think should be sufficient to regain the Affections
of Men wandering after Chimera's, and unite them to a Prince who has laid such
Foundations of their Tranquillity. But Rebels and Robbers very seldom lissen to
these charms, let the charmer charm never so wisely. Which is the reason that
the remains of Rebellion cannot yet be extinguished; and that their are several
Traiterous Conspiracies and Correspondencies found out of such as make it their
business to disturb the peace of the Government. However in regard those
Discoveries are not yet ripe for public view, and that we can say nothing more
of the Highlanders, but that they Rob and plunder where they can find any
advantage, it is time here to conclude this account of the Revolution in
Scotland, no less memorable then that in England.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed and Sold by Tho. Salusbury, at the sign of the Temple
near Temple Bar in Fleet Street, 1690.
THE History of the late Great Revolution in England, with the Causes and Means
by which it was accomplished. Together with the Settlement thereof under their
most Serene Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, by the Lords and Commons
assembled in the late Parliament.

With an exact List of the Members of both Houses then Sitting; The Second
Edition: To which is added the Effigies of their Present Majesty's, curiously
Engraven on a Copper Plate.

A new Art of Brewing Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as to render
them more healthful to the Body, and agreeable to Nature, and to keep them
longer from souring, with less trouble and charge then generally practiced,
which will be a means to prevent those torturing Distempers of the Stone,
Gravel, Gout and Dropsy. With easy Experiments for making excellent Drinks
with Apples, Currants, Goosberries, Cherries, Herbs, seeds, Hay, etc. and the
way to preserve Eggs 5 or 6 Months from being musty or rotten. With an Appendix
how to make Fruit Trees constantly fruitful.

Miscellany Poems, viz. I. Remarks on the Death of K. C. II. II. On the Success
of K. J. II. III. Upon Faith, IV. Upon Patience. V. Ambitioh. VI. To the
University of Oxford. VIII. The Soul to a good a Conscience. VII. The Soul to a
bad Conscience. By J. Whitehall.

The Declaration and Manifesto of the Protestants of the Valleys of Piedmont,
called the Vaudois, to all Christian Princes and States, of the Reasons of
their taking up Arms against the Duke of Savoy. And why they have put
themselves under the protection of WILLIAM, King of Great Britain, and of the
Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland.

An exact Collection of many Wonderful prophesies relating to the Government of
England, etc. Since the first year of the Reign of K. James I. to this present
time 1690. All which have been truly fulfilled and accomplished. Also many
Prophesies, yet foretelling what Government is to succeed to make this Kingdom
happy: With the certain time of the Downfall of Antichrist throughout the World.

Remarks upon the Dream of the late abdicated Q. of England, and upon that of
Madam the D. of La Valiere, late Mistress to the French King, etc.


