A PROCLAMATION Discharging Merchants, and other Traffickers, to Sell or
Exchange any Prohibit Commodities, with themselves, or amongst others.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland
Defender of the Faith,
to (...) Macers of our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting,
Forasmuch as We, from the great care We always had of the Advancement of the
Trade and Manufactories of this Our Ancient Kingdom, have made several good
Laws and Acts thereanent, and particularly, by the 18th. Act of our Current
Parliament, in the Month of September, 1681. Relative to our former
Proclamation in April, preceding; The Importing, Selling, Venting, Bartering,
or Exchanging of diverse Commodities therein named, is Prohibited and
Discharged, under the Certifications and Penalties expressed therein: And albeit
We then understood that the Importing, and Venting of these Prohibited
Commodities could hardly be restrained without a total Prohibition had been
given to the wearing thereof; yet out of a tenderness to the Merchants, who
might have had great parts of their Stocks in these Commodities upon their
hands, We thought it not then fit to make a total and immediate Prohibition to
the Wearing, but ordained them to be put under Bond, not to Import any of these
Prohibited Goods thereafter, nor to Vent, Sell, Barter, or Exchange any
thereof, upon hazard of incurring the Certifications contained therein: And
notwithstanding there has been more then sufficient time allowed to the
Merchants to have sold off these Prohibited Goods, yet upon pretext thereof,
and of the Abiguity of the words in the Bond, that they are only obliged not to
Vent, Sell, Barter, or Exchange any of these Goods, that at the buying or
receiving thereof were known to have been Imported, contrary to the Laws;
diverse Persons have presumed to Import, at the least to Reset Commodities
unwarrantable Imported, and to Vent, Sell, Barter, and Exchange the same, so
that thereby the Execution of the Law has been hitherto evacuated and eluded,
and honest Men, who out of Conscience and Duty have given obedience, in hazard
to be ruined, and the Trade and Manufactory of the Kingdom overturned and
destroyed; and although we had more then reason to have enforced the Execution
of the said good Laws, by the examplary punishment of persons most guilty:
Nevertheless We, according to Our accustomed Clemency, have thought fit to
continue any Sentence upon the Process in dependence a against them, at the
instance of our Advocat, till we shall have occasion to know their future
behavior. And in the mean time, for Explicating and making the said Act of
Parliament effectual for the good ends therein designed, We with Advice of Our
Privy Council hereby Prohibit and Discharge all Merchants within this Kingdom,
or other Trafficquers, Men, or Women, to Buy, Sell, or Barter, or Exchange with
themselves, or among others, any Clothes, Stuffs, Sarges, Holland, Cambridge,
Silk stockings, or any Goods made of Wool, or Lint, after tho Date hereof,
except they know and can be able to declare upon Oath they were either made in
the Kingdom, or lawfully Imported, preceding the Prohibition contained in the
Act of Parliament and Proclamation aforesaid, under the Penalties and
Certifications therein contained, to be inflicted on them, without favor or
defalcation. And in respect diverse Persons have, or may pretend to have such
Goods in their custody, as to which they cannot positively declare upon Oath
that they were Imported before the Prohibition, as having come through several
hands: We do allow the Merchants Burgesses of Edinburgh, and others, havers of
such Goods in their Possession, before the Date hereof (who did take the Bond,
and give up Inventar, and none others) liberty to Retail the same to the
Liedges, or Export them out of the Kingdom at any time betwixt this and the
first of November next; Certifying such as shall upon pretext hereof Import any
Prohibited Commodities, or Vent, Sell, Barter, or Exchange any thereof after
the said day, the same shall be Confiscat, Burnt, and Destroyed, and the
Persons guilty otherwise punished, conform to the said Act of Parliament.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the 16th of August, One thousand six
hundred eighty and three. And of our Reign, the thirtieth and fifth Year. Per
Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty And Reprinted at London, for Longly Curtis near Fleet-Bridge. 1683.


