A DISCOVERY OF THE World to Come According to the SCRIPTURES.

The first Part thereof being Didactical, or such as contains a Form of
Positive Doctrine.

WHEREIN, 1. The Doctrine of the World to come, is propounded, explicated,
confirmed, and applied in a more familiar method, then formerly has been
observed 2. The Doctrine of Millenaries, touching a New Reformed Church in the
latter Times, which they call A New World, is confuted. 3. Sundry passages of
holy Writ are interpreted in reference to the World to come, which have been
formerly wrested, and forced in a wrong sense.


Written by J. SEAGER. M. A. and Minister of Broadclist in the County of Devon.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

TO The Parishoners of Broadclist, Grace and Peace be Multiplied.
BEloved in the Lord, It is now full eighteen years since that I was placed by
the hand of Providence, as a Spiritual Pastor amongst you, upon the death of
Mr. Robert Stennings; three years of which time I was forced by the violence of
Soldiers, to absent my self from you: these three years only excepted I have
been constantly with you; and as the Lord has given me much health and
strength of nature amongst you, so I have spent much of that strength in my
private studdies, and public employments for you. In witness whereof I can yet
produce diverse volumes of Sermons, written by me and published amongst you:
but I account this needless, seeing you your selves can witness enough, as
touching this matter. I will not compare my self with other Spiritual
Laborers in Gods Vineyard, for I know that they have received, some of them
ten talents, some five, some two; yet this I may safely say, that I have not
hid my Masters one talent in a napkin, but have improved it with diligence for
the advancement of his glory and truth amongst you.

Wherefore after so long a time, it concerns you all to enquire how ye have
profited by my Ministry for be ye well assured, that after so much spiritual
husbandry as has been used amongst you, in plowing, sowing, planting, and
wattering; the Lord will expect a plentiful crop of saving knowledge and
obedience from you.

For my part, I am prone to think the best of you, as indulgent fathers are
wont to think of their children, I acknowledge that diverse of your friends and
allies have dyed in my time; whose life was precious, and whose death was
comfortable unto me: and I hope to be better acquainted with them in the world
to come, then ever I was in this world. I ac-acknowledge also, that there are
diverse now living amongst you, of whom I am persuaded such things as accompany
Salvation; that they do sincerely love God and his truth, and have not received
the Grace of God, nor the word of his grace in vain: and my prayer for such is,
That they may persevere in grace unto the end; holding fast the pattern of
wholesome words which they have received; and may never suffer themselves to be
drawn away with the error of the wicked, and so fall from their own
stedfastness. And I must needs acknowledge a third sort amongst you, whom I
have hitherto apprehended as proud contemners of the Word of God in my
Ministry; I pray God to give them Repentance unto life, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare o^ the devil, and may obtain pardon for this sin
before their death; otherwise I tremble to think how hard it will be with them
in the great day of the Lord Christ, when they shall be accountable for every
good Sermon, and for every wholesome truth, which they have thus contemned and
trampled under their feet.

And now my beloved, being desirous before my death to leave among you some
token and testimony of my love toward you, I have published this Treatise,
which I call A Discovery of the World to come; some matters herein contained
have been delivered in the open Congregation, and here your eyes may see what
your ears have heard; yea here your eyes may see more, then yet your ears
have heard from me, or from any other as I suppose, touching this subject. I am
persuaded in my conscience of the truth of such grounds as are here delivered;
and my own soul has felt the comfort of them, for which cause I am the more
hopeful that the same grounds may prove useful and beneficial unto others.
You may perceive with your eyes, that I have not studdied strong lines and
lofty expressions in this work, but have endeavored in plain and familiar
terms to unfold a great Mystery unto you. I do not herein persuade you to seek
and search after the knowledge of this present world, and the things hereof;
neither do I herein persuade you to love this present world, and the things
hereof, you are by nature prone enough unto these things: but hereby I do
persuade and entreat you to study the knowledge of the world to come, and to
be better acquainted with the Doctrine hereof then yet you are: because I
apprehend this as a choice part and high degree of saving knowledge; and that
which will profit you more at the last, then all earthly treasures whatsoever,
and I am persuaded it is for want of this part of saving knowledge, that many
errors in these latter times, are so readily entertained an assented unto.

In brief, you have here a price put into your hands, by Gods providence; the
Lord give you hearts to make a good use of it: and if at any time I shall
perceive this first part of my Discovery to be acceptable and useful to the
Church of God; I shall forthwith (if the Lord shall permit) studdy to conceive a
Second Part; and as soon as I shall have conceived it, I shall be in travel to
bring it forth to public view. In the interim I commend you to God and the
Word of Grace which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance
amongst all them that are sanctified.

Your Servant in such matters as concerns your eternal good John Seager.

The Contents.
AN Introduction.

Sect. I. Showing, That none should be grossly ignorant of the World to come, as
touching the Nature of it.

Sect. II. Showing, That the World to come, considered as a Country, or a
Continent, is to be distinguished from the third Heaven.

Sect. III. Showing, That the World to come shall have no Being before this
present evil world shall be dissolved, but shall begin immediately thereupon.

Sect. IV. Touching the Nature of the World to come, considered as a Continent.

Sect. V. Touching the second Coming of Christ in the Flesh.

Sect. VI. Touching the last Resurrection.

Sect. VII. Touching the last Judgment.

Sect. VIII. Touching the Personal-Humane Kingdom of Christ in the World to
come.

Sect. IX. Touching the different Conditions of good and evil Angels in the
World to come.

Sect. X. Touching the blessed Condition of Gods Elect, and the cursed
Condition of Reprobates, in the World to come; more generally considered.

Sect. XI. Touching the Salvation of Gods Elect, and the Destruction of
Reprobates, in the World to come.

Sect. XII. Touching the Life of Gods Elect, and the Death of Reprobates, in
the World to come.

Sect. XIII. Touching the Glory of Gods Elect, and the Shame of Reprobates, in
the World to come.

Sect. XIV. Touching the Honor of Gods Elect, and the Contempt of Reprobates,
in the World to come*

Sect. XV. Touching the Liberty of Gods Elect, and the Bondage of Reprobates,
in the World to come*

Sect. XVI. Touching the Dominion of Gods Elect, and the Slavery of Reprobates,
in the World to come.

Sect. XVII. Touching the Riches of Gods Elect, and the Poverty of Reprobates,
in the World to come.

Sect. XVIII. Touching the Peace of Gods Elect, and the Tribulation of
Reprobates, in the World to come.

Sect. XIX. Touching the Light of Gods Elect, and the Darkness of Reprobates,
in the World to come.

Sect. XX. Touching the Joy of Gods Elect, and the Sorrow of Reprobates, in the
World to come.

Sect. XXI. Touching the Security of Gods Elect, and the Fear of Reprobates, in
the World to come.

A DISCOVERY OF THE World to Come.
An Introduction.
IT is well known of some, That many learned men have written many learned
Tractates concerning this corrupt World wherein we live. In which they have
discovered not only the whole Continent thereof, which they call the Globe of
Heaven and Earth; but also several Parts, Countries, and Occurrences belonging
to the same: who, by this industry of theirs, have deserved well of all
Students and lovers of learning.

Wherefore it should not be thought presumption for me being a Minister of the
Gospel (though the least of many) to discover in this Tractate, such as it is,
my thoughts concerning the World to Come; In as much as the world to come is a
subject of transcent worth and excellency, far surpassing all that can be
thought or spoken concerning this polluted world. And it was wont to be thought
as a virtue in any, to have their minds much taken up about this Subject; which
being esteemed as a virtue in others, should not be imputed as a vice unto me.

Now in this Treatise I intend to take the Sacred Scripture for my guide, and
to say no more herein then I shall conceive to be warranted thereby. And seeing
I have not as yet so much as heard or read of any writer that has professedly
made a Discovery of the World to come (though many have written of the Heaven
that now is) it may not be expected that I should observe so exact a Method in
this discourse, as doubtless some after Writers may: yet I intend to lay down
my Meditations touching this subject, in the same Order, in which they have
been represented to me, and conceived by me.

SECTION. I. Showing, That none should be grosty ignorant of the World to come,
as touching the nature of it.
THere be some things which a Christian may safely be ignorant of, without any
prejudice to his soul, as on my part it is freely confessed, That I know not
God perfectly, 1 Cor. 13. 9. I know not the mind of the Lord perfectly, Romans
11. 34. I know not the times and seasons, which the father has put in his own
power, Act. 1. 7. I know not the numericall day and hour of Christ's second
coming, Mat. 25. 13. I know not the certain definite number of my particular
sins, Psalm. 19. 12. I know not the full power of Gods anger, Psalm. 90. 11*
Which ignorance being inavoydable on my part, an^ so no sin in me, cannot be
any way prejudicial to my soul; yet I do not think it safe for any to be
grossly or perversely ignorant of the World to come as touching the nature of it.

Howbeit, I conceive this ignorance to be too common amongst many Christian
professors in these our days: for do but ask many of them what the Scripture
means by the World to come? and either they will say, We cannot tell; or else
they will say, It means nothing else thereby but the third heaven, or the
highest heaven, which now is; and so they conceive no difference betwixt the
world to come and the highest heaven. And do but observe the discourses of
many, both in public and in private, when they speak of the World to come, and
you shall find that they will never express distinctly what they mean by this
subject: from which answers and practices of theirs I thus infer within my
self, Surely these people have had some good thoughts in their minds concerning
the World to come, and they can speak much of diverse things and occurrences
which shall be in it, but are still ignorant thereof as touching the nature of
it.

And doubtless this ignorance has been occasio^ed, and is still continued and
fomented by a mis^^ision or misunderstanding of diverse such Scripture
^assages, as do plainly describe unto us the nature of ^^e World to come; and
as long as such passages are ^is-understood, how can it be but that people
should be grossly ignorant of this subject? Where^ore I shall endeavor in the
following Sections, to g^ve a true interpretation of those forenamed
scrip^ure-passages, as occasion shall be offered, that so all ^ay be rightly
informed touching the nature of this ^^bject.

Mean while I affirm, That none should be grossly A Position.
ignorant of the world to come, as touching the nature of it; but all should
understand in some competent measure what the Scripture means by this subject:
and that for these Reasons:

First, It cannot be denied, that the world to com^

Mat. 12. 32. Whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neithe^ in this world, neither in the world to come.

Mark. 10. 30. He shall receive an hundred fol^ now in this time, and in the
world to com^ eternal life.

Luke 20. 34, 35. The children of this world ma^ry and are given in marriage:
but the which shall be accounted worthy to obtain the world, and the
resurrection from the dea^^ neither marry nor are given in marrage.

Ephesians. 1. 1. 21. Christ is far above every na^^ that is named not only in this
world, but a^^ in that which is to come.

Heb. 2. 5. Unto the Angels has he not put ^ subjection the world to come.

Heb. 6. 5. They have tasted the good Word God, and the powers of the world to
come.

In all which places the world to come is not o^ mentioned, but also plainly
asserted, yea distingui^^ed from this polluted world: And wherefore sho^ it be
so often mentioned in the New Testame^^ but for this end, that all should
rightly underst^^^ the nature of it? Whatsoever things are thus wr^^ten, are
written for our learning, Romans 15. 4. ^* if so, then none should be grossly or
perversely ignor^^^ of the nature of it.

Secondly, Things revealed belong to us, and to our children, for to know them,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and we are commanded to search the Scriptures, that we may
understand what is revealed in them, Joh. 5. 39. And he that shall still
continue stubbornly ignorant of his masters revealed will, shall be beaten with
stripes, that is, he shall have his portion of torments in the world to come.
Now the world to come is revealed in the Word of God, and much therein is
revealed concerning it: Therefore it cannot be safe for any to continue grossly
or perversely ignorant thereof, nor of what is meant thereby.

Thirdly, They that understand not the world to come, nor the nature of it,
cannot so ardently desire and affect the fruition of it as those that do;
because good things are most desired of such as know them best: And as none do
so earnestly desire the blessed enjoyment of God and of Christ, as those that
have most acquaintance with God in Christ; so none do so strongly desire the
world to come, and the enjoyment of it, as those that have most unders^^^^ing
concerning it.

Fourthly, The doctrine of the w^rld to come is very useful and comfortable,
yea I know no doctrine in the whole Bible more pro^^^able for instruction,
reproof and comfort then (...), if rightly understood and applied: But how can
it prove useful to such as understand it not

Fifthly, All Gods elect, with Abraham their ^ather, are heir^ of the world to
come, Romans 4. for which cause ^hey would be, not only willing to understand and
know whatsoever the Scripture teaches concerning the same; but also should
take great delight to read, hear, and confer of such matters as concern the
same: As they that are heirs apparent to the Kingdoms of this present world,
are not only willing to understand the nature of them, but also find great
content to discourse of such things as concern them. And so for these Reasons I
infer, that it cannot be safe for any to be grofly and perversely ignorant of
the World to come.

Now if ignorance of the World to come be so dangerous, Meditations, knowing
that he can mak^ (...) as beneficial to others as they have been unt^ me. (...)
if this discovery shall by his divine providence invite ^^ occasion but some
one Divine, of better parts then ^^ self, to write a better Discours^
concerning the sam^ Subject, how shall I rejoice But to conclude this ^^rst
Section, I profess that esteem the right knowledge of the World to come a^ a
choice piece of saving kn^wledg, and I estee^ them all happy that shall attain
unto it. Wherefor^ let us be bold in the fear of God to search and enquire
farther, what the Scripture mean^ by the Worl^ to come; which for my part I
intend, if God sha^ permit. And in the following Sections I shall consider the
World to come two ways; first I shall consider it as a Country or Continent,
next I shall consider it in reference to the principal matters and things which
shall be contained in it.

SECT. II. Showing, That the World to come, considered as a Continent, is to be
distinguished from the third Heaven.
I Acknowledge that there shall be some of the same things in the World to come,
which are now in the third Heaven: As the humane nature of Christ, the person
of Enoch, the person of Elijah, which are now in the third Heaven, and shall be
in the World to come; and as the two latter persons do now reign with Christ in
the third Heaven, so they shall reign with him in the World to come: and as
they now enjoy abundance of holiness, righteousness, love, joy and peace, etc.
so they shall enjoy as much, if not much more, in the World to come.

Yet I affirm, That the World to come, considered as a Continent, is to be
distinguished from the third Heaven. For 1. Our Savior Christ once came from
the third Heaven into this world, for to take our nature upon him, but he came
not then from the World to come into this world for to take our nature upon
him. 2. After his Resurrection he ascended into the third Heaven, but he did
not ascend into the World to come, which had then no being. 3. Saint Paul by
his life time was caught up into the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. but we
cannot say, he was taken up, or caught up, into the World to come. 4. The Souls
of the faithful, after their separation from the body (as we conceive) are in
the third Heaven, but we cannot say, they are in the world to come. 5. The
third Heaven both is for the present, and has been of old; but the world to
come neither is for the present, nor has been of old, but is altogether yet to
come. From all which premises I infer, That the world to come, considered as a
Continent, is to be distinguished from the third Heaven.

Yea that I may not dissemble, my whole meaning is this point, I must needs add
this above all, That I conceive as much difference betwixt the world to come,
and the third Heaven, as betwixt a created and Ens creatum and increatum.
an uncreated Substance: And as I shall prove in its proper place, That the
world to come shall be created by God himself; so in this place I dare affirm,
That the third Heaven was never created; and if this shall appear to be so,
then there must needs be a vast difference betwixt the world to come, and the
third Heaven.

But some one it may be will say unto me, I wonder

What I have said I have said, and I hope I shall clearly evidence this last
passage, viz. That the

First, I take this for a ground, That which was 1 Argument.
not made with hands was never created: which proposition (as I suppose) none
will deny: For what is it to be created, but to be made with hands? and what is
it to be uncreated, but to be not made with hands? And the Scripture
acknowledges, that all created things were made with hands, and were the work
of Gods hands; as Psalm. 8. 3. I consider the Heavens, the work of thy fingers,
the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained. Verse. 6. Thou have made him to
have dominion over the works of tby hands. Psalm. 19. 1. The Firmament shows
his handy work. Psalm. 102. 25. Of old have thou laid the Foundation of the
Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands. Isai. 48. 13. My hand has
laid the Foundation of the Earth, and my right hand has spanned the Heavens.
Thus all created Substances were made with hands, and consequently that which
was not made with hands, was uncreated.

Now we read of the third Heaven, that it was not made with hands, Heb. 9. 11.
and that when Christ entered into it, he entered into the holy Places not made
with hands, Heb. 9. 24. Where the Apostle (...).
plainly distinguishes the third Heaven not only from the Tabernacle in Moses
time, which was made with men's hands, but also from the whole created world,
which was made with Gods hands: not denying the whole Creation to be the work
of his hands, but says of the third Heaven, That it was not made with hands,
and if it were not made with hands, then surely it was uncreated.

Agreeable hereunto is that other place, 2 Cor. 5. 1. If our earthly house of
this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens: Where the Apostle shows, that the Souls of the
faithful after their separation from the body shall have an house not made
(...).
with hands; plainly distinguishing the Souls heavenly house from its bodily or
earthly house: And as he denies not its bodily house to be made with hands, nor
could have denied it; because God made it of the dust of the ground, Genesis 2. So
he affirms, that its heavenly house was not made with hands; and if it were not
made with hands, then it was uncreated; and if it were uncreated, then it must
needs follow that the third Heaven also was uncreated.

Secondly, I take this for a ground, That which 2 Argument.
was from everlasting; and without beginning, was never created: which
Proposition (as I suppose) will not be denied, because it is acknowledged on
all sides, That whatsoever had a beginning, and was not from everlasting, was
created, Genesis 1. 1. and whatsoever had not a beginning, but was from
everlasting, was not created.

Now I assume, That the highest Heaven (commonly called the third Heaven) was
from everlasting, and without beginning; and I am moved to think so, for these
Reasons:

1. God himself was from everlasting, and without beginning, as it is written,
Psalm. 90. 2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed
the Earth, and the World, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.
And we read in Scripture of Gods Glory before the world was, Joh. 17. 5. Of his
Ordination before the world was, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Of his choosing of men before the
foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. And of his purpose before the world
began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. From which places I infer, That God himself was from
everlasting, and without beginning; and if he were from everlasting, then he
was somewhere from everlasting; I dare not say, he was no where from
everlasting, neither dare I say, he was everywhere from everlasting; but he was
somewhere from everlasting: and where was that, but in the highest Heaven? and
if he were in the highest Heaven from everlasting, then this Heaven was also
from everlasting with God, and so without beginning.

2. This third Heaven is called Gods Place, Isai. 26. 21. The Lord comes out
of his Place to punish the inhabitants of the Earth: and Mica. 1. 3. Yea it is
called his high and holy place, Isai. 57. 15. and his dwelling place, 1 King.
8. 30. Hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place.

Now I demand, whether it was not Gods dwelling place before the Creation, as
it has been since? Yes doubtless, it has been his dwelling place ever since
the Creation, and shall be so for ever, and was so from everlasting; for which
cause he is said to inhabit eternity, Isai. 57. 15. and to inhabit eternity,
is to inhabit an eternal place; for in the same Text, his dwelling in an
eternal place, is distinguished from his dwelling in the hearts of humble and
contrite ones. And if the third Heaven was Gods eternal place, then surely it
was from everlasting with him, and so without beginning: Yea if we acknowledge
God to be an everlasting Being, I see no reason why we should deny him an
everlasting place suitable to his Being.

3. This Heaven, of which I speak, is called Gods Throne, Isai. 66. 1. Heaven
is my Throne; and Mat. 5. 34. Mat. 23. 22. Acts 7. 49. And was it not his
Throne from everlasting? Doubtless it was; and so much I gather from that of
the Prophet, Psa. 93. 2. where he says thus to God, Thy Throne is established
of old, thou art from everlasting: which sounds in my ears as if he had said,
As God was from everlasting, so was his heavenly Throne; and if it were from
everlasting, then it was without beginning; and if we acknowledge him to be an
everlasting King, and to have a Kingdom from everlasting, as the Scripture
witnesses in many places, why should we not also acknowledge this his heavenly
Throne to be from everlasting, and so to be without beginning.

4. Yea this Heaven, of which I speak, is that which is predicable, and may be
predicated of the Essence of God, and we may say without a trope or figure,
this Heaven is God, and God is this Heaven; for which cause I conceive it is,
that this Heaven is often put for God himself in the written Word, as Dan. 4.
26. where it was said to Nebuchadnezzar, Thy Kingdom shall be sure unto thee,
after thou shall have known that the Heavens do rule: which is all one as if it
had been said, After thou shall have known that the most high God shall reign
in the Kingdoms of men, as it is interpreted for us, Dan. 5. 21. So also it is
said unto the chief Priests and Elders, Mat. 21. 25. The Baptism of John,
whence was it? from Heaven or of men? as if it had been said, Was it from God,
or from men only? So again, Luke 15. 21. the Prodigal said unto his father, I
have sinned against Heaven and against thee: which is all one as if he had
said, I have sinned against God and against thee. And so lastly John said, Joh.
3. 27. A man can receive nothing except it be given him from Heaven; that is,
except it be given him from God, from whom every good and perfect gift does
come. In all which, and other such like places, God is described by the name of
Heaven, and called Heaven; and why so? For to teach us (as I conceive) that
this Heaven is something appertaining to the Essence of God, and does not
essentially differ from God himself; but as he is a spiritual Being, an
independent Being, so he is also an heavenly Being: And as we may safely say,
That he is a merciful God, the God of Mercy, and Mercy it self; so it is not
improper to say, He is a heavenly God, the God of Heaven, and Heaven it self.
Now we know that all things belonging to the Essence of God, were from
everlasting with him; but this Heaven, of which I speak, is something belonging
or appertaining to his Essence, as I have showed; and consequently it was
without beginning. These are four Reasons which has induced me to think, that
the third Heaven was from everlasting, and without beginning; and if so, then
it will from hence necessarily follow, that it was never created.

Thirdly, I take this for a ground, That which is essentially Adam before his
fall, it was not essential to him, but it was the gift of God: so that holiness
which was and is in the humane nature of Christ, is not essential to his
Humanity, but is the gift of God; and that holiness which is in the Regenerate,
is not essential to them, but is the gift of God; that holiness which belongs
to the seventh day, is not essential to it, but accidental, by reason of Gods
Institution; that Ceremonial holiness which was in Temples and Altars, was not
essential, but accidental, by reason of Gods Ordinanation; and the created
Heavens are so far from being essentially holy, that they have been and are
polluted and defiled with the sin of Angels and men, as it is said, Job 15. 15.
The Heavens are not clean in his sight: Yea the whole Creation is so far from
being essentially holy, that it groans to be delivered from that bondage of
corruption which the sin of men and devils has brought upon it, Romans 8. 21.
22. And if there be no essential holiness to be found in any created Being,
then it must be granted, That whatsoever is essentially holy and undefiled, was
never created.

Now I affirm, That the third Heaven is essentially holy and undefiled, as we
may conceive, for these Reasons:

1. This Heaven was from everlasting with God, as has been before showed; and
whatsoever was from everlasting, was essentially holy and undefiled.

2. This Heaven is somewhat appertaining to the Essence of God, as has been
before showed; and whatsoever appertains to the Essence of God, is essentially
holy and undefiled.

3. The Scripture speaks much of the holiness of this third Heaven, saying, He
will hear him from his holy Heaven, Psalm. 20. 6. Who shall dwell in thy holy
Hill? Psalm. 15. 1. Who shall stand in his holy Place? Psalm. 24. 3. God sits
upon the Throne of his Holiness, Psalm. 47. 8. which holiness of the third
Heaven must be either essential or accidental; and accidental it cannot be,
because in those and such like places the third Heaven is thereby distinguished
from all places and persons that are accidentally holy, as the distinction is
plainly expressed in those words, I dwell in the high and holy Place; with him
also that is of an humble and contrite spirit, Isa. 57. 15.

4. Neither can it be proved, that this Heaven, of which I speak, ever was or
ever shall be defiled with any sin, as the created Heavens were and are
defiled. For which Causes I conceive the third Heaven to be essentially holy
and undefiled; and if so, then from hence it will necessarily follow, That it
was never created.

Fourthly, I take this for another ground, That 4 Argument.
which is by nature immutable and unchangeable, was never created: and this
Proposition also may well be yielded, because we have known the mutability of
all created things. As we have seen the mutability of the Angels, in that some
of them kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, Jude 6. and
in that others of them are now confirmed in their original purity: So we have
seen the mutability of Adam in his first Fall, and of his Posterity since his
Fall: and we read of the mutability of that Heaven and Earth which God created
in the beginning; Psalm. 102. 26. They shall perish, yea, all of them shall wax
old like a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed. And seeing we cannot be ignorant of the mutability of all created
things, we may well grant, That whatsoever is by nature immutable and
unchangeable, was never created.

But I add hereunto, That the third Heaven is by nature immutable; as we may
well conceive: First, Because God himself is by nature immutable, according as
it is written, Psalm. 102. 27. But thou art the same. Job 23. 13. But he is
still of one mind; and who can turn him? Mal. 3. 6. I am the Lord, I change
not. Jam. 1. 17. With him is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. And if God
himself be by nature unchangeable, then all things belonging to his Essence,
must needs be so too; but the third Heaven is something belonging to his
Essence, as has been showed; therefore it must needs be by nature
unchangeable. Secondly, That which ever was, is, and shall be Gods dwelling
place, and Gods Throne, must needs be by nature immutable; but the third Heaven
ever was, is, and shall be his dwelling place and his Throne, as was before in
part intimated, therefore it must needs be by nature immutable; and if so, it
will necessarily follow, That it was never created.

Fifthly, I take this for another ground, That which 5 Argument.
both is, and ever has been above the created Heavens, was never created; as
we may well think, because we cannot name any created Substance that both is,
and ever was above the created Heavens: Indeed I grant, That the humane nature
of Christ, and the Souls of the faithful since their separation, are now as
created Beings above the created Heavens; yet we cannot say, they have ever
been so, because there was a time when they were beneath the created Heavens;
neither can it be said of any created Substance, That it both is, and ever has
been above the created Heavens; wherefore we may well assent to this
Proposition, That whatsoever both is and ever has been above the created
Heavens, was never created. But I add, That the third Heaven both is and ever
has been above the created Heavens: And so much I gather from such passages in
the Word of God, as speak of a place above the created Heavens; as, Thou have
set thy Glory above the Heavens, Psalm. 8. 1. Be thou exalted, O God, above the
Heavens, Psalm. 57. 5. Thy Mercy is great above the Heavens, Psalm. 108. 4.
Christ ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, Ephesians.
4. 10. that is, above all created Heavens, etc. And if there be a place above
the created Heavens, what should that place be but the third Heaven? And if we
acknowledge concerning God himself, That he is, and ever has been; above the
created Heavens, as we may well acknowledge, because he is said to be most High,
and to be higher then the highest of created Beings; why should we not also
acknowledge concerning the third Heaven, which is Gods essential Place or Vbi,
that it both is, and ever has been, above the created Heavens? and if so, then
it will necessarily follow, That it was never created.

Sixthly, I take this for another ground, That 6 Argument.
which is a place of perfect Bliss, was never created: which I conceive to be
true, because there is no perfect Bliss to be found in this created World; and
we use to say, None are perfectly blessed while they remain in this World, but
are subject to many defects and imperfections: their knowledge cannot be
perfect, because it is mixed with ignorance; their joy cannot be perfect,
because it is mixed with sorrow; their love cannot be perfect, because it is
mixed with hatred; their righteousness cannot be perfect, because it is mixed
with sin: Yea this whole Creation is so far from being a place of perfect
Bliss, that it groans to be dissolved, and so to be resolved into a more
blessed condition; and if there be no perfect Bliss to be found in this created
world, then it must needs be found in an uncreated place.

But, say I, The third Heaven is a place of perfect Bliss; for there the Father
is perfectly blessed above all degrees of comparison or comprehension; there
the Son is perfectly blessed in his degree, and there the Saints are perfectly
blessed in their degree; and it is commonly said, That this Heaven is a blessed
Coelum beatorum.
Heaven, the Heaven of blessed Ones, and of blessed Souls departed; and if so,
then it will follow, That it was never created.

Seventhly, I take this for my last ground, That

And I add, That the third Heaven never was any thing of, or belonging to this
created world, as may appear by such places of Scripture, as do distinguish
this Heaven from this created world, and from all things of, or belonging
thereunto.

Thus the Fathers being in this Heaven, is distinguished from his being in this
created world: Our Father which art in Heaven, Mat. 6. 9. Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven:
Whosoever shall deny me before men, him also will I deny before my Father which
is in Heaven, Mat. 10. 32, 33.

Thus Christ's being in Heaven, as touching his humane nature, is distinguished
from his being in this created world: I came forth from the Father, and am come
into the World: Again, I leave the World, and go to the Father, Joh. 16. 28.
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall s^ come again, in
like manner as ye have seen him g^ into Heaven, Acts 1. 11.

Thus the being of holy Angels in this Heaven, is distinguished from their
being in this created world at other times: In Heaven their Angels do always
behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 18. 10. Likewise joy
shall be in Heaven in the presence of the Angels of God, Luke 15. 7, 10.

And thus the being of faithful Souls in this Heaven is distinguished from
their former being in this created world: Luke 23. 43. To day shall thou be
with me in Paradise.

From which distinguishing places I gather, That this third Heaven never was
any thing of, or belonging to this created world; and if so, then it will
follow from hence, That it was never created.

And I would here demand of any indifferent Reader, not prepossessed with
prejudice, Whether our Savior Christ, and the faithful Souls departed, at the
time of their ascension into this Heaven, did not leave this created world
altogether, and so go unto the Father? If you say, They did not, then you
grant, that they yet remain in some part of the created world, and that at the
time of their ascension, they went but from one part of this created world unto
another; and consequently from one place of misery unto another: But if you
say, They left this created world altogether when they ascended into this
Heaven, then by consequence you grant, That they are now in an uncreated
Heaven; and so you do consent unto all that I have said concerning this matter.

Wherefore I hope these seven Arguments, before produced, will suffice for
proof of my former assertion: Howbeit to make the matter yet more plain, I
shall be contented to answer such Objections as I can imagine will be raised
against the said assertion.

Peradventure some man will say, Many natural Coelum Empyreum.
they say, It is a created Heaven; for which cause your former Assertion is the
more to be suspected.

1. My former Assertion is not to be tried by the rules of natural Philosophy,
but by the written Bartholinus de Coelo.
third Heaven to be an uncreated Heaven, to be distinguished from the whole
created world; and proves that Empyrean Heaven (of which they speak so much)
to be a mere Chimera, or figment of their own; and I hold the testimony of one
such Christian Philosopher to be of more validity for my cause, then the
testimony of many more natural Philosophers can be against it.

Peradventure another will say, Many good Divines

1. If in this point I dissent from good Divines, that has been too long
concealed from many. Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, Amicior Veritas.


2. Suppose those good Divines do not agree with me in plain words, nor speak
out as I do, That the third Heaven is an uncreated Heaven, but seem to imply,
that it is a part of the created world: Yet, I take it, they do agree with me
in effect, and by good consequence, when as they teach, That the third Heaven
is incorruptible, unchangeable, immovable; for if it be incorruptible,
unchangeable, immovable, how can it be any part of the created world? or if it
be any part of the created world, how can it be incorruptible, unchangeable,
immovable? seeing we know that the whole created world is corruptible, and
groans to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, Romans 8. 21, 22. And as
it is corruptible, so it is changeable, and shall be changed, Psalm. 102. 26.
And as it is changeable, so it is moveable, and shall be moved and shaken, yea
it shall be shaken in pieces at the time of its dissolution, as it is written,
Yet once more, I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven, Heb. 12. 26. If
then those good Divines, which the Objection speaks of, do agree with me in
effect, and by good consequence, why should I be blamed for speaking that
plainly which they speak obscurely and implicitly?

Peradventure another will say, If there be an Nehem. 9. 6. where it is said,
Thou, even thou, art Lord alone; thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens,
with all their Host, etc. and if so, then the third must needs be a created
Heaven also.

I dare not confound the third Heaven with the Heaven of Heavens, as some have
done, even supposing them to be both one, and that whatsoever is affirmed or
denied of the one, may also be affirmed or denied of the other: But I conceive
a great difference betwixt them; for by the Heaven of Heavens, in the place
before quoted, and in some other places of Scripture, I understand only the
highest of created Heavens, which, in reference to those inferior Heavens which
are within its circumference, is called the Heaven of Heavens: But by the third
Heaven, I understand the highest Heaven, Luke 19. 38. which is higher then the
highest of created Heavens, and has no other Heaven above it, being the
highest of all Heavens, and the highest mentioned in Scripture: whereas the
Heaven of Heavens before mentioned, though it be the highest of created
Heavens, yet it is not the highest of all Heavens, but has this third Heaven
above it. Now I acknowledge, That the Heaven of Heavens, in the former sense
considered, is a created Heaven, according to that of Nehem. 9. 6. and being
the highest of created Heavens, it must needs be it self also a created Heaven.
But it will not follow from hence, That the third Heaven is a created Heaven,
because this is above all created Heavens, and therefore must needs be
uncreated, as has been showed before.

And for the better avoiding of strife about words, I acknowledge also, That the
third Heaven, in a tolerable sense, may be called the Heaven of Heavens, viz.
in respect of its transcendent excellency; as God sometimes is called, God of
Gods, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; yet I do not remember that it is any
where so called in Scripture; but if it be any where so called, it cannot be
the same with the Heaven of Heavens, before described.

Peradventure another will say, If there be an uncreated Heaven, that third
Heaven into which Saint Paul was caught up, 2 Cor. 12. 2. should seem to be
that; but that third Heaven may be thought to be a created Heaven, because it
is called the third, in reference to two created Heavens, viz. the Airy Heaven
and the Starry Heaven; and if these two be created Heavens, then the third also
must needs be so too.

The consequence of this Objection is denied: for we read of two Adams in
Scripture, the first Adam and the second; and the first Adam was sinful, yet it
will not follow from thence, that the second Adam was so too. So, though I
grant the two Heavens, before mentioned, to be created Heavens, yet it will not
follow from hence, that the third is so too: And as I acknowledge that third
Heaven, into which Saint Paul was taken up, to be that blessed Heaven of which
I speak in my former Assertion; so I have proved by seven Arguments already,
That it was never created; and I am the more confirmed in it, because Saint
Paul calls that third Heaven by the name of Paradise, and says, he heard
unspeakable words in it, not lawful to be uttered, 2 Cor. 12. 4. whereas if a
man could see and hear all that is to be seen and heard in the created Heavens,
I suppose it might be lawful for him to utter it.

Peradventure another will say, That which is, and Souls departed; therefore it
is a created place.

First, I acknowledge, that the third Heaven is, for the present, the habitation
of some created Beings; Psalm. 71. 3. Psalm. 90. 1. Psalm. 91. 1. yet we may not
thence infer, that God is a created Being: So though I grant, That the third
Heaven is the habitation of some created Beings for the present, yet we may not
hence infer, That it is a created place. Secondly, Whereas the Objection says,
That the third Heaven shall ever be the habitation of created Beings, as now it
is; this is plainly denied by me: for I believe, That the third Heaven shall be
the habitation of Christ's humane Nature, of holy Angels, and faithful Souls, as
now it is, only for a time, Rev. 20. 4. that is, until the Father shall have
put all things under his feet, and shall have subduedall his enemies, Psa. 110.
1. and until the times of restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. and when this
time shall be expired (which shall be at the end of this present world) I
believe, That Christ in his humane Nature shall come again from the third
Heaven, with all his holy Angels and Saints with him, for to judge and reign for
ever after in the World to come; and that he shall then deliver up the Kingdom
to God, even the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. What Kingdom? That personal Kingdom of
the Father in which he now reigns, and shall reign till then; and that then
the Father shall be All in All in his own personal Kingdom, as he was before
Christ came thither, and shall be supreme over all elsewhere, (though the Son
be after a sort now equal with him,) and so shall Christ ever after sit upon
his own personal Throne, and reign in his own personal Kingdom, Rev. 3. 21.
Luke 22. 29, 30. as I shall have occasion hereafter in this Treatise to show
more fully.

Now what other matters will be objected against my former Assertion, I cannot
imagine: but the former Objections are thus answered; and I suppose that other
such like may as easily be answered. And all that has been said in this
Section, tends to the confutation, not only of such as think the third Heaven
to be a created Heaven, but also of such as think the World to come to be all
one with the third Heaven; whereas it may plainly appear by what has been
said, That the World to come, considered as a Continent, is to be distinguished
from the third Heaven.

SECT. III. Showing, That the World to come (considered as a Continent) shall
have no Being before this present evil World shall be dissolved, but shall
begin immediately thereupon.
FOr evidencing whereof, these four Positions are to be proved; viz.

1. This present World is evil. 2. This present World shall be dissolved. 3.
The World to come shall have no Being before this present World be dissolved.
4. That it shall begin immediately thereupon.
That this present World is evil, is plainly acknowledged, 1 Position
Gal. 1. 4. Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from
this present evil World: where this present world is called an evil world; not
in respect of the original and first condition of it, for that was very good;
And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1.
31. Nor in respect of the substance of any creature contained in it, for every
creature of God is good, viz. for the substance of it, 1 Timothy 4. 4. But it is
called an evil world, in respect of two accidents belonging to it, viz. the
evil of sin, and the evil of pain or punishment.

The first thing that proves this present world to be evil is sin, whereof
there is much to be found, and many are the corruptions and pollutions that are
in this world through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 1 John 2. 16. For the
reprobate Angels, who sinned in the beginning, do sin still, and can do nothing
else but sin; and all men and women, now living in this world, are sinful by
nature, and sinful by practice, and do sin daily, in thought, word or deed, by
omission or commission, some unto death, and some not unto death, 1 John 5. 16.
And if I should here reckon up in order all the particular sins mentioned or
spoken against in the Word of God, it would be no hard matter to nominate or
find a subject person, if not many subject persons, for every sin: Yea, there
is no man so just upon earth, that does good, and sineth not, Eccles. 7. 20.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20. 9. If
we should say, our sins are but few, the Prophet will tell us, they are more
then can be numbered by us; for who can understand his errors? Psalm. 19. 12. Or
if we should justify our selves, and say, We have no sin, we should but act
the part of Deceivers, Liars, Hypocrites and Apostates; for if any man say, ^e
has no sin, he deceives himself, and there is no truth in him; he makes God
a liar, and his Word ^s not in him, 1 John 1. 8, 10. Now sin is evil, Psalm. ^4.
14. and the greatest of evils, because it has no ^eal good in it, but is most
opposite unto the greatest good, and is the cause of all other evils: And if
sin be evil, then the world that has so much sin in it must needs be evil too,
because of sin; and as it was never evil before sin came into it, so it was
never good since, in this respect: And how can it be good ^n this respect?
seeing sin is a transgression of the Law, a work of the Devil, the World and
the Flesh; seeing it is hateful to God, and hurtful to men; a dishonor to God,
and a reproach to men; a grief to God, and to all good men; and the only
Makebate betwixt God and man.

Yea, as long as we shall find any sin in the world, whether it be original or
actual, against Law or Gospel, against God, our neighbor, or our selves, we may
safely say, It is an evil world by reason of sin. Thus, it was an evil world by
reason of sin in Noah's time, because then the wickedness of man was great upon
the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually; the earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled
with violence, Genesis 6. 5, 11. It was an evil world, when there was no King in
Israel, because then every man did that which was right in his own eyes, Judge.
17. 6. It was an evil world by reason of sin in Zedekiahs time, because then
the King himself did that which was evil in the sight of his God; and all the
chief of the Priests and the Prophets transgressed very much after all the
abominations of the Heathen ^^d polluted the house of the Lord which he had
hallowed in Jerusalem; and they mocked the Messenger of God, and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, till there was no remedy, 2 Chro. 36. 12, 14, 16. It was an evil world
by reason of sin in the Prophet Hosea's time, because then there was no truth,
no^ Hos. 4. 1, 2.
mercy, etc. It was an evil world by reason of sin in our Saviors time,
because then many loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were
evil, etc. John 3. 19, 20. And thus it is an evil world by reason of sin even
at this day, for we know that many Countries at this day are merely Paganish
and Atheistical, with God and without Christ: and many others have taken up a
false Religion, as Judaism; Mahomatism, Antichristianism and Sectarism^ yea the
most reformed Countries and Churches at this day are blemished with many
deformities; and this English Nation, which was wont to be renowned for the
form and power of godliness, is now become a very sink of errors and abominable
practices; so that a stranger or forraigner may now nod the head at England,
and say, There are many deceivers in England, who have deceived many. There are
in it many false Prophets that walk about Mat. 24. 11 Mat. 7. 15.
in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. There are many false
teachers, that privily 2 Pet. 2. 1.
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. There are
many that creep into 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
houses, and lead captive filly women, laden with iniquity, led away with
diverse lusts; ever learning, and never come unto the knowledge of the truth.
There are many that will not endure sound doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
but after their own lusts do heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;
and turning their ^ars from the truth, are turned unto fables. There 2 Pet. 2.
2.
^re many that follow the pernicious ways of Seducers, by reason of whom the
way of truth is evil spoken of. And there are many that are lovers of 2 Timothy 3.
2, 3, 4, 5.
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unthankeful, unholy, without natural affection, truce-breachers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And as it is an evil world at this
day by reason of sin, so we may well expect, that it shall grow worse and worse
toward its end and dissolution, because our Savior has said, That toward
the end iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold, Mat. 24.
12. wherefore we may well acknowledge this present world to be evil in respect
of sin.

The second thing which proves this present world to be evil is pain or
punishment, whereof also there is much to be found; and as long as a man lives
in this world, his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him
shall mourn, Job 14. 22. Sin and punishment are as the cause and the effect, as
the mother and the daughter, the one leads the way, the other drags after; the
one makes men merry for the present, the other makes them mourn afterward: and
as all men living have sinned, so they do all suffer for their sin more or
less, in one kind or other; only with this difference; those pains which are
suffered by Gods Elect in this world, are truly said to be castigatory, and
such as do prepare them for eternal Salvation; but those which are suffered by
the rest, are truly said to be vindicatory, and such as do prepare them for
eternal wrath: And the pains of this life are either inward, such as are
inflicted upon the Soul, or inward man; or else outward, such as are inflicted
upon the body, or outward estate of man. But if any desire to have a particular
account of the pains of this life, he must hear and observe the several plaints
and cries of all particular persons, and so you shall have one to cry out, Oh
my head! another, Oh my eye! another, Oh my tooth! another, Oh my heart!
another, Oh my back! another, Oh my bones! another, Oh my bowels! another, Oh
my thigh! another, Oh my foot! You shall have one to complain of the Fever,
another of the Plurisie, another of the Dropsy, another of the Palsy, another
of the Stone, another of the Strangury, another of the Gout. You shall hear one
bewail his corporal blindness, another his deafness, another his lameness,
another his poverty, another his oppression, another his losses, another his
imprisonment, another his banishment: And perchance you shall have another say,
The graves are ready for me, and the pains of death, or the pains of Hell are
upon me: Thus lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin; and sin, when it
is finished, brings forth death, Jam. 1. 15. Yea, not only man himself does
thus suffer for his sin in this world, but also other creatures do suffer pain
for man's sake; and the whole Creation is in pain, and groans to be delivered
from that bondage of corruption, which the sin of man has brought upon it;
Romans 8. Now all pain or punishment is evil in its own nature, Mat. 6. 13. That
which helps to make the days of our pilgrimage to be few and evil, Genesis 47. 9.
And all the days of the afflicted are evil, Prove. 15. 15. And consequently this
present world, that has so much pain or punishment in it, must needs be evil
in this respect. And if here it should be asked, Whether the latter days of
this world shall not be better then the former, and more free from pain and
punishment? My Answer should be, I think they shall not, because our Savior
has foretold us of many painful evils that shall happen toward the end of
this world, as of Wars, and rumors of Mat. 24. 6, 7, 10, 30.
Wars; of Famines, Pestilences and Earthquakes in diverse places; of the rising
of Nation against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom; of the rising of parents
against their children, and children against their parents; of hating and
betraying one another: and shows, That at the very time of his second
appearing, all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn; and doubtless they shall
then mourn, not only by reason of sin, but also by reason of pain and
punishment that shall be then upon them. Wherefore I infer from what has been
said, That this present world is evil, and is likely to beget worse, both in
respect of sin, and also in respect of pain or punishment.

Yet I find in some Books printed of late years, Jews, and thereupon shall
follow a great Conversion of the Gentiles, and such a golden age for holiness
and happiness as never has been: Yea some of them have said, That there shall
be a Reformation-change all the world over, at least in Discipline, before its
end. But I would tell such Dreamers, Surely a deep sleep is fallen upon you;
you sleep in the day of spiritual light, and not in the night of spiritual
darkness, as others do; you are more swayed by the letter, then by the proper
sense and scope of those Scriptures which you bring for the proof of that
fantastical New-World, of which you speak: you balk the New Testament, and
hide your selves under the dark Prophecies of the Old; whereas you should
consider, that Christ and his Apostles have so clearly interpreted the Prophets
as touching the latter times, and have so fully stated the evil and perilous
condition of them, that we need not appeal from them to the Prophets in this
Argument. And whereas in your printed pages you quote diverse passages out of
the 11 Chapter to the Romans, as if they were pat and sure for your opinion: I
would tell you also, That you much mistake the proper occasion and scope of
that Chapter; for you should know, that the Apostle, in the said Chapter, does
speak of the Jews of his present time, and not of a latter offspring of them,
as may appear verse. 5. and that the Jews of his then present time were some of
them of Gods Election, and others not, verse. 7. and that those of the Election
were some of them converted, and others were not, verse. 14. but as for such as
were unconverted among them, he was willing to convert and save them, and had a
good hope to do it, as he shows, verse. 14, 15, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
Yet in all this Chapter he speaks not a word of a National Conversion of the
Jews of latter times; and when he says, A^l Israel shall be saved, verse. 26.
he is so far from speaking of the temporal Conversion of any, that he speaks of
the final, full and everlasting Salva^ion of all the Elect Israel of God, as
has been acknowledged by many learned Expositors. Wherefore, Calvin, Gerard,
Wollebius.
when you shall awake out of this sleep, I hope ^ou will say with me, that ye
have been in a dream ^hitherto, and that this present world is evil, and is
^ikely to be yet worse, both in respect of sin and punishment.

But if some shall here object and say, We must

To this I answer: It will be hard, if not impossible, Sol.
for any to prove, either that these perilous days of ours do belong unto the
morning of the latter times, or that the evening shall be less perilous then
the morning has been: Rather I think it may be proved, That the morning of the
latter times was less perilous, both in respect of sin and punishment, and
more eximious for holiness and happiness, then the evening shall be. Wherefore,
as I conceive, this distinction thus applied will not help at a dead lift,
though it may be very useful as it may be applied some other way.

And though it be true, that all such unconverted Jews as belong to Gods
Election shall in time be converted; yet it will be a sweating task for any to
prove from the 11 Chapter to the Romans, or from any other place or places of
Scripture, That there shall be an Universal or a National Conversion either of
the present o^ of a latter offspring of Jews, or that there shall be so great
or so numerous a Conversion of Jews hereafter in any time to come, as there was
in the days of Christ and of his Apostles: And if the Conversion of the
Gentiles shall continue in a constant course and succession till the second
Coming of Christ from the heavenly Sion, Romans 11. 25, 26. what time will there
remain for a National Conversion of a latter offspring of Jews? But more will
be said of this in the following pages.

Again, If this present world be evil in both the former respects, then the
sons of men should not love it in those respects, nor set their hearts upon it.
Indeed we have no reason to hate this world, as it is Gods workmanship, nor as
it is the place for Repentance and true Conversion, nor as it is the place
wherein much good may be received and done; and wherein we are to seek the
Kingdom of God and his Mat. 6.
Righteousness; to run the race of Christianity, and to make our Calling and
Election sure. So neither have we any reason to love it, for any vanity, sin,
corruption or misery, that is to be found in it, according to that of Saint
John; Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world, 1 John 2.
15. where the world is taken either figuratively, for the wicked of the world,
or else properly, for the plac^ of earthly corruption: and by the things that
ar^ in the world, he understands the sinful lusts hereof, and shows that this
world is not to be loved in these respects, because if any man love the world
(in such respects) the love of the father is not in him; and all that is in the
world (says he) the lust of the flesh the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, is not of the Father, but is of the world, Verse. 16. And Saint James
tells us. That the friendship of this world is enmity with God, Jam. 4. 4. Nay
we should be so far from loving it in those respects, that,

1. We should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 12.

2. We should use it rather for necessity, then for delight; and this is to use
this world, as not abusing it, 1 Cor. 7. 31.

3. We should strive by faith to overcome and subdue in our selves the love of
earthly vanities; For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world, and this
is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John 5. 4.

4. We should take heed, lest at any time our hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day of the
Lord come upon us unawares, Luke 21. 34.

5. We should be heavenly minded and affected, according to the Apostles
advice: If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God: Set your affection on things
above, not on things on the earth, Col. 3. 1, 2. And according to our Saviors
advice; Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for your
selves treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal: For where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also, Mat. 6. 19, 20, 21.

6. We should be much conversant in our thoughts and speeches about heavenly
matters and affairs; and this is to have our Conversation in Heaven, from
whence we look for our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 20.

7. We should be constantly willing to leave this world, and to be wholly
divorced from it in the former respects; as Elijah was, when he said, It is
enough Lord, take away my life, for I am no better then my father: as old
Simeon was, when he said, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace:
and Saint Paul was, when he said, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all: And then may a man truly say with the Apostle, I
am crucified unto the world, and the world to me, Gal. 6. 14. when he is as
willing to part with the world, as the world is to part with him.

The next Position to be proved, is,

That this present world shall one day be dissolved: 2 Posit.
And here by this present world, I understand the visible Heavens and Earth
that now are, together with the creatures and works which are in them, or shall
be found in them at the latter day: For though the visible Heavens and Earth
which now are, may be called this present world (considered as a Continent) and
the creatures and works in them, may be called the things of the world; yet all
these together do but make up this whole visible world, as appears, 2 Pet. 3.
10. And to be dissolved, is all one as to be brought to dust; as when a man's
body shall be dissolved, it shall be brought to dust, according to that, Genesis
3. 19. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. So when this world shall
be dissolved, it shall be brought to dust, because it is the nature of fire
when it burns up any substance, to bring it to dust and ashes; and this present
world shall be burnt up, (as I am to show by and by,) therefore it shall be
brought to dust.

And that I be not misapprehended of any in this point, these three Cautions
are to be considered before I come to prove my Position.

1. I do not say, That this present world shall be annihilated or brought to
nothing, as some have thought, because the dust hereof shall remain after its
dissolution, as the dust of man's body shall remain somewhile after its
dissolution.

2. I grant, That some of Gods Elect shall be found alive in their bodies at
the latter day, and that their bodies shall not be dissolved, but shall be
preserved from the dissolution that shall then come upon this world, as it is
written, Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together in
the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord,
1 These. 4, 17. but these only excepted, this whole visible world shall be
dissolved.

3. Neither do I say, That this present world shall be dissolved altogether in
respect of its Essence and Being, because it shall have a Being, viz. a new
form and manner of Being after its dissolution: as when a man dies, his body is
dissolved, not altogether in respect of its Essence and Being, because man's
body shall have a new form and manner of Being after its dissolution, Job 14.
14. but when a man dies, his body is dissolved only in respect of its present
or pristine condition, and shall be no more such a body as it was, either for
substance or corrupt qualities, because the substance thereof shall be turned
to dust, and the present or pristine corrupt qualities thereof shall cease. So
when this present world shall be dissolved, it shall not cease to be
altogether, because it shall be again under a new form and condition, and that
for ever, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Isai. 66. 22. for which cause it is said, That the
Earth abides for ever, Eccles. 1. 4. and it cannot abide for ever under its
present form and condition, but doubtless it shall abide for ever under a new
form, after its new Creation: and it is said, that God has established the
world never to be moved, 1 Chronicles. 16. 30. Psalm. 93. 1. Psalm. 96. 10. Jer. 10.
12. Ier. 51. 15. Isai. 45. 18. Yet we know that this world shall be moved at
its dissolution, Heb. 12. 26. But the meaning of these places places is, that
after its new Creation it shall never be moved: So then, this present world
shall be dissolved only in respect of its present or pristine condition; that
is, it shall be no more such a world as now it is, either for substance or
corrupt qualities, because the present substance of it shall be turned to dust,
and the present corrupt qualities and accounts of it shall be no more.

Now that this present world shall one day be dissolved, in the former sense,
is fully acknowledged (...).
by Saint Peter, who says, All these things shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. 11.
meaning (by all these things) the visible Heavens and Earth which now are, with
all the creatures and works in them, which altogether make up this present
world; and he says further, verse. 12. That these things being on fire, shall
be dissolved: and so he plainly avereth, that this present wo^ld shall one day
be dissolved and brought to dust. And for further proof hereof, these ensuing
particulars should be considered.

1. That this present world shall one day have an end put unto it, as the
Scripture witnesses, as often as it speaks of the end of this world, as Mat.
24. 3. Mat. 28. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 11. and 15. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 7. From whence I may
thus reason, That which shall have an end put unto it, shall be so far
dissolved; but this present world shall have an end put unto it, in respect of
its present condition: therefore in this respect it shall be dissolved.

2. That this present world (considered as before) shall one day perish,
according to that, They shall perish, but thou shall endure, Psalm. 102. verse.
26. Now that which shall perish, shall so far be dissolved; but this present
world shall perish, in respect of its present and pristine condition: therefore
in this respect it shall be dissolved.

3. That this present world is mutable, and shall be changed, according to
that, As a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, Psalm.
102. 26. As man's body shall be changed, Job 14. 14. Now that which shall be
changed, shall be so far dissolved, as it shall be changed; but this present
world shall one day be changed, as touching its present and pristine condition,
form and manner of Being: therefore in this respect it shall be dissolved.

4. That this world is corruptible, and under the bondage of corruption, as may
appear, Romans 8. 21. and that which is corruptible shall one day be dissolved,
so far as it is corruptible; but this present world is corruptible, inrespect
of its present and pristine condition: therefore in this respect it shall be
dissolved.

5. That this present world is moveable, and shall one day be shaken in pieces,
as it is said, Once more I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven, Heb. 12.
26. and that which may be shaken, shall be dissolved, so far as it may be
shaken; but this present world shall be shaken in respect of its present
condition, form and manner of Being: therefore in this respect it shall be
dissolved.

6. That this present world is subject to vanity, Romans 8. 20. and is of a
vanishing nature: For the Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, Isa. 51. 6.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, Mat. 5. 18. The fashion of this world passes
away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. The world passes away, and the lusts thereof, 1 John 2.
17. Now that which shall vanish away, shall be dissolved, so far as it shall
vanish away; but this present world shall vanish away in respect of its present
condition, form and manner of Being: therefore in this respect it shall be
dissolved.

7. That this present world waxes old like a garment, Psalm. 102. 26. Isai. 51.
6. and has been in its latter age for one thousand six hundred years, 1 Cor.
10. 11. 1 John 2. 18. Now that which waxes old like a ga^ment shall one day be
dissolved in that respect; but this present world waxes old in respect of its
present condition: therefore in this respect it shall be dissolved.

8. That this present world shall one day be no more remembered, nor come into
mind, in respect of its present and pristine condition, form and manner of
Being, Isai. 65. 17. Rev. 21. 1. and consequently in this respect it shall one
day be dissolved and brought to dust.

And for further satisfaction in this point, I shall ^nswer these three Queries.

By whom this present world shall be dissolved? Answ. It shall be dissolved by
him that made it; It Ejusdem enim est mundum creare, and eundem destruere.
was only God himself that created it in the begin^ing, Genesis 1. 1. and God
himself shall dissolve it, Psalm. 102. 26. Heb. 12. 26. by his mighty power.

By what means it shall be dissolved? Answ. It shall be dissolved by means of
fire; of which fire A fire shall devour before him, and ^t shall be very
tempestuous round about him, Psalm. ^0. 3. The day comes that shall burn like
an Oven, and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall he stubble, and
the day that comes shall burn them up, that it shall leave them neither root
nor branch, Mal. 4. 1. The Heavens and the Earth which now are, are reserved
unto fire against the day of Judgment and Perdition of ungodly men: In which
day the Heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, 2 Pet. 3. 7, 12. And though I cannot perfectly show what
Qualis autem futurus sit hic ignis, Deus novit, qui est ignis consumens. Wolleb.
kind of fire this shall be, because only God himself, who is a consuming fire,
perfectly knows what kind of fire it shall be; yet I dare affirm, that it shall
be such a Judgment of fire as never was, has been, or shall be before it, 2
Pet. 3 7. And that this fire shall be extraordinary: 1. For its noise, because
it is said, That the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
that is, with such a noise as shall be heard all the earth over, while the fire
shall be yet in the Heavens. 2. For its brightness or shining, because it shall
be seen all the earth over, whiles it shall be yet in the Heavens; as the
lightening shines from the one end of Heaven to the other, Mat. 24. 27. 3. For
it^ melting and burning virtue, because it shall melt and burn up such things
as were never melted, burnt and consumed since the world began.

When it shall be dissolved? Answ. Touching the time of the worlds dissolution,
the Scripture teachet^ viz.

1. That it shall be dissolved in Gods appointed time, because he does all his
works in his appointed time: and as he has appointed a day wherein h^ will
judge the world in righteousness, so he has appointed a day wherein he will
dissolve this present world, Acts 17. 31.

2. That the time of Christ's second coming sha^ be the time of the worlds
dissolution, as may appea^ plainly, Mat. 24. 3. 1 Cor. 15. 24. 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10,
12* where we find, that in the very day of Christ's second Coming, the Heavens
being on fire, shall b^ dissolved, the Elements shall melt; the Earth also and
the works that are therein shall be burnt up Howbeit, as we know not in what
day or hour o^ the year, and of the age of the world, the Son of man shall
come: so we know not in what day or hou^ of the year, and of the age of the
world, this present world shall be dissolved.

3. That the time of this worlds dissolution draws nigh, 1 Cor. 10. 11. Jam.
5. 8. 1 Pet. 4. 7. And w^ have no reason to think it to be far off, because
man^ Symptoms of the worlds dissolution, mentioned i^ holy Writ, have been
observed in our times; as, w^ have heard of the plentiful preaching of the
Gospel and of great Persecutions thereupon; we have heard of Wars, and Famines,
and Pestilences, and Earthquakes in diverse places; we have heard of many false
Teachers, and false Christ's; of many Seducers ^^d seduced persons amongst us:
we have seen how ^iquity has abounded, and love has waxed cold amongst us.
And seeing these Symptoms of this ^orlds dissolution have been amongst us, we
have ^o reason to think its dissolution to be far off. In^eed there are some
Symptoms of this worlds disso^ution, which are not as yet made visible unto
us; as ^he final Ruin of the Roman Antichrist, the battle of Gog and Magog,
and that alteration which shall ^e in the Sun, Moon and Stars, Mat. 24. but,
for ought I know, these three may speedily come, and soon follow one another.
And I have read a Judicious Divine Mr J. Z. in his printed Book on Rev. 20.
, who thinks that the Ruin of the Roman Antichrist will be made visible about
the year 666. that the battle of Gog and Magog will follow shortly thereupon,
and that the alteration, forementioned in the Sun, Moon and Stars, will
immediately succeed.

This Position thus cleared, makes for the refutation of

The first opinion is of such as think that this present world is eternal, in
respect of its present form and condition, and so shall never be dissolved;
which was the opinion of Aristotle the Philosopher, who was the more to be
pitied, because he knew not the Scriptures, nor the power of God, as therein
revealed: but we Christians have known the Scriptures, and have read often in
them of the end of the world, and therefore have no reason to hearken to
Aristotle in this Assertion of his.

The second opinion is of those who think that this present world shall cease
to be altogether after its dissolution; wherein they are much mistaken: For
though it shall cease to be, in some respect, aft^^ its dissolution, viz. in
respect of its former and pr^stine condition; yet it shall not cease to be
altog^ther, because it shall have an everlasting Being under a new form and
condition, as has been before proved; and as man's body after its dissolution
sha^ have an everlasting Being under a new form an^ condition: neither do I
think it worth my labou^ to spend more words in confutation of this opinion.

The third opinion is of those who think that this present world shall only be
purged by fire, at the latter day, from its evil qualities, and not dissolved:
As the old world in Noah's time was drowned in respect of its superficies, and
in respect of some creatures in it, yet the substance of it remained firm: So
say they, This present world shall be purged by fire from its corruptions and
evil qualities, but the substance of Heaven and Earth shall remain as an
everlasting Monument of Gods Wisdom and Power, Goodness and Mercy. But these
are mistaken also: For though I grant, That fire has a purging and refining
virtue, and that if the Lord should restrain the fire of the great Day, before
mentioned (as a Goldsmith restrains the fire when the gold is in it) it
should only then purge and refine the world, and the substance thereof should
remain; yet the Scripture shows plainly, That by the fire of that great Day,
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein, (whether
works of the first Creation, or works of nature, or works of man's art and
industry) shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10. Now when any substance is consumed
and burnt up, it is more then purged ^^om its corruption; but this present
world shall ^e one day consumed and burnt up in respect of its ^^esent
substance, and so it shall be more then purged ^^d refined by fire.

Much more I might say against this opinion, if (...) had the Books of such as
have asserted it, ^ut I have them not, yea I am a plundered man, one ^^at has
but few Books left; therefore I will say ^o more now touching this opinion.

The fourth opinion is of those who think that the ^^me of this worlds
dissolution is yet one thousand ^ears off at least, as some of the Millenaries
of these ^imes think: in favor of which opinion they bring that of Saint Peter,
A thousand years with the Lord ^s as one day, and one day as a thousand years,
^ Pet. 3. 8. And that of Saint John, The Souls of them which were beheaded for
the witness of Jesus, ^ived and reigned with him a thousand years, Rev. ^0. 4.
From which places they infer, That the time of this worlds dissolution must
needs be yet one ^housand years off at least: but these places, rightly
weighed, will never prove their opinion: For suppose that those passages, as
they lie, have reference to the end of this world; and suppose that those two
Apostles, Peter and John, by virtue of those passages, in their time, thought
the end of the world to be a thousand years off; yet we should consider, that a
thousand years and more, are by, gone, and past, since those words were spoken
by them; and consequently, though they in their times might conceive the end of
the world to be then a thousand years off, yet we in these times have no reason
to think it so far off: Nay I have showed before, That we have good reason to
think that the time of this world dissolution is near at hand.

Again, That which has been said touching the worlds dissolution, should
admonish us to moderat^ our minds and affections in the use of all worldl^
things, though never so lawful in themselves, according to that of Saint Paul,
The time is short: It remains, that both they that have wives, be ^^ though
they had none; and they that weep, as thoug^ they wept not; and they that
rejoice, as though the^ rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though the^
possessed not; and they that use this world, as not ^ busing it: For the
fashion of this world passes away 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.

Lastly, It should exhort us to all holiness of li^ and conversation, according
to that of Saint Peter^ Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolve^
what manner of persons ought ye to be in all ho^^ conversation and godliness? 2
Pet. 3. 11. where w^ may not think that the Apostle teaches us to distinguish
between an holy conversation and godlines^ because these two agree in one; an
holy conversatio^ is a godly conversation, and a godly conversation as holy
conversation: But in that place he teachet^ two things.

First, That the certainty of this worlds dissolution should persuade us to be
universal in our obedience; that is, in the practice of holy and godly duties;
which universal obedience is that which Go^ commands at our hands: Let not
the Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therei^ day and
night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein,
Josh. 1. 8. It is tha^ which God wishes for, on our behalf: Oh tha^ there were
such an heart in them, that they would ^ear me, and keep all my Commandments
always, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. It is that which he has promised to ^eward with many
blessings, Psalm. 19. 11. Josh. 1. 8, etc. It is that which is and will be
dangerous for us ^o neglect; For he that breaks the least of Gods
Commandments, and teaches men so, without re^entance, shall be the least in
the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5. 19. Yea, it is that which all men will either wish
for, or rejoice in, at the time of the worlds ^issolution: Therefore I say,
That the certainty of ^his worlds dissolution should persuade all men to be
universal in their obedience, in the practice of holy and godly duties. Let us
not then, my Brethren, content our selves with the bare and naked professi^^ ^f
godliness, nor with some good words in prayer and conference, nor with the
doing of many things commanded, with Herod, while we allow our selves in the
omission and neglect of many other: But let us strive to practice every known
duty prescribed in Gods Word, after the example of Zachari^as and Elizabeth his
wife, who walked in all the Commandments of God, blameless, Luke 1. 6.
remembering what David says, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect
unto all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6.

Secondly, In that next fore-quoted place of Saint Peter, he teaches, That all
Christians should be eximious and exemplary before others in their obedience,
and that in all holy conversation and godliness; which exemplary obedience also
is that which God commands at our hands, thus; Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, Mat. 5. 16. It is that which will cause
the observers of it to glorify God Mat. 5. 16
: It is that which is commended in the converted Corinthians, for their zeal
provoked many, 2 Cor. 9. 2. and in the converted Thessalonians, for they were
ensamples to all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia, 1 These. 1. 7. And it is
that which shall not be forgotten another day, for they that exceed others
here, in the practice of holiness and virtue, shall exceed them also hereafter
in glory, 1 Cor. 15. Yea, it is that which many will wish for, and many will
rejoice in at the time of this worlds dissolution: Therefore the certainty and
nearness of this worlds dissolution should persuade all Christians to be
exemplary before their brethren in all holy conversation and godliness. Let us
not then be altogether careless of a good conversation, with Gallio, and many
others: neither let us be of a loose and dissolute conversation, with the
Gentiles, Romans 1. Neither let us be of a scandalous conversation, with those
Jews, through whom the Name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles, Romans 2.
Neither let us be exemplary for wickedness, as Cain, Balaam and Jeroboam were:
Neither let us be lukewarm in the practice of godliness, as the Laodiceans
were: But let us strive to excel in virtue, and to go before others in all holy
conversation and godliness, remembering that whatsoever good any man does, that
shall he receive of God, whether he be bond or free, Ephesians. 6. 8.

The third Position here to be proved, is, That 3 Posit.
the World to come shall have no Being before this present World shall be
dissolved: And for proof hereof,

It should be considered, first, That the World to not only of this present
world, but also of the end of it; as, Mat. 12, 32. Luke 18. 30. Ephesians. 1. 21.
Heb. 2. 5. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Yea I dare say, That wheresoever the World to come is
mentioned in the Word of God, either in so many words, or by way of
interpretation, it is mentioned as a Consequent of the end of this world. Now
that which shall be a Consequent of the end of this world, shall have no Being
before this present world shall be dissolved and ended; but the World to come
shall be a Consequent of the end of this world: therefore ^t shall have no
Being before this present world shall be dissolved.

It should be considered again, That all things, Christ shall deliver up the
Kingdom to God, even the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. At the end of this world the
Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them
into a furnace of fire, Mat. 13. 40, 41, 42. At the end of this world the
Angels shall ^ome forth, and sever the wicked from among the ^ust, Mat. 13. 49,
etc. And if all things, properly belonging to the World to come, shall follow
the and of this world, then the World to come it self shall have no Being
before this present world shall be dissolved: but the former is true; therefore
the latter.

And it should be considered thirdly, That where Medes and Persians had no
Being before the Monarchy of the Babylonians was dissolved; the Monarchy of the
Greeks and Macedonians had no Being before the Monarchy of the Medes and
Persians was dissolved; the Monarchy of the Romans had no Being before the
Monarchy of the Greeks and Macedonians was dissolved. And as the Kingdom of
David had no Being before the Kingdom of Saul was dissolved, the Kingdom of
Solomon had no Being before the Kingdom of David was dissolved, and the Kingdom
of Rehoboam had no Being before the Kingdom of Solomon was dissolved: So the
World to come shall be a collective body in an orderly succession Vid. learned
Dickson in his Commentaries on Heb. 12. 26.
: therefore it shall have no Being before this present world shall be dissolved.

Which Position thus confirmed, makes against those Mede being one, and not the
least of them, thinks Mr Mede on Rev. 20. 4.
that this present world shall be dissolved before the World to come shall have
any Being:) but it is the opinion of many of them, who have thus expressed
themselves: That by the World to come the Scripmeans nothing else but an
Universal Reformation-change all this world over, either in respect of
Conversion, as one says, or in respect of Discipline at least, as another of
them says; and that the said Reformation-change shall be one thousand years
before the end of this world; therefore the World to come shall be one thousand
years before the end of this world. But I will tell these men, that this
opinion of theirs has four Errors involved or wrapped up in it.

As, 1. It is an Error to think that there shall be an extraordinary or
Universal Reformation-change, either in respect of Conversion, or in respect of
Discipline, before the end of this world; because the constant current of the
New Testament is against this conceit, and shows clearly, That the latter age
of this world shall be a very deformed age, both in respect of the evil of sin
which shall abound therein, and also in respect of the evil of pain and trouble
that shall follow thereupon, (as has been before hinted;) nay it shows, That
at the very time of Christ's second appearing in the Clouds, he shall find the
world, I mean the people of this world, in a posture of security: For as in the
days that were before the Flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not,
until the Flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the Coming of the
Son of man be, Mat. 24. 38, 39. In a posture of unbelief: For when the Son of
man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Luke 18. 8. He may find some
faith on the earth, but it is probable he shall then find but little faith, as
touching his coming, and the World to come. In a posture of Atheism, scoffing
and scorning at Religion, especially at the promise of his coming, and of the
end of the world; There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after
their own lusts, 2 Pet. 3. 3. Yea, he shall then find the people of the world
in a posture of War, beating their fellow Servants, and preparing a great
battle against the Church, Rev. 20. 9. Wherefore I see no reason why we should
look for such a Reformation-change as these men speak of; yet I hope there
shall be a Reformation-change in many particular persons before the end of this
world; and its possible there may be a Reformation-change in some particular
Countries, at least in respect of Discipline: but that there shall be such an
extraordinary or Universal Reformation before the end of this world, far be it
from me, and from my friends, so much as to dream thereof.

2. It is an Error in these men to conceive that the end of this present world
shall be a thousand years off, after their supposed Reformation shall begin, or
from this time, (as some of them say, it being now begun,) seeing the signs
presaging the end of the world, laid down in the New Testament, should teach us
to think otherwise: And for what other use serves this conceit of theirs? but
to make men secure in their sins, and to persuade them that the Lord delays his
coming, and to say in their hearts, Where is the promise of his coming? Yea,
for my part, I think, That the Son of man will be seen to come in the Clouds of
Heaven, before such a Reformation-change, as they speak of, will be seen to
begin, or to be established in the earth: And whereas they tell us of the
Saints living and reigning with Christ a thousand years, Rev. 20. 4. as if that
place made much for them; I would have them know, that that place is not to be
understood of Saints on earth, as if they should live and reign with Christ in
their bodies upon this corrupt earth a thousand years by virtue of a
Reformation-change in this world; but it is to be understood of Saints departed
this life, now in the third Heaven, in respect of their Souls, where they were
to live and reign with Christ for a thousand years, or more, from the time when
those words were spoken, (a certain time being there put for an uncertain,)
even until his coming again from thence.

3. It is an Error in these men to think, that by the World to come the
Scripture means a Reformation-change in this world, seeing by the World to come
we are to understand a new created world, properly so called, that shall
consist of new Heavens and a new Earth, properly so called, and of new
Creatures and occurrences in them, as I hope to show more fully in my next
Section: Yea the World to come shall be such a world wherein the righteous
shall inherit everlasting life, Luke 18. 30. but supposing there should be such
a Reformation-change in this world, as they dream of, yet we cannot therein
inherit everlasting life: therefore we may not understand by the World to come
such a Reformation-change.

4. It is an Error in these men to confound the World to come with this present
world, seeing the Scripture has plainly distinguished them in many places,
Mat. 12. 32. Luke 18. 30. Ephesians. 1. 21, etc. And as the time to come cannot be
all one with the time present, nor the time present with the time to come; so
neither can the World to come be all one, or at one time, with this present
world; nor this present world all one, or at one time, with the World to come:
But leaving this fancy of theirs, I proceed.

And I acknowledge in the fourth place, That the 4 Posit.
World to come shall begin immediately, or suddenly, upon the dissolution of
this present world; that is to say, as soon as this present world shall have an
end, the World to come shall begin; as soon as these visible Heavens shall be
dissolved, there shall be other Heavens in their stead; as soon as this visible
Earth shall be dissolved, there shall be another Earth instead thereof, with
other creatures in it: and so the World to come shall begin immediately or
suddenly upon the dissolution of this present world. For confirmation whereof,
though I cannot produce any plain place of Scripture so clear as to convince
all gainsayers, yet I can produce some probable grounds, such as have
satisfied my self, as touching the truth of this Position.

As, 1. The Scripture speaks not of any space of time, much less of any
considerable space of time that shall be, betwixt the dissolution of this
present world, and the Creation of the World to come: therefore it is probable
that there shall be no considerable space of time betwixt them; and
consequently that the World to come shall begin immediately or suddenly upon
the dissolution of this present world.

2. The Scripture speaks of diverse things that shall happen in and upon one and
the same day, viz. the great Day of the Lord. As, 1. The dissolution of this
present world. 2. The Creation of the World to come. 3. The subduing of all
Christ's Enemies. 4. The Resignation of the Kingdom to God even the Father. 5.
The glorious Appearing of Christ. 6. The Resurrection of the dead. 7. The
Sentence of the last Judgment. And if all these things shall happen upon one
and the same day, viz. the great Day of the Lord, then it is probable that
there shall be no considerable space of time betwixt them; and consequently
that the World to come shall begin immediately or suddenly upon the dissolution
of this present world.

3. I have seriously thought upon that of the Apostle Paul; Then shall we which
live, and remain, be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air, 1 These. 4. 17. where he intimates, as I conceive, That the
World to come shall be created after the same order in which this present world
shall be dissolved: And as this present world shall be dissolved first in its
upper part, viz. the visible Heavens, Clouds and Air, which now are; so the
World to come shall be created first in its upper part, viz. the new Heavens,
Clouds and Air, etc. and so the Saints, which shall be found living upon this
corrupt earth, when the fire begins to seize upon it, shall be caught up
together with the Saints that shall come with Christ, to meet him and them in
the new Clouds and Air: for I cannot imagine, that either the Saints which
shall come from Heaven, or those that shall come from the Earth, shall meet in
these corrupt Clouds and Air which now are; and so I may well gather from this
place, That the World to come shall begin immediately or suddenly upon the
dissolution of this present world.

Which Position thus cleared, crosses a certain Mede In his Book on the
Revelation.
; for though he grants, That the World to come shall not begin before this
present world shall be dissolved, yet he thinks that the Day of Judgment shall
continue for a thousand years, and thereupon shall follow the World to come.
But I would fain know what he means by the Day of Judgment in that place;
whether the Day of Sentence, or the Day of Execution? If he mean the Day of
Execution, he might as well have said, the Day of Judgment shall continue for
ever; for doubtless the Execution of the last Judgment shall continue for ever
and ever: But if he mean the Day of Sentence, I wonder he should say, the Day
of Judgment shall continue a thousand years, seeing no good reason can be
given, why the Lord should so long deliberate about the Sentence of Judgment.
Notwithstanding then this opinion of his, I am still of the opinion, That the
World to come shall begin immediately or suddenly upon the dissolution of this
present world.

And if so, there is no reason why good Christians should mourn, grieve, or be
discouraged to hear of the dissolution of this present world, seeing the World
to come shall begin immediately hereupon: It is a comfort against the death of
these corrupt bodies of ours to hear that we shall have other and better bodies
after the death of these; so it should be a comfort against the dissolution of
this world, to hear that there shall be another, and a better world after the
dissolution of this.

SECT. IV. Showing, The nature of the World to come, considered as a Continent.
ANd that we may rightly understand the nature of it, and judge rightly thereof,
these ensuing Grounds should be weighed.

First, I affirm, That the World to come is taken 1 Ground.
both strictly and largely in the Word of God.

It is strictly taken, wheresoever the World to come is distinguished from the
matters and things that shall be contained in it, as Mat. 12. 32. Luke 18. 30.
and 20. 34, 35. Ephesians. 1. 21. Heb. 6. 5. in all which places it is mentioned by
way of distinction.

It is largely taken, wheresoever the World to come is named, and not
distinguished from the matters and things that shall be contained in it, as
Romans 4. 13. Heb. 2. 5. where it is mentioned without a distinction. Wherefore
such might here be blamed as have spoken more or less of the World to come in a
confused way, neither distinguishing thereof, nor showing what they mean
thereby, seeing it is a received Maxim, That ambiguous and doubtful terms
should first be distinguished, and afterward Ambigua priua distinguenda.
defined or described: But the very name of the World to come is ambiguous, yet
they have not distinguished it unto this day.

Secondly, I affirm, That (in regard of the former 2 Ground.
distinction) the World to come is to be considered two manner of ways, of such
as would describe it in a methodical way, viz. extensively and inten^ively.

1. It is to be considered extensively, as we apprehend it for to be a Country,
a Continent, or a place of ^arge extent and capacity, Heb. 11. 14, 16. in which
sense I have spoken of it more especially in my former Sections, and am now to
speak more of it in this.

2. It is to be considered in reference to the powers, matters and things which
shall be contained in ^t, Heb. 6. 5. in which sense I am to speak of it more
fully in my following Sections.

Wherefore I may be bold to say of such Writers ^s have spoken much of some
things which shall be in the World to come, but have said nothing of it as it
shall be a Country or Continent, That they have not methodically proceeded as
concerning this Subject. For if a man should write a large history concerning
this present world, and therein should say nothing of it as it is a Continent,
might we not well say, Surely such a man was never thoroughly advised as
touching the business he took in hand? Yes: And so may we think of such as have
written nothing of the World to come as it shall be a Country or Continent,
whatsoever they have spoken of it in reference to the things which shall be
contained in it

Thirdly, I affirm, That the World to come, considered 3 Ground.
as a Continent, shall consist of new Heavens and a new Earth; that is to say,
of new created Heavens, and a new created Earth. And so much I learn from that
promise of the Lord; Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth, and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind, Isai. 65. 17. where it is
to me apparent, that the Lord describes the World to come in opposition to this
present world, considering each of them as a Continent, and shows, that as this
present world (as a Continent) does consist of those visible Heavens and Earth
which now are, and shall be no more remembered, nor come into mind, after their
dissolution, as touching their pristine condition: So the World to come,
considered as a Continent, shall consist of new created Heavens, and a new
created Earth: and I am the more confirmed in this interpretation, because in
the 4 verses next before, and in the 8 verses next after this promise, the Lord
speaks of diverse things that shall be found in the World to come; but all those
things there mentioned shall be be found in the new Heavens and new Earth,
men^^oned in this promise; therefore it is plain from ^^nce, That the World to
come, considered as a Con^^nent, shall consist of new created Heavens, and a
^^w created Earth.

So much also I learn from that other promise of ^^e Lord; For as the new
Heavens, and the new ^arth, which I will make, shall remain before me, ^ shall
your seed and your name remain, Isai. 66. 22. ^here the Lord describes the
World to come both ^ a Continent, and also in reference to some things ^^at
shall be contained in it; as a Continent, he calls ^ by the name of new Heavens
and a new Earth; ^^d in reference to some things that shall be con^^ined in it,
he says, That the Elect seed and their ^^me shall remain before him, viz. for
ever. Now ^e may not think that the Elect seed and their name shall remain for
ever in this world, but it is certain that they shall remain for ever in the
new Heavens and new Earth, here mentioned; and so it is plain ^^om hence too,
That the world to come, considered ^s a Continent, shall consist of new Heavens
and a ^ew Earth.

So much again I learn from those words of Saint Peter; Nevertheless we,
according to his promise, ^ook for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein
^welleth Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. where he de^cribes the world to come both
as a Continent, and ^lso in reference to something that shall be contain^d in
it; as a Continent, he calls it new Heavens and a new Earth; and in reference
to something that shall be in it, he says, wherein dwells Righteousness: In
which latter clause the present tense ^s put for the future, dwells for shall
dwell, and Righteousness is put for perfect Righteousness, fr^^ from all
unrighteousness and sin: Now we kno^ that perfect Righteousness, free from all
unright^ousness and sin, shall never dwell in this prese^^ world; but this
perfect Righteousness shall dwe^^ in the new Heavens and new Earth here
mentione^ Wherefore by new Heavens and a new Earth Saint Peter means nothing
else but the World to come considered as a Continent: and we may perceive i^
too by his method in this Chapter; for having spoken before of the dissolution
of this present world and showed what use we are to make of that point in verse.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. he descends in the 13 verse to speak of the World to come,
and shows what use we are to make of this point also, verse. 14. unto the end of
this Chapter; and he joins these two Theams together by this connective
particle [Nevertheless,] which imports, as if he had said, Though it be so,
that this present world shall one day be dissolved, and these visible Heavens
and Earth which now are shall be burnt up, and brought to dust; yet we, who are
Believers, according to the promise under the Old Testament, do look for a new
world instead of this; that is, for new created Heavens, and a new created
Earth instead of these: and so it is clear also from Saint Peter's doctrine,
That the World to come, considered as a Continent, shall consist of new created
Heavens, and a new created Earth.

And lastly, I learn so much from Saint John's Vision, thus expressed; And I saw
a new Heaven and a new Earth, for the first Heaven and the first Earth were
passed away, Rev. ^1. 1. which place does well accord with the three former,
because herein the Apostle describes the World to come in ^osition to this
present world, and shows, that ^s present world, considered as a Continent,
con^eth of a present visible Heaven and Earth, that is, ^^ Starry Heaven and an
Ayry Heaven, compassing ^s Earth: So the world to come, considered as a
^^ntinent, shall consist of a new created Heaven ^^d Earth, that is, of a new
Starry Heaven, and a ^^w Ayry Heaven, that shall compass the new ^^rth. And so
we have now a fourfold testimony ^^m the word of God for the proof of this
third ^ound.

If any shall here object, and say, That I am alone

My answer is, If I were alone in this interpreta^^^n, Piscator In his
Commentaries on 2 Pet. 3. 13
, Dr Dickson In his Commentaries on 2 Pet. 3. 13, and on Heb. 12.
, Mr Ellis In his Book, entitled, The Deliverance of the whole House of Israel.
, and the ^e Annotations on the Bible On 2 Pet. 3. 13.
: the latter of which ^^^imates or hints this reason, why the world to ^^me, as
a Continent, shall consist of new Heavens and a new Earth, viz. that it may be
somewhat pr^portionable to the Saints, for to delight their ey^^ and minds.
Wherefore it is not from an affecta^^on of singularity, but out of love to the
truth, that have informed the Reader with this Ground.

Moreover, before I leave this Ground, I wou^^ have it known, That there are
many other passag^ of Scripture (besides those before quoted) which if rightly
understood, will make much for t^^ confirmation of it: Of which I shall
instance some. As,

1. It is said, The world shall be established, the it shall not be moved,
Psalm. 96. 10. And how shall ^ understand this passage? Shall not this prese^^
world be moved and shaken from its present st^^ and condition at the time of
its dissolution? Y^^ doubtless it shall: But the meaning of it is, The this
world, after its new Creation, and after it sh^^ consist of new Heavens and a
new Earth, shall ne^ be moved or shaken, according to that of the Ap^stle: This
word, Yet once more, signifies the ^ moving of those things that are shaken,
as of thin^ that are made, that those things which cannot ^ shaken may remain,
Heb. 12. 27. So that from t^^ passage, thus understood, we may gather, That t^^
World to come, considered as a Continent, sh^^ consist of new created Heavens
and a new creat^ Earth.

2. It is said in another place, The Earth abide for ever, Eccles. 1. 4. How
so? Shall this corru^^ earth, which now is, abide for ever in its present a^^
pristine condition? No, it shall be burnt up, 2 Pet 3. 10. But the meaning of
this passage is, That t^^ Earth, after its new Creation, shall abide for eve^
and so we gather from hence, That there shall be a new created Earth after this
Earth shall be dissolved; and we may not imagine, That the new created Earth
shall be without a new created Heaven; consequently we may infer, That the
World to come, considered as a Continent, shall consist of new created Heavens
and a new created Earth.

3. It is said elsewhere, The meek shall inherit the Earth, Mat. 5. 5. Yea, The
meek shall inherit the Earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
peace, Psalm. 37. 11. which promises belong to all the godly meek in this world,
as well as to any; but we find by experience, that there are some god^y meek in
this world who can hardly be said to have any inheritance in this corrupt
Earth, and if some of the meek do inherit it, it is but a small part of it, and
that with much grief and vexation of spirit, not with abundance of peace:
wherefore the meaning of these promises is, That all the godly meek shall
inherit the new created Earth, and therein delight themselves in the abundance
of peace; and consesequently the World to come, as a Continent, shall consist
of a new created Earth; and if so, then of new created Heavens too.

4. It is said in the Psalm last quoted, The righteous shall inherit the Land,
and dwell therein for ever, Psalm. 37. 29. where the [Land] is all one with the
[Earth;] and this promise belongs to all that are truly righteous, as well as
to any; but we know that all who are truly righteous in this world do not
actually inherit this corrupt earth, and they that do inherit some little
portion thereof, shall not dwell therein for ever; therefore this promise must
needs have reference to the new created Earth or Land, which all that are truly
righteous shall not only inherit, but also shall dwell therein for ever; and so
the World to come, as a Continent, shall consist not only of new created
Heavens, but also of a new created Earth.

5. It is said of Christ, His dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the
River, unto the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 72. 8. which promise belonged to
Solomon, as a Type of Christ, in a limited sense, and by virtue of it he was to
have dominion over divert Nations and Countries; but this promise had reference
to Christ in a larger sense, and by virtue of it he is to have dominion over
all people that ever were, are, or shall be, as the Son of man; which dominion
is not to be expected in this corrupt world, on this corrupt earth, but it
shall be made good unto him in and upon the new created Earth, which new Earth
shall not be without new Heavens; and so we infer from hence, That the world to
come, as a Continent, shall consist of new created Heavens, and a new created
Earth.

6. It is said in the name of all the faithful Servants of God, We shall reign
on the Earth, Rev. 5. 10. the meaning of which promise is, That they shall
reign over all their enemies ghostly and bodily: Now we see by daily experience
that it is not thus with them on this corrupt earth, for here the faithful
Servants of God have many Tyrants that sometime reign over them in a Tyrannical
way, as Sin, the Flesh, Satan, and the world; here the plowers plow upon their
backs, and make long furrows; here men Psa. 66. 12
ride over their heads; here they meet with a Law in their members that leads
them captive to the Law of sin: But we are to understand, that this Promise
shall be made good unto them in the new created Earth, wherein they shall,
under Christ, reign over all their Enemies, bodily and ghostly; which new Earth
cannot be without a new Heaven: And so we gather from hence; That the World to
come, as a Continent, shall consist of new created Heavens, and a new created
Earth.

7. God said unto Abraham, I will give unto ^hee, and to thy seed after thee,
the Land wherein ^hou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for ^n
everlasting possession, Genes. 17. 8. Which Promise is to be made good to
Abraham in his own person, and to all his Elect seed in their persons. Now we
know, that Abraham, in his own person, ^id possess the Land of Canaan no
otherwise then ^s a stranger; and that his Elect seed have not all ^ossessed it
in their persons, according to this Pro^ise; much less have they had it for an
everlasting possession: Wherefore this Promise must needs have ^eference to the
World to come, and to a new cre^ted Earth, wherein shall be a new Land of
Canaan, which Abraham and his Elect seed shall all enjoy, in their own persons,
for an everlasting possession: which ^ew Earth and new Canaan cannot be
imagined to ^e without a new Heaven: And so I infer from ^ence also; That the
World to come, as a Conti^ent, shall consist of new created Heavens, and a ^ew
created Earth.

8. It is said in another place, That he who bless^th himself in the Earth,
shall bless himself in the God of Truth; and he that swears in the Earth,
shall swear by the God of Truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and
because they are hid from mine eyes, Isai. 65. 16. And here, if we compare the
matter promised with the matter of the next precedent Verse, together with the
Reasons annexed to it, and also with the matter of the next subsequent Verse,
we may easily find, that the earth, in this place, is put for the new created
Earth, which God has promised: Wherein who so blesses himself, shall bless
himself in the God of Truth; and who so swears, shall swear by the God of
Truth; and wherein also former troubles shall be forgotten, and hid from Gods
eyes: Which new Earth shall not be without new Heavens, as in the next Verse
appears. Therefore from hence also I gather; That the World to come, as a
Continent, shall consist of new created Heavens, and a new create^ Earth.

9. Lastly, We are taught to say to God in ou^ prayers, Thy will be done on
Earth, as it is in Heaven: In which Petition (as I conceive) this wor^ Earth
includes not only this corrupt Earth wherein we live, but also that new Earth
which shall b^ created instead of this; Because we are to desire* That Gods
Will, so far as it shall be revealed to men^ may be done in both, as it is in
Heaven; that is t^ say, we are to desire, that his Will may be done i^ this
corrupt Earth, in some like manner, as it is now done in Heaven; viz. readily,
willingly, cheerfully, constantly, sincerely. And we are to desire, tha^ his
Will may be done in the new Earth, in full lik^ manner, as it is now done in the
blessed Heaven; viz* perfectly, without all sinful defects: And doubtles^ Gods
will shall be done in the new created Earth a^ perfectly by all his Elect, as
it is now done by the Saints in Heaven, which are but some of them* And seeing
we cannot think upon such a new Eart^ without a new Heaven, I may safely
conclude, That the World to come, considered as a Continent, shall consist of
new created Heavens, and a new created Earth.

Other Scripture-passages might be produced for the ratification of this
ground; but I am loath to burden the Reader with any more in this place.

Fourthly, I affirm, That the World to come, considered 4 Ground.
as a Continent, shall in some things correspond and accord with this present
world: As in these particulars;

1. This present world, considered as a Continent, consists of visible
Heavens, and a visible Earth; And here, by visible Heavens, we commonly
understand, both the Airy Heaven, which is now next above us, and the Starry
Heaven, which is now next above that. And here also, by a visible Earth, we
commonly understand both the dry Land, and the Waters, which now are: Genesis 1.
9. So the World to come, considered as a Continent, shall consist of visible
Heavens, and a visible Earth, as may appear by what has been said upon the
former ground. 1 These. 4, 17 Dan. 12, 3
And here again, by visible Heavens, I understand both that Airy Heaven, and
that Starry Heaven, which shall be created upon the dissolution of these which
now are. And also by a visible Earth, I understand both that dry Land, and
those Waters, which shall be created upon the dissolution of these which now
are.

2. This present world, considered as a Continent, received its beginning by
Creation, and was created by God himself: Genesis 1. 1.

So the World to come, considered as a Continent, shall receive its beginning
by Creation, and shall be created by God himself: Isai. 65. 17. and 66. 22. Yet
I dare not say, that it shall be created of nothing, as this present world was.
Indeed it is possible enough with God to create it of nothing pre-existent: Yet
it seems more probable to me, that it shall be created of the dust of this
present world, after it shall be burnt up, and brought to dust; As the bodies
of men, women, and children, in their Resurrection, shall be formed or created
of the dust of their old bodies. But I will not contend for this, as for a
matter of Faith: It Is enough for us to believe, that the World to come shall be
created by God himself, either of nothing, or of something; and if of
something, then it is probable that it may be created, as well of the dust of
this, as of any other thing.

3. This present world, considered as a Continent, does contain in it variety
of Creatures; some rational, some irrational: So the World to come, as a
Continent, shall contain in it variety of Creatures; some rational, some
irrational; as I intend to show in the next part of this Treatise, after I
shall have spoken of the more principal matters of the World to come.

Fifthly, I affirm, That the World to come, considened 5 Ground.
as a Continent, shall differ from this present world, both for substance and
qualities.

That it shall differ from this present world, for qualities, or as touching
its qualities, is acknowledged by many Writers.

1. Because this present world waxes old like a garment, and is grown
decrepit; but that to come shall be new.

2. Because this is corruptible; but that shall be incorruptible.

3. Because this is mutable, and moveable; but that shall be immutable, and
immovable: Isai. 66. 22. Heb. 12.

4. Because this is polluted, and defiled; but that shall be undefiled.

5. Because this shall have an end; but that shall be everlasting, without end.

For which causes the World to come must needs differ from this present world,
for qualities, or, in and touching its qualities. And hereunto I add,

That it shall differ also from this present world, for substance, or as
touching the substance of it:

1. Because the World to come shall not be created, before the substance of
this world, as a Continent, shall be burnt up, and brought to dust; as has
been before showed: And if so, then the World to come must needs be another
from this for substance, and so differ from this as touching the substance of
it.

2. Because the World to come shall not be created of the substance of this
present world; but either it shall be created of nothing, or of something that
shall not be the substance of this. And suppose it shall be created of the dust
of this; yet it will not hereupon follow, that it shall be created of the
substance of this. For as the dust of a man's body, after it is burnt to ashes,
cannot properly be called the substance of his body; so neither can the dust of
this present world, after it shall be burnt to ashes, be properly called the
substance of this world. And seeing the World to come shall not be created of
the substance of this; it will necessarily follow, That it shall be another
from this, and shall differ from this, as touching the substance of it.

3. Unless the World to come shall differ from this in and for the substance of
it, I cannot see how it can differ from it, in and for the qualities of it;
because where any natural substance remains, the natural qualities of it are
wont to remain too: As when, in Noah's time, the world then was drowned with a
flood, the natural substance of it remained, and the natural qualities too,
though the superficies of it was much altered for a while. But it is granted by
many (as I said) That the world to come shall differ from this for qualities:
Therefore I infer from the premises; That the World to come, considered as a
Continent, shall differ from this present world, and be another from it, both
for substance and qualities.

Sixthly, I affirm, That the World to come, considered 6 Ground.
as a Continent, shall be the same, for essence and essential properties, with
this present world.

Thus our new bodies, after the last Resurrection, shall be the same, for
essence and essential properties, with these bodies which now we have. And as
it is essential to these bodies, which now we have, to to consist of flesh and
bones, of eyes, ears, hands, and feet, etc. So it shall be essential to our new
bodies, after the last Resurrection, to consist of flesh and bones, of eyes,
ears, hands, and feet, etc. For I my self shall behold him (says Job) with
these same eyes, Job 19. 27. Yet our new bodies shall not be the same with
these for substance; for thou sowest not that body that shall be, 1 Cor. 15.
37. Neither shall they be the same with these for qualities; for that which is
sown in corruption, shall rise again in incorruption: that which is sown in
dishonor, shall be raised in glory, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.

So the World to come shall be the same, for essence and essential properties,
with this present world. And as it is essential to this world, to be Gods
Creation and Workmanship, to consist of visible Heavens, and a visible Earth,
to be a round world, and of large extent: So shall it be essential to the World
to come, to be Gods Creation and Workmanship, to consist of visible Heavens,
and a visible Earth, to be a round world, and of large extent. And so much I
gather from this Scripture-Maxim; God has established the world, never to be
moved, Psalm. 96. 10. whereas we know that this present world shall be moved at
the time of its dissolution, in respect of its present substance and qualities:
but the meaning is. That it shall never be moved, in respect of its essence,
because this shall continue, not only until, but after its new Creation. I
infer then, That the World to come shall be the same with this, for essence and
essential properties; though it shall not be the same with it for substance and
qualities.

These six Grounds, thus cleared, make for the discovery

The first Error is of those who think, That the World to come shall be nothing
else, but that blessed Heaven, or third Heaven, which now is. Which Opinion (as
I take it) has been effectually confuted before, in my second Section: and so
I need say no more of it in this place.

The second is the Error of those who think, That the World to come shall be
the same, for substance, with this present world. Which Error (as I conceive)
has been substantially refuted in my two last Grounds upon this Section. For
though I grant in one of them, That the World to come shall be the same, for
essence, with this world; yet I have showed in the other, That it shall not be
the same, for substance, with it. And therefore I will say no more at this time
concerning this matter.

The third is the Error of those who think, That the World to come, as a
Continent, shall not consist of new Heavens, and a new Earth; because (say
they) where ever the Scripture speaks of new Heavens, and a new Earth, it
speaks of a new reformed Church in this life, all the world over, before the
end of it; and not of the World to come.

Which Opinion has obtained many Patrons, Advocates, and Followers, of late
years, and in these Times; who have hereupon fancyed to themselves strange
Forms of Religion, and strange Forms of Government and Discipline, as necessary
to be established in the Church in these latter Times. But all of them have
justly deserved to be censured by the Church. 1. Because they have put a false
gloss, or interpretation, upon those places which speak of the new Heavens, and
a new Earth. 2. Because they make use of a figurative or allegorical
interpretation, when the proper and litteral sense is only right and orthodox.
3. Because they wrest many other places of Scripture in favor of this
interpretation. 4. Because that conclusion, which they intend to prove by their
wrestings, is grossly erroneous in it self: viz. That there shall be such a
Reformed Church all the world over, as they speak of, before the end come, as I
have before showed. Wherefore though I have here fit occasion given for to
examine their Books, and to discover their several Mistakes and Errors; yet I
am not willing in this Tract, either to trouble ^he Reader any further with
their conceits, or to hin^er him from the meditation of profitable matters.

Again, These six Grounds, discovering the nature of the World to come, should
move and excite all ^eleeving Christians, to look and hope for such a world to
come, as is here described, with Christian hope; after the example of S. Peter,
and the faith^ul with him, who looked for new Heavens, and a new Earth, 2 Pet.
3. 13. So did the scattered Jews, to whom he wrote his epistle, they looked and
hoped ^or the same: Wherefore (beloved) seeing ye look for such things, 2 Pet.
3. 14. And when Abraham looked for a City with foundations, whose builder and
maker is God, Heb. 11. 10. doubtless he hoped ^or the world to come, wherein
this City shall be found. So when the believing Romans had in them the hope of
glory, Romans 5. 2. and Paul had in him the hope of the Resurrection, Act. 23. 6.
They had also in them a good hope of the world to come, wherein such things are
to be found.

If it be here asked, why believing Christians should hope for the world to
come? I answer,

1. The world to come is often promised in the Word of God; and for this cause
we should look and hope for it: Nevertheless, according to his promise, we look
for new Heavens, and a new Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 13.

2. We are commanded to look and hope for the world to come: Look up, for your
Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21. 28. Looking for that blessed hope, Tit. 2.
13. And for this cause we should hope for it.

3. This hope of the world to come is called the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.
23. because the Gospe^ teaches and persuades it: And for this cause we should
hope for it.

4. This hope of the world to come is called the hope of our calling, Ephesians. 1.
18. because it should accompany the Christian Calling: And for this cause it
should not be wanting in us.

5. Unless Believers hope in Christ for the world to come, they are of all men
most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19.

And if it be asked, after what manner believing Christians should hope for the
world to come? I answer, thus:

1. Our hope for the world to come should be a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. such
as should make us active and lively in the performance of Christian duties.

2. It should be constant and steadfast: such as should continue with us in the
worst times, unto the end of our days; according to that of the Apostle, Gird
up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope unto the end, for the grace that
is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13.
Prove. 14. 32.

3. It should be a patient hope: such as should make us to wait patiently for
the world to come, and the good things thereof, with the faithful at Jerusalem,
Luke 2. 38. and with Joseph the Counselor, Luke 23. 51.

4. It should be cheerful: such as should make us comfortable under the Cross
of Christ, with the believing Romans, who rejoiced in hope of the glory of God
to be revealed hereafter, Romans 5. 2.

5. It should be diligent: such as should stir us up to be diligent in the
exercise of all saving graces, ac^^rding to that of the Apostle, Seeing ye look
for ^^ch things, be diligent, that ye may be found of ^^ in peace, without
spot, and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. ^. where he intimates, That they who are
dili^^nt in the exercise of saving grace, while they live this world, shall be
found, of God, and of Christ, the world to come, and accepted of him, as
per^^ctly reconciled, and as perfectly holy; and conse^^ently they shall be
found of him in peace, with^^t spot, and blameless. Let us not then cast off
this ^^pe at any time.

SECT. V. Touching the Second Coming of Christ in the Flesh.
HAving hitherto spoken of the World to come, considering it chiefly as a
Country or Conti^ent, Method requires that I should now, in the next ^^ace,
speak of it in reference to the things which shall ^e contained in it. And
though I cannot name all ^he particular matters, things, and occurrences, which
shall be in the World to come; yet the Scripture mentions many of them: and
such as I find ^entioned in Scripture I shall endeavor to discover, ^^ God
shall permit: And amongst others, I here name five principal things that shall
be visible to men in the World to come; viz.

1. The Second Coming of Christ in the Flesh. 2. The last Resurrection. 3. The
last Judgment. 4. The Kingdom of Christ. 5. The blessed Condition of all that
ar^ Christ's, with the cursed Condition of al^ that are none of his.
But in this Section I shall speak only of the first o^ these, viz. Of the
Second Coming of Christ in the Flesh: And here we must know that the Word of
God does inform us of diverse things touching this matter: As,

First, It informs us, That the Second Coming 1 Informat.
of Christ in the Flesh is to be distinguished from all other Comings of his;
for wheresoever this Second Coming of his is mentioned, as Acts 1. 11. Heb. 9.
26. and in other places, it is distinguished from all other Comings of his: And
more particularly it is distinguished, 1. From his Coming in the Spirit; for
after his Ascension he came to his Apostles in the Spirit, or in a spiritual
way, in the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his promise
before his Ascension; I will not leave you comfortless, but will come unto you,
Joh. 14. 18. And this his Coming in the Spirit was not his second Coming in the
Flesh. 2. It is to be distinguished from his first Coming in the Flesh: For
though his first Coming in the Flesh was a Coming from Heaven, as his second
Coming shall be, as it is written, No man has ascended into Heaven, but he
that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven, Joh. 3. 13.
yet his first Coming in the Flesh was partly a coming into this polluted world
at the time of his Birth, as he says, To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth, Joh.
18. 37. And partly it was a coming from place to place in this polluted world;
as, He came from Galilee to ^rdan, to John, to be baptized of him, Mat. 3. 13.
^e came to his own, and his own received him not, ^^h. 1. 11. He left Judea,
and came to a City of ^^maria, which is called Sychar, Joh. 4. 3, 5. But ^s
second Coming in the Flesh shall never be a com^^g into this polluted world,
nor yet a coming ^^om place to place in it: wherefore it is plain by ^e Word of
God, That his second Coming in the ^esh is to be distinguished from all other
Comings ^^ his.

Secondly, It informs us, That the second ^ Informat.
^oming of Christ in the Flesh shall be most sure and ^ertain: And we may not
doubt hereof, because ^ is confirmed unto us by many plain testimonies ^f
Scripture; as by the testimony of Enoch, the ^eventh from Adam: Behold, the
Lord comes ^ith ten thousand of his Saints, Jude 14. that is, ^he Lord Christ
shall come; the present tense being ^ut for the future, as in other Prophecies.
So by ^he testimony of David: Our God shall come, and ^all not keep silence,
Psalm. 50. 3. So by the testimo^y of Christ himself; for while he was in this
world ^e said, They shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven,
Mat. 24. 30. The Son of man shall come in his Glory, Mat. 25. 31. Hereafter ye
shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, Mat. 26. 64. Luke 21.
27. If I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you to
my self, Joh. 14. 3. So by the testimony of two Angels: This same Jesus which
is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen
him go into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. So by the testimony of Saint Paul, who speaks
of the second Coming of our Lord Christ from Heaven, a^ of the manner of it, 1
These. 4. 15, 16. So by t^^ testimony of Saint James; Be patient, Brethr^^ until
the Coming of our Lord, Jam. 5. 7, 8. A^^ if the second Coming of Christ in the
Flesh be confirmed unto us by so many plain testimonies of Scripture, we should
not doubt hereof, but should loo^ upon it as upon that which shall be most sure
an^ certain.

Thirdly, It informs us, of the signs presagi^^ 3 Informat.
the second Coming of Christ in the Flesh, whi^^ are of two sorts, viz. some,
such as have been alre^dy observed in this world; and some, such as have not
yet been observed in it.

The signs presaging his second Coming, which have been already observed in
this world, are d^vers: As,

1. The preaching of the Gospel in all places a^signed and appointed for this
purpose; for our S^viour has showed, That before his second Comin^ in the
Flesh, the Gospel of the Kingdom shall b^ preached in all the world, for a
witness unto al^ Nations, Mat. 24. 14. where his meaning is not that at one and
the same time the Gospel shall b^ preached to all Nations in all the world, but
that successively, and at several times, it shall be preached to all Nations
assigned and appointed to hear it in Vid. Dickson ad loc.
all the world, for a witness unto them, viz. of good, in case they shall
receive and obey it; but of evil, in case they shall reject and contemn it. In
which sense this sign has been long observed already; for the Gospel was
preached, shortly after Christ's Ascension by the Apostles themselves, to all
Nations in the world then assigned and appointed to hear it; and since their
time it has been preached to all Nations ^ppointed to hear it; at this day it
is preached in all places of the world assigned for this purpose: and doubtless
this Ordinance shall continue according^y until the second Coming of Christ,
and no ^onger.

2. A great Apostasy or falling away from the truth of the Gospel; for Saint
Paul tells us, That the Day of the Lord Christ shall not come, except there
come a falling away first, 2 These. 2. 3. which sign also has been long
observed in this world; for this Apostasy from the truth of the Gospel began in
Saint John's time: They went out from us, but they were not of us, 1 John 2. 19.
and it became more general and notorious about the time of Antichrists first
rising: we have much cause to complain of it at this day, and may yet have more
experience of it before the Coming of Christ, because it is said, That in the
latter times, some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits, and doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1.

3. The discovery or revealing of Antichrist; for the same Apostle says, That
the Day of the Lord Christ shall not come, except that man of sin be revealed,
the son of perdition, 2 These. 2. 3. And this sign has been long since observed
in the world, and the revealing of Antichrist has been long since discerned by
such as have had discerning eyes, though not by others: For the Sun it self,
shining in the firmament, is not discerned by such as are blind, not through
any defect of light in the Sun, but through want of eyesight in such as are
blind; yet such as have the power and benefit of their eyesight, can discern
the Sun when it shines: So, though the Papists, and such as are popishly
affected, cannot, o^ will not, discern the revelation of Antichrist; ye^ the
reformed Churches, by the light of Gods VVor^ and Spirit, have long since
discerned it, and have long since unanimously concluded and found the papacy,
or succession of Popes, in the Sea of Rome, t^ be that great Antichrist which
the Scripture speak^ of; because all the properties of this Antichrist do so
fitly suit with the Papacy, as a coat or garment can suit with the body for
which it is cut out.

4. The Consumption of Antichrist in a spiritual way; for the same Apostle
shows, That before the second Coming of Christ in the Flesh he shall be
consumed (with the Spirit of Gods Mouth,) 2 These. 2. 8. that is, as some
interpret, with the spirit of Prophecy in the mouths of orthodox Preachers and
Writers, opposing his mystery of iniquity: And it has been observed in many
Christian Churches, that Antichrist has been long in this Consumption already,
and that his power, both in respect of Doctrine, Discipline and Dominion, has
been so much wasted and diminished in this spiritual way, that he is past all
hope of recovery.

5. Persecution for Truth and Righteousness sake; for our Savior has showed,
That before his second Coming in the Flesh many of his faithful Servants shall
be apprehended, and persecuted, delivered up to the Synagogues, and into
prisons, and shall be brought before Kings and Rulers for his Name sake: Yea,
they shall be afflicted, and killed, and hated of all men for his Name sake,
Luke 21. 12. Mat. 24. 9. And have we not had much experience of this sign? Yes;
witness the ten Persecutions after the Apostles times, and those other
Persecutions that have been since in diverse parts of Christendom, ^s in Spain,
France, England, and in other ^laces.

6. Treachery or Treason amongst Professors of the ^ame Religion; for our
Savior tells us also, That before his second Coming many shall be offended,
and shall betray one another, and hate one another, Mat. 24. 10. Yea, the
brother shall betray the bro^her to death, the father the son; and the children
shall rise up against their parents, and shall cause them to be put to death,
Mark 13. 12. And has not ^his sign been already observed in the world? Yes, ^t
sundry times; and at this day we find it an hard ^atter to find a faithful
friend, whom we may safe^^ trust, men's hearts for the most part are so full of
^uile and deceit, of treachery and falsehood.

7. The trouble of War; for our Savior has ^urther told us, That before his
second Coming in the ^lesh, we shall hear of Wars, and rumors of Wars; and
Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, Mat. 24. 6, 7.
And surely there ^ath been woeful experience of this sign in former ^ges, and of
latter years, amongst our selves; and at ^his day we see that the Sword is
drawn, and does ^^ge, devour and tyrannize, in diverse parts of the ^orld; yea,
we know not when it shall be sheath^d up again; neither is it probable that it
shall cease and be quiet before the Roman Antichrist shall be ^estroyed; nor
yet then, in all places, because Christ ^t his second Appearing shall find some
Nations in ^posture of War, Rev. 20. 8, 9.

8. The trouble of Famines, Pestilences and Earth^uakes; for our Savior has
told us, That before ^s second Coming there shall be these judgments in diverse
places, Mat. 24. 7. Mark 13. Luke 21. Now how many of these Pestilences,
Famines and Earthquakes, have been already observed in the world, the
Chronicles of several Nations may inform us: and how many more of such
judgments may yet be observed before the end comes, after times may declare.

9. The swarming of false Christ's, false Prophets, and false Teachers, in the
visible Church; for our Savior has foretold us, That before his second Coming
in the Flesh, many of this generation sha^^ arise in the visible Churches, and
shall swarm an^ creep into houses, like the Locusts of Egypt, an^ shall deceive
many, Mat. 24. Mark 13. Luke 21* 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. Now the Churches of Christ
have many sad stories upon record concerning such Locusts, since the Ascension
of Christ, especially in the Arrian times, and since the reign of Antichrist
began and the number of such is much increased of late i^ the Church of
England, and does rather increas^ then decrease in other Countries; yea, and is
likely so to do still toward the end of the world.

10. The prevailing of Errors and Heresies in the visible Church, by the spirit
of delusion: for the Scripture testifies, That before the second Coming of
Christ in the Flesh, God shall send men strong delusions to believe a lie,
because they received no^ the love of the truth, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. And as some
shall bring in damnable Heresies; so many sha^^ follow their pernicious ways, 2
Pet. 2. 1, 2. and many shall be deceived by them, Mat. 24. Now how long the
Churches of Christ have had experience o^ this sign, their Ecclesiastical
stories can witness; an^ how such Errors and Heresies have prevailed latel^ ^^
the Church of England, many can witness with ^^eat regreet; and how long this
spirit of delusion ^^all prevail with men before the mouth of all ^ickedness
shall be stopped, only GOD himself ^^ows.

11. A great growth of iniquity, causing a decay ^^ decrease of love; for our
Savior has showed, that before his second Coming in the Flesh, iniquity ^all
abound, and because it shall abound, the love ^^ many shall wax cold, Mat. 24.
12. where (as it Vide Dickson in his Commentaries on this place.
^^ems to me) the abounding of iniquity is to be re^^^ained to the unregenerate
sort, whether profane ^^ formal, in whom the practice of iniquity was to
^ound, and does abound, in these latter times, 2 Timothy ^ 2, 3, 4. and the
frigescence, or waxing cold of love, ^^ to be restrained to the regenerate of
the same ^^mes, who perceiving many of their supposed bre^^ren to revolt to the
practice of iniquity, and to re^^rn back with the dog to his vomit, shall be
jealous ^^d suspicious one of another, and so shall wax cold ^^ love one
toward another, not knowing whom ^^ trust: not as if the habit of love, or the
truth of ^hristian love, should decay in them; but they shall ^ot be so servent
in the exercise and manifestation of ^^eir love to each other, by reason of the
abounding ^f iniquity in others, as so merly they were: And ^oubtless this sign
also has been already observed ^^ many in the world, and is that which may
easily ^e perceived in these days, by such as have eyes to ^^scern it: For do
we not see how shy the godly ^e? and how fearful of trusting one another at
this ^y? And all this, because iniquity does so much ^ound in many professors,
whom they have lately ^^^ken for their beloved brethren.

Moreover, as these, before mentioned, are su^^ signs presaging his second
Coming, as have been ^^ ready observed in the world: So there are oth^^ signs
presaging it, which have not yet been, nor c^^ be yet observed in the world,
because they are no^ but shall be hereafter. As,

1. The Ruin of the Roman Antichrist is men^^oned as a sign presaging his
second Coming in t^^ Flesh; for it is said, That Christ shall destroy hi^ with
the brightness of his Coming, 2 These. 2. 8. n^ with his Coming, but with the
brightness of ^^ Coming: and here, by the brightness of his Co^ing, I
understand the last temporal Judgment the God shall bring upon the Roman
Antichrist, whi^^ shall be a Judgment of the Sword, accompani^^ with hailstones
from Heaven, Rev. 16. 19, 21. A^ as this Judgment shall destroy him, so it
shall be clear and bright evidence of Christ's second Approa^^ to be near at
hand; and for this cause may be ca^^ed the brightness of his Coming: and thoug^
this sign be not yet apparent, yet it shall be her^after.

2. The warlike preparations of Gog and Mago^ for a battle with the Saints, and
against the holy Cit^ is mentioned as a sign presaging his second Comin^ in the
Flesh; for it is said, That Satan being loos^ out of his prison, shall go forth
to deceive the N^tions which are in the four quarters of the eart^ Gog and
Magog, to gather them together to battle, Rev. 20. 8. And though it be true,
that Christ sha^ come again, and shall with fire from Heaven devou^ these
adversaries before this battle shall be fought yet this warlike preparation of
Gog and Magog is to be esteemed as a near and close presage of his secon^
Coming; and albeit this is not yet visible, yet it ^^all be in due season.

3. A great security of Nations is mentioned as a ^n presaging the second
Coming of Christ in the ^^esh; for we read, That Christ at this Coming of ^^
shall find the most part of the world in a secure ^^sture, neither mourning for
their sins, nor fearing ^^e Judgments approaching; For as in the days ^^fore
the Flood, they were eating and drinking, ^arrying, and giving in marriage,
until the day ^at Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not, ^til the Flood came,
and took them all away: So ^^all also the Coming of the Son of man be, Mat. 24.
^^, 39. Indeed this sign is visible in part at this pre^^nt, and shall be
conjunct and simultaneous with ^e second Coming of Christ in the Flesh; yet it
^^all be more visible then now it is, immediately be^^^e this Coming of his, to
such as shall have eyes to ^^scern it.

4. A great paucity of true Believers is mentioned a sign presaging his second
Coming in the Flesh; ^^r Christ himself says, When the Son of man com^^h,
shall he find faith on the earth? Luke 18. 8. which Interrogation of his sounds
in mine years, as ^he had said, Though at my second Appearing there ^^all be
found much dead faith, a great profession ^^ faith, and many unprofitable kinds
of faith; yet ^^at lively faith, which justifies a sinner before God, ^^all be
found but in a few: And though it be true, ^^at this sign shall be also
conjunct and simultaneous ^ith the second Coming of Christ; yet doubtless ^^
shall be more apparent then now it is, immediately before his second Coming, to
such as shall have eyes ^^ discern it.

5. A great alteration in the visible Heavens an^ Earth which now are is
mentioned as a sign pr^saging his second Coming in the Flesh; for it is sai^
That there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and
upon the Earth distres^ of Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the wave^
roaring, Luke 21. 25. And before that great an^ terrible Day of the Lord come,
the Sun shall ^^ darkened, and the Moon shall not give her ligh^ and the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, and the poers of Heaven shall be shaken, Mat. 24. 29.
An^ though some Writers do put an allegorical sense upon these passages, yet
the litteral sense must and w^ stand good, which is, That all these creatures
sh^^ withhold their wonted operation and influence, an^ shall no more be able
to give comfort unto men, n^ to show forth their glory as before, but shall
cea^ from their service, and lose their power, as a learne^ Divine writes: And
though this sign be not y^^ M. Dickson in his commentaries on Mat. 24. 29.
apparent, yet it shall be immediately before the appearing of Christ in the
Clouds.

6. After these things it is said, Then shall appe^^ the sign of the Son of man
in Heaven, Mat. 24. 3^ And here, by the sign of the Son of man, I do no^
understand, with some Writers, the sign of t^^ Cross; nor, with others, the
glorious Person of Ch^^^^ himself coming in the Clouds: but by it I unde^stand
the fire of the great day of the Lord, which shall begin in these visible
Heavens, and shall shi^^ all the world over, as the lightening shines from on^
end of Heaven unto the other: This is the sign the Son of man, and the last
sign of his which sh^^ be in Heaven before his personal approach in t^^ Clouds.
Thus the Word of God informs us ^^ the signs presaging the second Coming of
Christ in the Flesh.

Fourthly, It informs us, touching the time of his second Coming in the
Flesh; and so teaches 4 Informat.
us,

1. That the very punctual time, that is, the day and hour of this Coming of
his, is known only to God himself, not to men, nor to Angels, nor to Christ
himself, as he is the Son of man: For of that day, and that hour, knows no
man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father,
Mark 13. 32. And in this sense our Savior said unto his followers, It is not
for you to know the times and the seasons which the Father has put in his own
power, Acts 1. 7.

2. That we should not think the time of this his second Coming to be far off,
because the Scripture speaks of it as of that which is near at hand, Luke 21.
31. Romans 13. 12. Phil. 4. 5. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Rev. 22. 10. Jam. 5. 8. wherefore, if
we will judge according to Scripture, we should judge it to be near at hand: And
seeing the most part of those signs, which presage this second Coming of his,
have been already observed in the world, and the rest of them are daily
expected, it seems unreasonable to me, that any should think it to be far off,
or yet a thousand years off, as some have thought.

3. That the day of this his second Coming shall be a long day, and longer then
any that has been, or shall be before it; for it shall be somewhat like that
day in Joshua's time, when the Sun and the Moon stood still in the midst of
Heaven, Josh. 10. 12, 13, 14. and it shall be such a day as is described by the
Prophet Zechariah, in which it shall not be clear nor dark, but it shall be one
day which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor night, but it shall come to
pass that at evening time it shall be light, Zech. 14. 6, 7. Yea, we may well
conceive that it shall be a very long day, because of the great transactions
that shall be in it; for on that day shall be, 1. The dissolution of this
present world. 2. The Creation of the World to come. 3. The subduing of all
Christ's Enemies unto him. 4. The Resignation of the Kingdom of Heaven unto God
the Father. 5. The Appearing of the Son of man. 6. The Resurrection of all the
dead. And 7. The Sentence of the last Judgment. So it must needs be a long day,
that shall be famous for all these transactions.

And hereunto I add, That though the punctual time of his second Coming in the
Flesh be known only to God; yet some Divines think, that the yearly or annual
time of the worlds end, and his second Coming, are not obscurely pointed at in
Scripture by those numbers of 1260. Rev. 11. 3. of 1290. Dan. 12. 11. of 666.
Rev. 13. 18. of 1335. Dan. 12. 12. For say they, If these numbers were rightly
Vide Mr J. E. in his Book, entitled, The deliverance of the whole House of
Israel.
understood, they would put us very near upon the worlds end, and the second
Coming of Christ: and from these places they infer, That the whole reign of the
Papal Antichrist, from the first to the last, shall be 1260 years, and his fall
or ruin shall be in the year of our Lord 666. and this second Coming of Christ
shall be 45^ years after that: But I deliver this only as the opinion of some,
and so leave it to the censure of the godly, and to the experience of after
times, not doubting that some matter of moment will be found in it.

Fifthly, It informs us, touching the place from 5 Informat,
whence he shall come again in the Flesh the second ^^me, and so assures us,
that this Coming of his shall be from Heaven, viz. that third Heaven or blessed
Heaven wherein he now is, and reigns with his Father i^ his humane nature, as
God and man in one person: and for to assure us hereof it is said, This same
Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come, in like manner, as
ye have seen him go into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. The Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a shout, 1 These. 4. 16. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with ^is mighty Angels, 2 These. 2. 7. From Heaven we look for our
Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 20. and hereunto accords that Vision of
Saint John, I saw the holy City, New Jerusalem, coming ^own from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a bride ^dorned for her husband, Rev. 21. 2, 10. Where, by
New Jerusalem, I understand all the Saints which Christ shall bring with him at
his second Coming, to be espoused unto him after a more glorious manner then
formerly they were: and if this New Jerusalem shall come down from God out of
Heaven, then Christ himself also shall come down from thence at his next return
in the Flesh.

But it may be here demanded, Whether Christ

To which demand I answer thus: First, The third he reigns with the Father as
God and man in on^ person: and so I believe, That Christ, at his secon^ Coming
from the third Heaven, shall leave it altogether, never to possess it again as
formerly, nor as the constant place of his habitation: yet I deny not but
conceive, that after this descention of his he may be taken up again in his
humane Nature at some times into the third Heaven, for some ends known only to
God, as Saint Paul once was before hi^ death: but still I think, that at his
next Return from this Heaven in his humane Nature, he shall leave i^ altogether
as the dwelling place of his humane Nature; and that for these Reasons:

1. The third Heaven was not promised to Christ for an everlasting habitation,
but only for a certain time, as may be seen in these places; Sit thou at my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110. 1. He must
reign, till he (viz. the Father) has put all enemies under his feet, 1 Cor.
15. 25. And that which is here promised shall be made good unto him at his
second Coming, and not before: And if the third Heaven be not promised unto him
for an everlasting habitation, but for such a time as is expressed in the
promise, then we may well think, That at his second Coming from this Heaven he
shall leave it altogether, as it is the dwelling place of his humane Nature.

2. It is said, That this third Heaven shall receive or contain Christ but for
a certain time, viz. until the times of restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21.
that is, until the World to come shall be created, and all things therein shall
be restored, according to the Decrees and Promises of God: And if so, then
doubtless Christ at his second Coming from this Heaven shall leave it
altogether, considered as the dwelling place of his humane Nature.

3. It is written, That Christ at his second Coming from this Heaven shall
resign or deliver up the Kingdom to God even the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. And
what Kingdom is this that he shall then deliver up to his Father? Ans. 1. I do
not say, with some Writers, That he shall then deliver up his Mediatory Kingdom
to his Father; because this Kingdom (which belongs unto him as he is the Son of
David) shall have no end, Luke 1. 33. Neither, 2. do I say with others, That he
shall then deliver up his Church-Kingdom unto his Fathers sole dispose and
Government; because the Government of the Church, both Militant and Triumphant,
is laid upon Christ's shoulders as a Mediator, and shall never be taken off from
him, Isai. 9. 6, 7. Neither, 3. do I say with others, That he shall then
deliver up his Representative Kingdom (consisting of outward Ordinances and
Administrations now in use) to be abolished by his Father; because these things
shall cease and determine of their own accord, and be abolished before his
second Coming at least in order of nature. But I say, That he shall then resign
and deliver up the Kingdom of Heaven, properly so called (as it is his Fathers
personal Kingdom) unto the sole dispose and Government of his Father, that so
his Father may be all in all in it, as he was before Christ's coming thither, 1
Cor. 15. 28. And if he shall resign this Kingdom to God even the Father, then
we may well think, That at his next Coming from this Heaven in his humane
Nature, he shall leave it altogether, as it is the dwelling place of his humane
Nature.

4. It is said, That Christ, after his next Coming from Heaven in the Flesh,
shall be subject to him that put all things under him, 1 Cor. 15. 28. that is,
as if the Apostle had said, While Christ remains in the third Heaven in his
humane Nature, and as the person of a Mediator, we are not to consider him as
the Fathers Subject, because he is there after a sort equal with his Father,
his Father having advanced him at his own right hand, upon his own Throne, and
having given unto him all power in Heaven and in Earth: but after his coming
from thence he shall be subject to his Father, as he was before his Ascension:
and if so, then doubtless at his second Coming from this Heaven he shall leave
it, as the dwelling place of his humane Nature.

5. Have we never read, That Christ, after his personal Coming from this third
Heaven, shall possess his own personal Kingdom, and sit upon his own personal
Throne, according to his Fathers appointment? Luke 19, 12. and 22. 29. Rev. 3.
21. And how can this be? unless he shall then leave his Fathers personal
Kingdom, and personal Throne; and unless he shall then leave this third Heaven
altogether, considering it as the dwelling place of his humane Nature.

Sixthly, It informs us, touching the place whither 6 Informat.
he shall come, when he shall come again in the Flesh: And so I cannot think
that he shall come again from Heaven into this polluted world; because this
will be no fit place for a glorified Person to be and reside in: but doubtless
he shall come again from Heaven into the World to come, which shall be created
instead of this; that is, into the new Heavens, and the new Earth: And so first
he shall come into the new Heavens, there to be made visible to the Inhabitants
of this Earth, that some of them, viz. his friends, may be caught up together
in the Clouds to meet him in the air of the new Heaven, 1 These. 4. 17. and that
others, viz. his enemies, may be afflicted and astonished to behold him, Rev.
1. 7. And from thence he shall descend unto the new Earth, there to reside and
dwell for ever, and all his Saints with him; as it is written, We look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein shall dwell Righteousness, viz. the Lord our
Righteousness, with all his righteous Ones, and nothing else but Righteousness,
2 Pet. 3. 13. And as it is written again, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, Rev. 21. 3. Yea, this dwelling of Christ and
his Saints upon the new Earth, was lively represented unto us at the time of
his Transfiguration upon the Mount; for then and there Christ himself, with
Moses and Elias, appeared Mat. 17.
in a humane shape, and Peter said, Master, it is good for us to be here; that
is, to reside or dwell here; let us build three Tabernacles, one for thee, one
for Moses, and one for Elias: By which Transfiguration we are plainly taught
what shall be hereafter.

But here perhaps some will be ready to object and

This will be no dishonor at all unto them, because Christ and his Saints
shall be in some respects as we may well conceive for these Reasons:

1. Because the World to come will be more suitable and proportionable unto
humane bodies and natures then the third Heaven now is.

2. Because in the World to come Christ shall reign in his own personal
Kingdom, with all his Saints with him; whereas now in the third Heaven he
raigns as Mediator only in his Fathers personal Kingdom, and with only some of
his Saints with him.

3. Because in the World to come all Christ's Enemies shall be manifestly
subdued unto him; whereas now, while he remains in the third Heaven, we cannot
see all things put under him, Heb. 2 8.

4. Because in the World to come the Saints shall reign with Christ both in
soul and body, and that for ever; whereas now in the third Heaven they reign
with him only in respect of Souls, and that but for a time. These things
considered, I am so far from thinking, that it will be a dishonor to Christ
and his Saints, when they shall leave the third Heaven, for to reside upon the
new Earth, that I rather think it will be an increase or augmentation of honor
and glory unto them.

Seventhly, It informs us, touching the manner 7 Informat.
of his second Coming in the Flesh; and shows, that he shall come again in
like manner as he went into Heaven: This same Jesus which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall so come, in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven,
Acts 1. 11. that is to say,

1. As he ascended in a visible manner, in the sight of many: so he shall come
again in a visible manner; for they shall see the Son of man come in the
Clouds, Mat. 24. 30. And every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him, Revel. 1. 7.

2. As he ascended in a bodily manner, and in his humane nature: so he shall
come again in a bodily manner, and in his humane nature, Mat. 24. 30.

3. As he ascended in a triumphant manner, triumphing over Death, Hell, and the
Grave: so he shall come again in a triumphant manner, triumphing over all his
Enemies.

4. As he ascended gloriously; so he shall come again in the glory of his
Father, with power and great glory.

5. As he ascended in a kingly manner, with some good Angels attending on him:
so he shall come again in like manner, with all his holy and mighty Angels
attending on him, 2 These. 1. 7. Mat. 25. 31.

6. As his Ascension gave his Enemies great cause to lament and bewail their
condition: so his Coming again shall give them great cause so to do; for then
the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn, Mat. 24. 30. And all the kindreds of the
Earth shall wail because of him, Rev. 1. 7.

7. As his Ascension into Heaven gave his friends great cause to rejoice,
because he went thither to prepare a place for them: so his Coming again from
thence shall give them great cause to rejoice too, because unto them that look
for him he shall appear the second time without sin, unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 28.

Eighthly, It informs us, touching the ends of 8 Informat.
his second Coming in the Flesh; which ends may be thus exp^essed:

1. He shall come again from Heaven for to judge and reign in the World to come;
for it is said, He shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and in
his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. From whence I gather, That Christ shall have a
Kingdom in the World to come, wherein he shall judge and reign: So much also may
be gathered from 1 Chronicles. 16. 31, 33. And if so, then he shall come again from
Heaven for to judge and reign in the World to come, Luke 1. 33. Jude 15.

2 He shall come again from Heaven for to render unto every one according to
his works; as it is written, Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me,
to give to every man according as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 12. From whence I
gather, That as Christ in the World to come shall render unto the good
according to the good works which shall be found upon them, not remembering
their evil works; and unto the wicked according to the evil works which shall
be found upon them, not regarding their seeming good works: So he shall come
again from Heaven for this end.

3. He shall come again in flaming fire, for to take vengeance on them which
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 8.
viz. in case they shall not repent of these sins before their death.

4. He shall come again from Heaven for to convince all that are ungodly, of
all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and all their hard
speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 15.

5. He shall come again from Heaven for to be glorified in his Saints, and to
be admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1. 10. viz. in the World to come.

All these Informations put together, and all that

1. To beware of Atheism, that they be not found Atheists in this point, for
they that are Atheists in this particular will scoff at this doctrine, as it is
said, There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his Coming? 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. and it
shall be evil for such at that day.

2. To beware of ignorance and disobedience, that we be not found wilfully
ignorant of God, and wilfully disobedient to the Gospel of Christ; because at
his second Coming he shall punish such as shall be found in the guilt of these
sins with everlasting destruction from the presence of God, and from the glory
of his power, 2 These. 1. 9.

3. To beware of intemporance and excess in eating and drinking, and the cares
of this life: Take heed, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares, Luke 21. 34.

4. To beware of security, that we do not sleep as do others, and promise our
selves peace and safety in our sins; because sudden destruction shall come upon
such, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.
3, 6.

5. To beware of causeless contention and strife with our neighbors: For if a
servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to
beat the menservants and maidens, the Lord of that servant will come in a day
when he looks not for him, and in an hour when he is not aware, and will cut
him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion with unbelievers, Luke 12. 45,
46.

6. To beware of all erroneous opinions about this Subject. And seeing we have
such clear Informations in the Word of God concerning it, it will be dangerous
for us to listen to any Informations contrary to these; or to entertain any
erroneous opinions in reference to this second Coming of Christ in the Flesh:
of which sort I have met with some created at this day.

As one says, There shall be a third Coming of Mr J. Arch
Christ in the Flesh, to which many Scriptures, before quoted, properly belong,
as he thinks; and that his second Coming in the Flesh shall be only to raise
the dead Saints, and to set up his Kingdom upon this Earth, and to establish it
in the hands of all his dead and living Saints, whereupon he shall withdraw
himself into Heaven again, until his third Coming at the end of the world:
whereas the Scripture speaks plainly but of two Comings of his in the Flesh,
and shows, That as his first Coming in the Flesh was to take away sin; so his
second Coming shall be without sin, unto Salvation, Hebr. 9 28.

Another says, That his second Coming in the Flesh is yet far off, a thousand
years off at least.

Another says, That his second Coming in the Flesh shall not be before there
shall be a National Conversion of the Jews, which shall occasion a more full
Conversion of Gentiles.

Another says, That his second Coming in the Flesh shall be into this corrupt
world.

Another says, That after his second Coming in the Flesh he shall return
bodily into the third Heaven, there to reside for ever, and his Saints with him.

But I rescent these opinions as so many wild fancies or foperies, such as have
no footing at all in the Word of God: And though I might here fill many pages
with a large Confutation of them; yet I forbear, because I desire to furnish
the Reader with more profitable matter, and do think, that by the light of the
former Informations the judicious Reader may discern the darkness of these
conceits.

Again, That which has been said touching the second Coming of Christ in the
Flesh should exhort and persuade all men, to whom these tidings shall come, to
these following duties.

1. To be watchful against sin and Satan, that we may keep a good Conscience in
all things: Sleep not as do others, but watch, and be sober, 1 These. 5. 6.
Behold, I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he be found naked, and they see his shame, Rev. 16. 15.

2. To believe his second Coming in the Flesh assuredly, seeing we have no
reason to doubt thereof, and seeing they that believe not this are no better
then Atheists; and Christ shall come to be admired in them that believe.

3. To look for, that is, to hope for, this second Coming of his, as we are
taught to do, both by precept, 2 Pet. 3. 12. and by example, Philip. 3. 20.

4. To love this second Coming of his, seeing there shall be a Crown of
Righteousness for such as love his Appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

5. To pray for this second Coming of his, that it may be hastened, Rev. 22.
20. and that we may be accounted worthy to stand before him at that day, Luke
21. 36.

6. To be diligent whiles we live, both in our general and particular Callings:
For blessed is that man, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find s^ doing,
Luke 12. 43.

SECT. VI. Touching the last Resurrection.
AS the second Coming of Christ in the Flesh is one of the first things which
shall be made visible in the World to come: So the last Resurrection is another
of them which shall be made visible too upon the same day with his second
Coming, if not at the same instant. And touching this Subject also the
Scripture informs us of diverse things: As,

First, It informs us, That the last Resurrection 1 Informat.
is to be distinguished from a spiritual Resurrection:

1. Because all that have now a lively faith are partakers of a spiritual
Resurrection, in that they are quickened together with Christ, and are risen
together with him, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. Col. 3. 1. according to his promise, The
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
man, and they that hear shall live, Joh. 5. 25. whereas none of them are yet
partakers of the last Resurrection.

2. Because a spiritual Resurrection is all one with Regeneration, being that
Grace of God whereby men are quickened spiritually, and so raised from the
death of sin unto the life of Righteousness, and translated from death unto
life in a spiritual sense, 1 John 3. 14. but the last Resurrection shall not be
all one with Regeneration.

3. Because a spiritual Resurrection is called the first Resurrection, and that
properly, Rev. 20. 5. 6. but the last Resurrection shall not be the first.

4. Because this spiritual Resurrection is proper only unto such as are or
shall be blessed and holy; as it is said, Blessed and holy is he that has part
in the first Resurrection, for upon such the second death has no power; but
they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years, Rev. 20. 6. viz. in the state of the first and spiritual Resurrection:
but the last Resurrection shall not be proper only unto such as are or shall be
blessed and holy.

5. Because this spiritual Resurrection is not a bodily Resurrection, from a
bodily death: but the last Resurrection shall be a bodily Resurrection, from a
bodily death. And so for these Reasons the last Resurrection is to be
distinguished from a spiritual Resurrection.

Secondly, It informs us, That the last Resurrection 2 Informat.
is to be distinguished from all corporal Resurrections that have been
heretofore. Indeed we read of many corporal Resurrection that have been
heretofore; as the widow of Sarepha's son was raised from death to life by the
power of God in the Ministry of Elijah, 1 King. 17. 22. The Sh^namites son was
raised from death no life by the power of God in the Ministry of Elisha, 2
King. 4. 34, 35. The dead man that was cast into the Sepulcher of Elisha was
raised from death to life, 2 King. 13. 21. The Rulers daughter was raised from
death to life by our Savior Christ, Mat. 9. 25. The widow of Naims son was
raised from death to life by Christ himself, Luke 7. 14, 15. Lazarus, after he
had been in the grave four days, was raised from death to life by Christ
himself, Joh. 11. 43, 44. Tabitha was raised from death to life by the power of
God in the Ministry of Peter the Apostle, Acts 9. 40. Eutichus, that fell down
from the third loft, and was taken up dead, was raised again by the power of
God in the Ministry of S. Paul, Acts 20. 10. Yea we read, That when Christ was
crucified, the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept,
arose, and came out of the graves, after his Resurrection, and went into the
holy City, and appeared unto many, Mat. 27. 52, 53. Yet I say, That the last
Resurrection is to be distinguished from all these.

1. Because these Resurrections are so many pledges and foregoing signs of the
last Resurrection.

2. Because these Resurrections were but particular ones: but the last
Resurrection shall be a general one.

3. Because these Resurrections left men in a state of mortality, and in
possibility of a corporal death: but the last Resurrection shall not leave men
in such a condition.

Thirdly, It informs us, That the last Resurrection 3 Informat.
shall be common to all dead people, men, women and children; whether good or
bad, just or unjust, Elect or Reprobates. Indeed some men shall be found living
at the second Appearing of Christ, who shall be caught up in the Clouds to meet
him in the air, 1 These. 4. 17. and so they shall neither dye, nor rise again,
only they shall be changed, and this change shall be unto them instead of a
Resurrection; 1 Cor. 15. 51. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed: Yet doubtless all men, women and children, that shall be found dead at
that day, of what sort or quality soever, shall be raised again in their
bodies, and their Souls shall come into them again, that in Soul and body
united they may live for ever, either in a state of Bliss, or in a state of
misery: For the Prophet Isaiah says in the plural number, not excepting any,
Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body, shall they arise: Awake,
and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and
the earth shall cast out the dead, Isai. 26. 19. S. John says, I saw the dead,
small See John 28. 29. and Acts 24. 15.
and great, stand before God, Rev. 20. 12, 13. And how can this be, unless all
the dead, both small and great shall rise again? And though the Prophet Daniel
says, That many of them which sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, Dan.
12. 2. Yet doubtless he means all such sleepers, who, when they shall be
divided into two sorts, viz. Elect and Reprobates, shall be but many of each
sort: And so the last Resurrection shall be common to all dead people, men,
women and children.

Howbeit, we must acknowledge some difference between the Resurrection of the
just and the unjust. For,

1. The just, and such as have done good with acceptance, shall come forth to
the Resurrection of life: but the unjust, and such as have done evil without
repentance, shall come forth to the resurrection of condemnation, Joh. 5. 29.

2. The just, and such as have done good, with acceptance, shall have a
priority in the last Resurrection; The dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 These.
4. 16. if not in time, yet in dignity: but the unjust, and such as have done
evil, without repentance, shall have a posteriority in the last Resurrection,
that is, they shall rise last, though not in time, yet in dignity, and so shall
be less honorable in this Resurrection, then the just shall be.

3. The just, and such as have done good, with acceptance, shall rise again,
not only by the power of the Trinity, but also by the power of Christ as
Mediator, by virtue of his Merit and their Union with him: but the unjust, and
such as have done evil, without repentance, shall rise again only by the power
of the Trinity, and not by the power of Christ as their Mediator, nor by virtue
of his Merit and their Union with him, seeing they have no Union with him.

Fourthly, It informs us, That the last Resurrection ^ Informat.
shall be proper to mankind, and not common to other creatures with them; that
is to say, Though it be true, that all dead men, women and children, shall rise
again at the last day; yet we may not think, that dead birds, beasts, and
fishes, shall rise again with them; for two Reasons.

1. Because the Apostle Paul speaking largely of the last Resurrection, does
restrain it to mankind, excepting dead birds, beasts, and fishes, from ^aving
any share in it, saying, All flesh is not the ^ame flesh, but there is one kind
of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, another of birds,
1 Cor. 15. 39. as if he had said, When I speak of the last Resurrection, I
would be understood to ^peak of it only in reference to mankind, and not in
reference to birds, beasts, and fishes; for as these creatures dyed not in the
first Adam, so they shall not be raised by the second Adam.

2. The reason why dead men and women shall rise again, is, because they have
reasonable Souls living while their bodies are dead, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Dives, Lazarus, are now alive in their Souls, their bodies being dead: but
other creatures, as birds, beasts, fishes, have no souls living while their
bodies are dead: for there is this difference betwixt a man and a beast, that
when a man dies his spirit lives and ascends to God that gave it, but when a
beast dies his spirit dies with him and returns to dust; which is a matter well
known and considered but of a few, therefore Solomon says, Who knows the
spirit of a man, that goes upward; and the spirit of the beast, that goes
downward to the earth? Eccles. 3. 21. And from hence also I may infer, That the
last Resurrection shall be proper only unto mankind, and not common to other
creatures with them.

But here it may be objected, 1. There shall be

I grant, There shall be other creatures in the

2. There shall be a restitution of all things at the Acts 3. 21. And does not
this import the Resurrection of other creatures beside man?

It does not; because this restitution is there limited

3. But there is a large deliverance promised to viz. That the creature it self
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of God, Romans 8. 21. and does not this deliverance include a
Resurrection of other creatures beside mankind.

It does not: For though I grant, 1. That in this still, That the last
Resurrection shall be proper to mankind, and not common to other creatures with
them, whatsoever others have said or written to the contrary.

Fifthly, It informs us, That the last Resurrection 5 Informat.
shall be sure and certain, and that which none should doubt of; because the
Scripture does make it sure unto us by three things:

1. By plain Testimonies, such as cannot be gainsayed, Isai. 26. 19. Dan. 12.
2. Joh. 5. 28, 29. Acts 24. 15, etc.

2. By Types, Parables and similitudes: Thus the budding of Aarons rod, after
it was dry like the other, was a Type to assure us of the Resurrection of our
bodies, Numb. 17. 8. Thus the translation of Enoch and Elias was a Type to
assure us, that in and after the last Resurrection we shall live in our bodies,
as they are now alive in their bodies, Genesis 5. 2 King. 2. Thus the Parable of
the dry bones living again was written to assure us, that our bodies shall live
again after death, Ezekiel. 37. 3, 6. and the similitude of seed reviving after it
is dead in the earth, is to assure us of the last Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 36,
37.

3. By Arguments or Reasons: The one taken from the Resurrection of Christ; for
if Christ be risen, then all dead men and women shall one day rise again by the
same power of the Godhead: but Christ is risen from the dead, as is made
apparent, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21. therefore all dead men and women shall rise again.
Another is taken from Baptism: one end whereof is to assure men of the last
Resurrection; and Baptism should be in vain, in this rerespect, if there should
not be a Resurrection: but Baptism shall not be in vain in this respect; erg^
there shall be a general Resurrection. Another i^ taken from the sufferings of
the godly in this world for they are wont to suffer much in hope of the la^^
Resurrection, and such sufferings of theirs should be in vain, if there should
be no such Resurrection 1 Cor. 15. but their sufferings shall not be in vain;
therefore, without doubt, there shall be such a Resurrection. And another is
taken from Gods Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to be their God, and
the God of their seed for ever: And how can this be made good without a general
Resurrection, whereby the bodies of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their seed,
shall be made alive again, that so they may both live for ever in souls and
bodies united, and God may be their God for ever, seeing he is not the God of
the dead, but of the living, Mat. 22. 32. Wherefore none should doubt of the
last Resurrection, seeing the Scripture does so many ways assure us of it.

Sixthly, It informs us, That the last Resurrection 6 Informat.
shall have diverse Causes; as,

1. The efficient Cause of it, shall be the whole Trinity, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; and therefore it is said, That the Lord kills and makes alive, he
brings down to the grave, and brings up, 1 Samuel 2. 6. And it is God that
raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9. Joh. 5. 21.

2. The meritorious cause of it, shall be Christ as Mediator, who merited the
Resurrection from the dead: but he merited it only for the Elect; and so the
Elect shall be raised, not only by the power of the Trinity, but also by the
power of Christ as Mediator, both by virtue of his Merit, and efficacious
Spirit, Romans 8. 11. and also by virtue of their my^tical Joh. 6. 39. 40, 54. 1
Cor. 15. 45.
Union with him, as their Head: whereas the reprobates shall be raised only by
the power of the Trinity.

3. The instrumental Cause of it, shall be the sound of a Trumpet: For the
Trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised, 1 Cor. 15. 52. The Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first,
1 These. 4. 16. And though we cannot fully understand what kind of Trumpet this
shall be, yet we may well conceive that it shall be an extraordinary one, such
as has not been, nor shall be heard of any until then, when the voice thereof
shall awaken all the dead throughout the world from their late and long sleep.

4. The final Cause of it, shall be principally the Glory of God, that he may
glorify his Mercy upon some, and his Justice upon others, after their
Resurrection: And secondarily, that all the raised may receive according to the
things done in their bodies, whether they shall be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

Seventhly, It informs us, That the last Resurrection 7 Informat.
shall be upon one and the same day with the second Coming of Christ, as
appears, 1 These. 4. 16. and for this cause it is said, That the dead shall rise
and be raised at the last day, Joh. 6. 39, 40, 54. and 11. 24. where the day of
Christ's second Coming is called the last day, not absolutely, but respectively
(as I conceive,) because it shall be the first and last day of that nature and
kind: And though Zach. 14.
we know not this day, as we know other days, by way of computation, from the
beginning; yet we must know it to be the last day, in the former sense.

Eighthly, It informs us, That the last Resurrection 8 Informat.
shall produce a great change in or upon the bodies of men, women and children:
For though in this Resurrection, of which I speak, our bodies shall be the same
with these, 1. For Essence, because whatsoever is essential to these shall be
essential to them, as head and ears, eyes, hands and feet, etc. 2. For
Propriety, because every one shall receive his own body again, 1 Cor. 15. as
God shall give unto every dead seed its own body; and so we shall see Christ
not with other, but with these same eyes, Job 19. 27. Yet in the last
Resurrection our bodies shall not be the same with these, either,

1. For Substance, because the substance of these shall perish, and be brought
to dust, Genesis 3. and the substance of those shall be formed and raised, as is
probable, out of the dust of these, not out of the substance of them. Indeed
those bodies of men which have been translated without death, and those bodies
of men which shall be changed without death, probably shall have the same
substance in the World to come which now they have: But I speak here of the
dead bodies of men, and do not think that they shall be the same for substance
with these which now we have, for the Reason before alleged.

2. Neither shall our bodies in the last Resurrection be the same with these
for Qualities; because they shall be changed in this respect: For whereas,

1. These bodies are corruptible; those shall be incorruptible.

2. These bodies are mortal; those shall be im^ortal. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.
Phil. 3. 21.


3. These bodies are weak and frail; those shall ^e strong and able.

4. These bodies are deformed and vile; those shall be well formed.

5. These bodies are natural; those shall be spi^itual.

6. These are, it may be, imperfect, for stature or ^imbs; those shall be
perfect in both respects.

And thus the last Resurrection shall produce a great change in or upon the
bodies of dead men and women.

Being thus informed touching the last Resurrection, we should be admonished
from hence to beware of all erroneous opinions, in reference to this Subject:
As,

1. If any think there shall be no such Resurrection, Mat. 22. 23. as some
Philosophers, Epicureans and Stoics, thought, Acts 17. 18. and as some amongst
the Corinthians thought, 1 Cor. 15. 12. This is an erroneous opinion, contrary
to the Informations before given; and we should beware of it, because they who
thus think are not much better then Atheists, but are much worse then some
Pagans in former times, who acknowledged the Resurrection of the dead, and an
everlasting life after death.

2. If any think this Resurrection is past already, with Hyminetus and
Philetus, 2 Timothy 2. 18. This is an erroneous opinion too, and we should beware
of it, because they who thus think conceive, that either the Scripture speaks
of no other Resurrection but a spiritual Resurrection, or of no other
Resurrection but such corporal resurrections as ha^^ been heretofore: whereas
it has been showed before, That the Scripture does plainly distinguish the
last Resurrection from both these.

3. If any think that the reasonable soul of man is mortal, and shall dye with
the body, it is an erro^^ not only against those plain places of Scriptu^^
Psalm. 16. Luke 23. Luke 16.
which teaches, That the Souls of Christ, of the penitent Thief, of Dives and
Lazarus, were living while their bodies were dead; but also against the
doctrine of the last Resurrection: For if these soul^ of men should dye with
their bodies, what bette^ reason can there be given for the resurrection o^
dead men, then may be given for the resurrection o^ dead beasts, birds and
fishes? wherefore beware o^ this opinion.

4. If any think that dead beasts, as well as dead men, shall rise again at the
last day, they are much deceived also, as may appear by what has been said
before in this Section: and this brutish conceit is a plain denial of that
difference which Solomon puts betwixt a man and a beast in their death, Eccl.
3. 21. and shows themselves to be ignorant of it: therefore beware of it.

5. If any think that the dead in Christ shall rise a thousand years before
those men which are dead out of Christ, we must take this for an error too,
(though it has many friends,) because the Word of God teaches us to allow but
one day for the last Resurrection, called the last day, Joh. 6. 39, 40, 54. and
11. 24. in which this great Work shall be finished: How then can the dead in
Christ rise a thousand years before the rest of the dead, unless this one last
day shall contain a thousand years from the morning to the evening of it? which
I suppose none of them will acknowledge for a truth. Wherefore when it is said,
The dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. we must understand, that
they shall rise first in ^rder of dignity, if not first in time, as we said
before: And suppose they shall rise some moment of time before the rest of the
dead, yet we have no reason ^o think that they shall rise a thousand years
before them. And whereas it is said, The rest of the dead ^ived not again,
until the thousand years were ex^ired, Revel: 20. we are to understand, that
Saint ^ohn, in this place, and in the Context, does acquaint ^s with two sorts
of dead men, viz. some are dead ^n Christ, and these are yet alive in him, and
shall ^ive with him in Heaven, by virtue of their spiritual Resurrection, until
the thousand years there spoken ^f shall be expired: And others are dead out of
Christ, and these shall never live by virtue of a spi^itual Resurrection,
neither shall they live again by ^irtue of a corporal Resurrection, until the
thou^and years before mentioned shall be expired: And ^f this be the true
meaning of the place, as I conceive ^^ is, it makes nothing at all for this
last Opinion, ^ut proves it rather to be erroneous: and therefore we should
take heed of it.

Again, This Doctrine, touching the last Resur^ection, should exhort and stir
us up to diverse du^ies. As,

1. To believe the last Resurrection, seeing we have so many Scriptures to
confirm it; for when our Savior had spoken to Martha concerning this subject,
he said unto her, Beleevest thou this? intimating that we should believe what
the Scripture faith of the Resurrection: And when Saint Paul had spoken of the
same point, he said to the Corinthians, So we preach, and so ye have believed,
1. Cor. 15.

2. To hope for the last Resurrection; as we are taught by the example of Saint
Paul and others; Act. 23. 6^* and ^^. 1^. because it will be a joyful day for
all Gods Elect.

3. To be patient, in the mean time, under all afflictions and perfecutions, as
the Martyrs in the primitive times were willing to suffer, and refused to
accept of deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection, Hebr. 11.
35.

4. To do good in every kind, seeing we know that our labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord, but that we shall be recompensed for every good act at the
Resurrection of the just, Luke 14. 14.

Lastly, This Doctrine, touching the last Resurrection, should comfort all good
Christians greatly against all the evils of this life; seeing we are charged to
comfort one another with these words, which concern the Resurrection, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 18. More particularly, it should comfort such against all their bodily
infirmities and defects, as blindness, deafness, lameness, sickness, etc.
knowing that in the Resurrection all these shall be done away, and our bodies
shall be restored unto us safe and sound, in all parts, and in all respect^:
And against the fear of a corporal death, as Job did comfort himself against
it, when he said, If a man dye, shall he live again? A^ the days of mine
appointed time will I wait, till my change shall come, Job 14. 14. And as David
also comforted himself in the like case, when he said, My flesh was glad, and
my glory rejoiced, because thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy
holy One to see corruption, Psalm. 16.

SECT. VII. Touching the last Judgment.
THree of the first things which shall be made visible in the World to come,
are, the second Coming of Christ in the Flesh, the last Resurrection, and the
last Judgment. And having spoken of two of these before, I am now to speak of
the third in this Section: And here, for the better information of our
judgments, I shall affirm diverse things also touching the last Judgment. As,

First, I affirm, That the last Judgment it to be 1 Inform.
distinguished from all other judgments, whether of God, or of men.

It is to be distinguished from all other Judgments of God.

1. Because all other Judgments of God are but some National, or some
particular ones, such as concern some whole Nations, or such as concern some
particular persons: But the last Judgment shall be more then some National or
particular one, because it shall be universal, such as shall concern all
particulars of Mankind, of all Nations.

2. Because all other Judgments of God are passed upon men at several times;
for some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment, and some
men's follow after, 1 Timothy 5. 24. But the last Judgment shall be passed upon men
all at once.

3. Because all other Judgments of God are but partial and gradual, not
according the full measure of their works; but the last Judgment shall be full
and complete.

4. Because all other Judgments of God are but temporal, whereas the last shall
be eternal, in respect of the execution thereof.

5. Because all other Judgments of God have in them something that is secret
and hid from men; but the last Judgment, with the cause of it, shall be fully
and clearly revealed to men.

It is also to be distinguished from all judgments of men, that are given and
passed by men in this life.

1. Because such judgments of men are, in some things, commonly peccant, and
faulty, like themselves: but the last Judgment shall not be peccant or faulty
in any thing.

2. Because such Judgments of men may be appealed from unto the Judgment of God
at least; but the last Judgment will admit of no appeal: and so the last
Judgment is to be distinguished from all other Judgments, whether of God, or of
men.

Secondly, I affirm, That the last Judgment 2 Inform.
shall certainly be, and come to pass in due season.

And we should not doubt of it, because God has made the last Judgment sure
unto us by three things: As,

1. By the Resurrection of Christ from the dead: And one end for which God
raised him from the dead, was, that thereby he might assure us of the last
Judgment: Act. 17. 31.

2. By his Decree and Appointment: For it is appointed unto men once to dye,
but after this the Judgment, Hebr. 9. 27. And God has appointed a day, in
which he will judge the world, Act. 17. 31. Now matters decreed and appointed by
God, shall certainly be, and come to pass in due season: But the last Judgment
is a matter decreed and appointed by God; therefore it shall certainly be, and
come to pass in due season.

3. By plain Testimonies of Scripture, such as cannot be evaded: For David
speaks plainly of the last Judgment, when he says, The ungodly shall not
stand in the Judgment, Psalm. 1. 5. God shall administer Judgment unto the
people in uprightness, Psalm. 9. 8. He shall call to the Heavens from above, and
to the Earth, that he may judge his people, Psalm. 50. 4. So does Solomon, when
he says, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked, Eccles. 3. 17. For all
these things God shall bring thee to judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. And God shall
bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or
evil, Eccles. 12. 14. So does our Savior, when he says, That he shall execute
judgment as the Son of man, Ioh. 5. 27. So does Saint Paul, when he says, We
know the judgment of God shall be according to truth, against them that do such
things, Romans 2. 2. So does Saint James, when he says, There shall be judgment
merciless unto them that show no mercy, and mercy rejoices against judgment,
James 2. 13. And so does Saint Peter, when he speaks of the Judgment of the
great day, 2 Pet. 3. 7. Wherefore seeing the last Judgment is thus made sure
unto us by these things, we should not doubt thereof, but should believe that
it shall certainly be, and come to pass in due season.

Thirdly, I affirm, That the last Judgment shall 3 Informat
be visibly administered only by Christ, as Mediator, as God and Man in one
person. Indeed, I grant that this Judgment shall be efficiently caused by the
whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, because it is said, That God shall
judge the world, Psa. 50. 6. and 75. 7. Act. 17. 31. And the outward acts of the
Godhead are common to all three persons in the Godhead. I grant also, that this
Judgment shall be instrumentally caused by the holy Angels, because they shall
go forth, and gather together Gods Elect from the four winds of the Earth, viz.
unto Judgment, Matthew. 24. 31. They shall sever, or separate, the good from the
bad before the sentence of Judgment shall be given, Mat. 13. 49. And I grant,
that this Judgment shall be attested, and approved of, by all the Saints of
God: In which sense it is said, That the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.
2. And the Apostles shall sit upon Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, Mat. 19. 28.

Yet we must know, that this Judgment shall be visibly administered only by
Christ, as Mediator, and as God and Man in one person, and by no other person:
In which sense it is said, The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment unto the Son, Joh. 5. 22. God will judge the world by the man whom he
has ordained, that is, by Christ, Act. 17. 31. He will judge the secrets of men
by Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 16. And Christ is ordained of God to be Judge of quick
and dead, Act. 10. 42. 2 Timothy 4. verse. 1.

And this (without doubt) will be a great comfort to Gods Elect at the day of
Judgment, when they shall consider that they shall have none to pronounce
Judgment upon them at that day, but Christ their Savior, who dyed for their
sins, and rose again for their Justification: As on the other side, it will be
a great terror to reprobate sinners, when they shall consider that they shall
have none pronounce Judgment upon them, but Christ, whom they have always
contemned and despised; if not in his person, yet in his Ordinances, and in his
Members: and whom they would not have to reign over them in this world by his
Word and Spirit.

Fourthly, I affirm, That the last judgment shall 4 Inform.
extend unto all reasonable Creatures, both Angels and men.

It shall extend to the Angels, both good and evil: For Christ is the Lord of
the good Angels, and their office is to worship him as their Lord, and
therefore he shall judge them at the latter day, not for any evil they have
done, because they have done none; but according to the good they have done,
because they have been always ready to worship him, to obey his voice, and to
do his Will. And he shall judge the evil Angels, or Devils, for their first
fall, and for all the evils they have acted since; For they are reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day, Jude 6.
And h^^ Judgment upon them shall be approved of by the Saints; Know ye not that
we shall judge the Angels? that is, the evil Angels: 1 Cor. 6. 3.

This Judgment also shall extend unto all men, women, and children. For this
cause it is said, That Christ shall judge the righteous and the wicked; that i^,
such as shall be found righteous, or wicked, at that day; Eccles. 3. 17. And he
shall judge the quick and the dead, Act. 10. 42. that is, such as shall be found
alive, at his second Coming; and such as shall be found, dead at that day,
shall be raised, and brought to Judgment: And he shall judge the small and the
great, Revel. 20. 13. all the ungodly, Jude 15: yea all shall stand before him,
Romans 14. 10. Therefore all men shall be judged by him.

Yet we must understand, That he shall judge men in a different way at that day:
For he shall judge the Elect, as righteous persons, with the Judgment of
Absolution; but he shall judge the Reprobates, as wicked persons, with the
Judgment of Condemnation: And he shall judge the Elect and Righteous according
to the good they have done, forgetting their evil works; but he shall judge the
Reprobates and wicked according to the evil they have done, not regarding their
seeing good works.

Fifthly, I affirm, That the last Judgment shall be just and righteous
altogether. For which cause 5 Inform.
it is said, That God shall judge the world in righteousness, in uprightness, in
truth, Psalm. 9. 8. Acts 17. 31. Romans 2. 2. And if he shall thus judge the world
at the last, then the last Judgment shall be just and righteous altogether.

Yea, all the proceedings of this Judgment shall be just, as may be seen in
these particulars:

1. There shall be a Throne, or seat, prepared for Judgment: For God has
prepared his Throne for judgment, Psalm. 9. 7. And will not this be just, That a
Throne shall be prepared before Judgment shall be pronounced on any?

2. There shall be a summons to Judgment, to this effect; Arise ye dead, and
come to judgment. And will not this be just, That there shall be a general
summons before the Judgment shall be pronounced upon any?

3. There shall be a personal appearance of all men made before the Judgment
seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And will not this be just, That there shall be a
personal appearance of all before Judgment shall be pronounced upon any?

4. There shall be a cause produced for this Judgment, viz. the righteousness
of the Just, and the wickedness of the unjust: For God shall bring every work
to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil, Eccles. 12.
14. And will not this be just, That there shall be a cause produced before the
Judgment shall be pronounced upon any?

5. There shall be evidence brought in on both ^^es, viz. for the acquitting
and absolving of the Just, and for the condemning of the unjust: Which evidence
shall be found written in the books which shall then be opened; for the books
shall be opened, Dan. 7. 10. Revel. 20. 12. What Books? These: 1. The book of
Gods Omniscience. 2. The book of every man's Conscience. 3. The book of the Law,
James 2. 12. 4. The book of the Gospel, Rom 2. 16. 5. The book of Life, Rev.
20. 13. These books shall be opened, and in them shall be found written
whatsoever shall make for acquitting of the Just, and the condemning of the
unjust: And they shall be judged according to that which shall be found written
in these books. And will not this be just, That evidence shall be brought in on
both sides before the Judgment shall be pronounced upon either party? Yes.

6. There shall be (after all this) a Sentence of Judgment given and
pronounced, both upon the Just and unjust.

The Sentence that shall be given and pronounced upon the Elect, under the name
and notion of just persons, shall be to this effect; Come ye blessed Children
of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. And the reason of this Sentence shall be added, thus; For I was hungry,
and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was naked, and ye
clothed me; I was sick, and in prison, and ye came unto me: And in as much as
ye have done it to one of these little ones which believe in me, ye have done
it unto me: Mat. 25. 34. 40.

The Sentence also which shall be given and pronounced upon the Reprobates,
under the name and notion of unjust persons, shall be to this effect; Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And the
reason of this Sentence also shall be added, thus: For I was hungry, and ye
gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and
ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye
visited me not. Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me: Matthew. 25. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. And
will it not be just, That after a Throne has been prepared for Judgment, and
summons have been given, and a personal appearance has been made, and a cause
has been produced, and evidence h^th been brought in; that this Sentence of
Judgment should be given? Yes, doubtless. Wherefore seeing all the proceedings
of this Judgment shall be just, I may well infer, That the last Judgment shall
be just and righteous altogether.

Sixthly, I affirm, That the Word of God teaches 6 Inform.
^^ something touching the time of the last Judgment.

As, 1. That this Judgment shall be upon one and the same day with the second
Coming of Christ: And for this cause the day of his second Coming is called,
the day of Judgment, Mat. 10. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 7. 1 Ioh. 4. 17. Jude 6. And here
it should be remembered, that the day of Judgment is taken and used in a double
sense: 1. For the day of Sentence; As when it is said, that every idle word
that men speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment, Mat.
12. 36. 2. For the day of Execution; As when it is said, The Lord knows how
to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust to the day of
Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. Now when I say that the day of Judgment
shall be the same with the day of Christ's second Coming, we must understand it
of the day of Sentence, not of the day of Execution, because the day of
Execution shall continue after the day of his second Coming.

2. It teaches us, That the time of the last Judgment should not be thought to
be far off, because Saint James says, Behold the Judge (meaning Christ)
stands before the door, Iam. 5. 9. which expression is taken from an earthly
Judge, who when he stands before the door, should not be thought to be far of,
but near at hand; neither should his judgment be thought to be far of, but near
at hand: but Christ our Judge stands before the door (says he,) therefore we
should not think him to be far off, but near at hand; neither should we think
this Judgment of his to be far off, but near at hand.

Seventhly, I affirm, That the Word of God teaches 7 Inform.
us something touching the place of the last Judgment, and shows where it shall
be; viz. in the World to come. For it is said, That Christ shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, and in his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. Whence I
gather, That Christ at his second appearing shall have a humane Kingdom, such
as now he has not; and that where this Kingdom shall be, there shall the last
Judgment be: But this Kingdom of his shall be in the World to come, as I shall
have occasion to prove hereafter; therefore this Judgment of his shall be in
the World to come.

Yet I suppose that all Divines are not of my mind That God shall call to the
Heavens above, and to the Earth, that he may judge his people, Psalm. 50. 4.

Whereunto I reply, That this conceit is against that Christ shall come from
the third Heaven for to judge the quick and the dead. And what need he come from
thence for to judge them, if he shall judge them there? or there pronounce
Judgment upon them?

Besides, this place quoted from the Psalmist relates not to the place of this
last Judgment, but to the persons that shall be judged: And so the meaning of
it is, as if he had said, God shall command the Heaven from above to let forth
the Souls that are therein, and the Earth from beneath to yield forth the
bodies of men therein, that so both in Soul and body they may be judged.
Wherefore I cannot imagine that this Judgment shall be given or pronounced in
the third Heaven.

Another may think, That this Judgment shall be That such as shall live, and
remain, at the second Coming of Christ, shall be caught up together in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17:

Whereunto also I reply, That the Apostle, in the

Another may think, That this Judgment shall be Jehoshaphat, which, as some
say, is situate beween Mount Sion and Mount Olivet; because the Prophet Joel
says, That God will gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the
valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there: Joel 3. 2.

But to this I answer; That if we view the Context Joel there speaks of a
temporal judgment that was to be brought upon the Enemies of Israel and Judah
in the valley of Iehoshaphat, and not of this last Judgment. How then can it be
proved from hence, That this last Judgment shall be upon the earth that now is,
and namely in the valley of Ichoshaphat.

But if any will say, This Temporal judgment might be a type of the last
Judgment, I will not gainsay it. Yet all that I can gather from this, is* That
this last Judgment shall as certainly be in the World to come, as that was in
the valley of Ichoshaphat that now is. And it may be that the Throne of the
last Judgment shall be near about the valley of Ichosaphat, which shall be in
the World to come.

Eighthly, I affirm, That the Word of God teaches 8 Inform.
us something also touching the Execution of the last Judgment. As,

1. That the Execution of it shall immediately follow the Sentence of it: For
no sooner shall that Sentence be given, but forthwith the righteous shall go
into life eternal, and the wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment,
Mat. 25. 46.

2. That the Execution of it shall be full and complete in all things,
according to the Sentence: For nothing shall be found in the Sentence, which
shall be found wanting in the Execution; but in all things according to the
Sentence shall the Execution be: they that shall be blessed in the Sentence,
shall be blessed in the Execution: and they that shall be cursed in the
Sentence, shall be cursed in the Execution: and so Christ shall render unto
every man according to his works, Rev. 22. To them, who by patient continuance
in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life: But
unto them that are contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and auguish, Romans 2. 7, 8,
9.

3. That the Execution of it shall continue for ever: For it is granted, that
the felicity of the godly, and the misery of the wicked, shall have no end in
the World to come: And if so, then it will follow, that the Execution of this
last Judgment shall have no end; but shall continue for ever, both in
multiplying of joys upon the godly, and in multiplying of sorrows upon the
wicked. And what else can befall them both, after the Sentence of this
Judgment, but the Execution thereof? Wherefore if we take the day of Judgment
for the day of Sentence, we cannot say with Mr Mede, and say truly, That it On
the Apotalyps.
shall continue a thousand years. But if we take the day of Judgment for the
day of Execution, we may say, and say truly, That it shall continue for ever.

Now as the Scripture does thus inform our judgments concerning the last
Judgment; so does it also

Partly by way of Dehortation: And so this Doctrine of the last Judgment should
dehort us in general from the practice of all sin, because every sin;
unrepented of, and unpardoned, shall be brought to judgment, and receive a just
recompense of reward. Eccles. 12. 14.

And in particular, it should dehort us,

1. From Atheism in all degrees; because they that shall be found in the guilt
of this sin, without a pardon for it, at the day of Judgment, shall suffer for
it, according to the full desert of their sin: And God shall then say unto such
an Atheist, Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self, but
I will reprove thee, and set those things in order before thine eyes, Psalm. 50.
21.

2. From sinful ignorance in all kinds; because they that shall be found in
the guilt of this evil, without a pardon for it, at the day of Judgment, shall
suffer for it; as it is written, He that knows not his Masters will, shall be
beaten with stripes, Luke 12. 48. And Christ at his second Coming shall take
vengeance on such as know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

3. From sinful unbelief in all kinds; because such as shall be found in the
guilt of this evil, without a pardon for it, at the day of Judgment, shall be
condemned for it, and shall suffer according to their demerit; as it is
written, He that believes not, shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16. And the
unbeleevers shall have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 21. 8.

4. From sinful impenitency in every kind; because such as shall be found in
the guilt of this evil, without a pardon for it at that day, shall perish for
it everlastingly, according to that of our Savior, Excepe ye repent, ye shall
all perish, Luke 13. 1, 2.

5. From sinful disobedience in every kind; because such as shall be found in
the guilt of this evil, without a pardon for it at that day, shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of God, and the glory of his
power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

6. From sinful envy, and grudging at the good of others; because such as shall
be found in the guilt of this evil, without a pardon for it at that day, shall
be severely judged and condemned for it; according to that of Saint James,
Grudg not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold the Judge
stands before the door: Jam. 5. 9.

7. From rash and peremptory judging one of another; because such as shall be
found in the guilt of this evil, without a pardon for it at that day, shall be
condemned for it; according to that of Saint James, My brethren, be not many
Masters, knowing that ye shall receive the greater condemnation: Jam. 3. 1.

8. From sinful swearing in every kind, because such as shall be found in the
guilt of this evil, without a pardon for it, at that day, shall be condemned
for it; according to that of S. James, But above all things, my brethren, swear
not, neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor by any other Oath; but let your
Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; lest ye fall into condemnation, Iam. 5. 12.

9. From sinful security; because such as shall be found in the guilt of this
evil, without a pardon for it, at that day, shall be greatly terrified in their
consciences, in so much, that they shall hide themselves in the Dens and Rocks
of the Mountains, and shall say unto the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb: for the great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand? Rev. 6. 16, 17.

10. From unmercifulness; because such as shall be found in the guilt of this
evil, without a pardon for it, at that day, shall be severely punished for it;
according as it is written, There shall be Judgment merciless to them that show
no mercy, Iam. 2. 13.

11. From Adultery and Whoredom; because such as shall be found in the guilt of
this evil, without a pardon for it, at that day, shall be judged for it; as it
is said, But Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 3.

12. From all Errors in opinion, especially such as relate to this Subject: As,
1. That this Judgment is yet far off. 2. That the day of Sentence shall
continue a thousand years. 3. That the place of this Judgment shall be in this
present world, Now such and all other Errors should be abandoned; because such
as shall be found guilty of them, without a pardon, at this great Day, shall be
condemned for them, as S. Peter says of erroneous persons, Their Judgment
lingereth not, their Damnation slumbereth not, 2 Pet. 2. 3.

Partly also this Doctrine of the last Judgment is applied in Scripture by way
of Exhortation:

And so it should exhort us in general to the practice of all known duties,
seeing we know, that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he
receive of God, at the day of Judgment, whether he be bond or free, Ephesians. 6. 8.

More particularly, it should exhort us;

1. To believe in the Lord Jesus Christ effectually, so as to rely upon him,
for Pardon, Peace, Sanctification and Salvation; and not to content our selves,
as many do, with a bare profession of faith, or with an historical faith, or
with a temporary faith, or with a false faith, saying, they believe that all
shall be saved etc. seeing we know that a dead faith cannot save any; but it
shall be well for such Believers as have a lively faith at the day of Judgment;
as it is written, He that believes shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. Christ shall
come to be admired of those that believe, 2 These. 1. 10. And whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. Joh.
11.

2. To repent of our sins daily, by way of confession, contrition and prayer,
seeing we know it shall go well with such penitent sinners at the day of
Judgment, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of God,
Acts 3. 19.

3. To be doers of Gods Word, and not hearers only, deceiving our own Souls,
seeing we know it shall be well with the doers of Gods Word at the day of
Judgment; as it is written, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the will of God which is in
Heaven, Mat. 7. And it shall be then said unto every doer of Gods Will, Well
done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in little, I will make
thee Ruler over much, enter into thy Masters Joy.

4. To be merciful unto such as are in misery, seeing we know that Mercy
rejoices against Judgment, yea against the last Judgment, Jam. 2. 13.

5. To be circumspect in our ways; according to that of Saint James, So speak,
and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty, Jam. 2. 12.

6. To fear the last Judgment, not with a distrustful fear, but with an awful
and reverential fear, so as to be admonished thereby to eschew the evil
forbidden, and to do the good required; as David feared the temporal Judgments
of God, Psalm 119. 120.

7. To make our Calling and Election sure, seeing we know that it shall be well
with Gods Chosen at the day of Judgment, Romans 8. 33.

SECT. VIII. Touching the Personal-Humane Kingdom of Christ in the World to
come.
THough the Kingdom of Christ be Monarchical, and so but one Kingdom in a large
sense, there being no other Christ superior or equal to him in it; yet there be
different estates of his Kingdom, and every estate of it is called a Kingdom in
Scripture; and so we have warrant from the Word of God to distinguish of the
Kingdom of Christ, and to say, there is a threefold Kingdom of his, viz.

1. His Essential Kingdom. 2. His Personal-Divine Kingdom. 3. His
Personal-Humane Kingdom.
1. The Essential Kingdom of Christ is that Kingdom which belongs to him as he
is God equal with the Father and the Holy Ghost; for whatsoever is common to
the three persons in the Trinity is essential to each of them, as the Godhead
is common to all, and essential to each of them; Omnisciency is common to all,
and essential to each of them; Omnipotency is common to all, and essential to
each of them: So there is a Kingdom common to all of them, which therefore may
be called, the essential Kingdom of Christ, as he is God equal with the Father
and the Holy Ghost; which Kingdom of his is called by some, His Natural
Kingdom; by others, His Native or Providential Kingdom; by me, His Essential
Kingdom: And this Kingdom of his has for its Object both this world and the
World to come: It is every where, in Heaven, in Earth, and under the ^^^th; it
extends to all creatures, together with their actions, and all accidents
incidental unto them; as it is said, God has established his Throne in Heaven,
and his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103. 19. O Lord our Lord, how excellent
is thy Name in all the Earth! Psalm. 8. 1. God rules in the kingdoms of men,
Dan. 4. 17, 25. And the Wisdom of God says, By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the
Earth, Prove. 8. 15, 16.

2. The Personal-Divine Kingdom of Christ is that Kingdom which belongs unto
him, as he is God and man in one Person, and wherein he now raigns in his
Divine Nature: For it is commonly acknowledged by Divines, That Christ now
reigns over his Militant Church in his Divine Nature, and has so reigned
from the beginning hitherto, and shall so reign unto the end of the world in a
spiritual way, and that both inwardly, by his Word and Spirit, and outwardly,
by the Discipline and Government which he has appointed in his Church: And
they say, The Person which thus raigns is God and man, yet the Nature wherein
he raigns is not the Humane, but the Divine Nature; and therefore I call it his
Personal-Divine Kingdom. Of this Kingdom of his it is said, The Kingdom of God
is at hand, Mar. 1. 15. The Kingdom of God comes not with observation: The
Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17. 20, 21. The Kingdom of God is not meat
and drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.
17. And I acknowledge, that this Kingdom of his may fitly be called his
Spiritual Kingdom, because his Government in it is altogether Spiritual: It may
fitly be called his Donative Kingdom, because he received it by donation and
gift from his Father, Joh. 17. 2. It may fitly be called his Mediatory Kingdom,
because it belongs unto him as he is a Mediator between God and man: And it may
fitly be called his Oeconomical Kingdom, because it extends properly to his
Family, the visible Church: Neither do I think, that think this Personal
Kingdom of Christ, considered as merely Divine, shall extend to the Church
Triumphant.

3. The Personal-Humane Kingdom of Christ is that Kingdom which belongs unto
him, as he is the Son of man, and the Son of David, and wherein he shall reign
in his Humane Nature, bodily and visibly. And though I grant, That this Kingdom
of his shall be a second estate of his Personal, Donative, Mediatory,
Occonomical Kingdom: yet for distinction sake I call it his Personal-Humane
Kingdom, because only in this estate of his Kingdom shall he reign after a
bodily and humane manner.

Now this is the Kingdom of which I am here to speak, and I shall speak of it,
partly by way of Doctrine, and partly by way of Use and Application.

By way of Doctrine, I shall lay down several principles or grounds needful to
be known concerning this Kingdom of Christ: As,

First, I affirm, That Christ shall one day have ^ Ground.
a Personal-Humane Kingdom, wherein he shall reign bodily in his Humane Nature.
as we may well conceive;

1. Because he shall one day have a Kingdom, wherein he shall judge the quick
and the dead, 2 Timothy 4. 1. But he shall never judge the quick and the dead in
his present Personal-Spiritual Kingdom: Therefore he shall one day have a
Personal-Humane Kingdom, wherein he shall do this.

2. Because he shall one day have a Kingdom, wherein some shall sit at his
right hand, and others at his left hand, as is acknowledged, Mat. 20. 21, 23.
But none shall sit on his right hand, and on his left, in his present
Personal-Spiritual Divine Kingdom: Therefore he shall one day have a
Personal-Humane Kingdom, wherein some shall sit on his right hand, and some on
his left.

3. Because he shall one day have a Kingdom, wherein some shall eat and drink
at his table, after a new manner, yet unknown; as it is acknowledged, Luke 22.
30. Ye shall eat and drink at my tabl, in my Kingdom: But none shall eat and
drink at his table after a new manner and way, yet unknown, in his present
Personal-Spiritual Kingdom: Therefore he shall one day have a Personal-Humane
Kingdom, wherein this shall be done.

4. Because Christ was long since anointed to be a Prophet, a Priest, and a
King, not only in his Divine but also in his Humane Nature: And we know, that
in the days of his flesh he executed his Prophetical and Priestly Offices, not
only in his Divine, but also in his Humane Nature, though he did not then so
execute his Kingly Office: Therefore doubtless he shall one day execute his
Kingly Office also in his Humane Nature, and so he shall one day have a
Personal-Humane Kingdom.

This ground should firmly be held against such as think that Christ shall
never have a Personal-Humane Kingdom, but say, That the Personal Kingdom of
Christ is and ever shall be, only a Spiritual Kingdom. And though I do not read
much, yet I have read two or three Books printed of late years, which speak
much of the Personal Reign or Kingdom of Christ: but what they speak, they
refer only to his Spiritual Kingdom, and nothing at all to his Personal-Humane
Kingdom. Now all that I shall say of these Writers is this; I will not
dishonor them so much as to name them it my margin; neither do I think that
they have as yet seriously considered of such Reasons as are here alleged, and
might be farther alleged, for the Personal-Humane Kingdom of Christ: but if at
any time they shall seriously consider of them, I persuade my self they will be
of another mind.

Secondly, I affirm, That Christ's Personal-Humane ^ Ground.
Kingdom shall never be found to be of, in, or belonging to this persent world.
And so much I gather from those words of our Savior, My Kingdom is not of this
world, if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I
should not be delivered unto the Jews, but now is my Kingdom not from hence,
Ioh. 18. 36. where our Savior speaks not of his Essential Kingdom, nor of his
present Personal-Divine Kingdom, because both these belong to this present
world, as well as to any other: But he speaks of his Personal-Humane Kingdom,
which belongs not to this world in any respect: For they that have humane
Kingdoms in this world have some to fight for them against their enemies; but
Christ, while he was in this world, had no servants to fight for him against
the Jews: Therefore his Personal-Humane Kingdom belongs not to this present
world. Again, we know, that while Christ lived in this world he had no Humane
Kingdom of it, but he still ^ppeared in the form and condition of a Servant,
not in the form and condition of a humane King, Phil. 2. therefore we may well
think, that he shall never be a humane King, nor have a humane Kingdom in this
world. Moreover, we know, that Christ shall not come again in his Humane Nature
before this present world shall be dissolved, and an other world shall be
created instead hereof: And if Christ shall not come again in his Humane Nature
till then, it is manifest, That his Personal-Humane Kingdom shall never be
found to be of, in, or belonging to this present world.

This ground also should be firmly held against such as think, that Christ
shall have a Personal-Humane Kingdom in this world; which is the opinion of
many Millenaries in these days: For though some of this sort are come on to
this Error, to think that Christ's Personal Kingdom shall be only a Spiritual
Kingdom; yet the most part of this sort think that Christ shall have a
Personal-Humane Kingdom in this world, either for a thousand years, or at least
for a certain time. And they which are of this opinion are forced to hold some
other erroneous opinions; as, 1. That Christ shall come again in his Humane
Nature a thousand years before the end of this world. 2. That he shall convert
all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, that he may reign over them at his Coming.
3. That he shall raise the dead Saints a thousand years before the rest of the
dead, that they may reign with him. Thus one Error conceived, genders many. But
our Savior himself has sufficiently confuted these Opinionists in one saying,
when speaking of his Humane Kingdom, he says, My Kingdom is not of this world:
How then can they prove, that Christ shall have a Humane Kingdom in this world?
And if they would but consider farther what has been said for the clearing of
this second ground, it may be that they might be be the better convinced of
their Error.

Thirdly, I affirm, That this Personal-Humane 3 Ground.
Kingdom of his shall be very visible and apparent unto men in the World to
come. For,

1. Seeing there is such a Kingdom belonging to him, it must needs be apparent
to men, either in this world, or in the World to come: but it shall not be
apparent to men in this world, Joh. 18. 36. Therefore it shall be apparent unto
them in the World to come.

2. We find, that the World to come shall be put in subjection not to the
Angels, but to Christ, as the Son of man, Heb. 2. 5, 6. And if so, then
doubtless his Humane Kingdom shall be very visible and apparent unto men in the
World to come.

3. Our Savior says, Hereafter ye shall see Heaven open, and the Angels of
God ascending and descending upon the Son of man, Ioh. 1. 51. Hereafter we
shall see this: and where shall we see it? not in the highest Heaven which now
is, there is no such thing to be seen; not in this present world, here is no
such thing to be seen: but in the World to come we shall see this Kingly Honor
given to Christ; and so his Personal-Humane Kingdom shall be very apparent to
men in the World to come.

4. It is plainly said, That every eye shall see Christ, in his Humane Nature,
sitting upon the Throne of his Glory, Rev. 1. 7. Mat. 25. 31. And some shall
say unto the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sits upon the Throne, Rev. 6. 16. And where shall this be, but in the
World to come? Wherefore from these premises I infer, That the Personal-Humane
Kingdom of Christ shall be very visible and apparent unto men in the World to
come.

And this Ground should be firmly held against such as think that Christ shall
have no Personal-Humane Kingdom in the World to come, because it is said, That
at or upon the end of this world he shall deliver up the Kingdom to God even
the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. But as I have intimated before upon an other
occasion, so now I say more fully, That Christ shall never deliver up his own
Kingdom to God even the Father, either his own Essential Kingdom, or his own
Personal Kingdom: For if he should deliver and resign his own Essential
Kingdom, then he should cease to be an Essential King, which would be absurd to
acknowledge: And if he shall resign his Personal, Divine, or Humane Kingdom to
God even the Father, then he shall cease to be a Personal King, or else the
Personal Kingdom of Christ shall become the Personal Kingdom of the Father;
both which would be also absurd to affirm: Therefore the true meaning of this
place is, That when Christ shall come again from the third Heaven (his Fathers
Personal Kingdom) in his Humane Nature, he shall then resign and deliver up
this Kingdom, viz. his Fathers Personal Kingdom (not his own Personal Kingdom)
to God even the Father, that his Father may be all in all in it, as he was
before Christ came thither in his Humane Nature. And so this place, rightly
understood, makes nothing at all against this third Ground.

Fourthly, I affirm, That this Personal-Humane 4 Ground.
Kingdom of his, belonging to the World to come, is much spoken of in the
Scriptures, both in the Old and New Testaments.

It is much spoken of in the Old Testament; for therein the Father has said
unto Christ, I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession: Thou shall break them with a
rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, Psalm. 2. 8,
9. And where shall this promise be fully made good unto him? not in this world,
but in the World to come, and in his Humane Kingdom.

Therein it is said concerning Christ, That he shall reign over the Nations,
and shall judge the Earth, 1 Chronicles. 16. 31, 33. And where shall this promise be
fully made good unto him? not in this world, but in the World to come, and in
his Humane Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1.

Therein it is said concerning him, That he shall have Dominion over the works
of Gods hands, and all things shall be put under his feet; all Sheep and Oxen;
yea, and the beasts of the field, the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea,
and whatsoever passes through the paths of the seas, Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8. And
where shall we see all this fully performed unto him? not in this world, Heb.
2. 8. but in the World to come, and in his Humane Kingdom.

Therein we find him described as a Humane King, Psalm. 45. throughout, Psalm.
72. and in many other places. But where shall he appear as a humane King? not
in this world, but in the World to come, where he shall have such a Kingdom.

Therein it is said concerning him, That of the increase of his Government
there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order
it, and to establish it with Judgment and Justice, Isai. 9. 7. And where shall
this promise be fully made good unto him? not in this world, but in the World
to come, and in his Humane Kingdom.

Therein it is said concerning him, That a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth: In whose days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, Ier. 23. ^, 6. And where shall this be
fully made good unto him? not in this world, but in the World to come.

Therein it is said concerning him, David my Servant shall be King over them,
and they shall all have one Shepherd, they shall also walk in my Judgments, and
observe my Statutes, and do them: And David shall be their Prince for ever,
Ezekiel. 37. 24, 25. And where shall this be fully made good unto him? not in this
world, but in the World to come, and in his Humane Kingdom.

Lastly, Therein it is said concerning him, That there was given him Dominion,
and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages should serve
him, Dan. 7. 14. And where shall this be fully made good unto him? not in this
world, but in the World to come, and in his Humane Kingdom.

It is also much spoken of in the New Testament: For herein we find, That the
Lord God shall give unto Christ the Throne of his Father David, Luke 1. 32. And
where shall he fully receive this gift? not in this world, but in the World to
come; for the Throne of David was not a Type of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, but
of his Humane Kingdom in the World to come.

Herein also we find, That some shall sit at his right hand, and some at his
left in his Kingdom, Mat. 20. 21. 23. And where shall this be fully verified of
him? not in this world, but in the World to come, and in his Humane Kingdom.

And when the penitent thief said, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom, Luke 23. 42. I do not think that he speak of Christ's coming into his
Spiritual Kingdom, which was both then and before in Being; but that he spoke
of his coming into his Humane Kingdom of Glory: And the better to assure him
that his request was granted, our Savior replied, To day shall thou be with me
in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. viz. in respect of thy Soul: And doubtless all that
are or shall be with him in Paradise, in respect of their Souls, shall be
remembered of him when he shall come into his Personal-Humane Kingdom.

And lustly, Whereas upon the sounding of the seventh Trumpet this saying shall
be ecchoed forth, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ, etc, Rev. 11. 15. I do not think that this saying
shall ever be fulfilled at the utmost in this world, but in the World to come:
And doubless after the Kingdoms of this world shall be dissolved, and broken in
pieces, as they shall be with the dissolution of this present world, then
immediately shall they be resolved into the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and shall be brought wholly in subjection to him, and not before.
Wherefore I infer, That the Personal-Humane Kingdom of Christ is much spoken in
the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament: And consequently we should
not doubt, whether or not he shall have such a Kingdom.

Fifthly, I affirm, That this Personal-Humane 5 Ground.
Kingdom of his, in the World to come, shall be of large extent.

For, 1. It shall extend to all Nations that shall be in the World to come: As
it is written of Christ, All Kings shall bow before him all Nations shall serve
him, Psalm. 72. 11. All Nations, and Languages, and People, shall serve him, Dan
7. 14. which shall never be fully accomplished in this world; as we may well
think, because at his second Coming he shall find the Nations which are in the
four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, gathered together to battle against
him and against his Saints, the number of whom shall be as the sand of the Sea,
Rev. 20. 8, 9. Therefore it is in the World to Come that all Nations shall
serve him.

2. It shall extend to all Countries that shall be in the World to come; as it
is written, His Domion shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the
ends of the Earth, Psalm. 72. 8.

3. It shall extend to all other creatures beside men and Angels, that shall be
in the World to come, Psa. 8. 6, 7, 8. whereas in this world we know, the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ does extend to no such creatures, but only unto the
visible Church, and some say, only unto the Saints on this earth.

4. It shall extend both to his friends and foes, which shall be in the World
to come: For Christ shall reign and rule over his Friends, the Saints, in this
Humane Kingdom of his; and for this cause he is called the King of Saints, Rev.
15. 3. And though the Saints shall rai^n with him in this Kingdom, yet their
reign shall be subordinate to his, and they shall be his Subjects, yet Kings
over others. And he shall also reign and rule over his Enemies in this Kingdom
of his; for which cause it is said, Through the greatness of thy Power shall
thine Enemies submit themselves unto thee, Psalm. 66. 3. They that dwell in the
Wilderness shall bow before him, and his Enemies shall lick the dust, Psalm. 72.
9.

5. Yea, it shall extend unto the whole World to come, seeing it shall be put
in subjection to him, Heb. 2. 5. And so this Kingdom of his shall be of large
extent.

Sixthly, I affirm, That this Personal-Humane 6 Ground.
Kingdom of his shall be a flourishing Kingdom: As,

1. In respect of Prosperity; because Christ shall reign prosperously in it,
without any disaster or ill success at all; as it is written of him, In thy
Majesty ride prosperously, because of Truth, and Meekness, and Righteousness,
Psalm. 45. 4. A King shall reign and prosper, Jer. 23. 5.

2. In respect of Honor and Glory; because he shall reign honorably it it,
without any the least open affront or dis-respect; as it is written of him,
Gird thy Sword upon thy thigh, O Most Mighty, with thy Glory and thy Majesty,
Psalm. 45. 3. Honor and Majesty are before him, Psalm. 96. 6.

3. In respect of Righteousness; because he shall reign and judge righteously it
it; as it is said of him, He shall execute Judgment and Justice, Jer. 23. 5. He
shall judge the People with Righteousness, Psalm. 72. 2. A Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, Heb. 1. 8.

4. In respect of Peace; because he shall reign peaceably in it, without any
open resistance, or opposition: Yea, in this Kingdom of his shall be abundance
of peace, and the mountains shall bring peace unto his people. Psalm. 72. 3, 7.

5. In respect of plenty; because in this Kingdom of his both Christ and his
Saints shall live in a plentiful condition, without the want of any thing: And
he that overcomes, shall inherit all things, Revel. 21. 7. And thus this
Kingdom of his shall be a flourishing Kingdom.

Seventhly, I affirm, That this Personal-Humane 7 Ground
Kingdom of his shall be an everlasting Kingdom: For thus it is written of him,
and of this his Kingdom; His name shall endure for ever, Psa. 72. 17. Of the
increase of His Government there shall be no end, Isai. 9. 7. His Kingdom shall
never be destroyed, but shall stand for ever, Dan. 2. 44. His Dominion is an
everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away; and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed, Dan. 7. 14. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of His Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1. 33. David shall be
their Prince for ever, Ezekiel. 37. 25. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever,
Heb. 1. 8. Yea, this Kingdom of his is called by Saint Peter, the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: 2 Pet. 1. 11.

Wherefore we should not vainly imagine, with M. H. A. M, G. H*
some Writers, That this Personal-Humane-Divine Kingdom of Christ shall one day
have an end, or that it shall continue but only for a long time; because, as
they say, some things are said in Scripture to continue for ever, which were to
continue but only for a long time: But we should understand, that these
phrases, for ever, for ever and ever, are taken two ways in Scripture:
Sometimes Tropically, and not properly; and then indeed they are referred to
such things as were to continue but only for a long time; as may be seen, Exodus
12. 14, 24. and 21. 6. Numb. 15. 15. Sometimes also the same phrases are taken
properly, and not Tropically; and then they are still referred to such things
as have no end at all. Yea, thus these phrases, for ever, for ever and ever,
are taken in the former passages, concerning the Personal Humane Kingdom of
Christ; and so the meaning of them is, That this Kingdom of his shall have no
end at all: And it is plainly said in some of those passages once and again,
That this Kingdon of his shall have no end, Isai. 9. 7. Luke 1. 33. By which
latter phrase we must expound the two former, that we may not consent to the
blasphemy of those who say, That the Personal Kingdom of Christ, whether
Divine, or Humane, shall continue but only for a time.

Thus much of this Kingdom of Christ, by way

First, This Doctrine should admonish all to beware, lest we entertain any
erroneous Opinions in our minds, in reference to this Kingdom of his. And far
be it from us to think:

1. That Christ's personal Kingdom shall be only a spiritual Kingdom. 2. That
Christ shall have a personal humane Kingdom in this world. 3. That he shall
have no personal humane Kingdom in the World to come. 4. That his personal
humane Kingdom shall have an end.
For all these Opinions are contrary to the former Grounds, and to the Truth it
self: Therefore beware of them.

Secondly, This Doctrine should humble all such as are enemies to Christ's
spiritual personal Kingdom in this world, and will not submit unto it, nor
suffer him to reign over them by his Word and Spirit. Surely such persons,
without repentance, and without a pardon, shall suffer for it, when Christ
shall come into his personal humane Kingdom. And so much we may gather from the
Prophets commination in Psalm. 2. For there he tells us of some that did rage,
and imagine a vain thing, and band themselves together, not only against the
Lord, and against his Christ; but also against the Laws of his spiritual
Kingdom, saying, Let us break their bands in sunder, and cast away their cords
from us: Verse. 1, 2, 3. And shows withal how Christ shall deal with such
(unless they repent) in his personal humane Kingdom; viz. how he shall break
them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, Verse.
9. Yea, our Savior himself shows us how he will punish men in his personal
humane Kingdom, if they will not submit unto him in his personal spiritual
Kingdom, when he says, But those mine Enemies, which would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27. Be humbled
therefore for this offense, which is a great offense.

Thirdly, This Doctrine should exhort and persuade all that are called
Christians unto sundry duties. As,

1. To talk and confer much about this Kingdom of Christ, that so they may
rightly understand the doctrine, nature, and state hereof; for it is said of
Gods Saints, That they shall speak of the glory of his Kingdom, and talk of his
power; to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious
majesty of his Kingdom: Psalm. 145. 11, 12. And we should be like unto such, in
doing the like.

2. To honor Christ as our everlasting King: For God would have all men to
honor the Son, as they honor the Father: And seeing he is and shall be our
King for ever, we can do no less then honor him; and we should honor him so, as,

1. To harken to the Doctrine of his Kingdom: Harken O Daughter, and consider,
and incline thine ear: Psalm. 45. 10.

2. To prefer him in our esteem before all the sons of men: as the Prophet
says to the Church, in reference to this Kingdom of his; Forget also thine own
people, and thy fathers house; so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty:
Psalm. 45. 10, 11.

3. To repent of our sins and offenses: For the Prophet, having spoken of his
Kingdom, does thereupon exhort to repentance, saying, Be wise now therefore, O
ye Kings; be learned, ye that are Judges of the Earth: Psalm. 2. 10. As if he
had said, Be wise to eschew evil, and be learned to do good: In which two
things consists the practice of true repentance.

4. To worship him with Fear: As it is said, in relation to Christ; He is thy
Lord God, worship thou him, Psalm. 45. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. Who shall not fear thee O Lord? Rev. 15. 4.

5. To submit to his Government in this life: And this is, in the Prophets
phrase, To kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and we perish: Psalm. 2. 12.

6. To believe and trust in him for all good things promised: And upon this
occasion the Prophet says, Blessed are all they that trust in him: Psalm. 2. 12.

7. To be diligent in our general and particular Callings, that we may become
profitable servants in them: For when Christ shall come into this Kingdom of
his, he shall plentifully reward his diligent and profitable servants, and
shall say unto one, Be thou Ruler over ten Cities; and to another, Be thou
Ruler over five Cities: Luke 19. 17, 19.

8. To be patient in our Tribulations, especially in such as we shall suffer
for Christ's sake: For if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him in
his Kingdom: 2 Timothy 2. 12.

9. To make our Calling and Election sure unto our selves: For so an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Cheist: 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11.

Lastly, All good Christians should rejoice, and be glad, when they hear and
read of this Kingdom of Christ: Yea, we should never think that we have well
meditated and thoroughly considered of this subject, until the meditation
thereof shall rejoice our spirirs. And for this end and purpose we shall find
in many places of Scripture, where this Kingdom is spoken of, that we are
called upon to rejoice: As, Rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. Let the
Heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be glad: Let the field be joyful before the
Lord; for he comes, for he comes to judge the world in righteousness: Psalm.
96. 11, 12, 13. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him; Let the children of
Zion be joyful in their King, let them praise his name in the dance, let them
sing praises unto him with the Timbrel and Harp: Psa. 149. 2, 3. The Lord God
omnipotent reigns, let us rejoice and be glad, and give honor to him: for the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready: Rev. 19.
6, 7.

SECT. IX. Touching the different condition of good and evil Angels in the
World to come.
HAving spoken of the Kingdom of Christ in the World to come; I shall here, in
the next place, say somewhat of the different condition of good and evil Angels
in the World to come. Yet I desire not to say much of this subject: I had
rather leave it to others, who have better learned the art of amplification.
And some can better lay a foundation, then build thereupon, as others can
better build, then lay the foundation. Only I shall express bri^fly what I
have warrant from the Word of God to believe concerning the condition of both
sorts of Angels. As,

Concerning good Angels. I believe,

1. That they shall all attend upon Christ at his Coming from Heaven into the
World to come: For it is aid plainly, The Son of man shall come in his glory,
and a^^ the holy Angels with him: Matt. 25. 30. And again, The Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels: 2 Thessalonians. 1. verse. 7.

2. That they shall be serviceable to Christ about the last Judgment: For it is
said, That he shall send his Angels, that is, his good Angels, with a great
sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four
winds, from one end of Heaven to the other: Matt. 24. 31. And that his Angels,
viz. his good Angels, shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the
just, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, etc. Matthew. 13. 49, 50.

3. That they shall have a constant intercourse, or passage, between the third
Heaven and the World to come, as royal Messengers or Ambassadors from the
Father to the Son of man, and from the Son of man to the Father; or from the
personal Kingdom of the Father to the personal Kingdom of the Son; and from the
personal humane Kingdom of the Son unto the personal Kingdom of the Father: And
so much I learn from those words of our Savior himself; Hereafter ye shall see
Heaven open, and the Angels of God, viz. his good Angels, ascending and
descending upon the Son of man: John 1. verse. 51.

4. That as they are now blessed, so shall they be for ever blessed in the
World to come: And by so much the more shall they be blessed in the World to
come, by how much their Ministry and Service shall be more visible to the
Saints, and better understood of them in the World to come, then now it is.

Which condition of the good Angels may inform in dignity far excel the good
Angels in the World to come: For we are sure that these Angels shall serve
Christ, and administer unto him; but we are not sure that Christ shall serve
them in the World to come. And we know that Christ is now for the present above
these Angels, in his Humane Nature, at his Fathers right hand; and that he took
not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and the nature of
Mankind: and therefore he shall still be above the Angels in his Humane
Nature. And albeit, during the time of his Humiliation, he was made a little
lower then the Angels, that he might suffer in the flesh: Yet now he is exalted
above them, and shall be crowned with glory and dignity above them, in the
World to come, for ever.

Again, This condition of the good Angels in the World to come, may inform us;
That the adopted Children of God have great cause to be thankful for the
perseverance of these Angels in the state of grace, for that God has kept them
hitherto in their holy station, that so they might be helpful to us by their
Ministry, both in this world, and in the World to come. And though our fleshly
nature be not sensible of the Ministry of these Angels, yet we should believe,
according to the Scriptures, That God does make their Ministry beneficial to
his adopted ones in this life diverse ways.

Sometimes for Instruction: as he sent a good Angel to instruct the Shepherds
concerning the birth of Christ, Luke 2. Another to instruct the women
concerning his Resurrection: Another to instruct his Disciples touching his
Ascension, Act. 1. 11.

Sometimes for Direction: as he sent a good Angel to direct Lot what course to
take for his own and his families safety.

Sometimes for Protection: as it is written, The Angel of the Lord encampeth
about them that fear him.

Sometimes for Deliverance: as he sent a good Angel to deliver Peter out of
prison, Act. 12.

Sometimes for Consolation: as when the Devil had ended his temptation against
Christ, he sent good Angels to administer comfort unto him: Mat. 4.

Now if we consider what excellent Creatures these good Angels are, and how
glorious they shall be in the World to come, we shall find it a great mercy of
God, that he has made them ministering spirits, and has sent them to minister
for the good of those, who are heirs of Salvation, Hebr. 1. 14. And
consequently, that the adopted ones have great cause to be thankful for their
Perseverance.

Concerning evil Angels, I believe,

1. That they shall be subject, not only unto Christ himself, but also unto
the Saints, in the World to come: And to assure us hereof, it is said, That the
Saints shall judge the Angels, that is, the evil Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 3. And that
the God of peace shall bruise Satan under their feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. And
so much God said unto Satan in the beginning, shortly after his Fall; I will
put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel: Genesis 3. 15.

2. That they shall be everlastingly punished in the World to come: and to
assure us hereof, it is said, That everlasting fire is prepared for the Devil
and his Angels: Mat. 25. 41.

3. That this everlasting punishment of theirs shall be full of torment, as
they themselves well know; and therefore they cried unto Christ, saying, What
have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? Art thou come hither to torment
us before the time? Mat. 8. 29. And again, I beseech thee torment me not, Luke
8. 28.

4. That this everlasting punishment of theirs shall be full of darkness: For
if now they be punished with everlasting chains under Darkness, Jude 6. much
more shall this punishment be upon them in the World to come. And if Reprobate
men shall be cast into outer darkness for their sins, Mat. 22. 13. how shall
Reprobate Angels escape this punishment?

Which condition of evil Angels in the World to

SECT. X. Touching the blessed condition of Gods Elect, and the cursed
condition of Reprobates, in the World to come; more generally considered.
HAving spoken of the different condition of good and evil Angels in the World
to come; I am, in the next place, to speak of the different condition of
mankind, viz. of the godly, and the wicked, of the Elect, and Reprobates, in
the world to come. And this different condition of theirs may be considered
more generally, and more specially: The general difference that shall be
betwixt them, may be expressed in these two Propositions:

Gods Elect shall be blessed in the World to come.

Reprobates shall be cursed in the World to come.

Gods Elect shall all be blessed in the World to 1 Proposit.
come: As we may well conceive, for these Reasons:

1. Because Gods Elect are all known of God with the knowledge of approbation:
as it is written, The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The
Lord knows them that are his; 2 Timothy 2. 19. And the Lord knows the way of
the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6. Now all that are thus known of God, shall be blessed
in the World to come: But Gods Elect are all thus known of him; therefore they
shall all be blessed in the World to come.

2. Because Gods Elect have their names all written in Heaven, Luke 10. 20. And
they that have their names there written, shall be blessed in the World to
come; why else should they be bid to rejoice in this? But this is true of all
Gods Elect; therefore they shall be blessed in the World to come.

3. Because Gods Elect shall all be pronounced blessed at the general Judgment;
and our Savior shall then say unto them, Come ye blessed Children of my
Father, etc. Matthew. 25. 34. Now they that shall be pronounced blessed at the
general Judgment, shall be blessed in the World to come: But this shall be true
of all Gods Elect; therefore they shall all be blessed in the World to come.

4. Because Gods Elect are all under that Covenant which God made with Abraham
and his seed, and have an inward right unto it; which was a Covenant of
blessing them, and is extant in this form; In blossing, I will bless thee: In
thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed: Genes. 12. 2, 3. and 18.
18. that is, the Elect of all Nations. Now they that have an inward right to
this Covenant, shall be blessed in the world to come: But Gods Elect have all
an inward right unto it; therefore they shall all be blessed in the World to
come.

5. Because Gods Elect shall enjoy all that Christ has merited for them; But
Christ has merited for them a blessed condition in the world to come; for
which cause it is said, That God sent his Son to bless us, Act. 3. 26. And he
sent his Son to bless his Elect, in that he sent him to merit for them the
blessings both of this world, and the world to come. Doubtless then they shall
all be blessed in the World to come.

6. Because Christ has promised, That none of Gods Elect shall be lost, Joh.
6. 37. And if none of them shall be lost, then they shall all be blessed in the
world to come.

7. Because God does continually bless his Elect in this world with spiritual
blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3. and with corporal and external blessings, Prove. 10. 6.
Wherefore doubtless they shall all be much more abundantly blessed in the world
to come.

Now, touching this blessedness of theirs, there are four Queries here to be
resolved. As,

Of whom they shall be blessed in the World to come?

Ans. They shall be blessed of the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
For the God that made Heaven and Earth, shall bless them, Psalm. 134. 3. And the
God that made Heaven and Earth, is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The God
Almighty shall bless them, Genesis 28. 3. And God almighty is Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: The Father is almighty, the Son almighty, and the Holy Ghost
almighty. Neither may we think that the act of blessing is to be appropriated
only unto any one person in the Godhead, because it is common to all.

For what causes they shall be blessed in the World to come?

Ans. Primarily and chiefly they shall be blessed for Gods sake: for his will
and pleasure sake, as the original cause; and for the glory of his grace, as
the final cause. And as God does all things chiefly for his own sake, Romans 11.
36. so he shall bless his Elect in the world to come chiefly for his own sake.

Secondarily, they shall be blessed in the world to come for Christ's sake, as
the meritorious cause: For as in Isaac typically, so in Christ really, shall
all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Romans 4. that is, the Elect of all
Nations.

Thirdly, they shall be blessed in the world to come, for the same graces and
virtues, for which they are blessed in this world: As God does bless them in
this; Partly for their effectual knowledge of him, and of his Will; as it is
said, Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. And for
this he shall bless them in the World to come.

Partly for their faith and confidence in Christ: Blessed are all they that
trust in him, Psalm. 2. 12. And for this he shall bless them in the world to
come.

Partly for their humility, godly sorrow, hungering and thirsting after
righteousness; for meekness, mercifulness: Blessed are the poor in spirit,
blessed are they that mourn, blessed are they that hunger Matthew: 5, 3 4, 5, 6
and thirst after righteousness, blessed are the meek, blessed are the
merciful, etc. And for these causes they shall be blessed in the world to come.

And partly for their godly fear, Psalm. 112. 1. for their upright walking,
Psalm. 119. 1. for their godly conversation, Psalm. 1. 1. for their patience in
suffering for truth and righteousness sake, Mat. 5. And doubtless for these
causes shall they be blessed in the world to come.

In what manner shall they be blessed in the World to come?

Ans. First, They shall be fully and perfectly blessed: For though there be no
perfect bliss to be expected in this world, neither is there perfect bliss
enjoyed now in Heaven by the faithful Souls departed; yet there shall be
perfect bliss for Gods Elect in the world to come: as we may gather from those
words of the Apostle; These all having obtained a good report through faith,
received not the Promises; God having provided some better thing for us, that
they without us should not be made perfect: Hebr. 11. 39, 40. where he shows,
that the faithful, mentioned before in this Chapter, were not perfectly blessed
in this life, because they received not all the Promises: and that their Souls,
now being in Heaven, are not perfectly blessed there, because they cannot be
made perfect without us, that do, or shall, believe in aftertimes. But withal
he intimates, That both the faithful of former times, and those of latter
times, shall be made perfect all of them together in the world to come. And
though these vessels of mercy may not be all of one size in the world to come,
but some of them may hold and contain more of Gods benediction then others, yet
all of them shall be filled up to the brim therewith, and so shall be perfectly
blessed.

Secondly, They shall be everlastingly blessed: For Gods mercy is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, Psalm. 103. 17. And as their
inchoate blessedness in this world shall end in that which is to come, so that
which is to come shall have no end.

Thirdly, They shall be exceedingly blessed, above all that we can now think,
or speak, or conceive, of their blessed condition, according to that of the
Apostle, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
where indeed the main scope of Saint Paul is to show, that the natural man is
no competent judge of heavenly things, as the spiritual man is. Howbeit, though
the spiritual man can better judge of such things then the natural man can, yet
we must understand that the spiritual man cannot perfectly judge them while he
is in this world, neither can he fully comprehend the blessed condition of the
Saints in the world to come.

Wherewith they shall be blessed in the World to come?

Ans. They shall be blessed in the world to come: 1. With everlasting
Salvation, Romans 11. 2. With everlasting Life, Joh. 3. 16. 3. With everlasting
Glory. 4. With everlasting Honor, Romans 2. 5. With everlasting Liberty, Romans 8.
6. With everlasting Dominion, Psalm. 7. With everlasting Riches, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
With everlasting Peace, Isai. 26. 9. With everlasting Light. 10. With
everlasting Joy. 11. With everlasting Security.


But my purpose is to speak of these particulars more fully in the following
Sections: It may suffice in this place to mention them only, because all that
I intended in this Section, touching this blessed condition of Gods Elect, was,
to speak of it in a general way, which I have done accordingly in this
Proposition.

If so be that Gods Elect shall be blessed in the And how shall we curse, whom
the Lord has not cursed, Number. 23. 8. Secondly, Because God will bless them,
though men curse them never so much; as the Prophet says, Let them curse, but
bless thou Lord, Psalm. 109. 28. And God shall bless us, Psalm. 67. 7. Thirdly,
Because God will curse them that curse his people, Genesis 12. 2, 3. Fourthly,
Because the curse causless shall not come, Prove. 26. 2. Fifthly, Because we
cannot curse them so secretly, as that the Lord shall not know it: For which
cause Solomon says, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; and curse not
the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and
that which has wings shall tell the matter: Eccles. 10. 20. For these causes
it is in vain for any to curse Gods Elect in this life. Wherefore, my
brethren, let us not curse one another, as the manner of some is: let not
Parents curse their Children, nor Children their Parents; Masters their
Servants, nor Servants their Masters; Husbands their Wives, nor Wives their
Husbands; the Rich the Poor, nor the Poor the Rich, etc. for in so doing we may
curse Gods Elect unawares; and it will be in vain to curse them. Nay, those
curses, which we shoot as arrows against them, may recoyl upon our selves: as
Balak and Balaam desired to curse the Israelites, but this became a curse to
themselves at last: So Shimei cursed David the Lords anointed; but this became
a curse upon himself at the last.

Object. Though it be not lawful to curse Gods Elect, yet I hope it may be
lawful to curse wicked Reprobates?

Sol. If we certainly knew Reprobates from others, in this life, we might
lawfully curse them, as God does and will curse them: But this knowledge is too
high for us; we cannot, without extraordinary revelation, know in particular
who are Reprobates in this life: therefore we ought not to curse any, as such.

Object. Noah cursed his son Came, Genes. 9. 25. and Elisha cursed the two and
forty children that mocked him, 2 King. 2. 24. and why may not we do the like?

Sol. These examples of Noah and Elisha are extraordinary, and are not recorded
for our imitation: But concerning them I thus judge and conceive, That either
Noah knew, by extraordinary revelation, his son Came to be a Reprobate, and
thereupon cursed him: or else, that he sinned in this act: And so that Elisha
either knew, by extraordinary Revelation, those two and forty children to be
Reprobates, and thereupon cursed them; or else, that he sinned in this act.

Now in these days we have no such extraordinary Revelations, but must walk by
that ordinary rule which our Savior has given us, viz. Bless them that curse
you; Bless, I say, and curse not: Mat. 5. 44.

Again, If eternal blessedness in the world to come shall be the reward and
portion of Gods Elect, then we should learn from hence too, That Christians
must live in this world as becomes Gods Elect, that so they may receive the
portion of such in the world to come. Now it becomes Gods Elect, in this life,
to know God, to fear him, to love him, to believe in him, to hope in him, to be
zealous for him, and willing to keep his Commandments. It becomes them to live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; yea, it becomes them
to live virtuously in every kind, as Saint Paul advises us; Put on (as the
Elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering: Forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, as Christ forgave you. And above all these things put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness: Col. 3. 12, 13. 14, etc. And if we thus live
here the life of Gods Elect, we shall undoubtedly receive the portion of Gods
Elect in the world to come, viz. eternal bliss and happiness Reprobates shall
all be cursed in the World to come: 2 Proposit.
As we we may well conceive, for these Reasons:

1. Because they shall not be known of God, and of Christ, in the world to
come, with the knowledge of approbation; as may appear by our Saviors speech to
the foolish Virgins, Verily, I say unto you, I know you not, Mat. 25. 12. and
to the Hypocrites at the latter day, I tell you, I know not whence ye are;
depart from me, ye workers of iniquity, Luke 13. 25, 27. And they that shall
not be known of God and of Christ with the knowledge of Approbation, shall be
cursed in the World to come.

2. Because they shall not have their names found written in Heaven: And such
as shall not have their names found written in Heaven, shall be cursed in the
world to come.

3. Because they shall be pronounced cursed at the general Judgment; and Christ
shall then say unto them, Matthew. 25. 41. And they that shall be pronounced
cursed at the general Judgment, shall be cursed in the world to come.

4. Because Christ was not made a curse for them, as he was for the Elect, Gal.
3. 13. And seeing Christ did not suffer the cursed death of the cross for them,
they must suffer the curse for themselves, and in their own persons, both in
this world, and in the world to come. Deuteronomy. 27, 15, to 26. and 28. 15, 16, 17


5. Because men are still under the curse of God, until they repent
effectually, and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Now we know that Reprobates
shall never have grace to repent effectually, and to believe effectually in the
Lord Jesus Christ; therefore they shall be cursed in the world to come.

1. And if it be here demanded, Of whom they shall be cursed in the World to
come? I answer, They shall be cursed of the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: He that made them, shall curse. And as the curse of the Lord
(Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,) is now upon the house of the wicked, Prove. 3.
33. So the curse of the Lord (Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) shall be upon the
heads of wicked Reprobates in the world to come.

2. If it be demanded again, For what causes they shall be cursed in the World
to come? I answer, They shall be cursed for all their sins in this world, of
what nature, sort, or degree soever they have been, or shall be. Yea, there is
no sin of theirs, whether original, or actual, of omission, or commission, in
thought, word, or deed, against the Law, or the Gospel, that shall be
forgotten; but all their sins shall come into remembrance before God: and for
these they shall be cursed in the world to come. And we may say of a cursing
Reprobate, with the Prophet, As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as
he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him: As he clothed himself
with cursing, like as with a garment; so let it come into his bowels like
water, and like oil into his bones. Let it be as the garment which covers
him; and for a girdle, wherewith he is girded continually: Psalm. 109. 17, 18,
19. For thus it shall be with them in the world to come.

3. If it be farther demanded, In what manner they shall be cursed in the World
to come? I answer thus; They shall be fully and perfectly cursed: For though
these vessels of wrath may not be of one size, but some of them may contain
more then others; yet they shall be all filled up to the brim with Gods curses
in the world to come.

They shall be also everlastingly cursed: For their cursed condition, in the
world to come, shall never have an end; but after millions of years shall be
expired, in their apprehension, they shall know it to be without end.

Yea, they shall be exceeding cursed, above all that can be spoken, or
conceived, by men and Angels, concerning this matter.

4. Lastly, If it be demanded, Wherewith they shall be cursed in the World to
come? I answer, thus:

They shall be cursed in the world to come: 1. With everlasting Destruction. 2.
With everlasting Death. 3. With everlasting Shame. 4. With everlasting
Contempt. 5. With everlasting Bondage. 6. With everlasting Slavery. 7. With
everlasting Poverty. 8. With everlasting Tribulation. 9. With everlasting
Darkness. 10. With everlasting Sorrow. 11. With everlasting Fear.

But my meaning is, to speak of these things more fully in the following
Sections: And it may suffice to mention them in this place, because all that I
intended in this, touching this cursed condition of Reprobates, was, to speak
of it in a general way; which I have done accordingly in this second
Proposition.

And this cursed condition of theirs may inform

First, That it had been good for Reprobates if they had never been born, as
our Savior said of Judas: for if they had never been born, they had never been
subject to the curse of God: But now seeing they have been, are, or shall be,
all born, it will follow from hence, That they shall be cursed for ever.

Secondly, That it will be worse with Reprobates in the world to come, then in
this. For,

1. In this they are seldom sensible of the curse of God, but do often think
themselves to be the blessed of the Lord: but in that, they shall still be
sensible of the curse of God.

2. In this, they meet with diverse things that take off from them the
meditation and thought of Gods curse; as riches, pleasures, profits, honors,
and merry companions, etc. But in that world they shall not meet with any thing
that shall take off from them the meditation and thought of Gods curse.

3. In this, there is still hope that they may be converted, and so escape the
eternal curse of God: But in that world there shall be no hope of their
conversion. Ergo.

Thirdly, If we will not be cursed with Reprobates in the world to come, we
must take heed of final impenitency and unbelief, the most proper sins of
Reprobates; and see that we be soundly converted: and then, not till then, we
shall be safe from the eternal curse of God.

SECT. XI. Touching the Salvation of Gods Elect, and the Destruction of
Reprobates, in the World to come.
HAving spoken of a general difference, which shall be betwixt Gods Elect, and
Reprobates, in the world to come; I am next to speak of some special
differences, which shall be betwixt them: And the first special difference,
which shall be betwixt them, may be expressed in these two Propositions: viz.

Gods Elect shall be saved in the World to come.

Reprobates shall be destroyed in the World to come.

Gods Elect shall be saved in the World to come: 1 Proposit.
And touching this Salvation of theirs, we are to understand: The Nature of it.
The Certainty of it. The Causes of it. The Extent of it. The Continuance of it.


First, As touching the Nature of it; I affirm, That they shall be saved from
all the Evils of the World to come, that shall be found therein: And this
Salvation of theirs shall be all one with Deliverance, with Redemption, with
Preservation, or safe-keeping.

It shall be all one with Deliverance: for so far as any in this world are
delivered from the evil of it, they are saved from the evil of it. Now Gods
Elect shall be delivered from all the evils of the world to come, according to
the last Petition of the Lords Prayer, But deliver us from evil, Mat. 6. 13.
And in this sense they shall be saved.

It shall be all one with Redemption: for so far as any in this world are
redeemed from the evil of it, they are saved from it: Now Gods Elect shall be
fully and perfectly redeemed from the evils of the world to come; according to
that of our Savior, Your Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21. 28. In this sense
also they shall be saved.

It shall be all one with Preservation or safekeeping: for so far as any are
preserved, and safely kept, in this world, from the evil of it, they are saved
from it: Now Gods Elect shall be fully and perfectly preserved, and safely
kept, from the Evils of the world to come; according to that promise, The Lord
shall preserve thee from all evil: Yea, it is even he that shall keep thy Soul:
Psalm. 121. 7. And in this sense too they shall be saved. In short, there is no
evil that shall touch them, or happen unto them, in the world to come, either
from God, from Chirst, from the good Angels, from evil Angels, from themselves,
from Reprobates, or from other creatures. There is no evil that shall happen
unto them, in respect of their Souls, bodies, names, or outward estates: for as
they shall gain much, so they shall suffer no loss; as they shall receive much
good, so they shall receive no evil from the hands of God in the world to come:
And so we may understand the nature of their Salvation.

Secondly, As concerning the certainty of their Salvation, I affirm, That Gods
Elect shall most certainly be saved in the World to come: As we may well
conceive for these Reasons:

1. Because they were from everlasting appointed and chosen unto Salvation: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. And they that were from everlasting appointed unto
it, shall be saved in the world to come.

2. Because they are, or shall be, all regenerated: And they that are, or shall
be, regenerated, shall be saved in the world to come: Mat. 19. 28.

3. Because they are, or shall be, all justified by the blood of Christ: And
they that are, or shall be, justified by his blood, shall be saved from wrath
by him, Romans 5. 9.

4. Because they are, or shall be, all reconciled to God by the death of his
Son: And they that shall be reconciled to God by the death of his Son, shall be
saved by his life: Romans 5. 10.

5. Because they are, or shall be, all the adopted children of God by grace:
And all that are, or shall be, the adopted children of God by grace, shall be
saved in the world to come, because they are heirs of Salvation, Hebr. 1. 14.

6. Because they do, or shall, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ effectually:
And they that do, or shall, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ effectually, shall
be saved in the world to come, according to the Promise, Act. 16. 31. Mark 16.
16.

7. Because they do, or shall, repent unfainedly: And they that do, or shall,
repent unfainedly, shall be saved in the world to come; seeing this is called
Repentance unto Salvation, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

8. Because they do, or shall, all hope in God with a lively hope: And they
that do, or shall, hope in God with a lively hope, shall be saved in the world
to come: Romans 8. 24.

9. Because they do, or shall, all fear the Lord with a godly fear: And they
that do, or shall, fear the Lord with a godly fear, shall be saved, not only
in this world, but also in the world to come: Psalm. 85. 9.

10. Because they do, or shall, all walk sincerely and uprightly before the
Lord: And they that do, or shall, walk sincerely and uprightly before the Lord,
shall be saved in the world to come: Prove. 28. 18.

11. Because they do, or shall, all call upon the name of the Lord in
sincerity: And they that so do, or shall do, shall be saved in the world to
come: Romans 10. 13.

12. Because they have endured, or shall endure, constantly in the state of
grace to the end: And they that shall so endure to the end, shall be saved in
the world to come: Mat. 10. 22.

13. Because they have an inward right to all the Promises of Salvation: as to
these amongst the rest; Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks,
Isai. 26. 1. But Israel shall be saved, Isai. 45. 17. In mount Sion shall be
Deliverance, Joel 2. 32. Obadi. 17. Israel shall be saved, as it is written,
There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from
Jacob, Romans 11. 26. In which promises, I understand, by mount Sion, the
triumphant Church of Gods Elect in the World to come, not excluding the
Militant: And by Israel and Jacob, the whole body of Gods Elect, who are fully
to enjoy these Promises in the world to come, and not before. And thus may we
understand the certainty of their Salvation.

Thirdly, As concerning the causes of their Salvation, I affirm;

1. That the efficient cause of their Salvation in the world to come, shall be
the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: For Salvation belongs to the
Lord, Psalm. 3. 8. And the Salvation of the righteous is of him, Psalm. 37. 39.
And the full Salvation of Israel shall come from him out of the heavenly Sion,
Psalm. 14. 6. And Israel shall be saved in the Lord, Isai. 45. 17. that is, by
the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2. That the principal moving cause of their Salvation in the world to come,
is, and shall be, the Grace of God; I mean, the gracious good will and pleasure
of God from everlasting: And for this cause it is said, We are saved by Grace,
Ephesians. 2. 8. And it is the grace of God that brings Salvation, Tit. 2. 11.

3. That the principal final cause of this their Salvation shall be the glory
of Gods mercy: He shall save them, that he may glorify his mercy upon them;
which the Prophet knew well, and therefore prayed, That God would save him for
his mercies sake, Psalm. 6. 4. and according to his mercy, Psalm. 109. verse. 26.

4. The meritorious cause of this their Salvation, is, and shall be, only
Christ: And there is no Salvation in any other, Act. 4. 12. as in the
meritorious cause: But he is the Author of eternal Salvation, as God equal with
the Father, in an efficient way; as Mediator, and as God and man in one person,
in a meritorious way, Hebr. 5. 9. And he it is by whom this Salvation is to be
obtained, 1 Thessalonians. 5. verse. 9.

5. The instrumental cause of this their Salvation, is, and shall be, the Word
of God read and preached: For this Word has an instrumental power to save
Souls, Jam. 1. 21. The Gospel is the power of God to Salvation, Romans 1. 16. By
it a man may be made wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And it pleases God, by
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21.

6. The dispositive or helping causes of this their Salvation, are, and shall
be, all spiritual blessings, or saving graces, in this life; as Justification,
Sanctification, Faith, Hope, Love, etc. For these are the things that accompany
Salvation, Hebr. 6. 9. And these are the things that do fit and prepare men for
Salvation in the world to come.

Fourthly, As concerning the extent of this their Salvation, I affirm; 1. That
it shall extend to all the particular persons of Gods Elect, whether Jews or
Gentiles by nature; for it is said plainly, All Israel shall be saved, Romans 11.
26. that is, all the Elect. God will have all men to be saved; that is, all his
Elect, 1 Timothy 2. 4. The promise shall be sure to all the seed, that is, to all
the Elect, Romans 4. 16. God preserves all them that love him, Psa. 145. 20. He
preserves them not only from temporal dangers, but he will also preserve them
unto Salvation in the world to come. Yea, we find, That the whole house of
Israel, that is, the whole Family of Gods Elect, shall be saved, Ezekiel. 37. 11.
and 39. 25. And, 2. as this Salvation shall extend to all their persons, so it
shall extend to them in all respects, both in respect of their Souls and
bodies; for their Souls shall be saved in the Day of the Lord, and they shall
receive the end of their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls, 1 Pet. 1. 9. And
if their Souls, after they are united to glorified bodies, shall be saved,
doubtless their glorified bodies shall be saved too.

Fifthly, As concerning the continuance of this their Salvation, I affirm, That
it shall continue ^or ever: For which cause it is called Eternal Sal^ation,
Heb. 5. 9. And it is said, That Israel shall ^e saved in the Lord with an
everlasting Salvati^n, Isai. 45. 17. We may not imagine then, that this
Salvation of theirs shall ever have an end.

This Proposition, thus cleared, may be useful di^ers

First, It makes for the confutation of such, as ^hink, though not all, yet at
least some of Gods E^ect may and shall perish in the world to come. Vorstius
and his, etc.
Which impious conceit may in no wise be assented unto.

1. Because it is most certain, that all Gods Elect shall be saved in the world
to come, as has been ^rove*

2. Because God was of the mind to save them ^ll, when he decreed their
Salvation: And it is blasphemy to think, that he has changed his mind since
concerning them, seeing he is still of one mind, Job ^3. 13. still the same,
Psalm. 102. 27. and changes not, Mal. 3. 6.

3. Because Christ has promised, That none of Gods Elect shall be lost, Joh.
6. 37. And if none of them shall be lost, then none of them shall perish in the
world to come.

4. Because God in Christ is able to save them to the uttermost, Heb. 5. 25.
And they are kept by the ^ower of God unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. And if ^o,
then none of them shall perish in the world to come.

But whereas such Opinionists tell us of Solomon, shall perish in the world to
come, because (as they say) he never truly repented in this world. I answer:

It is very uncharitable to think, or say, That Solomon never truly repented,
because we have very probable evidences of his Repentance in the fifth, sixth,
and seventh Chapters of the book of Proverbs, even as touching that particular
sin which they lie to his charge; and throughout that book, and the book of
Ecclesiastes, both written by him, we have more general evidences of his
Repentance. And seeing all the evidence we can have of another Repentance can
be but probable, having the like concerning Solomon's, we should be satisfied
therewith.

And whereas they tell us of the Apostasy of the

It is not only against the duty ^^ Charity, but God has promised to preserve
and keep them from this sin, Psa. 119. 165. Jerem. 32. 40. And our Savior has
showed, That the Elect cannot possibly be seduced so far, as to be guilty of
it, Mat. 24 24.

Secondly, It makes for the confutation of such as think, That our good works
in this life are meritorious, and shall merit Salvation in the World to come.
Which Popish conceit is in no wise to be granted neither.

1. Because Christ our Mediator is the only meritorious cause of Salvation, as
was said before out of Act. 4. 12:

2. Because our best works are very imperfect, being mixed with much evil, Romans
7. 21. By reason whereof our best performances are but half good performances,
if they be so much: How then can they merit at Gods hands? Can a servant merit
at our hands by half performances?

3. Because our best works are but debts, seeing we are debtors to the whole
Moral Law, to do the works therein prescribed: How then can they merit? Can we
merit any thing by paying our debts, or by half payment of them? No: we must
pay our debts to avoid the danger of imprisonment: But we must do more then
this, if we will merit at the hands of God.

4. Because our best works are but duty, Luke 17. 10. And can our servant merit
any thing at our hands by doing his duty? No: neither can we at Gods hands; but
we must do more then our duty, if we will merit from him: whereas we cannot do
half our duty.

5. Because we are but mere men; and never did any mere man merit at the hands
of God: The man Christ Jesus did, because he was God and man in one person: But
we are not like unto him, as touching his person; therefore we cannot merit as
he did.

Indeed God will reward the good actions of men performed in this life,
according to the measure and degrees of good that he finds in them: But this
reward shall be caused by Gods free grace, not by our works; it shall be
occasioned by Gods bounty, not by man's merit: And though God may make himself a
debtor to us by his promise, yet we cannot make him a Debtor to us by our
doings.

Thirdly, It may inform us, That Gods Elect should not despair of Salvation,
seeing it is most certain that they shall all be saved in the World to come.
Yea, suppose some of them are not yet sure of their Election, yet they should
not despair of their Salvavation, for these Reasons:

1. Because that particular Assurance, which is wanting for the present, may be
had hereafter: and we know not what a day, a week, a month, or a year, may
bring forth.

2. Because this particular Assurance is not so essential to Salvation, as
other gifts of God are, but a Christian may be saved without it, as doubtless
many have been.

3. Because our Salvation does not depend upon our Assurance, but upon our
Election. If a man be Elected, there is nothing that shall deprive him of
Salvation.

Indeed, I grant this Assurance to be a very comfortable blessing, such as we
should desire, seek, and pray for: yea, we should be diligent to make our
Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Yet in case a Christian want this Assurance, and,
after long seeking, cannot obtain it, he should not be so far discouraged, as
to despair of his Salvation; but in this case he should still believe in the
Lord Christ, and depend upon him for Salvation; which if he do, he shall be
saved, though he want this Assurance.

What think you then of Reprobates, may not such despair of Salvation? I answer;

If a man in this life could certainly know himself he might have some excuse
for this sin: But it is not possible for any in this life to know himself to be
such an one for certain, because our final and ultimate condition does not yet
appear unto us: Therefore no man living in this world may despair of his future
Salvation, be he never so wicked and vile a sinner for the present; but he
should still think in charity toward himself, that he may be one of Gods
Elect, though he be not certain of it; and that he may possibly be saved by his
future Faith and Repentance, as well as others, though it be ill with him for
the present. For we must know, that God does never, by his Word, or Spirit,
persuade any to despair of their Salvation: but suggestions of this nature do
usually, and for the most part, come from Satan, the father of lies. God
persuades all afflicted sinners to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for
salvation. But Satan persuades an afflicted sinner to despair of salvation,
with such suggestions as these; Thou art a Reprobate: Thou art none of Gods
Elect; none of those for whom Christ dyed; thou have no part in Christ:
therefore it is in vain for thee to hope for Salvation in the World to come. In
all which suggestions, Satan acts the part of a liar, because he does not
certainly know any of these things to be true of this or that particular
person, whiles he is yet alive in the body. Wherefore an afflicted sinner
should not listen to these suggestions of Satan, but he should attend to the
counsel of Gods Word, and labor to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ
effectually, as we are all bound to do, especially in difficult cases, that we
may be saved.

Fourthly, It may inform us, That Gods Elect should be constantly willing to
dye, and to leave this world; because it is most certain, that they shall all
be saved in the World to come, with a full, perfect, and everlasting Salvation;
as has been proved: whereas they cannot expect any such Salvation in this
world. And, amongst other considerations, these three especially should make
them willing to dye, and leave this world: viz.

1. Death will put an end to the practice of sin: As long as we live here, we
shall still be in a posture of sinning; but after death we shall sin no more:
And should we not be willing that these days of sin may be finished? Yes: Then
we should be willing to dye.

2. Death will put an end to all the afflictions of this life, which are caused
by sin; as wants, necessities, losses, crosses, sicknesses, diseases,
vexations, and perturbations, of what kind soever: And should we not be
willing to be delivered from all such afflictions? Yes: Then we should be
willing to dye.

3. Death is that which will put Gods Elect into the possession of good things
promised: as glory, honor, immortality, peace, joy, tranquillity, etc. And
should we not be willing to be put in the possession of such things? Yes: Then
we should be willing to dye.

Wherefore let not any of Gods Elect say, We could be well contented to abide
in this world still; it is good for us to be here, and to build Tabernacles
here: For if it be good for them to be here, it will be much better for them to
be elsewhere, either in Heaven, or in the World to come: and the greater good
is more to be desired, then the lesser. And if our hearts hanker never so much
after this world, we must leave it of necessity, sooner, or later: But it will
be more acceptable, and praiseworthy, if we shall leave it willingly,
whenever the Messengers of death shall be sent unto us.

Fifthly, It should inform us, That such as desire to be saved with Gods Elect,
in the World to come, should neither neglect, nor contemn, the ordinary means
of Salvation, which God has prepared and assigned for them; whether they be
inward, as, Faith, Repentance, Hope, Love, Fear, etc. or outward, as, the
administration of the Word and Sacraments, reading, singing, prayer,
thanksgiving, in public, or private, etc. For how shall we escape the
judgments of God, if we neglect, or contemn, so great Salvation, as God tenders
unto us by these ordinary means? Hebr. 2. 3. And surely it will be in vam for
any to say, If I be elected, I shall be saved, though I neglect, or contemn,
the ordinary means; because all such as are elected to be saved in an ordinary
way, are also elected to the conscionable use of such ordinary means, as are,
or shall be, assigned for them in way to Salvation.

Moreover, it should be remembered, that we are commanded to work out our own
Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. Now to work out our own
Salvation, is all one as to endevor our own Salvation in and by the use of
ordinary means, that so we may save our selves, as the phrase is, Act. 2. 40.
And to work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling, is to endevor it in
a reverential way, so as to stand in awe of Gods displeasure, and of Gods
temporal Judgments: For, as long as we live here, we are still in danger of
displeasing him by our sins, and of suffering for our sins: For which cause we
should fear both the Offense of God, and the Judgments of God; and so work out
our own Salvation with fear and trembling. And surely it is not so easy a
matter, as some think it to be: for he that will be saved in an ordinary way,
must be contented to do much, and to suffer much, in obedience to Gods Will,
before he shall come to inherit the promises: For which cause Saint Peter
says, That the righteous shall scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4. 18. And Saint Paul
says, A man shall be saved; yet so, as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 15. Wherefore we
should be careful to work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling.

The next Proposition is, That Reprobates shall 2 Proposit.
be destroyed in the world to come: And touching this destruction of theirs, we
are likewise to understand; The Nature of it. The Certainty of it. The Causes
of it. The Extent of it. The Continuance of it.


First, As touching the Nature of it; I affirm, That they shall be destroyed in
the World to come; not in a natural sense, so as to be brought to nothing; for
Reprobates shall have a Being in the world to come to their great grief: but
they shall be destroyed in a spiritual or mystical sense, so as to be brought
into a very evil condition, and so as to be put to endure all sorts of evils,
which shall be incidental to the world to come, whether they shall be evils of
loss, or evils of sense; Soul evils, or bodily evils; internal, or external
evils: Yea, it shall be evil for them to have any Being; it shall be evil for
them to see what they shall see, to hear what they shall hear, to speak what
they shall speak, and do what they shall do, in the World to come. So their
last day shall be an evil day, or a day of evil, Prove. 16. 4. and their last
end shall be worse then their beginning: And as in this world, so in the world
to come, evil shall bunt and pursue them, to overthrow them, Psalm. 140. 11.
Prove. 13. 21. Which evil condition of theirs shall be their destruction, their
full and final destruction.

Secondly, As concerning the certainty of it, I say, That Reprobates shall most
certainly be destroyed in the world to come: As may be proved by these
Arguments:

1. They whose last end shall be destruction, shall be destroyed in the world
to come: But the last end of Reprobates shall be destruction, Phil. 3. 19. Ergo.

2. They that are vessels fitted for destruction, shall be destroyed in the
world to come: But Reprobates are vessels fited for destruction, Ro^. 9. 22.
Ergo.

3. They that are made to be destroyed, shall be destroyed in the world to
come: Reprobates are made to be destroyed, Prove. 16. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 12. I do not
say, they are made to be destroyed for naught, but for sin. Ergo.

4. They that will never believe effectually, shall be destroyed in the world
to come; as was prefigured and fore-shewed by the destruction of the Egyptians
at the red Sea; God having saved the Israelites from them, afterward destroyed
them that believed not, Jude 5. Now Reprobates will never believe effectually.
Ergo.

5. They that will never repent of their transgressions unfainedly, shall be
destroyed in the world to com^, Psalm. 37. 38. But Reprobates will never repent
unfainedly of their transgressions. Ergo.

6. They that will still be workers of iniquity, shall be destroyed in the
world to come, according to that of Solomon, Destruction shall be to the
workers of iniquity, Prove. 10. 29. and 21. 15. But Reprobates will still be
workers of iniquity. Ergo.

7. They that will still be despisers of Gods Word, shall be destroyed in the
world to come, Prove. 13. 13. But Reprobates will still be Despisers of the
Word. Ergo.

8. They that will still harden their necks against reproof, shall be destroyed
in the World to come, Prove. 29. 1
without remedy: But Reprobates will still harden their necks against reproof.
Ergo.

9. They that will still go in the broad way that leads to destruction, shall
be destroyed in the world to come, Mat. 7. 13. But Reprobates will still go in
the broad way that leads to destruction. Ergo.

Thirdly, As concerning the causes of their Destruction in the World to come, I
affirm;

1. That the efficient cause thereof shall be the whole Trinity, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost: For which cause it is said, That H^ll and Destruction are
before the Lord, Prove. 15. 11. That Destruction shall come from the Almighty,
Joel 1. 15. The Lord will destroy the house of the proud, Pro. 15. 25.

2. That the meritorious cause of their Destruction, shall be their own sin in
this world committed: For which cause it is said, That evil shall slay the
wicked, Psa. 34. 21. Thy destruction is of thy self, Hosea 13. 9. And more
particularly it is said, The prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Pro. 1.
32. The perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them, Prove. 11 3. Pride
goes before destruction, Prove. 16. 18. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy
them, Prove. 21. 7. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, Hosea 4. 6.

3. That the final cause of their Destruction shall be the glory of Gods
Justice: God shall destroy them, that he may glorify his Justice upon them,
Pro. 16. 4.

4. The ministering or dispensing cause of their destruction, shall be both
Christ, and his Saints, in the world to come: For as Christ shall break them
with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, Ps. 2. 9. so
the saints shall do the like, Rev. 2. 27.

Fourthly, As concerning the extent of their destruction, I affirm, That it
shall extend to all of them in general, and particular: For because they will
not repent, they shall all perish, Luke 13. 1, 2. and shall all be destroyed,
Psa. 145. 20. and 62. 3. and that in all respects.

Fifthly, As touching the continuance of their Destruction, I say, That it
shall continue for ever: For it is written concerning wicked Reprobates, That
they shall be destroyed for ever, Psa. 52. 5. And if they grow green as the
grass, and flourish, it is that they may be destroyed for ever, Psa, 92. 7. And
again, That they shall be punished with everlasting Destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

Now this Proposition may inform us:

1. That it had been good for Reprobates if they had never been born: for if
they had never been born, they could not have been destroyed in this world, nor
in the world to come: But now seeing they have been, are, or shall be, all
born, it will follow necessarily, That they shall be all destroyed, both in
this world, and in the world to come, for their sins.

2. That it will be worse with them in the world to come, then it can be with
them in this world: For the worst destruction that can befall them in this
world, is but a temporal Destruction; but in the world to come they shall have
everlasting Destruction.

3. That seeing none are willing to be destroyed with Reprobates in the world
to come, we should all be careful:

1. To avoid the way that leads to destruction, which is a broad way, Mat. 7.
13. the way of the multitude, and of the major part: and we should not follow a
multitude to do evil, lest we suffer with them: But if we avoid this way, we
shall never be destroyed with Reprobates in the world to come.

2. To shun the most proper sins of Reprobates, as final impenitency, final
unbelief, and final apostasy: the two former of which may be without the
latter, but the latter can never be without the former; all three are deadly
sins: And if we be careful to shun these most proper sins of theirs, we shall
never be destroyed with them in the world to come.

3. To harken unto those which teach us the way of Salvation, that so we may be
acquainted with this way, and walk in it, and continue in it: and if we do so,
we shall never be destroyed with Reprobates in the world to come.

4. To give diligence, that we may make our calling and Election sure unto our
selves, by our faith, repentance, love, and obedience, and other such graces:
And of we do so, we shall never fall, 2 Pet* 1. 10. neither shall we ever be
destroyed with Reprobates in the world to come.

SECT. XII. Touching the Life of Gods Elect, and the Death of Reprobates, in
the World to Come.
I Am now to speak of a second special difference, which shall be betwixt Gods
Elect and Reprobates in the World to come: and this difference may be thus
expressed in two Propositions: viz.

Gods Elect shall enjoy everlasting Life in the world to come.

Reprobates shall suffer everlasting Death in the world to come.

The first Proposition is, That Gods Elect shall 1 Proposit.
enjoy everlasting Life in the World to come: And touching this Life of theirs
we are to consider; The Nature of it. The Certainty of it. The Causes of it.


First, Touching the nature of it; I say that everlasting Life is not here to
be taken in a natural sense, but in a spiritual and mystical sense: for if we
should take it in a natural sense, it can be nothing else, but an everlasting
conjunction of the Soul of man with his body; which Life shall be common to
good and bad, to Elect and Reprobates, in the World to come; because, after the
general Resurrection, they shall both live for ever, both in their Souls and
bodies, united and conjoined, and so shall both have everlasting life in a
natural sense: But here everlasting life is to be taken in a spiritual and
mystical sense; and so it shall be nothing else but an everlasting Conjunction
with God and with Christ: And so when I say, That Gods Elect shall enjoy
everlasting Life in the World to come, my meaning is, That they shall enjoy an
everlasting Conjunction with God and with Christ, or an everlasting Union and
Communion with God and with Christ, in the World to come: By reason whereof it
is said, That they shall ever be with the Lord Christ, 1 These. 4. 17. They
shall be with him, Joh. 14. 13. They shall be with him where he is, and shall
see his glory, Joh. 17. 24. and shall be perfect in one with the Father and the
Son* Joh. 17. 22. 23. And by virtue of this everlasting Conjunction with God
and with Christ, they shall still have experience of Gods goodness toward them
in Christ, and shall know that his goodness endures for ever, Psalm. 52. 1. By
virtue of it they shall still have experience of Gods mercy toward them in
Christ, and shall know that his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136. and that
his mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, Psalm.
103. 17. By virtue of it they shall still have experience of Gods Love toward
them in Christ, and shall perceive, that neither things present, nor things to
come, shall separate them from it, Romans 8. 38, 39. And by virtue of it they
shall still have experience of Gods favor and fellowship with them in Christ,
and shall know that Gods Tabernacle shall be with them, and that he shall dwell
with them, and be their God for ever, Rev. 21. 3. Which everlasting Conjunction
of theirs, with God and with Christ, shall be unto them everlasting Life, and
that everlasting Life which is promised in the Scriptures. And so we may
understand the Nature of it.

Secondly, Touching the Certainty of it, I say, That Gods Elect shall most
certainly enjoy everlasting Life in the World to come: As may be made good by
these Arguments.

1. They whose names are in the Book of Life, shall have everlasting Life in
the World to come: But Gods Elect have and shall have all their names found in
the Book of Life, Phil. 4. 3. Revel. 3. 5. Ergo.

2. They that are ordained unto eternal Life, shall enjoy everlasting Life in
the World to come: But Gods Elect are all ordained unto eternal Life, Act. 13.
48. Ergo.

3. They that shall have the gift of eternal Life, shall enjoy everlasting Life
in the World to come: But Gods Elect shall have the gift of eternal Life; as it
is written, The Father has given Christ power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal Life to as many as the Father has given him, Joh. 17. 2. Ergo.

4. They that are Heirs of eternal Life, shall enjoy everlasting Life in the
World to come: But Gods Elect are or shall be all Heirs of eternal Life, Tit.
3. 7. Ergo.

5. They that are or shall be justified and accounted righteous before God
through Christ, shall enjoy everlasting Life in the World to come; according to
that of our Savior, The righteous shall go into everlasting Life, Mat. 25. 46.
But Gods Elect are or shall be all justified and accounted righteous before God
through Christ. Ergo.

6. They that are or shall be sanctified, or made Partakers of renewed
Holiness, shall enjoy everlasting Life in the World to come, as it is said,
Romans 6. 22. But Gods Elect are or shall be all sanctified, and made Partakers
of renewed Holiness. Ergo.

7. They that do or shall believe effectually in Gop and in Christ, shall enjoy
everlasting Life in the World to come; as may appear, John 3. 16. and 6. 40,
47. 1 Timothy 1, 16. But Gods Elect do or shall all believe effectually in God and
in Christ. Ergo.

8. They that do or shall repent unfeignedly, shall enjoy everlasting Life in
the World to come; because unfeigned Repentance is called Repentance unto life,
Acts 11. 18. But Gods Elect do or shall all repent unfeignedly. Ergo.

9. They that are or shall be constant in well-doing, shall enjoy everlasting
Life in the World to come, as appears, Romans 2. 7. But Gods Elect are or shall
be constant in well-doing. Ergo.

10. They that are or shall be constant in graces received, shall enjoy
everlasting Life in the World to come, as it is promised; Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee the crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10. But Gods Elect are
or shall be thus constant, or thus faithful. Ergo.

11. They that do or shall, in obedience to Gods Will, suffer more or less for
Christ's sake, or the Gospels sake, shall enjoy everlasting Life in the World to
come, according to that of our Savior, There is no man that has left house,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or ^ands,
for my sake, and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this
time, and in the World to come eternal Life. Mark. 10. 30 But Gods Elect do or
shall, in obedience to Gods Will, suffer more or less for Christ's sake and the
Gospels. E^go.

12. They that shall rise again at the latter day to everlasting Life, shall
enjoy everlasting Life in the World to come: But Gods Elect shall rise again at
the latter day to everlasting Life, Dan. 12. 2. Ergo.

Thirdly, Touching the Causes of this everlasting Life, I say,

1. That the Efficient Cause of it shall be the whole Trinity, God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: And to assure us hereof, eternal Life is called the gift
of God, Romans 6. 23. And S. John says, That God has given unto us eternal
Life, 1 John 5. 11. where the Name of God devotes not any particular person in
the Godhead, but the whole Trinity; and so the whole Trinity is the Efficient
Cause of everlasting Life.

2. That the Impulsive or Moving Cause of it shall be the grace of God, or his
gracious Will: For as sin has reigned unto death, so shall grave reign through
righteousness unto eternal Life, Romans 5. 21.

3. The Meritorious Cause of it is and shall be only Christ: For in him was
life, Joh. 1. 4. He that has the Son, has life, he that has not the Son,
has not life, 1 Ioh. 5. 12. They that shall reign in life, shall reign by one,
Jesus Christ, Romans 5 17 21. And the Father has given him power over all flesh,
that he should give eternal life to as many as the Father has given him, Ioh.
17. 2.

4. The Final Cause of it shall be the glory of Gods mercy, that he may
glorify his mercy upon his Elect: He will give unto them eternal Life in the
World to come.

Which Proposition thus cleared, may be useful

First, By what has been said, we may discern some difference betwixt eternal
Salvation and eternal Life; because eternal Salvation, in a proper sense, shall
be an eternal Preservation from the evils of the World to come; but eternal
Life, in a proper sense, shall be an eternal Conjunction, Union or Communion
with God and with Christ. Indeed this difference has not been observed by all
Writers, but many have spoken confusedly of the World to come, and of the
things which shall be contained in it: And though the same men, when they speak
of temporal salvation, temporal life, glory, liberty, peace, etc. can
distinguish them; yet when they speak of eternal Salvation, eternal Life,
Glory, Liberty, Peace, etc. they will not distinguish; as if eternal things
needed not to be distinguished, as well as temporal.

Secondly, It may inform us, That Gods Elect shall be no losers in the World to
come, by any thing they shall do or suffer in obedience to Gods Will in this
world: For suppose they shall do much here, in obedience to his Will, as pray
much, hear much, read much, meditate much, believe much, repent much, love
much, etc. and suppose they shall suffer much here, in obedience to Gods Will,
as the hatred and contempt of the world, the reproaches, lies and slanders of
wicked men, the spoiling of their goods, imprisonment ban^shment etc. indeed
they may seem to be losers by it in this world, but they can be no losers by
these things in the World to come, because in that World they shall enjoy
everlasting Life; and this everlasting Life will be a suffic^ent recompense for
all that they shall thus do and suffer in this world. Wherefore we should be
rich in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.

Thirdly, It may inform us, That Gods Elect can lose nothing by a temporal
death, in respect of the consequent thereof: Because the day of death shall be
better unto them then the day of their birth, Eccles. 7. 1. And this temporal
death shall be seconded with everlasting Life in the World to come. Wherefore
when God calls us to suffer a temporal death, whether natural or violent,
especially for Christ's sake and the Gospels, we should even hate our own lives,
seeing our Savior has said, He that loves his life, shall lose it; and he
that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal, Joh. 12.
25. And whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever will lose
his life for my sake, shall find it, Mat. 16. 25.

Fourthly, It may inform us, That Gods Elect should not doubt of everlasting
Life in the World to come; because the Word makes it sure unto them by many
promises: And yet if any of them are not satisfied in their consciences
concerning this matter, they must be diligent to make their Calling and
Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and to be sure of a lively faith: And being
assured of these things, must know that they shall have life eternal, 1 John 5.
13.

Fifthly, It may inform us, That Gods Elect should constantly hope for eternal
life, and live in expectation thereof: because this hope is commended, Tit. 3.
7. and it is that whereby we may lay hold of eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. and
that without which the best Christians are in this life of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. being most of all exposed to the hatred, and
contempt, and violence of this world.

Sixthly, It may inform us, That such as desire to enjoy everlasting life with
Gods Elect, must choose the way that leads thereunto, and walk in it: For
there is but one way that leads unto eternal life, and unless we find it,
choose it, and walk in it, we shall never obtain our desire in this respect. Now
the way that leads unto eternal life is so described in the Scriptures, that
we may know it from other ways; for it is called the strait way, the narrow
way, the old way, and the good way.

It is called the strait way, Mat. 7. 14. because it is the way of Gods
Commandments; which way allows of no turning to the right hand, or to the left,
but leads straight on; and as long as we are in it, we go straight on; but if
we deviate or swerve from it, we turn either to the right hand, or to the left.

It is called the narrow way, Mat. 7. 14. because it is frequented but by few
passangers and travelers: and a way may be said to be broad or narrow
according to the number of travelers in it; a multitude of travelers make a
broad way, a paucity of travelers makes a narrow way.

It is called the old way; because the faithful of old time walked in it, as
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, etc.

And it is called a good way; because such good things as are evidences and
pledges of eternal life may be found in it: As in it we may find,

1. The effectual knowledge of God; one Evidence of eternal life: Joh. 17. 3.

2. A competent knowledge of the Scriptures; which is another Evidence of
eternal life: John 5. 39.

3. An endeavor to eschew evil, and do good; another Evidence of eternal life,
Psalm. 34. 14.

4. The practice of Righteousness, another Evidence of life, Prove. 12. 28.

5. The practice of godly fear, another Evidence of this life, Prove. 14. 7.

6. The exercise of Mercy, another Evidence of this life, Prove. 21. 21.

7. The exercise of Humility, another Evidence of it, Prove. 22. 4.

8. The exercise of godliness, another Evidence of it, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

9. Sincere obedience to Gods Commandments, which is another Evidence of life
eternal, Matthew. 19. 17.

And as many as shall choose this way, this strait, narrow, old, and good way,
and shall walk in it, shall be sure at the last to arrive at the Land of
Everlasting Life with the rest of Gods Elect.

The next Proposition is, That Reprobates shall 2 Proposit.
suffer everlasting Death in the World to come: And touching this Death of
theirs, we are to consider; The Nature of it. The Certainty of it. The Causes
of it.


First, Touching the Nature of it: I do not conceive that Reprobates shall
suffer everlasting Death in a natural sense; for then their souls should be
everlastingly separated from their bodies in the World to come, which may not
be granted* But they shall suffer everlasting Death in a spiritual or mystical
sense; that is to say, they shall suffer an everlasting separation of their
whole man from God, from Christ, and the Saints, from all Union and Communion
with them: Which separation of theirs from God and from Christ, may be gathered
from that one saying which Christ shall pronounce against them at the Day of
Judgment; Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Luke 13. 27. And their
separation from the Saints is illustrated in the Gospel by the separation of
goats from sheep Mat. 25. 32. as also by the severing of the bad fish from the
good, Mat. 13. 49. Now by reason of this everlasting separation of theirs from
all Union and Communion with God, with Christ, and the Saints, they shall never
have any experience of Gods Goodness, Mercy, and Love toward them in Christ:
Neither shall they ever have any experience of the Saints favor and
fellowship, but shall still abide under the wrath of God: And so this
everlasting separation of theirs will be unto them an everlasting Death; and
this Death is called in Scripture the second Death, Rev. 20. 6, 14. because it
shall follow immediately upon the destruction of the first death: For the
natural death of mankind, (which is the first death) shall be destroyed at the
general Resurrection, and thereupon shall begin this, the second Death. It is
called everlasting punishment, Mat. 25. 46. because it shall be such a
punishment to those that shall suffer it. And it is called a lake of fire, Rev.
20. 14* everlasting fire, Mat. 25. 41. everlasting burnings, Isai. 33. 14.
because all that shall suffer it, shall be everlastingly tormented with it, as
it were, with fire. Thus we may understand the Nature of thi^ Death.

Secondly, Touching the Certainty of it, I affirm, That Reprobates shall most
certainly suffer this everlasting Death in the World to come: As may be made
good by these Arguments.

1. They who shall not have their names found in the Book of Life, shall suffer
everlasting Death in the World to come, Rev. 20. 15. But Reprobates shall not
have their names found in the Book of Life. Ergo.

2. They that are appointed unto wrath, shall suffer everlasting Death in the
World to come: But Reprobates are appointed unto wrath, 1 These. 5. 9. Ergo.

3. They that are vessels of wrath, shall suffer everlasting Death in the World
to come: But Reprobates are vessels of wrath, Romans 9. 22. Ergo.

4. They that will never believe effectually, shall dye in the guilt of their
sins, and so suffer everlasting Death in the World to come, John 8. verse. 24.
But Reprobates will never believe effectually. Ergo.

5. They that will never unfeignedly repent, and so turn from their evil ways,
shall suffer everlasting Death in the World to come; as may appear, Ezekiel. 3.
19. and 18. 20. But Reprobates will never unfeignedly repent, and so turn from
their evil ways. Ergo.

6. They that will Apostatize, and grow worse and worse, shall suffer
everlasting Death in the World to come; as may appear, Ezekiel. 3. 20. and 18. 24.
But Reprobates will still Apostatize, and grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13.
Ergo.

7. They that will still hate wholesome reproof, shall suffer eternal Death in
the World to come, according to that of Solomon, He that hates reproof shall
dye, Prove. 15. 10. But Rebrobates will still hate reproof while they shall
remain here. Ergo.

8. They that will still and finally be wicked persons, shall suffer eternal
Death in the World to come, according to that of the Lord, O wicked man, thou
shall surely dye, Ezekiel. 33. 8. But Reprobates will still and finally be wicked
persons. Ergo.

9. They that will still despise Gods Ways and Commandments, shall be sure to
suffer everlasting Death in the World to come, as Solomon says, He that
despises his Ways shall dye, Prove. 19. 16. But Reprobates will still thus do
while they shall remain in this world. Ergo.

Thirdly, Touching the Causes of it, I affirm,

1. That the Efficient Cause of this their Death, shall be the whole Trinity,
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: For it is said concerning wicked Reprobates,
That God has prepared for them the instruments of death, Psalm. 7. 13. And that
he will kill their children with death, Rev. 2 23. And if the whole Trinity
will do this, then it is the whole Trinity that shall inflict eternal Death
upon Reprobates in the World to come.

2. That the Meritorious Cause hereof is and shall be sin for sin only; and
every sin, in its own nature, deserves death, both temporal and eternal; as it
is written, Death entered by sin, Romans 5. 12. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.
23. The Soul that sins shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 20. And though it be true, that
all such as have, or shall have, their sins pardoned through Christ, shall
escape eternal Death, notwithstanding the desert of their sin; yet it is most
certain, that Reprobates shall suffer this Death in the World to come even for
their sin, as the Meritorious Cause thereof; and then they shall acknowledge
that every sin of theirs has brought this Death upon them.

3. That the Final Cause of it shall be the Glory of Gods Justice; for he shall
punish them with everlasting Death, that he may manifest the Glory of his
Justice upon them, and that all men may see his Righteousness.

This latter Proposition may inform us as before:

1. That it had been good for Reprobates if they

2. That it will be worse with such in the World to come then it can be with
them in this world: for here they can suffer no other then a temporal death;
but hereafter they shall suffer eternal death, not without cause, but for their
sins.

3. That all men, living in the body, should take some speedy course for their
own safety, that they be preserved from eternal death; for I know that none of
us are willing to suffer this death with Reprobates in the World to come; and
the Word of God prescribes a way for the avoiding of it: And therefore all
should take this way, or this course, for their own safety and preservation.

Object. But what course must we take for to preserve our selves from this
eternal death?

Sol. First, We must earnestly pray to have our sins pardoned, as our Savior
has taught us in his Prayer; and this pardon of sin will preserve us from
eternal death; as may appear by that speech of Nathan to David, God has put
away thy sin; thou shall not dye, 2 Samuel 12. as if he had said, Though thou
may and must dye a temporal death, yet thou shall not dye an eternal death,
because God has pardoned thy sin.

Secondly, Because this pardon of sin cannot be obtained without a lively faith
in Christ, we must, in the next place, labor and pray for this faith; and such
a faith as this will preserve us from eternal death; as may appear by that
saying of Christ to Martha, Whosoever lives, and believes in me, he shall not
dye, Joh. 11. 26. that is, though he dye a temporal death, yet he shall not an
eternal death, because he believes in me.

Thirdly, Because our faith cannot be good without repentance, we must also
labor for a true and lively repentance; and such a kind of repentance will
preserve us from everlasting Death; according to that of the Prophet: If the
wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall
not dye, Ezekiel. 18. 21. that is, he shall not dye eternally.

Fourthly, Because our repentance cannot be effectual without sincere
obedience, which includes an hearty desire to keep the Commandments of God and
of Christ, we must, in the last place, be willing and obedient to his
Commandments; and this obedience will preserve us from eternal death; according
to that of our Savior: Verily, verily I say unto you, If a man keep my
sayings, he shall not see death, Joh. 8. 51. that is, he shall never see
eternal death, so as to suffer it.

SECT. XIII. Touching the Glory of Gods Elect, and the Shame of Reprobates, in
the World to come.
HEre follows a third special Difference which shall be betwixt the
forenamed parties in the World to come; which may be thus expressed in two
Propositions:

Gods Elect shall be rewarded with Glory in the World to come.

Reprobates shall be rewarded with Shame in the World to come.

First, Gods Elect shall be rewarded with Glory 1 Proposit.
in the World to come. Touching which Glory of theirs, we are to consider: The
Nature of it. The Certainty of it. The Degrees of it. The Causes of it. The
Continuance of it.


1. As concerning the Nature of it: By the Glory of Gods Elect in the World to
come, I understand, that they shall have nothing to be ashamed of, but shall
have much to glory of in that world.

They shall have nothing to be ashamed of in that world, because their sins
shall be all forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1. Acts 3. 19. and they that shall have all
their sins forgiven in that world, and declared to be forgiven, shall have
nothing to be ashamed of.

And as they shall have all their sins forgiven, so they shall have all their
sins forgotten in that world; for where God forgives any sin, there will he
also forget it, so as never to impute it, Isai. 43. 25. And they that shall
have all their sins forgotten, shall have nothing to be ashamed of in that
world.

Again, As they shall have their sins all forgotten, so shall they have their
consciences cleared from the guilt of sin in the World to come, for they shall
have boldness at the Day of Judgment, 1 John 4. 17. which boldness shall arise
from a conscience cleared and cleansed from the guilt of sin, and shall continue
for ever: and they that shall have their consciences thus cleared, shall have
nothing to be ashamed of in that world.

Yea, they shall have none to lay any thing to their charge in the World to
come, as I gather from that Interrogation of the Apostle: Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Chosen? Romans 8. 33. Seeing God, in and by Christ,
has or shall fully justify all his Elect, he might well say, Who shall lay
any thing to their charge? for doubless, neither God, nor Christ, nor Angels,
nor Men, nor Devils, shall lay any thing to their charge in the World to come;
and consequently they shall have nothing to be ashamed of in that world.

But on the contrary, they shall have much to glory of, because all their
graces and virtues, with their several operations in this world, shall be
remembered in the World to come; as the Prophet says, A Book of Remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name,
Mal. 3. 16. And they that shall have all their graces and virtues, with their
several operations, in the World to come remembered, shall have much to glory of
that world.

Beside this, they shall have all their graces and virtues illustrated, and
made to shine before Angels and men in the World to come: For God shall bring
forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgment as the noon day,
Psalm. 37. 6. They that are wise, shall shine as the firmament, and they that
turn many unto righteousness, as the stars for evermore, Dan. 12. 3. And the
righteous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13. 43.
And they that shall have their graces and virtues thus illustrated, shall have
much to glory of in that world.

And which is more, they shall have all their graces and virtues perfected in
the World to come: When that which is perfect is come, that which is imperfect
shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. Though it be hard to show what use there
shall be of some graces in the World to come, as of Repentance, Patience, etc.
yet because all graces are imperfect in this life, doubtless they shall be all
perfected hereafter in Gods Elect: And they that shall have all their graces
and virtues perfected, shall have much to glory of in that world.

Yea, they shall have all their graces and virtues, with their several acts and
operations, recompensed in the world to come; as Moses expected, when he chose
rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season, Hebr. 11. verse. ^6. And they that shall have such a
recompense, shall have much to glory of in the world to come. And thus we may
understand the Nature of this Glory.

2. As concerning the certainty of it, I affirm, That Gods Elect shall most
certainly be rewarded with glory in the world to come: As may be made good by
these Arguments:

1. They that are predestined unto glory, shall be rewarded with glory in the
world to come: But Gods Elect are predestined unto glory, Romans 8. 30. Ergo.

2. They that are vessels prepared unto glory, shall be rewarded with glory in
the world to come: But Gods Elect are vessels prepared unto glory, Romans 9. 23.
Ergo.

3. They that are, or shall be, effectually called unto glory, shall be
rewarded with glory in that world: But Gods Elect are, or shall be, all called
effectually unto glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 3. Ergo.

4. They that are, or shall be, heirs of glory, shall be rewarded with glory in
that world: But Gods Elect are, or shall be, all heirs of glory, Ro^. 8. 17.
Ergo.

5. They that shall never be ashamed in the world to come, shall be rewarded
with glory in that world: But Gods Elect, though they have much to be ashamed
of in this world, shall never be ashamed in the world to come: as may appear by
that of the Prophet, They shall not be ashamed, nor confounded, world without
end, Isai. 45. 17. My people shall never be ashamed, Joel 2. 26, 27. Ergo.

6. They that shall be a glorious Church in the world to come, shall be
rewarded with glory in that world: But Gods Elect shall be a glorious Church in
that world without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 27. Ergo.

7. They that shall partake of glory in the world to come, shall be rewarded
with glory in that world: But Gods Elect shall be partakers of glory in that
world, 1 Pet. 5. 1. Ergo.

8. They that are, or shall be, wise in Gods esteem, shall inherit glory in the
world to come, Prove. 3. 35. But Gods elect are, or shall be, wise in his esteem.
Erg.

9. They that are, or shall be righteous in Gods account, shall be rewarded
with glory in the world to come; according to the burden of that triumphant
song, Glory to the righteous, Isa. 24. 16. But Gods Elect are or shall be, all
righteous in Gods account. Erg.

10. They that have, or shall have, their faith tried as by fire, shall have
glory in the world to come, 1 Pet. 1. 7. But Gods Elect have, or shall have,
their faith tried as with fire. Ergo.

11. They that do, or shall, walk uprightly before God, shall have glory in the
world to come; according to his promise, Psalm. 84. 11. But Gods Elect do or
shall thus walk. Ergo.

12. They that are, or shall be, guided by the counsel of Gods Word here, shall
be rewarded with glory in the world to come; according to that of the Prophet,
Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory, Ps.
73. 24. But Gods Elect are, or shall be guided with Gods counsel here. Erg.

13. They that do, or shall, glorify God in this life, shall be rewarded with
glory in the world to come, Joh. 13. 32. But Gods Elect do, or shall, glorify
him in this life. Ergo.

3. Next as concerning the degrees of it, I acknowledge, That there shall be
degrees of glory in the world to come, according to the degrees of grace and
virtue in this world; and that those of the Elect, which have been, or shall
be, more gracious then others here, shall be more glorious hereafter; as on the
contrary, those of them that have been, or shall be, less gracious here, shall
be less glorious hereafter: so much the Apostle illustrateth by a comparison
taken from the natural glory of the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars: There is one
glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the
Stars; for one Star differs from another in glory: So shall it be in the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42. And if it shall be so in the Resurrection,
then it shall be so in the World to come, amongst Gods Elect: And it was showed
before, That some of them shall shine as the Firmament, some as the Stars, and
some as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. Now for natural glory, we know
the Sun has more then the Moon, the Moon more then the Stars, some Stars more
then others: And on the contrary, the Firmament has less natural glory then
the Stars, the Stars less then the Sun: So by these places and similitudes we
are taught what to think and judge of degrees of glory in the world to come.

4. As concerning the causes of it, I affirm:

1. That the efficient cause of it shall be the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: For the God of glory shall glorify his Elect in the world to come;
and the whole Trinity is the God of glory, Psa. 29. 3. Act. 7. 2. And he shall
give glory to the upright, Psalm. 84. 11.

2. That the meritorious cause of it shall be only Christ our Mediator, who is
called the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. and the Lord of glory, Jam. 2. 1.
because, in a meritorious way, he has brought, and is to bring, many sons unto
glory, Hebr. 2. 10.

3. That the final cause of it is and shall be the glory of Gods mercy: He will
glorify his Elect in the world to come, that he may glorify his mercy upon
them; as he does all things chiefly for his own glory, Romans 11. 36.

4. That the instrumental cause of it, is, and shall be, the Word or Gospel of
Christ, which has ever been instrumental unto some for the obtaining of glory,
2 Thessalonians. 4. 14. and is so far instrumental for this purpose, as it is
accompanied with the Ministry of Gods Spirit; and therefore it is said in
another place, We are changed from glory to glory by the Spirit of God, 2 Cor.
3. 18.

5. As concerning the continuance of it, I say, That this glory shall continue
for ever upon Gods Elect in the world to come; and that they shall never cease
to be glorious: for which cause it is called an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4. 17. and it is often called eternal glory; as ^ Tim. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 4, 10.

Now this doctrine, touching the glory of Gods Elect

1. To be patient in all your present tribulations and afflictions, because it
is most certain that Gods Elect shall be rewarded with glory in the world to
come; and therefore you should be patient in the mean time: Especially
considering,

1. That the afflictions of this, though grievous in themselves it may be, are
but light, in comparison of the glory that shall be revedled hereafter; and so
not worthy to be compared with it, Romans 8. verse. 18.

2. That the afflictions of this life are but short and momentary, in
comparison of the glory hereafter.

3. That the afflictions of this life, if patiently suffered, in obedience to
Gods will, shall be recompensed with glory, and so shall work for us a more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

2. To be plentiful in good works; and in doing Gods Will: For to him that does
good, shall be glory, Romans 2. 10. And look what good any man does; in obedience
to Gods Will, the same shall he receive, whether he be bond or free, Ephesians. 6. 8.
Yea, the more good we shall do, in obedience to Gods Will, the more glory shall
we receive; according to that of the Apostle, He that sows sparingly, shall
reap sparingly; but he that sows plentifully, shall reap plentifully, 2 Cor.
9. 6.

3. To hope for glory in the world to come: For it is most certain that Gods
Elect shall be rewarded with glory in that world, and therefore they should
constantly hope for it; as Saint Paul, and other Believers with him, did not
only hope for this glory, but also rejoice in hope thereof, Romans 5. 2. And
this hope is that which will support the Soul in the hour of temptation and
distress; whereas without it the Soul is in danger of sinking into the gulf of
despair. Wherefore let Israel still hope in the Lord, and that for this glory
which is to be revealed in the world to come.

4. To glorify God in this world, and to give as much glory to him as we can:
How else can we expect to be glorified of him in the world to come? And we
should here consider; First, That we are often commanded to glorify God:
Glorify him ye sons of Jacob, Psalm. 22. 23. Ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify him both in your Souls and bodies, which are his, 1 Cor. 6.
20. Secondly, That glory does most rightly belong unto God, because his glory
is above Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 148. 13. Thirdly, That Gods glory is most dear
unto him, because he will not give his glory to another, Isai. 42. 8. Fourthly,
That God does seek his own glory in all his actions for to teach us to do the
like. Fifthly, That Herod was punished with sudden death, because he gave not
glory to God, but to himself, Acts 12. 23. Wherefore we should be careful to
give all possible glory to God in this life.

How may we glorify him in this life?

We may do it diverse ways: As,

1. By believing Gods statutes and promises effectually: As Abraham, being
strong in the faith, gave glory to God, Romans 4. 20. so may we, if we be strong
in the faith. Yea, hereby we shall give him the glory of his truth and
faithfulness: For as he that believes not, has made him a liar; so he that
believes, has put to his seal, That God is true.

2. By being thankful unto God for favors and benefits received: for he that
offers praise, glorifieth him, Psalm. 50. 23.

3. By being fruitful in grace: For herein is my Father glorified (says
Christ) if ye bring forth much fruit, Joh. 15. 8.

4. By being exemplary to others in a good way: for hereby we shall not only
glorify our selves, but shall occasion others to do the like; according to
that of our Savior, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see you
good works, and may glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16.

5. By being patient under the reproaches that are, or shall be, put upon us
for Christ's sake; according to that of the Apostle, If ye be reproached for the
Name of Christ, happy are ye: On their part he is evil spoken of, but on your
part he is glorified: 1 Pet. 4. 14.

6. By intending Gods glory in all our lawful actions; according to the
Apostles rule, Whatsoever ye do in word, or deed, do all to the glory of God: 1
Cor. 10. 31.

The next Proposition is, That Reprobates shall 2. Proposit.
be rewarded with Shame in the WORLD to come.

Touching which Shame of theirs, we are to consider: The Nature of it. The
Certainty of it. The Degrees of it. The Causes of it. The Continuance of it.


First, Touching the nature of it, I conceive, That their shame in the World to
come, shall be a total privation of glory; because they shall have nothing to
glory of in the World to come: no Innocence, no Righteousness, no Holiness, no
Faith, no Repentance, no Love, no Obedience, etc. but they shall have much to
be ashamed of.

1. Because their sins in this world shall all be remembered, and set before
them, as the Lord says by the Prophet, Thou thoughtest, that I was altogether
such a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thine eyes, Psalm. 50. 21. and they that shall have all their sins remembered,
and set before them in the World to come, shall have much to be ashamed of in
that world.

2. Because they shall have their consciences awakened, to accuse and condemn
them in the World to come, Romans 2. 15. and if so, then they shall have much to
be ashamed of in that world.

3. Because they shall bear the guilt and punishment of all their sins in the
World to come, as it is written, God shall bring upon them their own iniquity,
Psalm. 94. 23. they shall bear their iniquity, Ezekiel. 44. 12. and every man
(without a pardon) shall bear his own burden, Gal, 6. 5. and they that shall
bear the guilt and punishment of all their sins in the World to come, shall
have much to be ashamed of in that world; and so I understand the nature of
their shame.

Secondly, touching the certainty of it; I say, that reprobates shall most
certainly be rewarded with shame in the World to come, as may be good by these
Arguments.

1. They that will still be wicked in this world shall be rewarded with shame
in the world to come, according to the Prayer of David, Let not me be ashamed,
but let the wicked be ashamed, Psalm. 31. 17. but reprobates will still be
wicked in this world: Ergo.

2. They that will still forsake God in this world, shall be rewarded with
shame in the world to come, according to that of the Prophet, O Lord, all that
forsake thee shall be ashamed, Jer. 17. 13. but reprobates will still forsake
God, and go on whoring from him in this world: Ergo.

3. They that will finally be ashamed of Christ, and his Gospel in this world,
shall be rewarded with shame in the world to come, according to that of our
Savior, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous
and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he
shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels: But reprobates
will finally be ashamed of Christ and his Gospel in this world: Ergo.

4. They that will still hate the righteous in this world, shall be rewarded
with shame in the world to come, as it was said to Job, They that hate thee
shall be clothed with shame, Job. 8. 22. but Reprobates will still hate the
righteous in this world: Ergo.

5. They that will still be the servants of sin and Satan in this world, shall
be rewarded with shame in the world to come, according as God says by the
Prophet, My servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed, Esa. 65. 13. but
reprobates will still be the servants of sin and Satan in this world: Ergo.

6. They that will still be foolish in this world in a spiritual sense, shall
be rewarded with shame in the world to come, according to that of Solomon,
Shame shall be the promotion of fools, Prove. 3. 35. but reprobates will still
be foolish in a spiritual sense: Ergo.

7. They that will still be proud in this world, and live under the dominion of
this sin, shall be rewarded with shame in the world to come, according to the
Prayer of David, Let the proud be ashamed, Psalm. 119. 78. And as Solomon
intimates, When pride comes, then comes shame, Prove. 11. 2. but reprobates
will still live in this sin, without repentance in this world: Ergo.

8. They that will still refuse wholesome instruction in this world, shall be
rewarded with shame in the world to come, as it is said, Shame shall be to him
that refuses instruction, Prove. 13. 18. but reprobates will still refuse
wholesome instruction in this world: Ergo.

9. They that shall rise again to shame at the general Resurrection, shall be
rewarded with shame in the world to come: But reprobates shall rise again to
shame at the general Resurrection, Dan. 12. 2. Ergo.

Thirdly, Touching the degrees of this their shame, I conceive that they shall
be proportioned according to their degrees of sinning in this world; as their
sins shall be more or less, so shall their shame be; the greater sinners
amongst them shall have the greater shame, and the lesser sinners amongst them
the lesser shame in the world to come: And so I conceive, because as every one
of them shall bear his own iniquity, so every one of them shall ber his own
shame, Ezekiel. 16. 54. yet every one of them shall be filled with shame, Hab. 2.
6.

Fourtthly, Touching the causes of this their shame, I say,

1. That the meritorious cause of it is, and shall be only their sin; for one
sin deserves shame, and every sin of it is own nature deserves the shame of this
world, and of that which is to come. And though it be true, that such sinners
as have, or shall have their sins pardoned, shall never be put to shame in the
world to come; yet Reprobates (who shall never have their sins pardoned,
because they will never repent in season) shall be sure in the world to come to
bear the whose shame which their sins have deserved, or shall deserve.

2. That the efficient cause of it shall be the whole Trinity, God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; for the same God that is now displeased and offended with
their sins, is he that shall bring them to shame, and put them to shame, and
fill their faces with shame in the world to come, as appears by the prayer of
the Prophet, Psalm. 83. 16, 17.

3. That the final cause of it shall be the glory of Gods justice, he shall
reward them with shame, that he may glorify his Justice upon them.

Fifthly, Touching the continuance of it; I say that this shame of theirs shall
continue for ever in the world to come, for which cause it is said, that their
everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten, Jer. 20. 11. and their
perpetual shame shall never be forgotten, Jer. 23. 40.

Which latter Proposition does not only confirm what has been formerly said,
viz. that i^ had been good for Reprobates if they had never been born, and that
it shall be worse with them in the World to come, then it can be with them in
this World; but also, it should admonish all mankind now living amongst us to
take some effectual course for their own safety, that they may be preserved
from this everlasting shame: we are not willing to have our share with
Reprobates in it, therefore we should take some effectual course for our
preservation from it.

What course must we take for our preservation?

1. We must sue out a pardon for our sins in

2. We must constantly believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and this faith will
preserve us, if not from temporal, yet from everlasting shame in the world to
come; as it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and
precious, and he that believes on him shall not be ashamed, Romans 9. 33. shall
not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2. 6. viz. in the world to come.

3. We must hope in the Lord for good things promised, and this hope, if it be
a lively hope, makes not ashamed, Romans 5. 5. but will preserve us, if not from
temporal, yet from eternal shame in the world to come.

4. We must patiently wait upon God for the accomplishment of his promises, and
then we shall not be ashamed in the world to come, as it is said, they shall
not be ashamed that wait for me, Esa. 49. 23.

5. We must be willing to observe and keep all the known precepts of God so
far as they shall concern us, and then we shall be preserved from this eternal
shame, as David says, Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all
thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6.

6. We must be soundly affected to Gods Word, and then we shall be safe from
eternal shame, according to the prayer of David, Let my heart be sound in thy
statutes, that I be not ashamed, Psalm. 119. 80.

7. We must walk uprightly and sincerely before the Lord, because the Lord
knows the days of the upright, and they shall not be ashamed in the evil
time, Psalm. 37. 18, 19.

8. We must persevere in grace received, which is to abide in Christ unto the
end, and then we shall be safe from eternal shame according to that of S.
John, Little children abidein him, that when he shall appear we may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming, 1 John 2. 28.

SECT. XIIII. Touching the honor of Gods Elect, and the contempt of Reprobates
in the world to come.
HEre follows a fourth special difference, which shall be betwixt the
parties before-named; which difference may be thus expressed in two
Propositions,

Gods Elect shall be honored in the world to come.

Reprobates shall be contemned in the world to come.

The former Proposition is, That Gods Elect Proposition.
shall be honored in the world to come; touching which honor of theirs, we
are to consider two things, viz.

The nature of it,

The certainty of it.

Frst, Touching the nature of it: I conceive that they shall be honored with an
high esteem in the world to come, and that on Gods part, on Christ's part,
amongst the Angels, amongst themselves, and amongst the reprobate sort of
mankind.

1. They shall be (...) esteemed of in the world to come on Go^ for part; for
he shall still esteem them as his Vovenant People according to his promise, I
will be your God, and ye shall be my people, Rev. 21. 3. which promise is often
repeated, he shall still esteem them as his children, according to his promise,
I will be a father to you, and ye shall be sons and daughters unto me, says
the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 18. He shall still esteem them as his faithful
servants, according to that saying, Well done good and faithful servant, Mat.
25. 23. He shall still esteem them as his triumphant Church, as the new
Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 2. Yea, he shall so highly esteem of them in the world to
come, that he shall put a new name upon them, Esa. 62. 2. another name from what
they now have, Esa. 65. 15. a name better then of sons and daughters, an
everlasting name, Esa. 56. 5.

2. They shall be highly esteemed of in the world to come on Christ's part; for
he shall still esteem them as his brethren; he was not ashamed Heb. 2. 11.
to call them his brethren in this world, neither shall he be ashamed to call
them such in the world to come; he shall still esteem of them, as of the
children of God, according to that compellation of his, Come ye blessed
children of my Father, Mat. 25. 34. He shall still esteem of them as of his
familiar friends, as may appear by this, because it is said, that they shall
eat and drink with him at his table in his Kingdom, Luke 22. 30. and shall sit
some of them at his right hand, and some at his left in his Kingdom, Mat. 20.
23. Yea, he shall so highly esteem of them, that he shall still own them for
Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1. 6.

3. They shall be hig^^y esteemed of in the world to come amongst the Angels
good and evil; for the good Angels shall so highly esteem of them, that they
shall own them for their superiors in some respect, seeing Christ took not
upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; and the evil Angels
shall so highly esteem of them, that they shall own them for their Judges, and
shall not dare to think dishonourably of them, 1 Cor. 6. 3.

4. They shall be highly esteemed of amongst themselves, for we know that Gods
Elect after they are effectually called, do honor one another with an high
esteem here in this world, Psalm. 15. 4. much more shall they honor one another
with an high esteem in the world to come.

5. They shall be highly esteemed of in the world to come, amongst the
reprobate sort of mankind; for these also shall have an high and honorable
esteem of Gods Elect in the world to come; for this cause it is said, that the
Gentiles shall see their righteousness, and all Kings their glory, Isai. 62.
2. God shall establish Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isai. 62. 7. which I
understand to be spoken chiefly of the new earth, or world to come, yea says
the Lord, they shall be a praise and an honor before all the Nations of the
earth, Jer. 33. 9. I will get them praise and f^me in doing laud, where they
have been put to shame, Zeph. 3. 19.

Secondly, touching the certainty of it, I say, that Gods Elect shall most
certainly be honored in the world to come, as may appear by these arguments.

1. They that are vessels of honor, shall be honored in the world to come,
but Gods Elect are vessels of honor, for which cause they are compared to
such vessels of a potter as are made for honor, Romans 9. 21. and to such
vessels in a great house as serve for honorable uses, 2 Timothy 2. 20. Ergo.

2. They that do, or shall know God effectually in this world, shall be
honored in the world to come, according to that promise, I will set him on
high, because he has known my Name, Psalm. 91. 14. which is, as if the Lord had
said, I will honor him both in this world if I shall see it expedient, and
much more in the world to come, but Gods Elect do, or shall all know God
effectually in this world: Ergo.

3. They that shall call upon God in sincerity here in this world, shall be
honored in the world to come, according to that promise, He shall call upon
me, and I will answer, and honor him, Psalm. 91. 15. But Gods Elect do, or shall
call upon him in sincerity in this world: Ergo.

4. They that do, or shall go fear the Lord with a godly fear here in this
world, shall be honored in the world to come; as we may gather from that of
Solomon; by the fear of the Lord are riches and honor, Pro. 22. 4. but Gods
Elect do, or shall fear him with a godly fear here in this world: Ergo.

5. They that do, or shall humble themselves for their sins after an holy
manner here in this world, shall be honored in the world to come; according to
that of Solomon, before honor is humility, Pro. 15. 33. and honor shall
uphold the humble in spirit, Pro. 29. 23. but Gods Elect do, or shall all
humble themselves for their sins, after an holy manner here in this world: Ergo.

6. They that are, or shall be merciful toward others, and follow after mercy
here in this world in obedience to God, shall be honored in the world to come,
according to that promise. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor,
his righteousness remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor,
Psalm. 112. 9. and Solomon says, he that follows after mercy, finds honor,
Pro. 21. 21. but Gods Elect are, or shall be merciful in this senie here in
this world: Ergo.

7. They that do, or shall regard wholesome reproof, shall be honored in the
world to come; as Solomon says, He that regards reproof, shall be honored,
Pro. 13. 18. but Gods Elect do, or shall regard wholesome reproof in this
world: Ergo.

8. They that do, or shall do good in obedience to Gods will here in this
world, shall be honored in the world to come, according to that of the
Apostle. Honor to every one that works good, to the Jew first, and also to
the Greek, Romans 2. 10. but Gods Elect do, or shall do good in obedience to Gods
will here in this world: Ergo.

9. They that are, or shall be the faithful servants of Christ here in this
world, shall be honouin the world to come, according to that of our Savior, If
any man serve me, him will my Father honor, Joh. 12. 26. but Gods Elect are or
shall be faithful servants of Christ here in this world: Ergo.

10. They that shall conscionably purge themselves from the errors of these
times, shall be honored in the world to come, according to that of the Apostle,
If any man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, 2 Timothy
2. 21. but Gods Elect are such as do, or shall purge themselves from the known
errors of their times: Ergo.

11. They that do, or shall honor God sincerely here in this world, shall be
honored of him in the world to come, as the Lord says, Them that honor me I
will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. but Gods Elect do, or shall sincerely endeavor to
honor him here in this world: Ergo.

This Proposition should comfort all Gods Elect, Our soul is exceedingly filled
with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the
proud, Psalm. 103. 4. and David said, remove from me reproach and contempt,
Psalm. 119. 22. Now when this comes to be our case as it is the case of many
good Christians, who are of Gods Elect, we should consider how our condition
shall be altered in the world to come, where we shall be so far advanced above
the contempt of this world, that we shall be honored on Gods part, on Christ's
part, amongst the Angels, amongst the Saints, and amongst the wicked
themselves, and shall we not take comfort in this.

Again, this should exhort all of us (that may be of Gods Elect, for ought we
know to the contrary) to honor God to the most of our ability here in this
world. Forasmuch as,

1. We are commanded to honor him, and to sing forth the honor of his Name,
Psalm. 66. 2.

2. We are taught by many examples so to do, for our Savior was careful on
this earth to honor him, as he said to the Jews, I honor my Father and ye
dishonor me, Joh. 8. 49. and the faithful of former times were careful to
honor him, as we may well think; 1. Because they honored Christ, and had an
high esteem of him, for they esteemed him to be fairer then the children of
men, Psalm. 45. 2. to be the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10. to be the
wonderful, Counselor, the Almighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, Isay 9. 6. to be the chief Shepherd and Bishop of their souls, 1 Pet.
2. 25. 2. Because they honored the word of God, and had an high esteem of it,
for they esteemed it above riches, Psalm. 119: 19. better then gold and silver,
Psalm 119. 72. more then their ordinary food, Job 23. 12. 3. Because they
honored the place of his public worship, and would say with the Prophet, O
how amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts! one day in thy Courts is
better then a thousand, I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God,
then to dwell in the tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84. 1. 10. 4. Because they
honored those that feared the Lord with a godly fear, Psa. 15. 4. and it was
much to be commended in Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, that after the Almighty
had afflicted him sore, he resolved to honor him that lives for ever, to
honor the King of heaven, Dan. 4. 34, 37. Having then such examples before us,
we should be moved to make them our paterns.

3. We know that honor must be given, to whom honor is due; and honor is due
to God, as he is our Creator, as he is a Father, Mal. 1. 6. as he is a King;
and in these respects we should give honor unto him.

4. He is worthy to receive all possible honor from us, as the twenty four
Elders confessed, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and
power, for thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and
have been created, Revel. 4. 11.

5. Unless we honor him in this world, we have no reason to expect honor from
him in that world which is to come.

6. But if we honor him in this, we shall be sure to be honored of him in
that world, according to his promise, Them that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

How must we honor him in this world?

1. We must honor him in our hearts, by having an high esteem of him, as Moses
had when he said, Lord, who is like unto thee among the Gods? glorious in
golinesse, fearful in praises, doing wonders, Exodus 15. 11. as Hannah had when
she said, there is none holy as the Lord, neither is there any rock like our
God, 1 Samuel 2. 2. as David had when he said, Who is a God save our Lord? who is
a rock save our God, Psalm. 18. 31. as Asaph had when he said, Lord whom have I
in heaven but thee? who is there on earth that I desire in comparison of thee?
Psalm. 73. 25. as Paul had when he said, O the depth of the wisdom, and the
knowledge of God, etc. Romans 11. 33. without which honor none can be accepted,
Isai. 29. 13.

2. We must honor him in our bodies, by yielding bodily submission and
reverence unto him upon all occasions, and by keeping our bodies pure and
chaste, 1 These. 4. 4.

3. We must honor him in our thoughts, words and actions, as at other times,
so chiefly upon the Sabbath or Lords day, according to that charge of the
Prophet, Thou shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasures, nor speaking thine own words, Isai. 58. 13.

4. We must honor him with our earthly substance, when we have occasion and
opportunity so to do; according to that of Solomon, Honor the Lord with thy
substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase, so shall thy barns
be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine, Prove. 3.
9. 10. Now I conceive that in these times men do give the Lord the first fruits
of all their increase, when they do duly and conscionably part with the tithes
or tenths of all their increase: and if so, then we may safely infer from
hence, that they which duly and conscionably part with their tithes, do honor
the Lord with their substance, and may well hereupon expect a blessing from
him, because of this promise.

5. We must honor him in this world above all others, above our selves, as
our Savior honored him above himself, Joh. 8. 54. above our earthly Kings,
Parents, Children, etc. for we know this was imputed as a sin to Eli the
Priest, that he honored his sons above God, 1 Samuel 2. 29. the chiefest good
must have the chiefest honor, and we acknowledge him to be our chiefest good,
therefore we must honor him above others.

The latter Proposition is, That reprobates shall 1 Proposition.
be contemned in the world to come, touching which contempt of theirs, we are
to consider,

The nature of it.

The certainty of it.

First, touching the nature of it. I conceive that to be contemned, is all one,
as to be lightly or lowly esteemed of, and so the word is interpreted in
Scripture, as whereas Iesurun contemned God, it is said that he lightly
esteemed the rock of his salvation, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. and whereas the wicked shall
be contemned if they repent not, it is said, they shall be lightly esteemed, 1.
Sam. 2. 30. So then, when I say that Reprobates shall be contemned in the world
to come, I understand that they shall be lightly esteemed of in the world to
come, on Gods part, and Christ's part, amongst the Angels, amongst the Saints,
and amongst themselves.

They shall be lightly esteemed of on Gods part in the world to come, for he
shall esteem them for no other, then reprobates, cast-awayes, cursed children,
children of the devil, children of wrath, and heirs of perdition.

They shall be lightly esteemed of on Christ's part, for he shall have the same
esteem of them, which his Father shall have in the world to come.

They shall be lightly esteemed of amongst the good Angels, who have no good
esteem of impenitent sinners in this world, such as think they need no
repentance, Luke 15. and if so, we may well think that they shall have a very
light esteem of reprobates in the world to come.

They shall have a light esteem amongst evil Angels, who have no great esteem
of impenitent sinners in this world, as may appear by that speech of Satan to
those Conjurers, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye, Acts 19. 15.
and if so, then we may well think that they shall have a very light esteem of
Reprobates in the world to come.

They shall be lightly esteemed of amongst the Saints, for the Saints in this
world contemn a vile person, Psalm. 15. 4. and if so, then we may well think,
that they shall have a very light esteem of Reprobates in the world to come.

They shall be lightly esteemed of amongst themselves, for though wicked men
may seem to honor one another in this world very much in time of prosperity;
yet in time of distress they seem to be regardlesse one of another, as may
appear by that speech of the chief Priests and Elders unto Judas when he was
distress and said, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood, for they
said unto him, what is that to us? see thou to that, Mat. 27. 4. and if wicked
men do no more regard one another here in time of distress, we may well
think that Reprobates shall have a very light esteem one of another in the
world to come; thus may we understand the nature of this their contempt.

Secondly, touching the certainty of it, I affirm that reprobates shall most
certainly be contemned and despised in the world to come, as may appear by
these arguments.

1. They that are vessels of dishonor, shall be contemned and despised in the
world to come, but reprobates are vessels of dishonor, for which cause they
are compared unto such vessels of a potter as are made for dishonor, Romans 9.
21. and unto such vessels in a great house as are made for dishonor and
contempt, 2 Timothy 2. 20. Ergo.

2. They that will still despise, and contemn God in this world, shall be
contemned and despised in the world to come, as the Lord said, Eli; They that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. but reprobates will still
despise and contemn God in this world: Ergo.

They that shall have their names left for a curse in the world to come, shall
be contemned and despised in that world; but reprobates shall have their names
left for a curse to Gods chosen in that world, Isai. 65. 15. Ergo.

4. They that will still be wicked in this world, shall be contemned and
despised in the world to come, according to that of Solomon, When the wicked
comes, then comes contempt, Prove. 18. 3. but reprobates will still be wicked
in this world: Ergo.

5. They that will still be proud and live under the dominion of this sin
without repentance, shall be contemned and despised in the world to come, as
the Prophet intimates when he says, God beholded the proud afar off, Psalm.
138. 6. a sign of present and future contempt, but reprobates will will still be
proud, and live under the dominion of this sin without repentance: Ergo.

6. They that will still be of a perverse heart in this world, shall be
contemned and despised in the world to come, according to that of Solomon, He
that is of a perverse heart shall be despised, Pro. 12. 8. viz. not only in
this world, but also in the world to come, if he continue such an one: Now
reprobates will still be of a perverse heart in this world: Ergo.

7. They that shall rise again to contempt at the general Resurrection, shall
be contemned and despised in the world to come, but reprobates shall rise again
to contempt, at the general Resurrection: Ergo.

8. They that shall be put to everlasting reproach in the world to come, shall
be contemned and despised in that world, but reprobates shall be put to
everlasting reproach in that world, Jer. 23. 40. Ergo.

Now this latter Proposition, does not only viz. that it had been good for
reprobates if they had never been born, and that it will be worse with them in
the world to come, then it can be with them in this, even in respect of
contempt: but also it makes for the reproof of all wicked impenitent sinners at
this day, who for the present are contemners and despisers of God, Psalm. 10.
13. contemners and despisers of his counsel, Psalm. 107. 11. contemners and
despisers of his word, Prove. 13. 13. contemners and despisers of his reproof,
Prove. 1. 30. contemners and despisers of good men, 2 Timothy 3. 3. contemners and
despisers of Gods judgments, Ezekiel. 20. 13. contemners and despisers of his
Ministers and messengers sent unto them, Luke 10. 16. and in all this,
contemners and despisers of God himself, as it is written, he that despises,
despises not man, but God, 1 These. 4. 8. and what think we shall be the reward
of such persons in the world to come? doubtless, unless they repent
effectually of this sin, before their death, they shall be contemned and
despised in the world to come, as the Lord has said, They that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Wherefore it concerns such contemners to repent speedily of their sin; and to
live for the time to come, as becomes good Christians, and then they shall not
be despised, but honored in the world to come, that is to say,

1. They should be of broken and contrite hearts, then shall they not be
despised, but honored in the world to come; A broken and contrite heart O God,
thou will not despise, Psalm. 51. 17.

2. They should know God effectually, then they shall not be despised, but
honored in the World to come, Psalm. 91. 14.

3. They should fear God effectually, then they shall not be despised, but
honored in that world, Prove. 22. 4.

4. They should humble themselves effectually before God, then they shall not
be despised, but honored in that world, Prove. 15. 33.

5. They should be willing to do Gods will, then they shall not be despised,
but honored in that world, Romans 2. 10.

6. They should be willing to suffer any earthly evil for Gods sake, then they
shall not be despised, but honored in that world; for the Lord despises not
his prisoners, Psalm. 69. 33.

SECT. XV. Touching the liberty of Gods Elect, and the bondage of Reprobates in
the world to come.
HEre follows a fifth special difference which shall be betwixt the parties
before-named in the world to come, which may be thus expressed in two
Propositions:

Gods Elect shall be at liberty, in the world to come.

Reprobates shall be in bondage, in the world to come.

The former Proposition is, That Gods Elect 1 Proposition.
shall be at liberty in the world to come; that is to say, they shall be at
liberty from the wrath of God, and from all the effects and fruits thereof in
that world; and so much may be made good by sundry Arguments. As,

1. S. Paul's Prophecy, or prophetical promise is pregnant for it, where he
says, The creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God, Romans 8. 21. Where
by the children of God, I understand his elect children, as Joh. 11. 52. who
for the present are not all his adopted children, but shall be in due time; and
by the liberty of these I understand a liberty from the wrath of God, and from
all the effects and fruits of it, because it is such a liberty as the creature
it self shall partake of, and I know no liberty but this, that the creature
here mentioned shall partake of, and it is called glorious liberty, for to
distinguish it from the liberty which the children of God enjoy in this world,
which is not glorious liberty, as that in the world to come shall be; yea, it
may be called glorious liberty, because it shall be perfect and complete, and
perfect things shall be glorious, as perfect peace shall be glorious peace,
perfect holiness, glorious holiness, so perfect liberty shall be glorious
liberty: And whereas it is said, that the creature it self shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption into this liberty, I understand by the creature
it self, this present fabric of heaven and earth, this present body or globe
of heaven and earth, which is a creature, and may be distinguished from all
mankind, as here it is, because it is a creature void of reason; and though it
be now in bondage to corruption by reason of man's sin, yet it shall one day be
delivered from this bondage, by means of its dissolution, and thereupon shall
be new created, Esa. 65. 17. and so set at liberty from the wrath of God, and
from all the fruits and effects thereof as well as the children of God: In this
Text then this liberty of Gods Elect in the world to come from the wrath of
God, is so plainly asserted, that we need not doubt thereof.

2. They that shall never be afflicted in the world to come in soul, body,
name, or estate, shall be at liberty from the wrath of God in that world: Now
Gods Elect shall never be afflicted in that world any manner of way, in soul,
body, name or estate, as I gather from that Promise which says, God shall wipe
all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. 21. 4. Ergo.

3. They that shall never taste of Gods anger, wrath, or displeasure in the
world to come, shall be at liberty from his wrath in that world: Now Gods Elect
shall never taste of Gods anger and displeasure in the world to come, as may
appear by these promises, I will not keep mine anger for ever, Jer. 3. 12. I
will not retain mine anger for ever, Mic. 7. 18. He will not always chide,
neither will he keep his anger for ever, Psalm. 103. 9. which promises are to be
understood only in reference to Gods Elect: Ergo.

4. They that shall be perfectly justified in the world to come, and declared
so to be, shall be at liberty from the wrath of God in that world: Now Gods
Elect shall be perfectly justified in the world to come from their sins, as it
is written, Repent and be converted, and your sins shall be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of God, Acts 3. 19. Yea
they shall be declared so to be, Psalm. 37. 6. Mat. 13. 43. viz. to be just and
righteous: Ergo.

5. They that shall be perfectly sanctified in the world to come, and shall be
declared so to be, shall be at liberty from the wrath of God, in that world:
Now Gods Elect shall be perfectly sanctified in the world to come, seeing the
deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob,
Romans 11. 26. and shall subdue their iniquities altogether, Mic. 7. 19. yea they
shall be declared so to be, in that they shall be presented before God
blameless and undefiled, without spot or blemish, Ephesians. 5. 27. Ergo.

6. They that shall be found to be the children of God, and manifested so to be
in the world to come, shall be at liberty from the wrath of God, and from all
the fruits and effects thereof in that world: Now Gods Elect shall be found to
be the Children of God, and shall be manifested so to be; for Christ shall say
unto them, Come ye blessed children of my Father, Mat. 25. 34. and there shall
be a manifestation of the sons of God, Romans 8. 19. Ergo,

7. They that shall perfectly please God in the world to come in all their
thoughts, words, and actions, shall be at liberty from his wrath, and from the
fruits and effects thereof in that world: Now Gods Elect shall perfectly please
God in the world to come, in all their thoughts, words and actions, for which
cause it is said, that they shall walk in the light of his countenance, Psalm.
89. 15. and shall walk in the name of the Lord for ever, Mic. 4. 5. and God
shall make them perfect, that they may do what shall be pleasing in his sight,
Heb. 13. 21. Ergo.

8. They that are vessels of mercy, and shall have mercy kept for them for
ever, shall be at liberty from Gods wrath, and from the fruits and effects of
it in the world to come: Now Gods Elect are vessels of mercy, Romans 9. 23. and
shall have mercy kept for them for ever, Psalm. 89. 2. 28. Ergo.

9. They that are delivered from the wrath to come in a meritorious way, shall
be at liberty from the wrath to come, and from the fruits and effects thereof;
but Gods Elect are delivered from the wrath to come in a meritorious way, 1
These. 1. 10. Joh. 8. 36. Ergo.

16. They that shall enjoy the everlasting kindness of God in the world to
come, shall be at liberty from his wrath, and from the fruits and effects of it
in that world; but Gods Elect shall enjoy the everlasting kindness of God in
the world to come, according to his promise; In a little wrath I hid my face
from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, Esa. 54. 8. Ergo.

Which Proposition thus confirmed, may be useful thus;

First, it makes for the confutation of such as promise themselves and others a
state of perfect liberty in this world, as some seducers in their Pamphlets
have lately done, who say that Mr. H. A.
the time of perfect liberty either is come, or is near at hand to be enjoyed
in this world, when the godly shall neither sin themselves, nor feel any more
fruits or effects of Gods anger, and displeasure for sin; but I may say of such
as S. Peter says of Sectaries in the latter times, Whilst they promise
liberty to others, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom
a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage, 2 Pet. 2. 19. So we
find by sad experience that these men are in bondage to corruption, whilst
they promise a state of perfect liberty to others.

Indeed I acknowledge a spiritual liberty belonging to the adopted children of
God in this world, That,

1. They are at liberty from the rigor of the Law, in as much as God does not
expect perfect obedience from them.

2. They are at liberty from the curse of the Law, in as much as Christ was
made a curse for them, Gal. 3. 13.

3. They are at liberty from the ceremonies of the Law, in as much as they are
not bound to observe them, for which cause they should stand fast in this
liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free, that they be not entangled again
with the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5. 1.

And I acknowledge that Christ has purchased a state of perfect liberty to be
enjoyed by all Gods Elect in the world to come, as has been proved; but that
they shall enjoy such an estate of perfect liberty from sin, and from the wrath
of God in this life, is utterly denied, by Orthodox Writers: For how can they
have a perfect liberty from sin in this would, seeing they are in danger of
sinning daily as long as they live here? Eccles. 7. 20. Jam. 2. 3. 1 John 1. 8.
And how can they have a perfect liberty in this life from the wrath of God,
seeing God is angry and displeased with them for every offense? As Moses the
servant of the Lord sinned, and GOD was angry with him for it, Deuteronomy. 1. 37.
Aaron the Saint of the Lord sinned, and God was angry with him for it, Deuteronomy. 9.
20. The Israelites sinned, and Gods anger was kindled against them for it, 2 Samuel 24. 1. Solomon sinned, and God was angry with him, 1 King. 11. 9.
Wherefore let not any confound this world with that which is to come, nor dream
of such a state of perfect liberty here, as only belongs to the world to come.

Secondly, it should persuade all good Christians to bear with godly patience
their present experience of Gods wrath, anger, and displeasure for sin; seeing
there will come a state of perfect liberty for them, they should in the mean
while possess their souls with patience, especially considering, 1. That our
present experience of his wrath is no more then what we have deserved, we
should resolve with the Prophet, I will bear the indignation of the Lord
because I have sinned, Micah 7. 9. 2. That our present experience of his wrath
is less then we have deserved. 3. That though God be angry with every sin, yet
he is slow to execute his anger, Psalm. 103. 8. 4. That though he has executed
his anger upon us, yet upon our unfeigned repentance he will cause it to cease
from us again, Psalm. 30. 5. Isa. 54. 8. Wherefore we should be patient under
his afflicting hand, expecting a glorious and perfect liberty from his wrath,
and the fruits of it.

Thirdly, it should admonish all the same parties, not to fear the wrath to
come with a distrustful fear; indeed we ought to fear it with a reverentiall
fear, so as to stand in awe of it as David did, My soul trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments, Psa. 119. 120. but we should not fear
it with a distrustful fear, as if it were impossible for us to escape it,
because Christ has purchased and God has promised a perfect liberty from it
in the world to come; wherefore in this sense a Christian should resolve and
say with David, Though I walk thorough the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear none evil, Psalm. 23. 4. Wherefore should I fear in the days of
evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? Psa. 49. 5. but
we should leave this perplexed fear to reprobate hypocrites, who are likely
sooner or later to be possessed with it, according to that of the Prophet, The
sinners in Zion were afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites, who
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with
the everlasting burnings? Isai. 33. 14.

The later Proposition is, That reprobates shall 2 Proposition.
be in bondage under the wrath of God in the world to come; as may appear by
these ensuing arguments.

1. They that are vessels of wrath, shall be in bondage under the wrath of God
in the world to come, but reprobates are vessels of wrath, Romans 6. 22. Ergo.

2. They that are appointed unto wrath, shall be in bondage under the wrath of
God in the world to come; but reprobates are appointed unto wrath, 1 These. 5.
9. Ergo.

3. They that will still remain the children of wrath, shall be in bondage
under the wrath of God in the world to come, but reprobates being by nature the
children of wrath as others are, will still remain such, Ephesians. 2. 3. Ergo.

4. They that will still by their impenitency heap up wrath against the day of
wrath, shall be in bondage under the wrath of God in the world to come, but
reprobates will still by their impenitency heap up wrath against the day of
wrath, Romans 2. 5. Ergo.

5. They that shall never receive the spirit of adoption, shall still be in
bondage under the wrath of God both here and hereafter, Romans 8. 15. for where
the spirit of adoption is not, there is the spirit of bondage. Now reprobates
shall never receive the spirit of adoption. Ergo.

6. They that will still obey unrighteousness in this world, shall be in
bondage under the wrath of God in the world to come, Romans 2. 8. but reprobates
will still obey unrighteousness in this world: Ergo.

7. They that shall never please God in the world to come, nor be accepted of
him in any of their thoughts, words, or actions, shall be in bondage under the
wrath of God in that world: now reprobates shall never please God in that
world, as they cannot please him in this, Isai. 66. 3. Ergo.

8. They that shall ever be afflicted and tormented in the world to come, shall
be in bondage under the wrath of God in that world; now reprobates shall ever
be afflicted and tormented in the world to come, as we may gather from that of
the Prophet, The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that
forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. Ergo.

9. They that shall seek to hide themselves from the wrath of God and of Christ
in the world to come, shall be in bondage under the wrath of God in that world:
now reprobates shall seek to hide themselves from the wrath of God, and of
Christ, and shall say unto the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, Rev. 6. 16. Ergo.

Which latter Proposition does not only confirm viz. that it had been good for
reprobates if they had never been born; and that it shall be worse with them in
the world to come in respect of bondage, then it can with them in this world.

But also should admonish all men living to take some effectual course for
their own safety, that they may escape the wrath to come: and for this end,

1. We must sue out a pardon for our sins from the Throne of Grace in the name
of Christ, and if we can obtain this pardon, we shall be safe from the wrath to
come. Psa. 32. 1.


2. We must repent of our sins heartily and effectually, and if so, we shall be
safe from the wrath to come.

3. We must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and be united unto him by a
lively Faith, and then we shall be safe from the wrath to come, For there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.

4. We must accustom our selves to do the will of God, and to keep his
Commandments in sincerity whilst we live; and if so, we shall escape the
wrath to come, and shall still be accepted of him in his beloved; and though we
can please him but in part here, yet we shall perfectly please him in all things
hereafter, in the world to come.

SECT. XVI. Touching the dominion of Gods Elect, and the slavery of reprobates
in the world to come.
HEre follows a sixth special difference, which shall be betwixt the parties
before-named in the world to come, which may be thus expressed in two
Propositions.

Gods Elect shall have dominion over reprobates, in the world to come.

Rebrobates shall be very slaves to Gods Elect, in the world to come.

The former Proposition is, That Gods Elect shall 1 Proposition.
have dominion over reprobates in the world to come; touching which dominion of
theirs, I shall endeavor to show two things, viz. The certainty of it. The
nature of it.


First, touching the certainty of it, Iaver it for a most certain truth, that
Gods Elect shall have dominion over reprobates in the world to come, as may be
made good by these arguments and considerations.

1. It is said of such wicked rich men as shall not truly repent, and be
converted before their death, That the upright shall have dominion over them in
the morning, Psalm. 49. 14. where by the upright I understand Gods Elect; who
are, or shall be all upright and sincere before God, and known by that name
another day; and by the Morning I understand the day of the last Resurrection,
which shall be as a morning, both in respect of such as shall then arise from
the sleep of death; and in respect of that everlasting day which shall have no
evening: and so from this place I may argue thus, They that shall begin to have
dominion over reprobates at the last Resurrection here called the Morning, shall
have dominion over them in the world to come: Now Gods Elect here called the
upright, shall begin to have dominion over reprobates at the last Resurrection
here called the Morning: Ergo. they shall have dominion over them in that world.

2. It should be considered that Gods Elect shall be Kings in the world to come,
not only in a spiritual and mystical sense as now they are, but in a more
genuine and proper sense; because Christ has made them Kings unto God, Rev. 1.
6. Rev. 5. 10. that is, in subordination unto God to serve him in a Kingly way;
their Kingship shall never be abolished. From whence I may argue thus, they that
shall be Kings in the world to come, shall have dominion in that world, either
over themselves, or over their fellow brethren and Saints, or over reprobates:
now Gods Elect shall be Kings in that world, yet shall not have dominion over
themselves in that world, because they shall have no vicious qualities or
corruptions in themselves there to be subdued; neither shall they have dominion
over their fellow brethren and Saints, who shall be as truly Kings as
themselves: Ergo, They shall have dominion over reprobates in that world.

3. It should be considered that Gods Elect shall be Princes in the world to
come properly so called, as I gather from that prophecy concerning Christ,
Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou may make Princes in
all the earth, Psalm. 45. 17. Where by all the earth, I understand not this
corrupt earth; as if Gods Elect should be all Princes in it; but the new earth,
or the habitable part of that new world which shall be created instead of
this, wherein they shall be Princes indeed: and so from hence I may reason thus,
if Gods Elect shall be Princes in the world to come, then they they shall have
dominion in that world, either over themselves, or over their fellow brethren
and Saints, or over reprobates; but they shall be Princes in that world, and
shall not have dominion over themselves, nor over their fellow brethren and
Saints, for the reasons before given: Ergo, they shall have dominion over
reprobates in that world.

4. It is promised that Gods Elect shall reign with Christ in the world to
come, If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. And we
shall reign on the earth, Rev. 5. 10. that is, on the new earth, the habitable
part of the world to come. From whence I may reason thus also, if they shall
reign with Christ in the world to come, then they shall reign either over
themselves, or over their fellow brethren and Saints, or over reprobates; but
they shall reign with Christ in that world, and they shall not reign over
themselves, nor over their fellow brethren and Saints: Ergo, They shall reign
over reprobates in that world.

5. It should be considered, that Gods Elect in the world to come shall have
power over Nations, as it is written, He that overcomes and keeps my works
unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, Rev. 2. 26. where by
Nations I understand such at the later day, as shall be found to have been the
reprobate sort of all Nations in this world. And if in this sense Gods Elect in
the world to come shall have power over Nations, then doubtless they should
have dominion over Reprobates in that world. But in this sense they shall have
power over Nations in that world. Ergo.

6. It should be considered, that Gods Elect in the world to come shall have
authority over diverse cities. For, our Savior shall say unto one faithful
servant, Have thou authority over ten cities: and to another, Have thou
authority over five cities, Luke 19. 17, 19. Where by cities I understand such
at the later day, as shall be found to have been the reprobate sort of diverse
Cities in this world, as of Sodom and Gomorrah, Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum,
Babylon, etc. and if in this sense Gods elect in the world to come shall have
authority over diverse Cities, then doubtless they shall have dominion over
reprobates in that world; but in this sense they shall have authority over
diverse Cities: Ergo.

7. They that shall judge reprobates in the world to come by way of attestation
or approbation, shall have dominion over them in this respect in that world;
but Gods Elect shall judge reprobates in that world, both reprobate Men, and
reprobate Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. Ergo.

8. They that shall punish reprobates in the world to come, and execute
judgments upon them, shall have dominion over them in this respect in that
world; but Gods Elect shall punish reprobates in the world to come, and execute
judgments upon them, as it is written, Let a two-edged sword be in their hand,
to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the people, to bind
their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, to execute on
them the judgments decreed, Psalm. 149. 6, 7, 8. Ergo.

9. They that shall captivate reprobates in the world to come, and rule over
them, shall have dominion over them in that world; but Gods Elect shall
captivate reprobates in the world to come, and rule over them, as it is
written, they shall take them captives, whose captives they were, and they shall
rule over their oppressors, Esa. 14. 2. Yea, shall rule them with a rod of
iron, Rev. 2. 27. Ergo.

10. They that shall have dominion in the world to come under the whole heaven,
shall have dominion over reprobates in that world; but Gods Elect shall have
dominion in the world to come under the whole heaven, according to that of the
Prophet Daniel, And the Kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most high, Dan. 7. 27. Ergo.

11. They that shall have reprobates subdued unto them in the world to come,
and brought under their feet, shall have dominion over them in that world; but
Gods Elect in the world to come shall have reprobates subdued unto them, and
brought under their feet, as it is written, He shall subdue the people under
us, and the Nations under our feet, Psalm. 47. 3. yea, says the Lord, they
shall lick up the dust of thy feet, Esa. 49. 23. Ergo.

12. If Gods Elect in the world to come shall impose service upon reprobates,
and shall compel such to serve them, then they shall have dominion over them in
that world: but Gods Elect in the world to come shall impose service on such,
and shall compel such to serve them, as I gather from that of the Prophet. And
the people shall take them and bring them to their place, and the house of
Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants and handmaids,
Isa. 14. 2. Ergo.

Secondly, touching the nature of this dominion, I affirm:

1. That the dominion of Gods Elect over reprobates in the world to come, shall
be a donative dominion, such as shall be given them from God, and from Christ;
for there is no cause to be found in them in respect of their nature or desert,
why they should have dominion over them, but this dominion shall be given to
the people of the Saints of the most High, Dan. 7. 27. and Christ shall give
them power over the Nations, Rev. 2. 26.

2. That this dominion of theirs shall be subordinate to the dominion of God,
and of Christ; for God shall reign over reprobates in the world to come by his
essential power, and Christ shall reign over them by his personal humane
power; but the Saints shall reign over them only by way of subordination, or
delegation, as Vicegerents, or D^puties under Christ; for which cause they are
called Kings unto God, that is, in subordination to God, Rev. 5. 10.

3. That this dominion of theirs shall not be an absolute, but a limited
dominion, that is to say, they shall not reign over reprobates according to
their own will and pleasure, but according to the decree, will, and pleasure of
God in Christ, they shall execute on them the judgments decreed, Ps. 149. 8.

4. That this dominion of theirs shall be full of hardship and severity as the
strict justice of God shall require, for which cause it is said, that they shall
rule them with a two-edged sword, with a rod of iron, and shall bind their Kings
in chains and their Nobles with fetters of iron; that is to say, they shall
exercise their power over reprobates in the world to come, with much hardship
and severity.

5. That this dominion of theirs shall be both common and special; common to
all, overall, and special to some, over some; for all Gods Elect shall have
this Kingly power overall reprobates where ever they find them in the world to
come, and yet some of them shall have a more special dominion over some
reprobates, then over others.

6. That this dominion of theirs shall continue for ever over such, as I gather
from that of the Prophet, The Saints of the most high shall take the kingdom,
and shall possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever, and ever, Dan. 7. 18.

Which Proposition thus cleared, may be useful thus:

1. It makes for the confutation of such as plead hard for a temporal dominion
of

But I would have these deluded Brethren at length to understand, that this
conceit of theirs is first contrary to Scripture, because that dominion over
the wicked which the Scripture promises to the Saints, is not a temporal
dominion to be enjoyed in this world, but an eternal dominion to be enjoyed in
the world to come, as has been before showed. Secondly, that it is contrary to
reason; for if Gods Elect in this life cannot discern reprobates from others,
it is against reason to think that they shall have dominion over them in this
life; but they cannot by all their skill discern reprobates from others while
they live here, therefore it is against reason to think that they shall have
dominion over them in this world. Thirdly, that it is contrary to daily
experience; for we find by daily experience, that Gods Elect in this world do
for the most part live under the dominion of others; either they live under the
dominion of lawful Kings, Princes, and Rulers, or else under the dominion of
wicked Tyrants, and Usurpers, and still they importune the Throne of grace for
such as are set in authority over them, that under them they may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: Is it not then contrary to
daily experience, to think that all the Saints shall have dominion over all the
wicked in this world? Yes: And if this Millenary principle shall once be
generally assented unto, which God forbid, then the next question will be, Who
shall be taken for Saints and fit persons to have dominion? And who shall be
taken for wicked ones or reprobates worthy to be under dominion in this world?
Which question without doubt will occasion as hot a dispute, and as mortal a
controversy as ever was in the world: Wherefore away with this conceit of a
temporal dominion of Saints in this world, let Professors be ashamed to own
it.

2. It may inform us of a great difference between the condition of Gods elect
in this world, and in that which is to come; for in this world they may
possibly be made servants and slaves to wicked men and reprobates, and as
slaves may be judged, punished, imprisoned, oppressed, bought and sold by them,
according to that of Solomon, Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit
in low place: I have seen servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants
upon the earth, Eccles. 10. 6, 7. But it shall not thus be with them in the
world to come, because in that world they shall be so far from being servants
and slaves to wicked men, and reprobates, that they shall be Lords and Kings,
and Rulers over them, and shall execute judgment and vengeance upon them;
wherefore they should be contented to suffer any servitude in this world that
is unavoidably put upon them, considering what lordship they shall have in that
which is to come.

3. It should persuade all that are called Christians at this day, not only to
give diligence that they make their callings and election sure, but also to
live as becomes Gods elect to live in this world, that is, soberly,
righteously, and godly; and if so we live in this world we shall certainly have
dominion over reprobates in that which is to come.

The other Proposition is, That reprobates shall be very slaves to Gods ^lect
in the world to come; for 2 Proposition.
proof whereof these ensuing Arguments should be weighed.

1. They that shall be forced against their wills in the world to come to suffer
Gods Elect to be Lords, and Kings, and Rulers over them, shall be very slaves
unto them in that world; but reprobates shall be forced against their wills in
the world to come, to suffer Gods elect to be Lords, and Kings, and Rulers over
them, as may appear by what has been already said; Ergo, they shall be very
slaves unto them in that world.

2. They that shall be forced in the world to come to fear Gods elect with a
slavish fear, shall be very slaves unto them in that world: but reprobates shall
be forced in the world to come to fear Gods elect with a slavish fear,
according to that of the Prophet, The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid
out of their close places, Psalm. 18. 45. Ergo.

3. They that shall be forced in the world to come against their wills to do
bodily reverence to Gods elect, shall be very slaves unto them in that respect;
but reprobates shall be forced in the world to come against their wills to do
bodily reverence to Gods Elect, and to bow down to them with their face
toward the earth, viz. the new earth which shall be, Esa. 49. 23. Ergo.

4. They that shall be forced in the world to come against their wills to
petition Gods Elect for favor, help and comfort, shall be very slaves unto
them in that respect; but reprobates shall be forced in the world to come
against their wills to petition Gods Elect for favor, help, and comfort, as we
may gather from that Petition of Dives to Abraham, Father Abraham have mercy on
me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his singer in water, and cool
my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame, Luke 16. 24. Ergo.

5. They that shall be forced in the world to come against their wills to do
service to Gods Elect, shall be very slaves to them in that respect; but
reprobates shall be forced in the world to come, against their wills to do
service to Gods Elect, as was showed before out of Esa. 14. 2. Ergo.

6. They that shall be forced in the world to come, against their wills to
submit to the commands of Gods Elect, shall be very slaves to them in that
respect; but reprobates shall be forced in the world to come, against their
wills to submit to the commands of Gods elect, as I gather from that of the
Kingly Prophet, As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me; the strangers
shall submit themselves unto me, Psalm. 18. 44. which words I conceive he
uttered, not only historically in reference to himself, but also typically in
reference to Gods elect in the world to come, Ergo.

7. They that shall be forced in the world to come, against their wills to bear
whatsoever punishment or judgment Gods Elect shall inflict upon them, shall be
very slaves to them in that respect; but reprobates shall be forced in the
world to come, to bear whatsoever punishment or judgment Gods elect shall
inflict upon them, as may appear by what was said before out of Psalm. 149. 6,
7, 8. Ergo, they shall be very slaves to Gods Elect in the world to come.

And this later Proposition thus proved, may others in this world. I do not
say, they are all reprobates who have dominion over others in this world; for
it is Gods Ordinance in that some shall have dominion, that some shall command,
and others obey, that some shall rule, and others be ruled, and sometimes godly
men, sometimes wicked men are called in a lawful way to rule over others both
in Church and Commonwealth: Yea, besides these there are many Usurpers who
exercise Authority, Supremacy, and Jurisdiction over others by their commands,
threats, and penalties, without a lawful calling, but put the case, that any
wicked persons after they have domineered over others in this world, shall die
without repentance, and so be found reprobates at the later day? what then
shall they gain by their Lordship and dominion over others in this world?

Surely nothing at all, but they shall be losers by it, and shall be made
slaves for it for ever: yea, according to their advancement here, shall be
their abasement hereafter, according to their dominion here, shall be their
slavery hereafter; wherefore, if we desire not to be slaves to Gods Elect in
the world to come, we must repent unfainedly while we live here, as of other
sins, so of our tyranny over others; and we must take heed how we lord it
over Gods heritage here; for it cannot be safe for us to lord it over such as
shall be our Lords and Masters in the world to come.

Yet many in these days are very ambitions of Lordship and dominion of others,
they cannot endure to be governed, but would be Governors themselves: they
hate Lordship, Kingship, and Supremacy in others, but they much desire the same
in behalf of themselves; and the grand contest now is, upon whose shoulders the
Government of Nations shall be laid? whether on theirs who most desire it, or
on theirs who have most right unto it? Indeed they that have right to this
Government by the Law of God and Man, may lawfully desire it; but why should
others desire it, who have no such right at all unto it? Surely these men are
right of Absaloms spirit, and every one of them says in his heart, as he
sometimes said, Oh! that I were made Judge in the Land, that every man which
has any suit or cause, might come unto me, and I would do him justice, 2 Samuel
15. 4. but Absaloms ambition was well rewarded when he was hanged as a Traitor
in the Forest: and the ambition of these also will be well rewarded, if ever
they shall come to preach their late repentance at Tyburne, or if ever they
shall come to be hanged in chains under darkness, or if ever they shall come
to be slaves to Gods Elect; which things may speedily befall them unless they
repent.

In the mean while, I had rather my soul should be subject to the powers that
are ordained of God, then that it should desire a temporal power over Nations.
I had rather be a Subject, then a Sovereign in this world, knowing the burden
of subjection and the danger too, to be far less then that of Sovereignty; and
if all that are called to be Subjects would study the point of subjection more,
and that of sovereignty less, it would be better for them both in this world,
and in that which is to come; and seeing God has commanded loyal subjection
for conscience sake to be yielded to lawful powers in this world, we may well
conceive that he will not suffer the same to go unrewarded, either in this, or
that which is to come.

SECT. XVII. Touching the riches of Gods Elect, and the poverty of reprobates
in the world to come.
HEre follows a seventh special difference, which shall be betwixt the
parties before-named in the world to come, and it may be expressed thus in two
Propositions.

Gods Elect shall have a rich estate, in the world to come.

Rebrobates shall have a poor estate, in the world to come.

The former Proposition is, That Gods Elect 1 Proposition.
shall have a rich estate in the world to come; for clearing whereof, we must
understand that the rich estate of Gods Elect in the world to come, is
described two ways in the Word of God, viz.

1. By the name of an Inheritance: for in Christ (as the Apostle says in the
name of the Elect) we have obtained an inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 11. that is, the
right of inheritance, and this inheritance is said to be incorruptible,
undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1. 4. It
is said to be immortal, because it cannot die away out of the name, as a
temporal inheritance may. It is said to be undefiled, because it cannot be
defiled and polluted with sin in the getting, keeping, and disposing of it, as
a temporal inheritance may be; neither can it fade away and be brought to
nothing; as a temporal inheritance may be; neither is it reserved for the
Elect in corrupt earth, to be possessed and enjoyed by them in this world; but
it is reserved for them in heaven, to be possessed and enjoyed by them in the
world to come: and we may conceive that this inheritance of theirs shall be of
large extent, because the Scripture speaks of diverse things which they shall
inherit in the world to come, viz.

They shall inherit the Kingdom prepared for them, Mat. 25. 34. Luke 12. 32.
Luke 22. 30.

They shall inherit a Crown, called a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
and a Crown of Life, Jam. 1. 12.

They shall inherit glory, Pro. 3. 35. the glory before described.

They shall inherit the blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 9.

They shall inherit the promises, Heb. 6. 12.

They shall inherit a reward for what they have done and suffered in obedience
to Gods will, Col. 3. 24.

They shall inherit all good things, Rev. 21. 7.

2. Moreover, their estate of inheritance is described by the name of riches;
and the riches of the world to come are called, Durable riches, Prove. 8. 18.
Because they shall be more durable then temporal riches are, and shall endure
for ever. Precious riches, Prove. 24. 4. Because they shall be far more
precious then any temporal riches can be. Pleasant riches, Prove. 24. 4.
Because they shall be more pleasant to the injoyers, then temporal riches can
be. True riches, Luke 16. 11. because they shall afford more truth of content
then any temporal riches can. Unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8. Because the
worth and value of them cannot in this life be searched out unto perfection, as
the value of temporal riches may; for there is none so rich in this world, in
respect of his earthly substance, but he may by himself or his friends search
out the farthest end of his wealth, and may know what his outward estate is
worth to be bought or sold; but the Riches of which I speak cannot be thus
serrched out in this life, seeing here we know but in part, and prophecy in
part, and they are called the Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. Because they shall
be none other but such as Christ has purchased with his most precious blood.

So from both these descriptions I may infer, That the the rich estate of Gods
Elect in the world to come, shall be a rich inheritance. And that they shall
have such a rich inheritance in the world to come, may be thus proved.

1. That they shall have unsearchable riches in the world to come, such as
Christ has purchased for them, shall have a rich estate or inheritance in that
world.

But Gods Elect shall have unsearchable riches in the world to come, such as
Christ has purchased for them: Ergo, they shall have a rich inheritance in
that world.

2. They that are or shall be rich in faith in this life, shall have a rich
estate in the world to come.

But Gods Elect are, or shall be rich in faith in this life; as may appear by
that of the Apostle, Has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith?
Iam. 2. 5. Ergo.

3. They that are, or shall be joint Heirs with Christ, shall have a rich
estate, or inheritance in the world to come, Romans 8. 17.

But Gods Elect are, or shall be joint Heirs with Christ: Ergo.

4. They that are, or shall be esteemed righteous before God through Christ in
this world, shall have a rich estate or inheritance in the world to come,
according to that of the Prophet, The righteous shall inherit the Land, and
dwell therein for ever, Psalm. 37. 29.

But Gods Elect are, or shall be esteemed righteous before God thorough Christ
in this world: Ergo.

5. They that are, or shall be truly sanctified in this world, shall have a
rich inheritance in the world to come amongst those that are sanctified, Acts
20. 32. Acts 26. 18.

But Gods Elect are, or shall be truly sanctified in this world: Ergo.

6. They that are, or shall be begotten again to a lively hope by the
Resurrection of Christ from the dead, shall have a rich inheritance in the
world to come, as appears 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

But Gods Elect are or shall be all be gotten again to a lively hope by the
resurrection from the dead. Ergo.

7. They that do or shall fear the Lord in this life with a godly fear, shall
have a rich estate in the world to come, according to that of the Prophet, Oh
how great is the goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee!
Psalm. 31. 19.

But Gods Elect do or shall fear him in this life with a godly fear. Ergo.

8. They that do or shall love the Lord in sincerity here in this world, shall
have a rich estate in that which is to come, according to that of the Apostle,
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 1. 9.

Now Gods Elect are such as do or shall love him in sincerity here in this
world. Ergo.

9. They that have or shall have the spirit of Christian meekness here in this
world, shall have a rich inheritance in that which is to come, according to that
promise once and again repeated, The meek shall inherit the earth, Psalm. 37.
11. Matthew. 5. 5. which promise shall never be perfectly fulfilled according to
the full extent of it but in the world to come upon the new earth.

Now Gods Elect have or shall have the spirit of Christian meekness here in
this world* Ergo.

10. They that do or shall heartily serve the Lord Christ in this world, shall
have a rich inheritance in that which is to come; according to that of the
Apostle, Ye shall receive the reward of inheritance, for ye serve the Lord
Christ, Col. 3. 24. Now Gods Elect do or shall heartily serve the Lord Christ
in this world. Ergo.

11. They that do or shall suffer more or less in this world for Christ's sake,
and the Gospels sake, shall have a rich inheritance in that which is to come;
according to that of our Savior: Every one that has forsaken houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for
my Names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting
life, Mat. 19. 29. Now Gods Elect are such as do or shall suffer more or less
for Christ's sake here in this world. Ergo.

12. They that shall finally overcome their spiritual enemies by faith, shall
have a rich inheritance in the World to come; as it is written, He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, Rev. 21. 7. But Gods Elect are such as
shall finally overcome their spiritual enemies by faith. Ergo, they shall have
a rich inheritance in that world.

Which Proposition thus proved, may be useful thus:

First, It may inform us, That Gods Elect shall lose nothing at the last by
their poverty in this world. Indeed, while they live here, they may have
experience of poverty in diverse kinds: They may be a poor despised people, as
many of them are; they may be a poor afflicted people, as many of them are;
they may be poor in spirit, as many of them are; they may be poor in their
outward estate, as Job sometime was, as the widow of Sareptha was, as Lazarus
was, and as the Saints at Jerusalem were, when the Brethren sent relief unto
them: But this can be no loss or disadvantage to them in the issue, because
they shall have such a rich estate and inheritance in the World to come, as
will abundantly recompense them for their poverty in this world: In
consideration whereof, they should be contented with any kind of poverty in
this life which God shall bring upon them; according to the Apostles advice:
Having food and raiment, let us be therewith contented; for we brought nothing
into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out, 1 Timothy 6. 7, 8.
And this advice of his was no more then he had learnt to put in practice: For,
says he, I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content: I
know how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and in all things
I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and suffer
need, Phil. 4. 11. 12.

Again, Seeing it is so, That Gods Elect shall have a rich estate in the World
to come, they should learn from hence, not to set their hearts inordinately and
expressively upon the riches of this world. Indeed the riches of this world are
promised to them, so far as God shall see them expedient for them; and by the
blessing of God many of them are made rich in this world; yet they should not
over-prize, overvalue, or overmuch affect these outward riches; seeing the
Prophet has said, If riches increase, set not your heart upon them, Psalm. 62.
10. And we find by experience, 1. That these outward riches are uncertain
riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. 2. That they are deceitful riches, Mat. 13. 22. 3. That
they cannot make a man truly happy or blessed, Luke 12. 15. 4. That they profit
nothing in the day of Gods wrath, Prove. 11. 4. 5. That they come alike to all,
to the righteous, and to the wicked, Eccles. 9. 2. 6. That where they are not
sanctified, they hinder the Salvation of many. How hardly shall they that have
riches enter into the Kingdom of God? Luke 18. 24. And where they are not
sanctified, they hasten and further the destruction of many; according to that
of the Apostle, They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition, Tim. 6. 9. But on the contrary, they should prefer the riches of the
World to come, and set their hearts upon them, considering that the riches of
that world shall be far more certain, more true, more durable, more precious
and more pleasant, then the riches of this can be, as was showed before.

The other Proposition is, That Reprobates shall 2 Proposit.
have a poor estate in the World to come: which may be thus confirmed.

1. They that have no riches purchased for them to be enjoyed in the World to
come, shall have a poor estate in that world: but Reprobates have no riches
purchased for them to be enjoyed in the world to come: Ergo, They shall have a
poor estate in that world.

2. They that shall have no inheritance with the Saints in the world to come,
shall have a poor estate in the world: now Reprobates shall have no inheritance
with the Saints in the world to come, as appears, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Gal. 5. 21.
Ephesians. 5 5. which threats shall be executed only on Reprobates, who shall
finally be found to be such unrighteous and wicked livers. Ergo.

3. They that shall inherit nothing in the World to come, but the reward of
their folly, shall have a poor estate in that world: But Reprobates shall
inherit nothing in the World to come but the reward of their folly, as
appears, Prove. 14. 18. Ergo.

4. They that shall have no portion of wealth but in this world, shall have but
a poor estate in the World to come: Now Reprobates shall have a portion of
wealth but in this world; as I gather from that of the Prophet, where he
prays to be delivered from the men of the world which have their portion in
this life, whose belly God fills with his hid treasure, Psalm. 17. 14. Ergo.

5. They that shall have their wealth perish with them, shall have but a poor
estate in the World to come: Now Reprobates shall have their wealth perish with
them; as it was said to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee, Acts 8. 20.
Ergo.

6. They that shall have their part and portion hereafter in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, shall have a poor estate in the World to come:
But Reprobates shall have their part and portion hereafter in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. Ergo.

7. They that shall be filled with want in the World to come, shall have a poor
estate in that world: But Reprobates shall be filled with want in the world to
come, Prove. 13. 25. Ergo.

8. They whose portion in the world to come shall be to drink still of the cup
of Gods wrath, shall have a poor estate in that world: But it shall be the
portion of Reprobates in the world to come to drink still of the cup of Gods
wrath, Psalm. 11. 6. Erg.

And this latter Proposition thus confirmed, may be

First, It may inform us, That none should envy the prosperity of wicked men in
this world, so as to grudg and be grieved at it: And that for these Reasons:

1. It is no new thing to hear of worldly wealth and riches conferred on the
wicked sort in this world: For scoffing Ishmael, profane Esau, churlish Nabal,
had a large portion of worldly wealth conferred on them; and our Savior speaks
of a foolish man, who had such an increase of worldly wealth, that he knew not
what to do with it, Luke 12. 17. and cursed Dives was so rich in worldly
substance, that he was clothed in purple, and fine linen, and fared
sumptuously every day, Luke 16. 19. Yea it is ordinary at this day to find the
wicked sort amongst the richer sort of this world: And if this be no new thing,
we have the less cause to grudg and murmur at it.

2. It is by the hand of divine Providence that the wicked sort are made rich
in this world: For the Lord makes poor, and makes rich; he brings low, and
lifts up, 1 Samuel 2. 7. He it is that fills their bellies with his hid
treasure, Psalm. 17. 14. Now the Lord is a free Dispensator, and may do with his
own as pleases him: And why should our eye be evil, because his is good?

3. The worldly wealth of the wicked is sometimes at least a Judgment of God
upon them; according to that of Solomon: There is a sore evil which I have seen
under the Sun, namely riches, kept for the owners thereof to their hurt, Eccl.
5. 13. And why should we envy the Judgment of God upon them?

4. The worldly wealth of the wicked is sometimes at least cursed unto them:
For God does curse them in their basket, and in their store, in the fruit of
their land, in the increase of their kine, and the flocks of their sheep, Deuteronomy.
28. 17, 18. And why should we envy the Curse of God upon them?

5. The worldly wealth of the wicked may be of short continuance, and be soon
taken from them; according to that of the Prophet: I have seen the wicked in
great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree: Yet he passed away,
and lo, he was not; yea, I sought him, but he could not be found, Psalm. 37. 35,
36. Though they have swallowed down riches, yet they shall vomit them up again;
God shall cast them out of their belly, Job 20. 15. Or their riches may perish
by evil travel, Eccles. 5. 14. And why should we envy their short prosperity?

6. The worldly wealth of the wicked may fall by inheritance unto the godly,
and to such as shall make a good use thereof; according to that of Solomon: The
wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just, Prove. 13. 22. And he that by
usury, and unjust gain, increases his substance, he shall gather it for him
that will pity the poor, Prove. 28. 8. And if so, we have the less cause to
grudg at their wealth.

7. It is possible that some, yea many wicked rich persons may be brought to
repentance before their death, and so may honor the Lord with their substance
as well as others: And if so, then we shall have more cause to rejoice then to
grieve, for that they are, or have been, so rich in this world.

8. But suppose the worst, that many or any wicked rich persons shall never be
brought to repentance, but shall dye out of Gods favor, and so be found
Reprobates in the world to come; what then? Surely then, woe shall be unto them;
according to that of our Savior, Woe unto you that are rich, for you have
received your consolation, Luke 6. 24. Then they shall wish that they had never
been rich in this world; then they shall be brought into a very poor estate and
condition: yea, then they shall not only be countable to God for their riches,
according to that in the Parable, Give account of thy stewardship; but also
shall be punished for the abuse of them; according to that of S. James: Go too
now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you:
Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten: Your gold and silver
is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire; ye have heaped treasure together for the last days,
Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3.

These things considered, I see no reason why any should grudg at the
prosperity of wicked rich men in this world, seeing that the Reprobate sort of
them shall have a very poor estate in the world to come: But I infer with the
Prophet; Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou envious
against the workers of iniquity; for they shall soon be cut down like the
grass, and wither as the green herb, Psalm. 73. 1, 2.

Secondly, if we will not be (as none desires to be) poor with Reprobates in the
world to come; we must labor to be poor in Spirit, and rich in grace while we
live in this world; for if we be poor in Spirit here in this life, we shall not
be poor in the world to come, as we may gather from that of our Savior,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 3.
And if we be rich in grace, that is, in knowledge faith, repentance, love, and
hope, etc. we shall not be poor in the World to come; as we may gather from
that of Saint James: Has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith,
and heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them that love him? Jam. 2.
5.

SECT. XVIII. Touching the Peace of Gods Elect, and the Tribulation of
Reprobates, in the World to come.
HEre follows an eighth special Difference, which shall be betwixt the
parties before named in the World to come; which may be thus expressed:

Gods Elect shall have Peace in the World

Reprobates shall have Tribulation to come.

The former Proposition is, That Gods Elect 1 Proposit.
shall have Peace in the World to come: which Peace of theirs is to be
considered:

As touching the Nature of it.

As touching the Certainty of it.

As touching the Nature of it, I affirm,

1. That their Peace in the World to come shall be great Peace; According to
that promise: Great shall be the Peace of thy Children, Isai. 54. 13. which
promise may be performed partly in this world, and partly in Heaven: but it
shall be perfectly performed only in the world to come; wherein the peace of
Gods Elect shall be great for variety, and great for excellency.

Their peace shall be great for variety; because in that world,

They shall have peace with God: God shall be no enemy unto them, neither shall
he lay any thing to their charge; but shall be more fully reconciled unto them,
in respect of manifestation, then now he is.

They shall have peace with Christ: for Christ shall be no Enemy unto them,
neither shall he lay any thing to their charge in that world; but shall own
them for his Friends, his Spouse, his Love, his undefiled.

They shall have peace with their Consciences: Their Consciences shall not
accuse nor trouble them for any sin, for any thing; but as they shall have
boldness at the day of Judgment, arising from peace of Conscience, 1 John 4.
18. so this peace shall continue still.

They shall have peace among themselves; that is, they shall worship and serve
God peaceably together, with one mind, and with one heart; and so there shall
be one Lord, and his Name one, Zech. 14. 9. because the Elect shall worship
only one Lord, and that with one kind of worship, and with one heart, and one
Soul, in that world.

They shall have peace from the Angels: for as the good Angels shall have no
will, so the evil Angels shall have no power, to hurt or molest them; as we may
gather from that Promise, The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly, Romans 16. verse. 20.

They shall have peace from wicked men and women: for though the Saints shall
have power to molest and trouble the wicked, yet the wicked shall have no power
to molest and trouble the Saints in that world, seeing they shall be bound in
chains, Psalm. 149. 7.

They shall have peace from all other creatures in that world; as it is
written, Thou shall be in league with the stones of the field, and the beasts
of the field shall be at peace with thee; and thou shall know that thy
Tabernacle shall be in peace, Job 5. 23, 24. Again, it is said, The Wolf and
the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock;
and dust shall be the Serpents meat: They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy Mountain, says the Lord, Isa. 65. 25. Which prophetical Promises shall
never be perfectly fulfilled in this world, but they shall be so fulfilled in
that which is to come: Such shall be the peace of Gods Elect in that world.

And as this peace of theirs shall be great for variety; so it shall be great
for excellency: in as much as the excellency of it shall far surpass all that
we can, now in our mortal condition, think or speak of it. And if there be any
peace of God out of God, belonging to any creature, which passes all
understanding, as it should seem there is, Phil. 4. 7. surely this shall be
such a peace. And who knows not that the peace of this world is more obvious to
our present apprehension and understanding, then that of the world to come?

2. I affirm, That this peace of theirs shall be abundant for measure and
degree; as it is promised, They shall delight themselves in the abundance of
peace, Psalm. 37. 11. And God shall extend peace to them like a river, Isai. 66.
12. Which Promises shall perfectly be fulfilled, not in this world, but in that
which is to come.

3. I affirm, That this peace of theirs shall be perfect, without defect; as
the Prophet assures us, when he says unto God, Thou will keep him in perfect
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, Isa. 26. 3. The best peace which can be
had in this world, may be in some respect defective; but in that which is to
come, the peace of Gods chosen shall be in nothing defective, but they shall
have so much of it as their hearts can wish or desire to have.

4. I affirm, That this peace of theirs shall be everlasting, without end: For
which cause it is said, That God shall keep them in perfect peace, in the
former place, Isai. 26. 3. without any limitation of time; to intimate, That he
shall keep them in this peace for ever: And the Covenant of peace, which he
has made with his chosen, is called an everlasting Covenant, Ezekiel. 37. 26. And
if this Covenant be everlasting, then surely the peace, which they shall enjoy
by virtue of this Covenant, shall be everlasting too: And so we have seen the
nature of this peace.

As touching the Certainty of it, I aver it for a most certain truth, That Gods
Elect shall have peace in the world to come; such a peace as has been
described: as may be proved by these Arguments:

1. They that shall be perfectly reconciled to God in the world to come, shall
have perfect peace in that world, perfect peace being a fruit of perfect
reconciliation: But Gods Elect shall be perfectly reconciled unto him in the
World to come, because they have been, are, or shall be, truly reconciled unto
him in this world. Ergo.

2. They that shall be perfectly justified in the World to come, shall have
perfect peace in that world; perfect peace being a fruit of perfect.
Justification: But Gods Elect shall be perfectly justified in the world to
come, Act. 3. 19. because they are, have been, or shall be, truly justified in
this world, Romans 5. 1. Ergo.

3. They that shall be perfectly sanctified in the world to come, shall have
perfect peace in that world, perfect peace being a fruit of perfect
Sanctification: But Gods Elect shall be perfectly sanctified in the world to
come, because they are, have been, or shall be, truly sanctified in this world.
Ergo.

4. They that are wont to have their minds stayed on God in this world, so as
to be steadfast toward him, in respect of graces received, and truths received,
and in respect of well doing, etc. shall have perfect peace in the world to
come; according to that of the Prophet, Thou will keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee, Isai. 26. 3. Now Gods Elect, after they are
effectually called, are wont to have their minds thus stayed on him. Ergo.

5. They that are wont to trust in God really, and in sincerity, here in this
world, shall have perfect peace in the world to come; as the Prophet adds in the
former place; Thou will keep him in perfect peace, because he trusts in thee,
Isai. 26. 3. Now Gods Elect, after their effectual calling, are wont thus to
trust in him. Ergo.

6. They that do or shall love Gods Word in sincerity, while they live here,
shall have perfect peace in the world to come, because they shall have great
peace in this life; as it is written, Great peace have they that love thy Law,
Psalm. 119. 165. Now Gods Elect are such as do or shall love his Word in
sincerity, while they live here. Ergo.

7. They that do or shall endevor to walk according to the rule of Gods Word,
while they live here, shall have perfect peace in the World to come; according
to that of the Apostle, As many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on
them and mercy, Gal. 6. 16. Now Gods Elect are such as do or shall endevor to
walk according to this rule, whiles they live in this world. Ergo.

8. They that are or shall be sincere and upright before God in this world,
shall have perfect peace in that which is to come; as I gather from that of the
Prophet, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man
is peace, Psalm. 37. 37. his end being put chiefly for his future condition in
the next world. Now Gods Elect are such as are or shall be all upright and
sincere before him in this world. Ergo.

9. They that are under a Covenant of peace, and have an inward right
thereunto, shall have perfect peace in the world to come, according to the same
Covenant. Now Gods Elect are all under a Covenant of peace, and have an inward
right thereunto, as appears, Ezekiel. 34. 25. and 37. 26. Ergo.

10. They that shall have nothing to offend them in the world to come, shall
have perfect peace in that world: But Gods Elect shall have nothing to offend
them in the world to come; as it is promised in plain words, Nothing shall
offend them, Psalm. 119. 165. Which Promise, though it may in some respects and
degrees be made good to them in this world, yet it shall not be perfectly
fulfilled, but in that which is to come, when nothing at all shall offend them.
Erg.

11. They that do or shall do good in this life with an honest and good heart,
shall have perfect peace in the world to come; as the Apostle witnesses, when
he says, Peace shall be to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek, Romans 2. 10. But Gods Elect are such as do, or shall do, good
in this life, with an honest and good heart. Ergo. They shall have perfect
peace in that which is to come.

This Proposition, thus cleared and proved, may be useful. As,

First, It makes for the confutation of such, as expect a state of perfect
peace in this world before its end; and give out in their Pamphlets, That the
latter times shall abound with such peace and unity, as the like was never
seen: For proof whereof they wrest many passages of Scripture, and draw them to
a wrong sense. But these Writers are much mistaken: For (as I have showed
before) that perfect peace, which is promised in holy Writ, belongs to the
world to come, not to this world. And it is a vain thing for any to expect
perfect peace in this world, for these causes:

1. Because God has put enmity betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seed of
the Serpent, Genesis 3. betwixt the godly and the wicked: so that the wicked are
still an abomination to the just, and the just are still an abomination to the
wicked: Which enmity doubtless will continue as long as this world it self
continues.

2. Because there is still an enmity betwixt the flesh and the spirit in every
regenerate person: For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other: so that we
cannot do the things that we would, Gal. 5. 17. Which enmity also is likely to
continue unto the worlds end.

3. Because the New Testament, which best describes this latter age of the
world, fore-shews, that the latter times shall be very unquiet, troublesome, and
perilous. What says our Savior? Think not (says he) that I am come to send
peace on Earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. I am come to set a man
at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law; and a man's foes shall be they of his
own household, Matt. 10. 24, 35, 36. And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of
wars, Matthew. 24. 6. And, says he, in the world ye shall have tribulation, Joh.
16. 33. In the last days perilous times shall come, says Saint Paul, 2 Timothy
3. 1. Yea, we find, Rev. 20. That Christ at his second Coming from Heaven
shall find the Nations of the world in a posture of war: And for these Reasons
we have no cause to think, that the latter times shall be such peaceable times,
as some have described.

Indeed, I grant, That Gods faithful people and servants, at certain times, may
enjoy much good peace in this world; They may have some experience of peace
with God through Christ; They may have, at times, some peace of Conscience
within themselves; They may have peace from war, and peace from public
persecution, for a time: But for any to dream of perfect peace in this world,
is all one as to dream of a dry Summer, when Winter is at hand. Wherefore let
us not harken unto those that preach and promise peace, peace, when trouble is
near.

Again, It may inform us, That Gods Elect should not be too much discouraged or
dejected by reason of their tribulations and want of peace in this life: For
such is the condition of this world, many are the troubles of the righteous;
and all that will live godly in Christ, must suffer here what is appointed for
them: Yea, they may seek and pray for outward peace with men, and yet not find
it; They may seek and pray for inward peace of Conscience, and yet not obtain
so much of it as they desire. But in the World to come they shall have as much
peace, both inward and outward, as their hearts can desire, and that for ever:
which will be a sufficient recompense for their want of peace in this world.

Lastly, If we desire to have perfect peace in the World to come with Gods
Elect, then we must endevor to perform all such conditions, on our part, as
have the promise of this peace annexed to them: that is to say;

We must endevor to be reconciled to God through Christ.

We must endevor to be really justified and sanctified.

We must endevor to love Gods Word in s^ncerity.

We must endevor to walk according to the Rule of it.

We must endevor to have our minds stayed on God.

We must endevor to trust in him effectually.

We must endeavor to be upright before him.

We must endeavor to please him in all our ways.

We must endeavor to do that which is good in his sight.

For these are the Conditions which have the promise of this peace annexed to
them: and if we make conscience of performing them, we shall not miss of
perfect and everlasting peace in the World to come.

The other Proposition is, That Reprobates 2 Proposit*
shall have Tribulation in the WORLD to come.

Which Tribulation of theirs, as I conceive, shall be a total privation of
peace in that World: For they shall have no peace with God, no peace with
Christ, no peace with their Consciences, no peace with the Saints, no peace
from among the Angels, no peace from among themselves, in that World: Which
total want of Peace will be unto them a great and perfect Tribulation, and that
Tribulation which is mentioned, Romans 2. verse. 9.

Now that Reprobates shall have no peace at all in the world to come, may be
proved by these Arguments ensuing:

1. They that shall be strangers from Christ in the World to come, shall have
no peace at all in that world, the peace of that world being Christ's purchase:
Matthew. 25. 41
But Reprobates shall be strangers from Christ in the world to come. Ergo.

2. They that shall be found unrighteous persons in the World to come, shall
have no peace at all in that world: But Reprobates shall be found unrighteous
persons in the world to come: Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6. 9. Ergo.

3. They that shall be found unclean and filthy persons in the world to come,
shall have no peace at all in that world: But Reprobates shall be found unclean
and filthy persons in the world to come; according to that of Saint John, He
that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Rev. 22. 11. Ergo.

4. They that shall be found impenitent sinners in the World to come, shall
have no peace at all in that world; as we may gather from that of Saint Paul,
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon every Soul of man that does evil, of the
Jews first, and also of the Greek, Romans 2. 9. viz. if they shall finally
persist in doing evil without repentance. Now Reprobates shall be found
impenitent persons in the world to come. Ergo.

5. They that shall be found wicked persons in the world to come, shall have no
peace at all in that world; as it is written, There is no peace, says my God,
to the wicked, Isai. 57. 21. But Reprobates shall be found wicked persons in
the world to come. Ergo.

6. They that will never know the way of peace, while they live in this world,
shall have no peace at all in that which is to come: But Reprobates will never
know the way of peace, while they live in this world, Isai. 59. 8. Ergo.

7. They that will still go in crooked paths, while they live in this world,
shall know no peace at all in that which is to come, Isai. 59. verse. 8. But
Reprobates will still go in crooked paths, while they live in this world. Ergo.

8. They that will still be Enemies to a godly peace in this world, shall have
no peace at all in that which is to come: But Reprobates will still be Enemies
to a godly Peace in this world, Psalm. 121. 6, 7. Ergo, They shall have no peace
at all in that which is to come, but tribulation; and this their Tribulation
shall be a total privation, or want of peace, as was said before.

Which Proposition does not only confirm what has been formerly affirmed,
viz. That it had been good for Reprobates if they had never been born.

But also shows, That such shall gain nothing at the last by any Peace of
theirs in this world.

Indeed, if there be any Civil or National Peace here, Reprobates may have a
share in it, as well as others: If there be any peace in sinning, they are wont
to have the greatest share in it. But what shall it profit them, when at last
their peace shall end in tribulation? Surely nothing; Rather then they shall
wish they had never known any such peace.

Wherefore, if we will provide for our own safety, that we may be preserved
from Tribulation in the World to come, we must be careful, while we live here,
to shun and decline those crooked paths of unrighteousness, uncleanness,
impenitency, hatred of godly peace, etc. which are wont to bring men at the
last to everlasting Tribulation: And if we be careful thus to do, then we shall
never know, by experience in our selves, any want of peace in the world to come.

SECT. XIX. Touching the Light of Gods Elect, and the Darkness of Reprobates,
in the World to Come.
HEre follows a nineth special difference, which shall be betwixt the parties
before named in the next world: And it may be thus expressed in two
Propositions:

Gods Elect shall abound with spiritual Light Reprobates shall be punished with
spiritual Darkness in the next world.

The former Proposition is, That Gods Elect 1 Proposit.
shall abound with spiritual Light in the World to come.

I speak not here of that natural and bodily Light which shall be suitable to
their new natures in the World to come, of which doubtless they shall find no
want; but only of their spiritual Light in that World, which shall far surpass
that spiritual Light which the best Christians have in this world.

For I grant, That the regenerate have some spiritual Light in this world: for
which cause they are called the children of Light, Luke 16. 8. That is to say:

They have some light of saving knowledge, which is a spiritual kind of Light,
and that which is mentioned, Mat. 4. 16. The people which sat in darkness, saw
great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death, light is
sprung up: viz. the light of saving knowledge.

They have some Light of Holiness, which is a spiritual kind of Light too, and
that which is mentioned, Matt. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father in Heaven.

They have some Light of Christian Experience, which is also a spiritual kind
of Light, and that which is mentioned, Psalm. 112. 4. Unto the upright there
arises light in darkness. But all this spiritual light of theirs is but
little, in comparison of that which Gods Elect shall have in the World to come;
because therein they shall abound with spiritual Light: that is, they shall
have as much light of saving knowledge, as much light of holiness, as much light
of godly experience, in that world, as their hearts shall be able to wish and
desire to have.

For proof whereof, these following Arguments are to be considered:

1. They that have spiritual Light sown already for them, shall have abundance
thereof, and abound therewith in the world to come. Now Gods Elect have this
spiritual Light sown already for them; as I gather from that of the Prophet,
Light is sown for the righteous, Psalm. 97. 11. where by light we are to
understand spiritual Light; and by the righteous, all and every one of Gods
Elect, who are or shall be all truly righteous before God in their generations.
And when he says, that this light is sown for them, his meaning is, that God
has certainly decreed and intended to give them a full and plentiful measure of
this Light in the next World, as men do certainly intend a full crop for the
poor, when they sow plentifully for them. Ergo.

2. They that do or shall endeavor to follow Christ in this World, and to
imitate His good example so far as it is imitable, shall abound with spiritual
light in that World which is to come: as we may gather from those words of our
Savior, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of Life, Ioh. 8. 12. viz. the Light of the Life of grace here, and the
Light of the Life of glory hereafter. Now Gods Elect are such as do or shall
endeavor to follow Christ, and to imitate his good example in things imitable.
Ergo.

3. They that are or shall be the Children of spiritual Light, shall abound
with spiritual Light in that World which is to come. Now Gods Elect are or
shall be the Children of spiritual Light, Luke 16. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5. Ergo.

4. They that shall have God Himself to be their everlasting Light, shall abound
with spiritual light in the World to come. Now Gods Elect shall have Him for
their everlasting Light. Esaias 60. 19, 20. Ergo.

5. They that shall have Christ the Lamb of God to be their Light, in the World
to come; shall abound with spiritual Light in that World. But Gods Elect shall
have Christ the Lamb of God to be their Light in the World to come, Rev. 21.
23. Ergo.

6. They that are or shall be meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in Light, shall abound with spiritual light in the World to come. Now
Gods Elect are such as are or shall be meet to be partakers of the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12. Ergo.

7. They that shall be immediately taught of God in the World to come, shall
abound with spiritual light in that World. Now Gods Elect shall be
immediately taught of God in the next World. As appears, Esaias 54. 13. Ioh. 6.
45. Ergo.

8. They that shall have no need to teach every one his Neighbor, nor every
one his Brother in the World to come, shall abound with spiritual light in
that World. Now Gods Elect shall have no need to teach every one his Neighbor
nor every one his Brother in the next World, as may be gathered from, Heb. 8.
11. Ergo.

9. They that shall have perfect saving konwledg of God in the World to come, I
mean so much knowledge of him, as their new natures shall be capable of: shall
abound with spiritual light in that World. Now Gods Elect shall have such
perfect knowledge of God in the next World, as may appear by these passages
they shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. They shall see face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. They
shall know me from the least to the greatest, Heb. 8. 11. the Earth (that is
the new Earth) shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of God, as the
Waters cover the Sea, Hab. 2. 14. Ergo,

10. They that shall have the perfect saving knowledge of Christ's Love to his, in
the World to come; shall abound with spiritual Light in that World, because
saving knowledge is spiritual Light. Now Gods Elect shall have in the next
World the perfect saving knowledge of Christ's Love to his, according to Saint
Paul's Prayer, they shall be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
length, and breadth and depth, and height, and to know the Love of Christ
passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. 19. that is, though this Love of his passes the
knowledge of men in this Life, yet it shall not pass the knowledge of the
Saints in that which is to come. Ergo.

11. They that in the World to c^^e shall have the perfect saving knowledge of
such Divine Mysteries, as are in a great part hid from many in this Life; shall
abound with spiritual light in that world. Now Gods Elect in the World to come
shall have the perfect knowledge of such Divine Mysteries, as are in a great
part hid from many in this Life; there being nothing hid now which shall not
therein be revealed and made known, Lu. 12. 2. Ergo.

12. They that in the World to come shall have perfect saving knowledge of the
works and creatures of God, shall abound with spiritual light in that World.
Now Gods Elect in the World to come shall have perfect knowledge of the works
and creatures of God; as we may gather from Adams wonderful knowledge in the
state of innocence, for he then knew the nature of all creatures, and gave them
significant and distinct Names according to their several natures, and as he
named every creature, so was the name thereof. Now if Adam in his innocence had
such admirable knowledge of al creatures, doubtless the saints in the state of
glory shall have much more perfect knowledge of them, and so much knowledge of
them as their new natures shall be made capable of, and so shall abound with
spiritual Light.

13. They that in the World to come shall have al comfortable knowledge, not
only of all the Faithful which have been, and or shall be in this World; but
also of al their former godly and familiar Friends, as such, shall abound with
spiritual Light in that World. Now it is probable that Gods Elect in the
World to come shall have al comfortable knowledge, not only of all the Faithful
which have been, are, or shall be in this World; but also of al their former
godly and familiar Friends as such.

And to strengthen this probability, I refer the Reader to these three places
of Scripture; first it is said of Reprobates that they shall see Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13. 28. and
shall they not see them so as to know them? yes; Secondly, it is said in the
Parable of Dives, that he saw Abraham a Luke 16. 23
far off and Lazarus in his bosom, and did he not see them so as to know them?
yes; and if Reprobates shall have such knowledge of the Saints in the next
World, as shall yield them no comfort at al: doubtless Gods Elect shall have
such knowledge one of another, as will be full of comfort. Thirdly, when Christ
was transfigured upon the Mount in the presence of Peter, James, and John, it
is said that there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, and talked with him, and
they appeared in such a bodily shape that Peter knew them distinctly, and
thereupon said, Master it is good for us to be here, if thou will, let us make
here three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses and one for Elias, Mat. 17.
3, 4. Which transfiguration of Christ with its occurrences I conceive to be a
lively representation of what shall be in the World to come. And so its
probable from hence also what mutual and comfortable knowledge the Saints shall
have one of another in that World? and consequently that they shall abound with
spiritual light in it.

14. They that shall not want any Light of holiness and righteousness in the
World to come, shall abound with spiritual light in that would, seeing the
Light of holiness is a spiritual kind of light. Now Gods Elect shall not want
any Light of holiness and righteousness in that World; because God shall bring
forth their righteousness as the Light: and their judgments as the Noonday,
Psalm. 37. 6. Ergo,

15. They that shall not want any Light of Gods countenance in the World to
come; shall abound with spiritual light in that World; the Light of his
countenance being a spiritual kind of light. Now Gods Elect shall not want any
Light of his countenance in that World; for the Prophet says. Blessed is the
People that knew the joyful sound, they shall walk O Lord in the light of thy
countenance, Psalm. 89. 15. Ergo.

Which Proposition thus proved, may be useful, new lights received, and give
out, that the latter times shall generaly abound with spiritual light more then
the former; that the ordinary sort of Saints shall shortly have as much
spiritual light as the Apostles themselves have, if not more, and so shall have
no need of publik Pastors and Teachers to instruct them; yea, that fullness of
spiritual light, which is promised in the World, they apply unto the Latter
Times.

Now in all this they do but delude themselves, and the World, as may be seen
in these particulars.

1. Whereas they boast of new lights received, in this they do but juggle and
put Light for darkness: for it is well known that their darkest errors are
shrouded under this Notion of new lights, and though they varnish them what
they can with a semblance of Light: yet that Light which seems to to be in
them is but spiritual darkness, and if so, how great is that darkness?

2. Whereas they say, that the Latter Times shall generaly abound with
spiritual light more then the former: in this there can be no truth, because
the new Testament shows that the Latter Times shall generaly abound with
Atheism, Error and Iniquity more then the former. Now Atheism, Error and
Iniquity are so many branches of spiritual darkness, and if the Latter Times
shall generaly abound with spiritual darkness more then the former; how can
they generaly abound with spiritual light more then the former? Indeed I
conceive that some particular truths relating to the World to come, shall be
more plainly discovered toward the end of this World by ordinary Teachers;
then formerly they have been by such Teachers, and in this sense, knowledge may
be increased about the time of the end, as the Prophet Daniel speaks, Dan. 12.
4. yet we may not infer from hence that the Latter Times, shall generaly abound
with spiritual light more then the former.

3. Whereas they say, that the ordinary sort of Saints shall shortly have as
much spiritual light as the Apostles themselves had, if not more; there can be
no truth in this neither; because the Apostles were taught of God immediately
in an extraordinary way, whereas the ordinary sort of Saints are now taught of
him but mediately, in an ordinary way and it is against reason to think that
this latter way of teaching should produce more spiritual light the^ the
former, or as much: But the truth is, that in the Apostles Writings are many
things so hard to be understood, that many ordinary Saints at this day, with
all their spiritual light, cannot attain to the right understanding of them.

4. Whereas they say, That the Saints of latter times shall have no need of
Pastors and Teachers for to instruct them: This is point blank against our
Saviors doctrine and practice: for he has not only ordained that public
Pastors and Teachers shall be continued in the Church to the end of the world,
Ephesians. 4. 13. but also has promised to be with them unto the end of the world,
Mat. 28. 20.

5. Whereas they say, That the fullness of spiritual light promised in the Word
is to be exhibited in the latter times; this is a mere delusion too: for it may
appear by that which has been formerly said, That the fullness of spiritual
light promised appertains to the World to come, and not to this present world.
Wherefore we should not hearken to such as speak and boast so much of new
Lights.

Again, It may inform us, That the World to come is much to be desired of all
good Christians: as in other respects, so in respect of that spiritual light
which shall abound in it: This world we know is much desired of some, in
respect of that natural and bodily light which may be enjoyed in it; for truly
the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the yes to behold the Sun,
Eccles. 11. 7. And it is much desired of others, in respect of that spiritual
light which may be enjoyed in it. Now Gods Elect shall en^oy much more spiritual
light in the World to come ^hen may be expected in this life: for whiles they
^ive here, they are defective in their spiritual light of saving knowledge, in
their spiritual light of holiness, ^n their spiritual light of experience; but
in that world they shall know no such defect: whiles they live here, the best
of them know but in part, and prophecy in part, and see as through a glass,
darkly; but in the World to come they shall know as they are known, and shall
see face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Wherefore that world is much to be desired in
this respect.

And if any desire it in this respect, there are three Things especially
expected from them.

1. That they be soundly regenerated and converted, that so they may be
translated into a state of spiritual light.

2. That after this, they be thankful for the spiritual light which they have
received, Psalm 16. 7.

3. That they be careful to improve their spiritual light, so as to walk in it,
or according to it, 1 These. 5.

The other Proposition is, That Reprobates shall be 2 Proposit.
punished with spiritual darkness in the World to come. Some perhaps may think
that Reprobates shall be punished with bodily darkness in the next world; as
the Egyptians were in Moses time; for then God brought a thick and palpable
darkness over all the land of Egypt, so that the Egyptians could not see one
another, nor rise any one off his place for three days, Exodus 10. 23. yet I
cannot think so; for if they shall be punished with bodily darkness, how then
can it be that they shall see him whom they have pierced? how then can it be
that they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God? which
things they shall certainly see with their bodily eyes in that world: rather
then I think that their bodily eyes shall be clear enough; but their spiritual
eyes shall be darkened, and they covered with spiritual darkness in that world.
Which spiritual darkness of theirs, as I conceive, shall be a total and
perpetual privation of that spiritual light which belongs to Gods Elect in that
world; that is to say, they shall have no light of saving knowledge, no light of
holiness, no light of comfortable experience in that world; but the darkness of
ignorance, the darkness of an unholy life, the darkness of discomfort, being so
many branches of spiritual darkness shall still remain upon them. And this
darkness of theirs is called in Scripture the midst of darkness; it may be,
because they shall not know how to come forth of it: Its called the blackness
of darkness; it may be, because they shall have no comfort in it: It is called
outer darkness; it may be, because it shall be proper to an outer sort of
people, such as shall be found to be out of Christ, and out of Gods favor in
that world.

Now that Reprobates shall be punished with spiritual darkness in the World to
come, may thus be proved:

1. It is said, That the light of the wicked shall be put out, Job 18. 5.
where, as I suppose, the Text speaks not of bodily light; for in this sense it
may be as truly said, The light of the godly shall be put out, as the light of
the wicked shall be put out: but it speaks of that spiritual light which wicked
hypocrites may seem to have in this life, and so the meaning is, That that
spiritual light which wicked hypocrites may seem to have in this life (if they
shall still remain such, and be found Reprobates at the last) shall be one day
altogether extinguished, and put out: from whence I may argue thus; They that
shall have their seeming spiritual light altogether extinguished, and put out,
shall be punished with spiritual darkness in the World to come: But Reprobates
shall have their seeming spiritual light altogether extinguished, and put out.
Ergo.

2. They that have no spiritual light sown for them, shall be punished with
spiritual darkness in the World to come: Now Reprobates have no spiritual light
sown for them; as may be gathered from Psalm. 97. 11. Ergo.

3. They that will still be the children of Satan's Kingdom in this world, shall
be punished with spiritual darkness in that which is to come; as it is written,
The children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness, Mat. 8. 12.
Now Reprobates will still be the children of Satan's Kingdom in this world. Ergo.

4. They that will still be without the wedding garment of saving faith and
repentance whiles they live in this world, shall be punished with spiritual
darkness in that which is to come; as may appear by our Saviors sentence upon
the man that had not on a wedding garment: Bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into outer darkness, Mat. 22. 13. Now Reprobates will still
be without the wedding garment of saving faith and repentance whiles they live
in this world. Ergo.

5. They that will still be unprofitable servants in this life, shall be
punished with spiritual darkness in the World to come; according to the saying
of Christ, Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, Mat. 25. 30.
But Reprobates will still be unprofitable servants in this life. Ergo.

6. They that will still remain in a state of spiritual darkness whiles they
live in this world, shall be punished with spiritual darkness in that which is
to come: Now Reprobates will still remain in a state of spiritual darkness
whiles they live in this world, and so long it will be truly said of them, That
they are in darkness, and walk in darkness, and know not whither they go,
because darkness has blinded their eyes, 1 John 2. 11. Ergo.

7. They that will still love spiritual darkness rather then spiritual light,
shall be punished with spiritual darkness in the World to come: But Reprobates
will still love spiritual darkness rather then spiritual light, Ioh. 3. 19.
Ergo.

8. They that will still mistake light for darkness, and darkness for light, in
a spiritual sense, shall be punished with spiritual darkness in the World to
come: But Reprobates will still mistake light for darkness, and darkness for
light, as both are taken in a spiritual sense, Isai. 5. 20. Ergo.

9. They that will still be deceivers of themselves and others, whiles they
live in this world, shall be punished with spiritual darkness in that which is
to come, 2 Pet. 2. 17. Jude 13. But Reprobates will still be seducers of
themselves and others, whiles they live in this world. Ergo.

10. They that will still be wicked in this world, shall be punished with
spiritual darkness in that which is to come; according to that in Hannah's
song, The wicked shall be silent in darkness, 1 Samuel 2. 9. Now Reprobates will
still remain wicked in this wo^ld. Ergo.

And this latter Proposition may inform us, That being alienated from the life
of God, through the darkness that is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts, Ephesians. 4 18. being destitute of all saving knowledge of God, of Christ,
and divine Mysteries; and being destitute of all real holiness, and godly
experience. And if they shall remain such until their death, without doubt they
shall be punished with everlasting darkness spiritual in the World to come, as
has been proved. Wherefore it cannot be safe for any to remain still in the
state of nature and unregeneracy.

But there is a necessity of Regeneration on their part who are not
regenerated, because without this grace they cannot escape the judgment of
spiritual darkness, temporal nor eternal: but if they can obtain this grace of
Regeneration, they shall be sure to obtain the blessing of spiritual light here
in this life, and the fullness of it in the life to come; according to that of
the Apostle, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light; that is, the light of saving grace here, and the light
of glory hereafter.

And for the better obtaining of this grace, they that want it,

1. Must diligently attend unto the outward Ministry of the Word, this being
the instrumental Cause or Means of Regeneration; as S. Peter says, We are born
again, not of corruptible, but of incorruptible seed, by the Word of God, 1
Pet. 1. 23.

2. They must diligently pray for the inward Ministry of the Spirit, this being
the efficient Cause of Regeneration; as our Savior says, That which is horn
of the Spirit, is Spirit, Joh. 3. 6.

SECT. XX. Touching the Joy of Gods Elect, and the Sorrow of Reprobates, in the
World to come
HEre follows a tenth special Difference which shall be betwixt the parties
before-named in the next world; and it may be thus expressed in two
Propositions:

Gods Elect shall abound with Joy in the next World.

Reprobates shall abound with Soroow in the next World.

The former Proposition is, That Gods Elect shall abound with Joy and Gladness
in the World to come. Which Joy of theirs shall be such as none in this life
can ^ully conceive nor express: For doubtless it shall be exceeding wonderful
and glorious; and that,

1. In regard of the manner of it; for it shall be suitable to their new
natures, which they shall re^eiv^.

2. In regard of the measure of it; for it shall exceedingly abound beyond all
their former joys.

3. In regard of the several objects and occasions of it; for in that world
they shall joy and rejoice in God, in Christ, in the Nature of God, the Mercies
of God, the Judgments of God; in their inward peace and glorious condition, and
in all that they shall see, or hear, or speak, or do: yea, the several objects
and occasions of their Joy in that world, shall be such, and so many, that they
cannot now be numbered by any.

But that Gods Elect shall abound with Joy in the world to come, may be thus
proved:

1. They that have such Joy and gladness already sown for them, as shall be
reaped in the world to come, shall abound with Joy in that world: Now Gods
Elect have such joy and gladness already sown for them, as shall be reaped in
the world to come; as we may gather from that of the Prophet, Gladness is sown
for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97. 11. And if it be sown for the upright in
heart, then it is sown for all the Elect, who are or shall be upright in heart;
and consequently they shall abundantly reap it in that world.

2. They that have, or shall have, the beginnings of spiritual joy in this
world, shall abound with joy in that which is to come: Now Gods Elect have, or
shall have, the beginnings of spiritual joy in this world; for so many of them
as are, or have been, effectually called, have already rejoiced in God, in
Christ, in the works of God, in the word and Promises of God, in the testimony
of a good conscience: yea they have already rejoiced in tribulation, and in
hope of the glory of God; and the rest of them shall one day be effectually
called too and so shall have the same beginnings of spiritual joy with the
former sort. Erg. they shall abound with joy in the world to come.

3. They that have, or shall have, the spirit of godly sorrow in this world,
shall abound with joy in that which is to come; according to these Promises:
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psa. 30. 5.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 5. Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4. Blessed are ye that weep now,
for ye shall laugh, Luke 6. 21. Now Gods Elect are such as have, or shall have,
the spirit of godly sorrow and contrition here in this world. Erg.

4. They that shall have no cause of sorrow in the world to come, shall abound
with joy in that world: Now Gods Elect shall have no cause of sorrow in the
world to come: For God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain; for the former things are passed away, Rev. 21. 4. Ergo.

5. They that shall sing for joy of heart in the world to come, shall abound
with joy in that world: But Gods Elect shall sing for joy of heart in the world
to come, Isai. 65. 14. Ergo.

6. They that shall be created a rejoicing and a joy in the world to come,
shall abound with joy in that world: But Gods Elect shall be created a
rejoicing and a joy in that world, Isai. 65. 18. Ergo.

7. They that shall enter into their Masters Joy in the world to come, shall
abound with joy in that world: Now Gods Elect shall enter into their Masters
Joy in that world, Mat. 25. 21. Ergo.

8. They that shall have fullness of joy in the world to come, shall abound with
joy in that world: Now Gods Elect shall have fullness of joy in the world to
come; as it is written, In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right
haend are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. Ergo.

9. They that shall have everlasting joy upon their heads in the world to come,
shall abound with joy in that world: Now Gods Elect shall have everlasting joy
upon their heads in the world to come: Isai. 35. 10. and 61. 7. Ergo.

Which Proposition, thus proved, may be useful

First, It makes for the confutation of such as expect a time of much joy, if
not perfect joy, for Gods faithful people here in this world, before the end;
and say, That the Sword, which is now drawn, shall subdue all the open Enemies
of Gods people; and so all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, and their
hearts shall be filled with joy unspeakable.

But all this is against the Word of God point blank.

For, 1. the Word shows, That the latter times shall be perilous times for
Gods faithful people, 2 Timothy 3. 1. And if they shall be perilous times for
them, how can they be such joyful times for them, as these men speak of?

2. Our Savior, speaking of the wars and tumults of the latter times, says,
That all these are the beginning of sorrows, Mat. 24. 8. And if the wars of the
latter times shall be the beginning of sorrows, how can they be occasions of so
much joy as these speak of?

3. The Word shows, That the wars of the latter times shall be increased about
the time of Christ's second Coming, Rev. 20. 9. And if so, how can or shall they
produce such joyful times in this world, as these men expect.

4. I have showed before, That that fullness of joy and gladness, which is
promised in the Word of God, appertains not to this world, but to that which is
to come.

Wherefore we should not harken to these filthy Dreamers, because we find by
experience that their Dreams are deceitful: For while they dream of much light,
behold much darkness that may be felt; and while they dream of much joy, behold
much sorrow and vexation of spirit.

Secondly, It may inform us, That Gods Elect shall be well rewarded at the
last, for all their godly sorrow in this life. Indeed, whiles they live here,
they are wont to be in heaviness through manifold temptations: Whiles they live
here, they are wont to mourn much after a godly sort for their own sins, for
the sins of others, for the afflictions and sufferings of Christ, for the
afflictions of their brethren, and for all the fruits and effects of Gods
displeasure: But in the World to come all this sorrow of theirs shall be turned
into gladness: They shall have beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning,
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isaiah 61. 3. And as this
sorrow of theirs shall more or less abound in this world, so shall their godly
Joy more or less abound in that which is to come: which will be a sufficient
recompense for all their good sorrow; and is still promised as a recompense
thereof in diverse places before mentioned.

Wherefore, if we desire to abound with joy in that world which is to come, we
must be contented, whiles we live here, to sow in tears of godly sorrow: and if
we sow plentifully in this way, we shall reap plentifully; according to Gods
promise, as the Prophet says, He that goes forth, and weepeth, bearing
precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves
with him, Psalm. 126. 6.

The other Proposition is, That Reprobates shall 2 Proposit.
abound with sorrow in the world to come.

Which sorrow of theirs, though it shall be such as no mortal man can fully
conceive and express; yet others have expressed what they have conceived
touching the same: And why may not I do the like?

I conceive then; First, That the sorrow of Reprobates in the World to come,
shall be, not only a privation of all those joys which belong to Gods Elect in
that world; but also shall be a positive and real passion of grief and
vexation. Secondly, I conceive, That in the next world they shall mourn, not
only for the guilt of all those sins, which shall be then and there laid to
their charge; but also for all those pains, torments, and punishments, which
shall be then and there inflicted on them. And thirdly, I conceive, That this
mourning of theirs shall be expressed by sighs and groans, by sobs and tears,
by weeping and howling, by grinding and gnashing of teeth.

Now that Reprobates shall abound with Sorrow in the WORLD to come, may be thus
proved:

1. They that shall express their grief in the world to come by weeping and
gnashing of teeth, shall abound with sorrow in that world: Now Reprobates shall
express their grief in the next world by weeping and gnashing of teeth, as the
Scripture witnesses in many places, Mat. 8. 12. and 22. 13. and 25. 30. Ergo.

2. They that shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit in
the world to come, shall abound with sorrow in that world: But Reprobates shall
cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit in the world to come,
Isai. 75. 14. Ergo.

3. They that will still contemn the spirit and practice of godly sorrow,
whiles they live in this world, and choose rather to spend their time in carnal
mirth and jollity, shall abound with sorrow in that which is to come; according
to that of our Savior, Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and
weep, Luke 6. 25. Now Reprobates will still contemn the spirit and practice of
godly sorrow, whiles they live in this world. Ergo.

4. They that will never repent effectually of their evil doings in this life,
shall abound with sorrow and anguish in the world to come; according to that of
the Apostle, Anguish shall be upon the Soul of every man that does evil, of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentile, Ro^. 2. 9. Now Reprobates will never repent
effectually of their evil doings in this life. Ergo.

5. They that have received, or shall receive, their full portion of
consolation and pleasure in this world, shall abound with sorrow in that which
is to come; as we may gather from what was said to Dives in the Parable, Son,
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things; and likewise
Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented, Luke 16.
25. Now Reprobates are such as either have received, or shall receive, their
full portion of consolation and pleasure in this world. Ergo.

6. They that shall be still vexed with the worm of conscience in the world to
come, shall abound with sorrow in that world, because the worm of conscience
(as some Divines say) is a continual remorse and furious Mr Bolton
reflection of the soul upon its own wilful folly, and thereby the woeful misery
it has brought upon it self: Now reprobates shall still be vexed with the worm
of conscience in the world to come, as the Scripture witnesses. Ergo.

7. They that shall be everlastingly tormented in the world to come, both in
soul and body, shall abound with sorrow in that world: Now reprobates shall be
everlastingly tormented in the next world, both in Soul and body. Their
soul-torments shall be such as have not bin felt nor experienced in this life;
and their bodily-torments shall be such as have never bin experienced in this
life. Therefore doubtless they shall abound with sorrow and grief in the world
to come.

And this latter Proposition may inform us, That vial, the harp, and the merry
lute in their feasts; and say, To morrow shall be as this day, and much more
vile: and in their merry meetings they are wont to cry down the spirit of
mourning, and to say, Hang up sorrow, for what serves it? let us eat, drink,
and be merry; let us rejoice in our youth, let our hearts cheer us in the days
of our youth, let us walk in the ways of our hearts, etc. But suppose any of
these mirth-mongers shall happen to dye in the guilt of their sins, without
repentance, and without a pardon, and so shall be found Reprobates at the last:
What then shall all their mirth profit them? Surely nothing at all: But then
they shall find, That it had been good for them if they had never been born:
Then they shall find, That all their mirth and jollity shall be turned into
sorrow and heaviness, into weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Wherefore my beloved, that we may not mourn and howl with Reprobates in the
world to come, let us still pray, that God will pour upon us the spirit of
godly mourning and contrition, that we may walk heavily, and grieve heartily
for our own sins, and for the sins of others, here in this life; That we may
mourn with those that mourn, and weep with those that weep now, in a good
sense: And if God shall vouchsafe us this spirit, then we shall not mourn with
Reprobates, but shall rejoice with Gods chosen for ever in the world to come.

SECT. XXI. Touching the Security of Gods Elect, and the Fear of Reprobates, in
the World to Come.
HEre follows an eleventh special difference which shall be betwixt the
parties before named in the next world: Which may be thus expressed:

Gods Elect shall dwell securely in the World to come.

Reprobates shall be afraid in the World to come.

The former Proposition, that Gods Elect shall 1. Propo.
dwell securely in the World to come.

And here I speak not of security, as it is sometimes taken in evil part, for
sinful security; for doubtless there shall be none such in the World to come:
but I speak of it as it is taken in good part, for holy security; and when I
say, that Gods Elect shall dwell securely in the World to come, my meaning is,
that they shall enjoy abundance of holy security in that World; that is to say,
though they shall have a reverentiall fear of God in that World, Psa. 67. 7.
yet they shall be safe and free from all slavish fear of God and of Christ; and
from al fear of evil; they shall not fear the evil of sin nor the evil of
punishment; they shall not fear the power of Men nor Devils; they shall not fear
the power of any creature in that World.

And that in this sense they shall dwell securely, in the World to come, may be
proved by diverse passages of Scripture, in which this security is either
promised or asserted, as,

1. They that shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, shall dwell securely
and enjoy abundance of holy security in the World to come. Now Gods Elect
shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, according to that of David,
surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 23. 6. Ergo, They shall
enjoy abundance of holy security in that World.

2. The Lord who is wisdom it self says, he that hearkeneth unto me, shall
dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil, Pro. 1. 33. which promise
may be in part fulfilled in this World: but it shall perfectly be fulfilled
only in that which is to come, and from hence I may reason thus: they that shall
perfectly enjoy this promise in the world to come, shall abound with holy
security in that world. Now Gods Elect shall perfectly enjoy this promise in the
world to come. Ergo.

3. It is said, who so puts his trust in the Lord, shall be safe, Prove. 29.
25. that is, shall be safe from the fear of evil; as that Text seems to import:
which promise also may be in part fulfilled in this world: but it shall
perfectly be fulfilled only in that which is to come: and so from hence I may
argue thus; they that shall perfectly enjoy this promise in the world to come,
shall abound with holy security in that world. Now God Elect shall perfectly
enjoy this promise in the world to come. Ergo.

4. The Propher Jeremiah shows, that in the days of Christ's Reign, Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, Ier. 23. 6. Whereby Judah and
Israel, I understand al Gods Elect, and by the Salvation and Safety there
promised them, I understand chiefly their Eternal Salvation in the World to
come, together with that safety from fear of evil, which shall follow thereupon,
and so from hence I may reason thus. They that shall be Eternally saved in the
World to come, shall be safe from the fear of evil in that World, and so
shall abound with holy security in it. Now Gods Elect shall be Eternaly saved in
the world to come. Ergo.

5. It is Gods Promise to his Elect, that he will gather them out of all
Countries, whether he has driven them, and will place them in their own
Country, and will cause them to dwell safely in it, Ierem. 32. 37. Which
promise has never been perfectly fulfilled as yet: but shall be perfectly
fulfilled in the World to come. From whence I may argue thus: they that shall
dwell safely in the World to come, shall abound with holy security in that world.
Now Gods Elect shall dwell safely in the world to come, Ergo.

6. The like promise is to be found elsewhere, for the Lord says of his chosen
People, they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the beasts of
the Land devour them, but they shall dwell safely and none shall make them afraid,
Ezekiel. 34. 28. which promise has never been perfectly fulfilled as yet, but
shall be perfectly fulfilled in the world to come, Ergo. In the world to come
Gods Elect shall dwell securely, and shall abound with holy security.

7. It is said, that perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment,
1 John 4. 18. and what fear shall perfect love cast out, but slavish fear and
fear of evil, from whence also I may thus reason; They that shall be perfect in
love in the World to come, shall be safe from the fear of evil in that world.
Now Gods Elect shall be perfect in love in the World to come. Ergo.

8. They that shall have perfect rest in the world to come, shall dwell securely
therein, and shall be at rest from the fear of evil. Now Gods elect shall have
perfect rest in the world to come, as it is written, there remains a rest for
the people of God. Heb. 4. 9. and again, It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled
rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels. Ergo. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7
Which proposition thus proved, may be applied first themselves and others,
abundance of holy and happy security in this Life, and say, that the Saints in
the latter times shall have so much rest and tranquillity, that none shall be
able to make them afraid, neither shall they fear any evil, present or to
come.

But these are much mistaken for it has been showed before that the blessing
of perfect security is not to be enjoyed in this world, but only in that which
is to come. And how can we expect such a blessing in this World, seeing it is
well known that as long as we live here, we are still under a possibility of
sinning and under a possibility of suffering for sin? and can we be free or
safe from the fear of evil as long as we are in such a condition? surely no,
because every known act of sin begets in men the fear of punishment, and every
punishment for sin, begets the fear of another punishment, away then with this
conceit.

Again, if Gods Elect shall dwell securely from al fear of evil in the World to
come, then this may inform us that it is a great favor and mercy of God for
any to be of the number of his Elect; and no marvel that Saint Paul was
thankful to God for the election of some amongst the Ephesians, and for the
election of some amongst the Thessalonians, for he knew this election of theirs
to be a great grace and favor of God, wherefore they that have a share in this
grace, can never be sufficiently thankful for it, considering that by virtue
of it they shall enjoy many privileges in the World to come, and this of
perfect and happy security amongst the rest. And that we may be abundantly
thankful for it, we must sti^l be exhorted to use all diligence, that are many
make our calling and election sure to our selves, ^ Pet. 1. 10. for as without
this assurance we cannot, so by virtue of it we shall be abundantly thankful
for this grace.

Thirdly, if we desire to partake of this blessing in the World to come, we
must endeavor whiles we live here to perform such conditions, as have the
promise of perfect and happy security annexed to them, that is to say;

1. We must hearken to Gods Counsel with obedient hearts, Pro. 1. 33.

2. We must trust in God with all our hearts, Pro. 29. 25.

3. We must approve our selves to be still his covenant People, Heb. 4. 9.

And then without doubt we shall dwell securely in the World to come, according
to Gods Promise.

The other Proposition is, that Reprobates shall 2. Propo.
be afraid in the World to come: that is, They shall be perplexed with the
fear of evil in that World, they shall still fear the displeasure of God, the
displeasure of Christ, the displeasure of the Saints with a slavish fear, they
shall still fear the Pains, Punishments and Torments, which are to be suffered
by them in that World, and that with a perplexed fear.

And for proof hereof, these Arguments may be produced.

1. If the perplexed fear of evil be a spiritual punishment belonging unto
Reprobates in this World, then they shall have much more experience of it in
that which is to come.

Now the perplexed fear of evil is a spiritual punishment belonging unto such
in this world, as may appear by these passages. The strangers shall fade away
and be afraid out of their close places, Psalm. 18. 45. They shall be afraid;
pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them: they shall be in pain as a Woman
that travelleth, they shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall be as
flames, Isa. 13. 8. in that day shall Egypt be like unto Women, it shall be
afraid and fear, because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of Hosts, which
he shakes over it. Esaias. 19. 16. The sinners in Zion are afraid fearfulness
has surprised the Hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring
fire: Esaias 33. 14. from all which places we may gather that the perplexed fear
of evil is a spiritual punishment belonging unto Reprobates in this world, and
if so, how can they escape the full measure of it in that which is to come?
seeing spiritual punishments in this life are but the first fruits of a full
crop to be received hereafter.

2. They that shall be afraid of the last judgment, shall be perplexed with the
fear of evil in the world to come. Now Reprobates shall be afraid of the last
judgment, for they shall hide themselves in the dens and Rock of the
Mountains, and shall say unto the Mountains and Rocks fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?
Rev. 15. 16, 17. Ergo.

3. They that shall have vexing and accusing consciences in the World to come,
shall be perplexed with the fear of evil in that World; but Reprobates shall
have vexing and accusing Consciences in the world to come, Romans 2. 15. Ergo.

4. They that shall suffer Hellish torments in the world to come, shall be
perplexed with the fear of evil in that world: But Reprobates shall suffer
hellish torments in the world to come, Psa. 9. 17. Ergo.

And this latter Proposition may be applied thus:

First, It confirms that divine Maxim, which has been often repeated, viz.
That it had been good for Reprobates if they had never been born: For if they
had never been born, they could never have had any experience of such perplexed
fears, neither in this world, nor in that which is to come: But now seeing they
have been, are, or shall be born, they cannot avoid them.

Secondly, It may inform us, That it shall be worse with them in the world to
come, in respect of this fear, then it can be with them in this life: For
though, whiles they live here, they may tremble, fear, and be much astonished,
by reason of Gods Judgments; yet hereafter they shall be much more astonished
in this respect.

Thirdly, It should admonish all, whiles we live here, to provide for our own
safety, that we may dwell securely, and may be free from fear of evil, in the
world to come. And for this end,

1. We must still pray for the blessing of pardon and reconcilion; which
blessing, if we can obtain before our death, we shall be safe from the fear of
evil in the next world.

2. We must still pray for the blessing of inward peace, and assurance of
conscience; which if we can obtain before our death, we shall be safe from the
of evil in the next world.

3. We must still pray for the spirit of Adoption; which if we can obtain
before our death, we shall be safe from the fear of evil in the next world, and
shall be able to say with the Apostle, We have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear again; but we have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry Abba, Father, Romans 8.

4. We must still pray for the spirit of Love, that it may increase and abound
more and more in us; which if we can obtain before our death, then we shall be
perfect in love hereafter in the next world; and this perfect love will cast
out all slavish fear of evil, and make us dwell securely for ever.

Finally, By all that has been said, touching the different condition of Gods
Elect and Reprobates in the world to come, we may plainly perceive the error of
such as plead for Universal Redemption, and say, That Christ by his Death has
purchased Eternal Redemption for all and every one of Mankind, none of them
excepted.

Which bold assertion must needs be erroneous; because it crosses all such
Scripture passages, as do by way of Antithesis describe a different condition
of Mankind in the world to come. And if there shall be such and so many
differences betwixt men and men in the world to come, as have been before
discovered, how can all and every one of them agree, or be equal, in the grace
of Redemption? Or, if all men agree, and be equal in the grace of Redemption,
how can there be such differences betwixt them in the world to come? Doubtless
there shall be no oppositive differences betwixt the redeemed of the Lord in
the next world: But all such differences shall be betwixt the redeemed, and the
not redeemed.

Wherefore I may safely say, That the grace of Eternal Redemption is the
privilege of Gods Elect, and was purchased only for them, not for all and
every one of Mankind: And our Savior plainly intimated so much, when he said,
I lay down my life for the sheep, Joh. 10. 15. And lest any should think that
by sheep in this place we are to understand all and every one of Mankind, he
does elsewhere distinguish between sheep and goats, Matthew. 25. that we may
understand by sheep the whole company of Gods Elect, and by goats, the whole
company of Reprobates.

And though the Scripture says in some places, That Christ dyed for all, and
tasted Death for all, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Heb. 2. 9. yet we must know, that in these,
and such like places, the word All is not taken absolutely, for all without
exception; but restrictively, for all the Elect, or for some of all Nations and
all conditions: And in this sense the word All does but signify many in the
Doctrine of Man's Redemption: for which cause it is often expounded in Scripture
by the word many; as when it is said, Christ gave his life a ransom for many,
Mat. 20. 28. He shed his blood for many, Matthew. 26. 28. He was once offered, to
bear the sins of many, Hebr. 9. 28.

Away then with the Doctrine of Universal Redemption: It has been too long
preached by some, and by such as know not how to content themselves and the
people longer then they are harping upon this string. But methinks the
different condition of Mankind, of Elect and Reprobates, in the world to come,
should make them ashamed to own this Doctrine any longer; because it is not
possible for them to reconcile this Doctrine of Universal Redemption with the
Doctrine of the World to come: For the former Doctrine communicates the benefit
of Christ's Death unto all and every one of Mankind; but the latter denies it
unto many, yea, unto all the Reprobate sort of Mankind: And so, for the
present, I conclude this point.

The Lord give you understanding in all things needful for you to know.

Imprimatur,

Januar. 19. 1650. Joseph Caryl.

FINIS.

