LES FEMMES ILLUSTRES OR THE Heroic Harrangues OF THE Illustrious Women

Written in FRENCH by the Exqui^ Pen of MONSIEUR de CUDDERY

GOVERNOR OF NOSTRE D^.

Translated By JAMES INNES.

EDINBURGH,

Printed by THOMAS BROWN (...) GLEN and JOHN Book Sellers Anno (...) 168^

TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS MARY of ESTE DUCHESS of ALBANY and YORK:
MADAM.
TO Celebrate Eternally the Honor of famous Heroins and perfectly to Sotemnise
the glory of the fair Sex, do Illustrious Queens and Princes prostrate
themselves at your Royal feet: The noise of your Bounteous worth has so
over-ecchoed the specious Universe, that they (but from your Royal
perfections) co^ld never hope to obtain, what they have long strayed through
the World in: quest of: Become now weary with wandering, and toiled with
fatigue, pity pleads in their behalf for lodging, and charity proclaims aloud
that their glory will be for ever Eclipsed, if the Rays of your Heroic and
Noble Virtue dissipate not the clouds which benight it, by taking them in
protection: Their Garlands will want the choicest Laurels of their acquired
praise, if your Royal Excellencies Crown not the Trophies of their merit by
sustaining their conquests: And they will not only ly always under the lash of
calumny, but be irrecoverably ship wracktif their recourse to your Royal
Highness for defense be rejected. Such has been the impatient Ambition of these
Magnanimous Spirits, to be adrest to you for particular tuition, that if they
could have traveled in English without a guide, they would have certainly
rendered themselves where I have made bold to present them, knowing you only
worthy to maintain their glory. Oppressed with the stormy malice of frowning
fortune, they fly to the altars of security, plunged in grief they Solace
themselves with entreating for shelter from untainted honor; and though by
redoubled misfortuns they be surcharged with sorrow, they shall retake their
courage under your Royal Tutelage, being fully assured that your Illustrious
Patronage is of sufficient power to stop the froward carrier of volatile
unconstancy, and justly persuaded to find a delectable retreat, where the
Princly Pattern of accomplished Virtue, and the glorious Model of sincer
perfection is presented to Posterity.

May your Royal Highness therefore, in bestowing a favorable look on
Illustrious Ladies, (whose a^duous desires have been to parta^ of a comfortable
and delicate ^^^^rity with you;) Be graciously pleased to accept of my thus
consecrating this my Translation of the first part of the Heroic Harrangues
that thereby I may avouch, I have safly lodged these renowned worthies in the
closet of Princely Excellency; Have securely harbored them in the haven of
safty; have quietly laid to rest their wearied ghosts under the shadow of Roy,
all Goodness: And in fine, sound them out a Noble repose, where the only refuge
could be had worthy of Heroic Souls. Since then in your Royal Person virtue
is completely perfect, and does from thence so splendidly renew its luster that
to defend the interest of famous He^iones must be Universally acknowledged your
propriety, I humbly beg liberty to leave them to the peaceable enjoyment of
^our Illustrious inclination, having Royalty for their Tutilare Angel, and a
glorious resting place in recompense of their sufferings. Your esteem Madam, is
the onlything can render this unpolisht work perfect and your approving of my
oblation will render me most happy, in obtaining the honor of presenting my
Royal Princes with these humble devoirs of.

Madam Your ROYAL HIGHNESSES Most Humble, Most Faithful and ever Devoted
Servant, JAMES INNES.

THE AUTHORS DEDICATION TO LADIES
I Present the Illustrious Women, to the most Illustrious of Women, and
conjures them to take them in protection; By sustaining the Glory of these
heroic persons, they mantain their own propriety, and by a generous Interest
defend themselves in defending these: for me beautiful and Lovlie Ladies, who
have always been the adorer of your Sex, if so be this work please you, and
contribute any thing to your Reputation, I shall arrive at the end I have
proposed to my self; Yet nevertheless, if by that goodness which is natural to
you, You will protect me; And if the malice of men should induce me to the
necessity of having need of so (...) a refuge, tell them, if you please; what I
am going to say to you, and I shall endeavor to make them silent, if you judge
me worthy ^o speak. Let them know then, For instructing them of my design,
that the fortunat sucesse I had of the translation which I made of the
harrangues of Manz^^^, has partly obliged me to undertake these, I desire to
see if I can work as livelie in original as in Copy, and that I wander not,
because I travel without a guide. But if they think it strange that I have
chosen Women for expressing my meditations, and imagine that Oratorical Art is
absolutely unknown to you, abuse them I conjure you, and defend me with so much
Eloquence, that they shall be compelled to confess there is no want of it in
you, and consequently I am not deceived in my choice: Certainly among the
thousands of rare qualities that the Ancients have noticed in your Sex; They
have always said that you possess Eloquence, without art, without Labor, and
without Pains, and that nature gives liberally to you, that which stud^^ sells
to us at a dear rate: That you are born the same which we become at last, and
that scailitie of speaking well is natural to you, in place of being acquired
by us. Yet it may be they will say to me, if Ladies be so naturally Eloquent
why do not I make them punctually observe all parts of orations, as Rhetoric
teaches in the schools? What may not be ^een in this book (Pardon me famous
Lady (...) the harsh words I am going to speak (...)) Exerdes, Mariationes,
Epilo^ues, Exag^^ (...). Metapb^^^s, D^gresssit^^s, (...) and all the
beautiful figures, which usuallie d^^enrich works of this kind. To this I can
answer them, that they are heir more fitly placed. The delicacie of art
consists in making believe there is none at all. You carry flies on your
faces, which by your dressing are put there, to make the whiteness of your
Complexion shine the clearer: Yet they are placed so orderly, that it might be
said they are living, and that they fly at hasard. You make curles and rings of
your hair, but with such a subtle negligence and agreeable cairlesness, that
it might be judged (...) the wind, then your hands had been helping to nature.
Just so heir I have endeavored to make my Heroines Eloquent; Yet I have not
thought that the Eloquence of a Lady should be the same of a Master of Arts;
The li^le St^e^^ and the Classes the Colleges and the Palace the Court and the
Vniversiies; Have as differing ways as if they were a people far from other:
And what would they do to see a Lady of the Let ne country among the young.
People of the Court: They would look upon her as a Ma^ster, and scorn her.
This, famous Persons, is what you have to say to them upon the subject ^^hand,
but if they insist that I have observed no order of Chronology heir, how I
have placed my (...); That they will see C^e^pas a before (...) after Zenob^a,
etc. Tell them it is ^ue, but this error is voluntar, and if I dare say,
Judicious. I have imitated at this time the Skill of their who make nosegayes,
who mix by a regular confusion Roses and Jassamine, the flower of Orange, and
the Pomgraned, the Tulips and the junquille, to the end that from this so
pleasing mixture of coulors there appear ane agreeable diversity still to
please the sight; Just so heir I have chosen in history the finest matter and
the most different that I could; And have so orderly mixed, and so fitly
concealed them, that it is almost impossible but the reader shall be diverted.
But divyn persons, if any remark slightlie that among Heroines, there are more
afflicted then content; Ansuer, it is ane ordinary thing, that fortune and
virtue are two old enemies, that all beauties are not happy and that
compassion and pity are not the least agreeable and least touching
resentments which this sort of reading can give. You have yet to answer these
who find it strange that the Title of my Book should be the Illustrious WOMEN
or the HEROIC HARRANGUES: And who will say, that Women and Ha^rangues are not
the same thing you have I say, to answer them that the example of Herod^^es
authorizes me, and condemns them: And if it was not forbidden him to name the
nine books of his history M^lpomene, Er^stone, Cleo, Vnauia, Terficor,
Eurerpe, (...), Calli^p^ia, and Pila^^ea, which are the names of the nine
Muses, these who are Good esse and not Books, this which I have do may very
well be permitted me.

Moreover if it be observed, that in part of my Harrangues, there are some
Meditations which have been seen in MODERN Tragedies: Where these same Heroins
are introduced: I do conjure you to hinder (...) from being so unjust as to
suspect my having taken them from thence And for my vindication say if you
please, that there are certain Universal Notions which necessarlie occurres to
all the World, when they treat of the same Subjects. Further if there be any
strange thing in my work, that has not been taken from the Modernes: But which
they and I have taken from Antiquity. I believed it requisite to adorn those
Harrangues with all that History had that was pleasant and remarkable,
concerning the Subject I treat of; And I have made a curious enough search
whereby to merit some Glory: However I was so scrupulous in it, that I have
marked with a different caracter all that it did furnish me with, so much for
Meditation to make slanderers silent: as for envy, I have no such esteem of my
self, as to dare believe, that I can make it speak. In fine to make an end of
answering ali the objections that can be made against me, if any does take the
Medalles of those Heroines, for Medailles made for pleasure, and think them
false, because their inscriptions are French, in stead of those which are true,
that are Greek or Latin: Answer if you please that they who are curious to
know, will defend me from the ignorance of them who know not: And that I have
made these inscriptions in our Language in favors of them who do not
understand Latin, and who cannot read Greeck.

Behold Noble Ladies, what you have to say for me, or to speak more truly. what
I had to say to you, for to end this dicourse by which I have begun, if so be,
you are satisfied I cannot faill to be contented: And if this Triumphing Arch
which I have set up, to the Glory of your Sex, be not judged unworthie of you,
it shall not be the last work I shall undertake for you, I meditat a second
Volumn of Harrangues, whose subject are no less great then the first: They have
also something more peireing, and more proper for divertisement: But you think
it convenient after this first race, that I withdraw to the end of the careire,
that before I make a second, I behold the scaffolds, and try to know in your
eyes if my adress has pleased you.

ARTEMISA TO SOCRATES. THE FIRST HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AFter that Artemisa had employed the most knowing Architectures of her time,
to build a glorious Monument, which was since one of the seven wonders of the
World: the love she had for her dear Mausole, was not fully sa^isfied; she
caused Socrates and Theopompus, the two most famous Orators of antiquity come
from Greece, and by truly Royal Liberality, she oblidged these great men to
set their Eloquence at work in favors of the King her Husband, that they might
eternise his memory; it was in asking this Favor, that this fair comfortless
spoke to them in this manner, when the excess of her love made her forget that
she was speaking before the famous Socrates.

ARTEMISA to SOCRATES.
IT is from you, O Famous Orator, that expect the immortality of Mausole; It is
you must give a Soul to all the Statues I set up; It is you must make-(...) a
Tomb, which the revolutions of Ag^^ cannot destroy, and which will eternise
Mausole, Socrates, and Artemisa together. Do not think that I believe Time or
Fortune will respect, the Gold, the Marble, the Jaspire, the Porphire, and the
Oriental Alabaster, which I employ to build Him a sumptuous Monument? No, I
know that these three hundred Pillars, in which all order is carefully
observed, whose foundations are so sollidli^ fixed, whose Chapiters, are so
magnifick, and where Art surpasses the Matter, shall one day be but pitiful
Ruins, and after a little Time shall be nothing at all; those low Sculptures,
which are at the four Faces of the Sepulcher, shall Successively be defaced by
injurious Seasons, and but with pain shall some imperfect figures be there
perceived, of all those things which we admire to day. Those Obelisques which
seem to defy Tempests, may be one day beat down with Thunder, and turned (...)
Dust, these smoking Vessals, those extinguished Terches, these trophies of
Arms, and all the Ornaments that Architecture is capable of, shall not hinder
the destruction of this Work: In fine Socrates. When I have wasted all my
Treasures for this Tomb, and that by the skillful hands of Scopas, of Briaxes,
of Timothy and of Leochares. I have put it in condition to pass for one of the
wonders of the World, if after all this none take care to preserve his Memory
by writtings: The statues which I have set up, the Gold, the Marble, the
Jaspire, the Porphire, the Alabaster, the Pillars, the low Sculpte^^ the
Obelisques the smoking Vessals, the extinguished Torches, and all the
Ornaments of Building (...) in the work, shall not (I say) hinder (...) his
Architectures, his Sculptors, and Artemisa her self from being buried in
Oblivion, and from be (...) known to the Ages which come (...) never been: It
belongs then to you (...) (...) to give more sollid foundations to this
structure: It is you must animat these Marbles by magnificent Inscriptions; It
is you must revive Mausole, it is you must make me live Eternally, although I
feel my Death very near approaching: I desire not Socrates, that you make
Elogies of Busire, or that you give praises to Helen, as you have done at other
times, I give you a more easy and more Illustrious Subject, the virtues of
Mausole, and the lawful love of Artemisa, are a more Noble subject, then the
inhumanity of Busire, or the slightness of Helen your Eloquence shall have no
crime to disguise: All the craft that Rhotorick teaches for Imposing of Fables,
and rendering them seemingly true, will but serve you to persuade to truth: and
without Printing any thing of Sophistes, it shall suffice that you writ as an
Orator, as a Philosopher and as a Historian together, Eloquence that rare
privilege, which the gods have bestowed on men as a raie of their divinity,
should never be employed but for protecting innocence; or eternising virtue.
They who have made a godess of persuasion, have not designed to render it a
slave to the Capricioes of men: and doubtless they know as well as I that
Eloquence is a gift of Heaven which none ought to profane, the power it has of
excit^ing or appeasing, the (...) violent passions; of softening the hardest
hearts; of persuading the most incredulous; of forcing the most obstinate, of
constraining even to our will, and of (...) us in opposition to our selves, by
quitting our (...) opinions to follow these of others; all these advantages, I
say, have not been given him to serve himself with injustice: On the contrary,
it is that which the gods have chosen to make the World see virtue as lovely as
it is, and to cause it every day make new conquests. It is by possessing of it,
that men acquire Immortality by making others immortal: It is it which in
^ight of Time and change of Things preserves the me^^o^ie of brave actions; It
is it which maugre the destruction of Kingdoms and Empires, does perpetuate the
(...) of Kings and Emperors, and when their ^^tie (...) are no more in their
Tombs, when their Pa^ces are destroyed, their most famous Towns desolated,
(...) their very Kingdoms have changed their Names, (...) the whole Earth see
an image of their vertu^^ Yea many ages after their death they have lived among
men, they have still Friends and Subjects, they are consulted for the
Government of their lives, their good qualities are imitated, they have new
Elogies made them, envy finishes not their Glory, they get all the Praises the
merit, there if so great veneration had for them, that People go not to the
places where they dwelt, without some kind of fear; and if there yet remain any
old Ruins of their Buildings, some does respect that in them which time did
not regaird, they look upon them with pleasure, and prefers them to all the
Magnificence of the Modernes, and the Limners also adorn their Tablets, with
their Illustrous Ruins, and with eternising their memories. After all this
wonder not Socrates, that I so passionately desire, your Eloquence to make a
Panegirick, for my dear lord: I know in what esteem it was through all Greece,
and I certainly foresee that Ages to come will render it Justice. All the
writtings that bear the Name of Socrates, or of Theopompus, shall be
reverenced, by time, by fortune and by all men. They shall pass among all
Nations, and in all Ages without having any wrong done to them, and shall
carry win^ them the reputation of them whom they speak of: Also there may be
Famous Persons found, who by the esteem they have of your work, will make you
speak of Languages, which have not yet been invented, who by the brightness of
your Glory, will believe they add sorn thing to their own by publishing of them
Speak then (...), speak then Socrates to the end, that all men may speak after
you. But do not think, that there are any thoughts of vaniti^, mingled with the
Prayer that I make to you; No Socrates, I will not have you search in my Person
not Life, whereof to me a Magnificent Elogie, I will not have you speak of my
Noble Birth; I will not that you tell I was Born with the Crown of
Hallicarnassus; I will not have you tell that though a Woman, I did know the
the Act of Sovereign Reigning; I will not that you acquant Posterity, with the
Extraordinary Esteem the great Xerxes had of me, I will not have you tell that
^ made a Voayage into Greece with him. I will not have you make known that I
had the first Place in his Co^^ (...) and that mine was ever followed; I will
not (...) you speak of the Exploits I did in that War, nor (...) exceeding
Price which the Athenians promised to any that would deliver me into their
hands: Only I Will have you tell that Artemisa was Queen of Caria. Because she
Married Mausole who was King of it: That Artemisa above all Virtues, did ever
love that which is most Necessary to her Sex: That Artemisa never had any
other Passion, But that of perfectly loving Her Husband; that Artemisa after
losing him, lost all desire of Life; and in fine, that Artemisa after that
Misfortune, had no other care but the Celebrating of his Memory. But after you
have said all those things, and praised Mausole as much as he Merited, after I
say, you have painted out my Grief, or to speak better my despair as great as
it is, forget not to declaire to Posterity, that after I hade Builded the most
Sumptuous Monument that never was seen; I could not find one Urne that I
belived worthy to enclose his Ashes. Cristall, Alabaster, and all the Precious
Stones which Nature produces, cannot me thinks abundantly testify my
affection: It must needs be Noble and Liberal, to give him an Urne of Gold
covered with Diamonds, but to give him the Heart for an Urne, it must be
Artemisa. There it is Socrates, where I shut up the Ashes of my dear lord;
there it is Theopompus, where I lay to rest his dear Relics, waiting
impatiently, till his Tomb be in condition to receive the Urne a live which I
have given him. It is truly my Heart should serve for an Urne to the Ashes of
my dear Mausole; Me thinks I give them a new life by putting them there, and
again me thinks they Communicate that mortal coldness to me which I feel in
them. Moreover it is very just that since Mausole was always in my heart while
he lived, he should also be there after his death: May be if I had put his
Ashes in this Urue of Gold all coverd with Jewels, may be (I say) some unjust
Conqueror should come to open his Tomb, and with a Profane and Sacralegious
hand take away the Urne, and cast his Ashes with the Wind, and separate mine
from those of Mausole. But as I use them, we shall be inseparable. There is no
Tyrrant can trouble my rest, because none ^an divide me from my dear lord.
Behold, Socrates, what I will have you say of me. But for my dear lord, forget
nothing that may be Glorious to him, nor any thing that was Effectually in him.
Tell that he was feared of his Enemies, beloved of his Subjects, and in
Veneration among the Princes his Neighbors. Speak of the great qualities of
his Soul, as well as of the favors he received from Nature; Praise his Valior
in War, his Sweetness in peace, and his Equity and Meekto all the World, In
fine from the Idea of an accomplished Prince, and you shall make the true
Picture of Mausole; Yet after you have said all things of this Noble Husband;
Speak zealously of the love he had for me, and of that which I had always for
him. ^aint this passion as strong as pure and as faithful as it is; undeceive
these who believe that Crym is the nourisher of Love, and who thinks that a
Lawful passion can be neither fervent, long or agreeable; Let them see that
Mausole and I give an exemple which destroys their Experience and all their
Reasons: Because as our Love had always much Innocence, it did not forbear to
have great Zeal, in lasting even to death, and being infinitely agreeable to us;
Speak then with the Elogie, of that holy Tie, which forces two Virtuous
Persons to Love each Other Eternally. And if possible make haste to satisfy me
Employ also your Eloquence toperswade them who work at the Tomb of Mausole, to
make as great dispatch as they possibly can, in advancing their work, for mine
begins to be finished. The few ashes that remain of my dear Mausole, will be
quickly consumed, and that once done I have no more to do in the World, all
that is on the Earth can no more touch my Spirit: I am insensible of all things
but grief, and the only desires of my Soul are to be Reunited to my dear
Mausole, and to know certainly that you take care of his Glory; your own
should oblidge you to this, compassion should carry you forward in it, and if
it be permitted to propose other recompenses to Philosophers then the sole
desire of well doing, consider what the expenses are that I am at, for Building
of this Magnificent Tomb, and judge from thence that she who spends so much of
her Treasures upon dumb Marbles, will not be ingrate when you speak to the
Glory of her dear Mausole; But whatsoever diligence you make to satisfy me,
nor the Architectures nor you shall so soon make an end of your work as I shall
finish mine: and if I be not mistaken I shall dy^ soon enough, to permit you to
Illustrat the Panegor^^ of Mausole, with the death of his Arte^^isa.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THis Virtuous QUEEN obtained her wish, Socrates and Theopompus did speak of
her dear Mausole, but in so advant ageous terms, that some-have acoused them of
flattery for her Money: As for her, it was not without reason that she pressed
the Builders, for this Sumptuous Monument was scarce finished, before she had
her Place in it. They who did begin this Mervellous work left it not
unfinished: It was of a long time one of the wonders of the World, and Her
Glory which had more sollid foundations then it, continuous yet in the Memory
of Men, with that of Mausole, and the Illustruous Artemisa.

MARIAMNE TO HEROD. THE SECOND HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
FEw are Ignorant that Herod put his Wife to death, but all do not know what
She said in her defense, the two Historians who writ of her; One was not in her
time, and the other was a Flatterer of Her Husband: So that it belongs to us to
try the Truth, in the Ignorance of the one and Malice of the other; for me I
acknowledge I am ranked in Mariamnes party, and whither it be by Pity or
Reason, whither I say her beauty has blinded or her Innocence made me clear
sighted, I cannot believe that a Princess descended from the Macabees
Illustrous Blood, had put a blemish on her Reputation: But I will rather love
to believe that Herod was still Herod, I would say an unjust and bloody man:
Behold then the Apology of this unfortunat Beauty, who has more Excellency
in her mouth then is in mine. Hear her then speak I Conjure you, and remark in
her Noble Pride the true Caralter of Ma^iamnes Humor.

MARIAMNE TO HEROD.
IT is neither fear of death, nor desire of life that makes me speak to day:
and were I but assure that posterity would do me justice when I shall be no
more. I my self would help my Accusers and Enemies: I would look upon the last
of my days as the first of my happiness, and would wait the hour of my Death
with so great, Constancy, that it should render these who Persecute me
confused. But since they would as much against, my virtue as my life, it were
great Coward liness to endure a Calumny without repelling it: Innocence and
Glory are two such precious Jewels, that all things should be done to preserve
them. Suffer then my lord (if it be suitable for the Granddaughter of Hircane
to call you so) that to let you see the purity of my Soul, I recall to your
Memory, what you are, and what I am, to the end that Comparing my past Actions
with the Accusations which are now made against me, you may some way prepare
your Spirit to believe these truths which I ought to tell it. Doubtless you
have not forgot that I am come of that famous Race, which for many Ages by past
has given Kings to Judea: That all my Predecessores did Justly hold that
Scepter which you have, that by their Birth right they carried the Crown which
Fortune has put upon your Head, and that if things had been according to
ordinar Order, so far from being my Judge, I might have reckoned you in the
Number of my Subjects, and lawfully taken that power of you, which you Usurp
over me; However as this high birth oblidged me to a not common Virtue, Hircane
did no sooner command me to be your Wife, knowing th^^ obedience I owed him,
without considering the in-equality that was betwixt us. I received you for my
husband, and although that my inclinations (thanks to Heaven) were quit
contrate to yours, you know in what manner I have lived with you: and if you
had need to expect more Complacency, and more Testimony of Affection from me,
when your very Alliance was as Honorable to me, as mine was Glorious to you.
Since that my lord, even to the death of Hircan, what have I done? what have I
said? what have I thought against you? Nothing, but that I could not rejoice in
your Victories, because they were fatal to my Relations, and again, because I
had a heart as great as the Nobleness of my Birth, I could not step upon the
The one of my Predecessors without shedding tears: Because I could not do it
in Justice; at least in the quality of Herod's Wife. But you know that being
unable to hinder a just Resentment which Reason and Nature has given me I took
all possible care to conceall my grief from you. I endeavored my self at that
time to justify you in my mind; and seeing that you had Ambition without
Cruelty, I have rather pitted then accused you. I called that Passion the error
of great Spirits, and the infallible sign of a Person born for great things.
How many times have I said to my self, if fortune would give you lawful
Enemies, you would be the greatest Prince of the Earth? How many times have I
wished that great and Mavelous Spirit which you have, that invincible heart
which makes you undertake all things, might carry you against a People over
whom you might be a Conqueror and not an Usurper. Alace, did you know all the
Vows that I have made for your Glory, you would not believe me capable of
having desires to Tenebrate its Splendour by forgetting my own. And perhaps it
is for that fault that Heaven punishes me; yet I cannot wish that I had dove
it; and although I see my self to day in hazard of losing my Life, I cannot
repent, for having preserved you by my Counsels, when con^are to all
appearance you would trust the Traitor Barsaphane, I do not Reproach you of
that good office. I ^nlie Remember you of it, thereby to let you see I have
still done all I could. But since that I avouch that I have no more lived so, I
have no more concilled my sorrows, I have no more stopped my voice, I have
weeped, I have cried, I have excessivly groaned and complained; But what less
could the Grand Daughter of Hircane do, who is expired by your orders and by
your cruelties? What less, I say, could the Sister of young Aristobulus do,
who perished by your Inhumanitie, for securing the Scepter in your hands? Ah!
No, no, Patience would have been Criminal at that time. I was without doubt
born for the Throne, but I would not mount it, because I could not without
Treading on the Bodies of my Grandfather and Brother. That Throne was wett
with their Blood, I ought at least to wash it with my tears; since it is not
permitted me to shed that of their Enemies. Woe is me! what object worthy of
compassion, was that, to see the Successor of so many Kings, that Reverend old
man, receive his death, from him whom he had made his allay; ^ tremble with
horror only to think of it, nor could I withdraw my thoughts, if the image of
young Aristobulus did not present it self to my eyes. What had that unfortunate
Youth done to merit such unhapiness? He was Young, he was Virtuous, he was
brave in all things, and his greatest fault was doubtless, that he resembled
me. But alace! that fault should have been advantageous to him at such a time:
for if it was true that you had such Passionate Love for me, as you would have
constantly persuaded me was in your heart; though Aristobulus had not been my
Brother, though he had not been innocent, you should have always respected my
Image in him. The Resemblance of a person Beloved, has made Arms fall from
most cruel hands, and caused them change their designs. But insensible that I
am what do I, to speak in this manner to him who would do so to my own Life;
And who not content with overturning tho Thrones of my Fathers, causing kill my
Grandfather, drown my Brother and extirpating all my Race, would also this day
ravish me of Honor, by unjustlie accusing me of three faults, which I could
never be capable of? I have been so little Accustomed to commit them, and am so
innocent of those which are imposed upon me that I doubt if I can well Remember
the Accusations which are made against me. Nevertheless, I think my Enemies
say, that I have sent my ^ictu^e to A^th^ny; that I have had too particular
intelligence with Joseph; and that I would have attempted your Life. O! Heavens
is it possible, that Mariamne is oblidged to answer such things? And may it not
be sufficient to tell, it is Mariamne whom they Accuse, to say that she is
Innocent? No, I will see that without remembering my state, or my virtue, I must
put my self in condition of being unjustlie condemned: And although my birthis
such that I ought not to give account of my Actions but to God alone; yet I
must Vindicat my self before my Accusers, my enemies and my Judges together.
You say then, that I have sent my Picture to Anthony, whom I know not, and who
did never see me: and without noticing any Circumstance, if not that he was
then in Egypt, yet you would have this Accusation pass for a constant truth;
But tell me a little, what Limner drew it? who was he who carried it? who are
they to whom Anthony has showen it? where are the letters he writ to thank me
for so great a favor? For it is not to be believed that he has received so
extraordinary a Testimony of my affection without giving me thanks. The heart
of Mariamne is not so little Glorious a conquest, though there have been many
Kings in the Earth, who would have esteemed it a Glory to have done it, and
who would not have done all things for deserving it. Nevertheless there appears
no signs of the care that Anthony has taken, either to Conquer or to Preserve
me: And surely in that Occasion, I must not only have forgot my proper
Glory, but altogether lost my Reason, to have dreamed of such a crime as I am
Accused of. But if it had been in the time that you did all things for him,
even in sending all your Jewels to him, and opposing the Roman Empire for his
sake, I had been somewhat judicious in my choice; And I ought not to believe
that Anthony who stimulates him. self by Generositie, should betray a man from
whom he ^rath had so many Obligations, for a person whom he knows not at all.
But if it be since that, that you have not been well together, by the divices
of Cleopatra, there is yet less appearance there: And I should have been very
inconsiderat^, to have given arms my self to my Ene^^ie; (for at that time
your interest was also mine) and moreover, what seeming truth can there be, if
I were a^ infamous as I am innocent, that at the time when all the Earth was
filled with the love of Anthony and Cleopatras I should have sent him my
Picture; Had Rome found that expedient, to cure her of the charms of that
Egyptian? Had the Empire need of that Remedy, or had I any desire to
Sacrifice my self to the vanity of that unfortunat Princess, whose jealousy
would not have failled to have been most highly Refulgent? No, Herod, nothing
of this is come to pass: And the Innocence of Mariamne is so great, that her
very Enemies, cannot propose crimes to her seeminglic true. And moreover, you
know that that which is called Beauty in me, never gave me vanity: And that I
have always taken more pains, to be Virtuous then fair. Yet I do not deny,
that there has been a Picture of Mariamne, which has passed among all Princes
of the Earth, and which perhaps will be a long time preserved there. Yes,
Herod, there is an invisible Image of Mariamne, which wanders through the
World; which makes her innocent Conquests; and which without her consent, makes
secret Enemies to you. Her high-Birth, her Virtue, her Patience, and your
Cruelty, are the only Colors that are made use of in this Picture: And the
Blood which I am going to shed, shall doubtless perfect the rendering of it
adorable to Posterity. But to answer the second Accusation that is made
against me, which though false, hinders not my changing of Colon^, by the
confusion I am in, to be constrained to speak of such a thing: I shall say with
joy, that thanks to Heaven, I have no other witness against me but you who
during the time of this supposed crime was at Laodicea: And by Consequence, was
incapable of answering for my Actions. So well am I assured, that neither your
eyes, nor your ears, could declare any thing against my innocence: And
although that your Court be all composed of your slaves, or of my enemies; that
your veris Sister who hates me, and through envy and by interest of State,
has observed with Extraordinary care, even the least things that I have done
or spoken, (I say) I am ver^^ certain, that she dares not maintain before me,
^o have heard on word, or remarked one single look, which could make the
modesty of Mariamne suspected. It is no^ but that I know very well she can
tell a lie: (...) which makes me speak with so much boldness, is (...) I know
me to have more Virtue then she has Malice: and that having Heavon for my
Protector, I cannot believe that if at least I do perish, I shall not obtain
Grace to die in that manner, that your injustice and my innocence shall be
equally manifested. And truly at this time we need but open our eyes to see
that these Accusations which are made against me, are but pretexts to loss me.
For what likelie-hood is there, if I were guilty of such a crime, that I would
have chosen the husband of Salome, my cruelest Enemy, and Herod's confident?
But a co^fide^t to that degree that all things were trusted to him: (...) there
was no wicked design, which was not communicated to him. He was partner in all
your crimes. He was the jailer and not lover of Mariamne; and to say all: It
was he should plunge the poyniard in my heart, to obey your will. O! Heaven who
did ever see such Testimonies of Love! Why Herod, you might at parting bid me
adieu with tears; you might look upon as you have done, with eyes wherein I saw
but signs of Affection; and at the same time meditate my death. Ah! If you
could (which I doubt not) you might very well also to day, feign that you
believe me culpable to make me die Innocent. And tell me not as a favor, that
this command was the effect of the strong passion you had for me: the death of
the person beloved can never be a Testimony of Affection. Hatred and Love have
not the same operations; they may some times reign successivlie in the heart,
but never together. Every man who loves well lives not without the person
beloved, yet he can always die without her; and her death can never be an
agreeable thought to him. He should regrate his being separated from her; and
not regrate that she died not with him. But your way of loving is only
peculiar to your self, and your inclinations are so Naturally cruel, that
poisons, and daggers, are the best gifts that can be received from yon, when
you would testify your Freindship. Pray you tell me how you can Accomodate all
those things. You say that I have sent my picture to Anthony, and consequently
that I had an intelligence with him: and at the same time, you again Accuse me
of having one with Joseph: because say you, you having trusted to him the thing
in the World, which was of ^greatest Importance to you; and he having
discovered it to me, it is impossible but that I should have given my self
absolutely to him for that advertisment. Consider well Herod, what you say?
Anthony and Joseph, could they be both together in my heart? were these two
rivals of the same quality and merit? And this Mariamne, whose Birth is so
great and Illustrious; whose Soul is so High and so Glorious, that her Noble
pride is by some rather taken for a fault then a virtue; could she be capable
for alike weakness, for two men so different, who could have no conformity
together, if not that it had been equally impossible for them to have touched
my heart, when they would have endeavored it. This conquest is not so easy as
you think: and truly I wonder, that you who could never do it, judges it has
cost others so little. I do acknowledge that Joseph did discover to me the
wicked design that you had against me: but I also avouch, I believed him not. I
did immedia^lie think that it was a Treachery of Salome, who to make me carry
my self the more excessivlie against you, to the end of advancing my death: had
invented that device: imagining with her self, that my death would trouble me
more, then did that of Hircane, and of my brother. And that which made me the
more believe it was so, was that I saw him undertake to persuade me, that I
ought to be infinitle oblidged to you for that excess of love, which you
testified to me at that time: adding also, that he told me not the design, but
when you was ready to return: and that so far from making a Misterious Secret,
he told it in presence of my Mother, and before all my Women. It is certain,
that as I ought also to know all from you, I doubted the truth of what Joseph
told me. I thought being the Mother of your Children you was incapable of such
barbarous thoughts: And in effect, without determinating the matter in my mind,
I waited your return. I received you then with the same Melancholy that I have
alwayies had, since the death of Hireane and Aristobulus, without testifying
any more: and observing all your actions, I acknowledge that I ever doubted the
truth of Joseph's discourse. The malice of his. Wire, made me also more
suspicious: and when I was speaking to you, it is true, I rather designed to
inform my self of the thing, then to reproach you. For if (...) been true that
I had a particular Affection for Joseph, and that I had taken what he said, as
the pure effect of of his compassion to me; I had sooner died then had spoken
of it, and that unfortunate man should have also lived. Nevertheless, behold,
all the Testimonies of good will that he has got from me: no body sales that we
have had too private correspondence together: No body says he has come often
to my appartments; and in fine, I have done nothing for him, but what his most
cruel enemy might have done, if they had known the same thing: surly I should
have rewarded him ill to treat him thus. You say also that hatred and
vengeance, caused me to favor Joseph, after having known your design: but know
that great Spirits never fail by example. The erimes of others gives them so
much horror, that they are never more stronglic confirmed in good, then when
they see evil committed: and for me, I think I should have been less innocent,
if you had been less unjust. In fine, for conclusiones, if Mariamne descended
from so many Illusturous Kings, had desired to give her affection to any, it
should not have been to the husband of Salome, nor to the favorite of Herod:
And if for the punishing of others crimes, she had been capable, she had not
caused him be put to death, whom she believed would preserve her life. You know
too well what was my wonder, when after the discourse which I made to you. I
knew by your answer all was true: I was so surprised, that I almost lost my
speech. Nevertheless I did not foresee the Accusation which is this day made
against me: And the only knowledge of your crime, and of Joseph's innocence,
whom I exposed to your cruelties, caused all my grief. Since that Salome
improving that misfortune for my Ruin, as she designed long ago, has
doubtless persuaded you, that I would attempt your life: and behold the only
crime wherein there can be a witness found against me, but if I be not
deceived, she does more justify then convict me: For what liklie-hood is
there, that in a design of this Importance, I should have trusted a man of so
low condition? And what seeming truth is there, if it were true that I had
correspondence with Joseph, but that it was ^^ther he then I made this
proposition? Used I to (...) with such Persons? Has this man come to my
Appartment? Have I set him beside you? Is he come of my Family? Is he a
Relation to any of My Officers In what place have I spoken to him? in what
manner have I suborned him? Let him show the Jewels that I have given him? Make
him let the money be seen that he has gotten for so great a design? For it is
not Rational, to think that upon simple hope, he would undertake the hazard of
his life. It may be he will answer, that since he had no design to do the deed,
but on the contrare to adverise you, he did not think of a reward. But I can
say to that impostore, that not to give me reason of suspecting him, he always
accepted what I offered to him: And that also not having spoken, and not being
able to show, is a strong and convincing persuasion of his lie: for in fine,
Gold is the Complice of all Crimes and Hope is the only Portion of great
Spirits: But for the Base and Mercenarie, they must be moved by the sight of a
certain reward; otherways that sort of People will not serve you: And too
many Examples of your Reign, should have taught you what I say. Yet though it
be true, that it cannot be made appear, that either I or mine, have had any
dealing with that man, it is not so of Salome your heart and my enemy. It is a
long time since my Women foretold me of it, that contrary to the Custom and
Decorum of the quality she keeps to day, he often went to entertain her, even
in her Closer: However, because I could never stoop to take notice of such
things, and by excess of virtue, did not easily suspect others; I heard that
Discourse without making any Restection upon it. But if you would oblidge them
to give account of so many Conversations as they had together, I am assured
that you would not find them answer you punctuallie. And moreover, in what
place have I taken poison; who prepared it? from whence caused I bring it? And
wherefore, if I had such intentiones, was it necessar to have employed that
man: was is not easy for me, when we have eat so many times together; to have
poisoned you with my own hand, without trusting (...) body? Why should not I
have attempted it at your return from Laodicea, as well as they pretend I have
done after your return from Rhodes, since the unhappie Joseph discovered to me
then your cruel Intentiones, as walk as when the unfortunate Son has told me
since? In fine Herod, all those things are without likeliehood, and there is no
Spirit so ignorant, who sees not clearlie, that if I were not descended from
the Kings of Judea; If I were not virtuous, I should have no enemies; and my
Death should not be resolved upon; I should not have sent my Picture to
Anthony; I should not have had Intelligence with Joseph; I should not have
attempted your life; and consequently mine should have been secure.

But because I am of too Illustrious blood, and because my Soul is too great,
to suffer the baseness and unworthiness of my enemies; Mariamne must die, she
must perish, she must be sacrificed to the hatred of her Persecutores: they
desire it so, and she is resolved to it. Think not unjust and cruel Herod, that
I speak with intention to incline you to pity: I think of preserving my
Reputation, and not of moving your heart. For as I said in the beginning of my
discourse, it is neither fear of death, nor desire of life, that makes me speak
to day. The first prepares Crowns for me, and the other can give me nothing but
troubles. It is not then hope of escaping from the danger I am in, that makes
me take care to justify my self: I know my sentenee is signed my Executioners
are ready to strik off my head, and that my Tomb is already opened to receive
me: But that which moved me to it, was to the end, that all who hear me, may
let Posterity know, that my very enemies could not with all their malice,
stain the virtue of Mariamne: Nor find a plausible pretext for condemning her.
If I obtain this favor from them who hear me, I die almost without grief: and
I shall absolutely say, without Regrate, if the Children I leave you were
Banished their paternall house: For I doubt not because they are Virtuous, but
that they will acquire your hatred as well as I. The complaints that they shall
make for my death, will be crimes against you: You will believe they design
against your life by lamenting the loss of mine. Woe is me! I see them already
Maltreated by that slave, who was your first wife: I see them submit to the
violent humor of your Son Antipater, to the calumnies of Solome, to the
outrages of (...); and to your own cruelty.

And perhaps these same Executioners who put me to death, will shed their
blood, or to speak better, will make an end of shedding mine. I already see
you unjust and cruel finishing so many Murders: But do not hope to enjoy
peaceably the Fruits of such fatal Victories. You seek a repose which you
shall not find; You shall be your own Accuser, your Judge, and your Hangman:
The Ghosts of so many Kings as I am come of whom you have abused in my Person,
shall inviron you on all parts: Those of Old Hircan and of Young Aristobolus,
shall disturb all your Life: You shall always see your self covered with the
Blood of your Children: And the Image of Mariamne pursued by these Executioners
who wait on her, shall ever follow you foot by foot. You shall always see that
whither awake or asleep, which shall reproach you for her death: You shall have
Repentance in your heart, Shame, Confusion, and Despare: You shall wish for the
death you give to others: My Virtue shall appear then as pure as it is: your
Crimes shall seem as great as they are: And perhaps you shall have the
misfortune to repent without amending: And I doubt not, but after you have
violated all Rights, Divine and Humane, some will do the same to your self.
Yes, I already see the eldest of your Children (for mine will never be capable
of it) desirous to give you that poison, which you accuse me unjustlie of. I
see (I say) all the Administratores of your fury, become your most cruel
Enemies: Salome, Pher^^^, and Antipater, shall be most violently obnoxious to
you: I see you hated of all People, detested of all Princes, execrable to
Posterity: and perhaps you shall become then so odious to your self, that
after you have; shed all the blood of your Race. Despair shall put ^ Dagger in
your hand, to deliver the World from so dangerous an Enemy, But it may also be
that your cause make an end when you would, and your shall have the misfortune
to endure in this life the punishments that are prepared for you in an other.
Behold, unjust and cruel Her^^^, the Prophecy which the unhappie Mariamne
dying unjustlie, makes of you: who in this (...) last day, looks upon you
rather as a Subject revolted, ^^ as her Tygrant then either as her King or
Husband.

THE EFFECT OF THIS DISCOURSE.
This afflicted and generous Beauty, obtained what she desired from her
Husband, and from Posterity; For the first gave her death, and the other has
preserved her glory: I shall think mine great, if after so many Ages, I could
also contribute something to hers and if my Meditations were not thought
unworthie of her. I would say more, if the Author of the holy Court had not
said all: But as he was too careful to leave any thing is so Noble a Field, I
am too Vain to appear unprofitably there after him. It suffices that I behold
his Triumph without lying me to his chariot, and I Love better to quit my
Arms, then to see him amidst his Trophies.

CLEOPATRA TO MARK-ANTHONIE. THE THIRD HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AFter the loss of the Battle of Actium, Occasioned by Cleopatras flight,
which was followed by that of Anthony: Herhad some opinion, that she would
Betray him, and testisled his Resentments to her. But that Lovely and Just
Egyptian, who desired to take away from him any impression that could be
disadvant agious to her: Did thus speak to him in behalf of her innocenoie. I
have surely established these words, which I put in the mouth of that Queen,
upon the Conjectures of History: And according to my sense, see what she could
say at that time, so that Irritated Lover.

CLEOPATRA TO MARK-ANTHONIE.
IS it true then, that Anthony could suspect Cleopatra to have favored his
Enemy? that he could think she would with her own hand pluck the Crown from
him, which Victory was putting upon his head? And to say all in one word, that
he believed she had betrayed him? Ah if it be so, and if by my Discourse I
cannotremit reason in your Soul, by giving it other thoughts of my fidelity. I
desire no more life; and death is the end of my wishes. No Anthony, if I be
dead in your heart, I will live no longer in the World: And perhaps my death
will let you see, that I have not desired yours. But I pray you tell me (O
Illustrious Emperor) what way, by what liberalities, or by what hopes could
Octavius corrupt my fidelity? This surely cannot be a new Passion, that has
surprised my heart in conquering his; Since we are equally unknown to other.
This could not be so by presents, for what could I receive from him, which I
have not received from you, who has given me whole Kingdoms, and made me reign
over the most part of Asia? but if it were true, that I could have resolved to
leave you, and follow his party, what security could I have taken from his
words? where are the pedges he has sent me in assurance of our Treatit? What
places has he rendered to me? Why Anthony, could I have trusted my self to
Cesars word he who is Octavi^^ brother: He who publicly deelared War against
(...) in Rome, and who did know me much better, (...) the name of that
Egyptian, more famous (said he) by her Enchantments then by her beauty, then
not by that of Cleopatra? Why Anthony, could I have been assured of him? By
that Cleopatra should have loaded her self with Chains? she should have with
her own hands tied her arms to the Triumphing Chariot of her Enemy, and which
is also worse, Anthonies Enemy. And by an imprudence and ungratitude which
never had example, she should have betrayed a man who betrayed his own glory
for love of her; who has made himself enenmy to his Country for her sake; who
has abandoned Cesars sister, rather then forsake her? Who has divided his
power with her? Who has preferred her interests to those of the Roman Empire?
and who, to say all, has absolutely given her his heart.

Ah! My Anthony, all those things are unliklie: And it almost suffices to see,
that I have not forgot my obligations to you, to make me be thought innocent.
But if it be permitted me to add one other Reason: I shall say, that as none
that is generous does as easily forget the good deeds of any other; so none
loves to loss their own propriety: and seldom would we by injuries deform the
good offices which we do to any Body.

Consider then if it be possible (pardon me for speaking so) that after I had
done all for you that I have done, I my self would extinguish the remembrance
of it in your Soul: And of my own inclination, infuse hatred in the heart,
whose Empire has cost me so many Vows and so much Pains. For if you
Remember, My dear Anthony, you was rather my conquest, then I yours: fame had
given me a Picture of you, which possessing me with admiration, made me design
to overcome in your person the Conqueror of all others. And though my eyes had
sometimes gained famous Victories, and could have counted among their Captives
Caesares and Halph gods: Yet I trusted not to their Charms, I suspected my
beauty at that time; I thought it had not force enough to conquer you: And as
you was the most Magnificent of all men, I did not wish that love should take
possession of your heart, but by Magnificencie: And that the day of its Pr^sall
should seem rather to be a day of Triumph then of Battle.

I desired to dasle your eyes then by the beauty of my Arms: for if you
remember, My dear Anthony, the first day that I say you, I shinned in a ship,
whose Poupe was all of Gold, the sails Purpell, and the oars Silver, which by
their Equal Cadence, imitated the sound of diverse instruments concording
together. I was under a Pavilion or wrought Gold, and knowing your Birth was
divine, because you are descended of Hercules, you are not ignorant, that I had
a Vesture like that which is given to Venus. All my Women were Splendidlie
Clothed as Nymphs: and a hundred Cupidons round about me: Were also an effect
of the desire I had to overcome you; For in fine, My dear Anthony, that little
Armor was only made against you.

It was not then without design that I overcame you: I employed all things to
that end: And nothing that Beauty, Skill, or Magnificencie could do was fogot
at that time. I know very well it is imprudence, to speak to you of all those
things, in a time so differing from the felicity of that: but that day was so
glo^ious to me, that I can never loss the memory of it: And moreover, to speak
Rationallie, that Remembrance is not unprofitable for my Vindication. For to
think any way, that I my self would loss my conquests? such thoughts never
entered in the mind of any Conqueror: Certainly Alexander would have rather
chosen to loss Macedonia then Persia: That Kingdom was his Fathers Estate; But
this was truly his own: And by the same Reason, I would have rather lost my
self then lost you. You know also if I be not mistaken that I was no severe
Conqueress: the Chains I gave you were of no weight: my Laws had nothing of
Rudness in them: and in the manner I used you, it had been hard to know, who
was Victorious.

Since that, what have I done Anthony, to make me be suspected? It is true I
forgot my own Glory, but it was for love of you. Yes, I have suffered my self
to be opprobriated in Rome: and although the pride of your Country, that treats
all strangers like Barbarians, and all Queens (like slaves) hindered me from
being your Wife, the affection which I have for your Person is so strong, that
I have not left off to be yours. Yes, Anthony, I loved you more then my honor,
and more then my life: I thought it could not be unjust to love a man worthy
of being ranked among the gods: And that the Passion which I had in my Soul,
had so noble a cause, that it would render me excusable: so that without
considering what misfortuns were prepared for me, I have most constantly loved
you, ever since the f^^st day that I gave you my promise. Judge from that if I
had power to betray you, or to speak better if I would betray my self. It is
true, I fled, but generous Anthony, if I took the flight it was for love of
you, I slighted the Victory to preserve your life: And your person was dearer
to me, then your glory or my own.

I Well see that this Discourse Astonishes and surprises you. But for your
comprehension, permit me to tell what condition my Soul was in, when in the
midest of the Fight, I saw you all covered with Darts and Flams. The death
which I saw in so many places made me apprehensive of yours: all the Enemies
Javelines seemed by me to address themselves against you: And, in the manner,
that my imagination represented the affair to me, I thought all Cesars Army
desired to fight none but Anthony. I many times fancied that I saw you
dragged by force into the enemies vessalls, or fall dead at their feet.

And although those who were round about me, assured me, that I was deceived by
my eyes, and that the Victory was still uncertain; What did I not say in those
fatal moments? And what grief did I not feel? Ah! my dear Anthony, did you but
know the sorrows of a Soul, that sees the Person beloved every minute in
hazard of dying; you would find it the most terrible torment, thar can ever be
endured. My heart received all the blows which were aimed at you; I was captive
every time, I thought you so, and death it self has nothing so rude, as what
I suffered at that time. In that deplorable condition, I found no remedy for
my grief: and my imagination using greater Ingenuitie for my Persecution; after
having persuaded me that all the enemies desired your death, immediately
persuaded me, that they resolved to preserve your life, thereby to make
themselves Masters of your liberty. The first thought did certainly give me a
little ease: But the image of Cesars Triumph, presenting it self all at once to
me, I relapsed into my former despair. It was not, my dear Anthony, that I
believed you capable of following a Conquerours Chariot: But I thought that to
shune that supreme misfortune, you would have recourse to death: So that
whatever way it was, I always found my self equally unhappie. I bethought me
of what poison I should choice that I might follow you: And there is no fatal
Resolution which past not in my mind I thought more then twenty times to cast
my self into the Sea, to free me from the agony I was in: Yet because I could
not die with out forsaking you, I could not pursue that design.

But coming of a sudden to consider the strong Passion which you always
testified to me, I thought if you should see me abandon the army, you would
also forsake it and by that found I the means of preserving your life, and
liberty together. For (said I to my self, after framing that Resolution) Caesar
does not seek Victory so much, as the life or liberty of Anthony: And upon
condition that he have neither the one nor the other, I shall be glad to loss
the Battle. In fine, my dear Anthony, I did what my affection and despair
councelled me to do: And you did what I expected from your love I had no sooner
seen, you quit your Ship, and take a Galley to follow me: but my heart was
sea^ed with a Surprisall of Joy: Me thought it was I gained the Battle, because
I preserved you: And beginning to think that Caesar would be content to exchange
his for for^^^e for mine, I was partly comforted of all my disgrace^. But that
which yielded me most satisfaction in that (...) day was to see Anthony
capable of preferring Cleopatra to the desire of conquering his enemies: that
he loved better to follow her though unfortunate, then to p^^sue the Victory
and in fine, that the Empire of the Wor^^ was not so dear to him as Cleopatra.
This thought (...) so pleasant that though my fright ranked us among the
conquered, I cannot repent me, and as the case is, the Battle of Actium shall
not be so glorious ^^ Caesar as to Cleopatra. He overcame Soldiers who wanted
their Commander, but Cleopatra saw the most Valiant of all the Heroes, throw
away his Arms, and follow her. But to perfect my vindication, (...) my dear
Anthony, that how soon you was disingaged from your Ships, I caused a Banner
be set upon the Poupe of mine, to advertise you where you should find me. Judge
then if that could be the action of a Criminal; For if I had designed to be
separated from you, it was easy for me not to have received you: Because I had
sixty sail, and you had but one single Galley. If I had betrayed you I might
have easily delivered you unto Cesars hands: And by that given him truly the
Victory.

If I had essaied to rank my self on the enemies side; if the flight which I
took, might have been suspicious to you; I shall say your suspicions are
lawful: But on the contrare, my flight having been the effect of my despair
and love you should complain of fortune and not accuse Cleopatra.

Further, do not imagine, that that Victory shall either be very Glorious to
Caesar, or your retrait shamfull to you; You fled not from your enemies, you but
followed Cleopatra. Your Soldiers were conquered by Caesar, but you was only
by love. If this Battle had been the first occasion of War, wherein you had
been found, your Valior might have been questioned: but it is so Universallie
known, that none are ignorant of it. There are almost no People, among whom you
have not given proof of your courage in the beginning of your Youth: And
certainly you must have given many, because the great Julius Caesar choice you
to command the left wing of his army, in the famous Battle of Pharsalia; and
in a day whereon the conquest of the Empire of all the World depended.

And moreover, Octavius knows sufficiently that you are skillful in the art of
fighting and conquering: That Battle which you gained against Cassius, will not
permit him to doubt: And less also the Victory you had of Brutus: When at this
time it may be said, that you have overcome Octavius his Conquerours: Because
you know, that he lost the Battle some days before, and baselie fled in
presence of these, whom you soon after did overcome: But with this difference
that Love caused your flight, and perhaps fear made his. You ^ee then my dear
Anthony, that you are conquered without disgrace, and that your enemies has
overcome without honor. And moreover, our affairs are not yet desperate: you
have a strong Army near Actium, which is not yet under Cesars Colors: My
Kingdoms have also men, money, and fortified places: and I wish that, all my
Subjects may loss to the last drop of their blood to preserve yours and your
liberty. But in fine, when fortune shall unjustlie take from you these Crowns,
which your merit, and valiour have gained by force: Know that Cleopatras love
shall not diminish. No my dear Anthony, when that enemy of Illustrious
Persons, shall reduce us to live under a Cotage of Straw, in some place remote
from the Society of the World; I shall have for you the same passion, that I
had in that blessed hour, wherein you gave Kingdoms: And wherein twenty two
Kings were to be seen in your Train. Think not then that misfortune can fright
me: there is but one which I can never suffer with you: And doubtless which you
also will not endure. Yes, Cleopatra can be exiled with Anthony and not
complain: She can Renounce all the Splendor of Royalitie, and yet preserve her
desires of life, but bondage is that which she can never endure, and which she
knows you will not suffer no more then she. Be then assured, that so far from
having intelligence with Caesar, I give you my promise, to die rather then trust
to him, or put my self in hazard of serving his Triumph.

No Anthony, Cleopatra shall never carry Chains ^ And if fortune be so
perverse to her, that she can have no way to choose, but that of Rome or of
Death; The surrendering of her life, shall justify your love to her, and her
innocence. But before we come to that extreme remedy, let us do all things to
resist our enemies. Let us preserve life so long as we can without shame: For
in fine, it should not be indifferent to us, while we love each other
perfectly. My dear Anthony I perceive, me thinks by your eyes, that my
discourse has not been unprofitable: They tell me that your heart repents, of
having unjustlie suspected me; That it sees my innocence as pure as it is; and
that the love it has for me is so great, that it forebears not yet to love the
person, who robbed your hands of the Victory. For me, my dear Anthony, you
shall always be my strongest and last passion; I do acknowledge, that in the
time I did not know you, Julius Cesars glory did touch my heart: And that I
could not hinder my self from loving a man, who over all the Earth, passed for
the first or Mortals. A man (I say) whom you formerlie judged worthy the
Empire of all the World: Because you gave him his first honor, by putting a
Diadem upon his head in the middle of Rome, and who after his death, by a brave
and Heroic Oration which you made to the Roman People, caused him be set up
amongst the gods: Who chased Brutus and Cassius; burned their Places; And
Signalised your Courage and Friend ship.

But since the time I have seen you, I can assure you, that you have
soveraignlie reigned in my Soul; and shall reign there continually. It is an
Empire which fortune has not given you, and which being without its
domination, shall ever be yours in spite of its unjustice. It may overturn
Kingdoms and Empires, but it shall never change my heart: And whatever does
usuallie destroy the strongest affections, shall but fortify mine. And to
testify to you, that I can love better then you, I will not suspect your
Friendship of any weakness. Yes Anthony, I do believe that although Cleopatra
has caused all your misfortunes, she shall ever make all your happiness: and
that without repenting you of having ever loved her, she shall always reign in
your heart, as you do in hers. Let us go then my dear Anthony, Let us go to
Alexandria, to do our last Endeavors, to conquer those who have overcome us:
it is there where perhaps we shall yet find wherewithal to subdue the insolence
of our enemies. But if it come to pass that Heaven has resolved our Ruin;
that fortune become constant to persecute as; that hope be absolutely denied
us; that all your friends abandon you; that all my subjects betray me, and join
with the stronger party; if (I say) it come to pass that all those things
befall us; we shall still find our Tomb in Alexandria; And to merit from our
enemies the favor, of letting our Ashes remain there together, we must
Signalise our death, by shunning bondage: and in that manner, we shall Rob them
of the Noblest fruits of their Victory, and conquer Caesar himself by death.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THey who Love, let themselves be easily persuaded, by things which can please
them: And the vol^^ of this fair Monster of Nilus, failed not to Attract
Anthonies mind, to what she desired. He did not follow Cleopatra, to forsake
her afterward: And his Choler being the Effect of his love, as well as his
flight had been, it was as easy to apease it as to fly. He then believed all
she said to him: He repented that he had suspected her fidelity: But repenred
not the loss of the Empire of the World, for preserving Cleopatra. He followed
her to Alexandria? Where though she was more Generous that second, then the
first time, they were not always happy; And of all the things which she
promised him Cleopatra could give Anthony, but the half of her Tomb.

SISIGAMBES TO ALEXANDER. THE FOURTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AFter Conquering the Indians, Alexander the Great Married Statira, one of
Darius his Daughters. Then was it that Sisigambes, Mother of that Princess,
abandoned her Soul to the joys and Inclinations which she had for that
Invincible Conqueror. She at that time Remembered all that he had done for her;
And as her Soul was Noble, she immediately testified her gratitude to him in
this manner.

SISIGAMBES to ALEXANDER.
IT is truly this day, O Invincible Alexander, that I believe you to be the
son of Jupiter: an ordinary man cannot be capable of so much Virtue. There
have been several times Victories and Conquerors known; But there was never a
person found like you who has made the portion of the Conqu^red equal with the
Victorious: Nor none who have divided the Empire which they have Conquered,
with the Children of their enemies. In fine, Alexander, though you were of
Humane Blood, and not of that of the gods; It is most certain that you deserve
Incense and Altars. I leave to the Famous Testimonies of your Valor, the
Publication of those Mavelous Exploits you have done, in making you Master of
the World: For I Propose to entertain you, only with your Clemency and
Goodness. You know, Generous Alexander, if I should for your glory Erect a
Trophie of your Enemies Spoils; I should there find Subject of making
sorrowful Tears flow abundantly, in a day wherein I ought to express joy.
This does not proceed from my not knowing, that I shall not there see the Body
of my Son: For I Remember you was so generouslie good, as to cover it with your
Royal Cloack, and bedew it with your Tears; When coming to the Place where he
expired by the cruelties of Treacherous Bessus, you saw that great Prince in so
deplorable a condition. No. Alexander, in this Juncture of affairs, I should
not look upon you as the old enemy of Darius, but as the revenger of his
Death, as the protector of his Mother and Wife; as the Husband of his Daughter,
and as the lawful Heir of the great Cyrus his Throne. In Effect* you know what
were my Sons last words: He testified his Gratitude of the Obligations that I
was indebted to you for: He made Vows for your Glory; He assured you he died
your Friend and Servant; And without employing those few Moments he had to
live, in Deploring his Misfortune; He wished you Conqeror of the Universe; He
hoped you would revenge his Death; That you would take care to perpetuate his
Memory; and he also left to you, the rewarding Polistratus, for that little
water he gave him, that he might the more distinctlie pronounce those things
which he had to say for your Glory.

O my dear Darius, you was truly my Son in speaking so of Alexander! I give
thanks to the gods, that at last you had Power to acknowledge, what we owe to
his Clemency, and Goodness. It is for those two Virtues, O Invincible Heroes!
That I admire you this day: The whole Earth is filled with the noise of your
Victories: you are the Master a^ Conqueror of all men; the meanest of your
Exploits are known to all; The very Plays of your infancy shall be Patterns
to all Kings that come after you: What your Conquests have been is every where
known: None are ignorant of what a Glorious War you made in Greece; The
Splendid Ruins of Thebes which you razed, are eternal signs that you was its
Conqueror. The Battle which you gave at the passage of the Garnick, equally
manifests your conduct and courage: None can be ignorant of what you did in the
day of Issus; Nor of what passed at the famous Seidge of Tire. The Battle of
Arbella had too remarkable Circumstances, not to be known of all the Earth.

The Conquest of the Indians, and the defaite of Porrus on the Banck of
Hidaspes, are Eternal Monuments of your Glory. For not only is it known, that
you excelled that great King; But it is also known that after you had Conquered
his Kingdom, you Restored it to him greater then it was before: And in this
manner, if it be allowed so to speak; You may not only be called the overcomer
of this Prince, but the Conqueror of Porrus: Because it seems you did not fight
but to make him greater.

The City of Oxidraxes, where you so resolutlie (...) your self, is seen of
all the Earth: It is looked upon as the field of Battle? Where your great Heart
seemed equally to defy death and fortune, and where you Surmounted both. In
fine, Alexander, there may be every where found Testimonies of your Valor and
Conquests; Wherefore, without speaking to you, I content my self with praising
your Clemency and Goodness. But, what do I say? Those two Virtues are as
Generally known as your courage: for if, as I have already said, you are
Master and conqueror of all men; It may be also said that you are all men's
Benefactor.

It will be said that the gods have remitted into your hands all the favors
they used to bestow; That they have established you to be the distributor of
good deeds; And that they have given you Commission to make all the World
happy. You do no sooner Conquer a Kingdom, but you give it: your enemies are
no sooner your Subjects, but they become your friends: And you not sooner
Conquer them, but you become their Protector.

I have so famous an example in my Person of what I say, that I cannot doubt it
without being Criminal. For, O Invincible Alexander! I shall never forget the
favors I have received from you:

Yes, I shall always remember that dismal-day, wherein my Daughter and I
became your Prisoners: Fear of bondage had possessed our Spirits with such horrid
Visions that death appeared the greatest happiness that could befall us. We had
lost the Battle with the Throne; we believed Darius already lost; And that
which was most insupportable to us, was, we thought that we should be
necessitated, to die by our own hands, to shun the Insolence of the Conquerors.

But alace! I did not then know Alexander; For, said I to my self, I am Mother
of the greatest of his Enemies, because Darius is the most powerful of all
them who resisted him: And judging of you by the rest, I feared you as much
then, as I love you now. This unjust fear was of no continuance in my mind:
the sight of you quickly dissipated it, and I also remember, the first time, I
had the honor of seeing you. You pardoned me a fault. For because I did no know
you, and because the trouble I was in, gave me not liberty (...) Reason well
on the matter, you know I took the Generous Ephistion for you: And that without
being angry? you said to me, that I was not mistaken, because he was the
second Alexander. That sign of Moderation toward me, and of Friendship toward
your Favorite, began to give me juster thoughts of you: And to remitt in my
Soul that hope which fear had chased from it. And surly you also to day does
well testify, that Ephistion is as dear to you as your self: Because having
designed to Marry the Eldest of my Daughters your self, you gave the other to
this second Alexander.

Since that, what have you not done for me? You have not only treated me as a
Queen, though I was Captive; But you have treated me as your Mother, and you
have done me the favor always to call me so. Every time that any new
Subject of grief did befall me, you have had the goodness to Solace me; I have
seen you in consideration of me weep for your Victories; I have seen you
Regrate Darius his Death; I have seen you careful of his Funerals and Tomb; I
have seen you expose your life to Revenge his death; I have seen you punish the
Traitor Bessus who did assasine him; I have seen you reward them who were
faithful to him; And I see you also this day restore Darius to the Throne, by
placing there his Daughter and mine.

But the most wonderful of all the Actions that I have seen you do for Darius;
Is that I have some times seen this Alexander Conqueror of the Universs, have
so much Virtue, as not to trust to his own: And not to expose himself to the
eyes of Darius his Wife, fearing least he should be Conquered by her beauty.

Ah! After all this it must certainly be acknowledged, that all that can be
said of you is far below your merit: you have both together the chastity of my
Sex, and the Virtues of all the Heroes, who have only preceeded you in age.

There can be no good qualities which are not to be found in your Person in the
highest degree: And it may be said that Virtues are Perfectionated in your
Soul, and take a new luster. That which is Temeritie in any other, is but
simple Effect of your courage, and excess of good cannot be vicious in you.
You give profuselie, and yet without prodigality: Because you do not only
proportionat the presents you make to them who receives them, but to him who
gives them.

So that, Towns, whole Provinces, Millions of Gold, Scepters and Crowns, are
things which Alexander can give without being Prodigal: For as he has received
more favors from Heaven then any other; it is also he should give more then
all others. This truth is so well known to you, and you practice it so
perfectly; That after having Conquered all the World, and having given it
almost wholly to diverse Persons; when you have been sometimes asked what you
would Reserve for your self; You have answered, Hope.

And truly I have often wondered to see, that you no sooner had any thing in
your power, but you did put it in that of an other: And nevertheless, you
desisted not to be always giving. This Reflection made me think, that
Alexander might be said to be like the Sea, which no sooner receives in its
Vast Breast the Tribute which all the Fountains, the Rivers and the Floods
carry to it, but it renders it with Usurie to some other part of the World.

What she takes from the Persians, she gives back to the Greecks; The Ship
wracks which she makes does not enrich her; She makes no body poor but to
augment some others fortune; And without keeping any thing either of what is
given her, or of what she Usurpes; She always rolls her Vawes with an equal
Motion. Just so is it with things that you receive from the Gratitude of your
Subjects, of the tributes they pay to you, or of the Conquests you make.

You receive them with one hand, and gives them with the other: The very
booties which you take from your Enemies, does but make Rich your Soldiers
(...) So that, be it in Peace, or in war, during a Tempest, or during a Calm,
you equally do good to all, without doing any to your self.

Yet there is this difference, between the Ocean and you, that all which goes
from the Sea returns to it, but what goes from your hands never comes back to
them again. Further, it shall be glorious for you to see People in your
History, who have refused your gifts, because you gave too much: And that
there shall be none found Complaining that you gave too little. Your
liberality is so much the more Execllent, in that it is not blind. You do good
to all the World, but you do it not always without choice.

All the days of your life are not those of Donationes to the People, where
without distinction, you throw Treasures among the crowd: Where the happy
only have the advantage.

Aristotle's Disciple knows better how to use Riches; and knows better how
liberality must be practiced. Yes Alexander, You have reconcilled Fortune with
Virtue: We see Philosophers, Poets, Musicians, Limners, and Sculptors in
abundance, and yet do not work but only for your Glory and their own.

We see (I say) Philosophers practice that Policy which they teach in
Governing great Kingdoms; We see Poets carry at once a Harp of Gold, and a
Quiver of Ibonie; To sing your Triumphs, and command your Provinces. We see
Musicians, whose Luttes are of Ivorie; Who emploie not their voices, but to
praise you, and to speak of your felicity. We see Limners as Rich as the
Mighty Princes have been formerlie, who employed them to work. We see
Sculptors, not only make use of Marble, Alabaster, and Porphire in their
statues; but have Palaces of their own, where all those things are seen.

In fine, all good Sciences and all good Arts, flourish under your reign. Also
it shall be said, that as the gods have made a Miracle of you, Nature was
likewaies desirous to make its chiefest works for love of you. You have
Aristotless, Xenophantess, Apelless and Licippess, who owing their felicity
and Glory to you, shall also bestow their Labor upon yours. All future Ages
that shall see the pictures which these Famous men will leave of you, either by
their writings, or by their tablets, or by their statues, shall doubtless envy
that of the great Alexander.

All the Virtues of that time shall wish to have been in this. You shall be the
Model of great Pinces, and the foil of perverse: And while there shall be men,
you shall be spoken of as a god. I certainly wonder an more, that our great
Xerxes with all his power could not perfect what designs he had conceived: For
since Greece ought to Educate you: The gods had reason to preserve the Conquest
of the World for you. If Xerxes had accomplished his enterprise, perhaps he
should have been called the Tyrran and whip of the Universe: But for you, you
are the Legitimate Prince of all the People whom you have Conquered. You are
sent from Heaven for the Worlds felicity: And there was just Subject for
Hamnon the Oracle of Jupiter to say, That you was his Son, and was Invincible.

No Alexander, none can exceed you, neither in War nor in Virtue: And after the
design you have made to day, of replacing Darius on the the Throne by dividing
it with his Daughter Statira: There is nothing more remains for you to do, and
nothing more for me to wish, but the Continuance of your Glory. It is not that
I fear it can be taken from you: No, there is no such thought in my mind: But I
fear that men's unjustice will render them unworthie of having you long for
their Master: Or that the gods jealous of our happiness recall you to
themselves. If which come to pass, I do assure you, O invincible Alexander! not
to stay in the World after you: I could live after Darius, who was my Son; But
after all the Obligations which I have had from you, I shall not survive
Alexander. I had not told you, such sad thoughts in a day of rejoicing, if I
had not believed that it would be advantageous to you, that it should be known
there was a Princess, that there was (I say) a Mother, and if I dare say a
Virtuous Mother, who without baseness, and without unjustice, has loved you
better then her own Son, though you was her enemy. Pardon me then so doleful
a thought, because it is Glorious to you: And believe that when my wishes are
exhausted, not only shall your Glory be immortal, but likewaies your Person.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
ALexander must be known, if the Effect of this Discourse be questioned. That
great and Generous Soul did again redouble his good Offices, to that
Illustrious Princess: And did so gain her Heart; That when soon after the death
of this invincible Conqueror came to pass in Babylon, she failled not to keep
her promise, for she died of sorrow. And certainly that death was a Glorious
sign of Alexanders goodness: And when some Excellent Orator, shall employ all
his Art, to make him a Famous Elogie: when he has (I say) Magnificently
Exaggerated all his brave Actions, I believe I shall say something Greater and
more Extraordinary: When I only say that Sisigambes endured the death of her
Son Darius, and could not bear with that of the great Alexander. She lived
after the one, and died after the other; And Virtue was of more force with her
then Nature. O the brave Panegirick! But why? it was Alexander.

SOPHONISBA TO MASSINISSA. THE FIFTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AFter that by the Romans assistance, Massinissa had Re-conquered the Kingdom
of his Fathers, and taken Siphax prisoner, who had Usurped it: He Beseidged and
took the town of Sirthe, where Sophonisba Wife of this Captive King, was
retired. The charms of that fair African, made strong impressions in his heart,
and the Numideans being Naturalie inclined to Love, he was no sooner
Victorious, but he began to feel himself Conquered. But coming to make
Reflections upon the Austere Humor of Scipio, he questioned not his being
desirous to have that Beautiful Captive Queen led in Triumph, to hinder which
he Married her the same day, not thinking that after that, any hodie would make
Triumph of the Wife of a King, allied to the Roman People. But scarcely was
this sudden Marriage celebrated, when Scipio being informed of it, sent by
Lellius to ordain Massinissa, to come to him and give account of his Victory.
But Sophonisba who had a Natural aversion to the Romans, and more also to
bondage; having seen something in the eyes of Lellius that threatened Triumph,
did in this manner speak to Massinissa, at his going to part from her.

SOPHONISBA TO MASSINISSA.
MY LORD.
I Well see by Lellius Procedure, that fortune is not yet weary of Persecuting
me: That after having in one and the same day, lost my Crown, my Husband and my
Liberty, and by a Capricio of that inconstant thing, found again my Liberty,
and Illustrious Husband, and a Crown; I well see (I say) that it is yet ready
after such strange accidents to make me loss all things.

Lellius looking upon me has doubtless judged me sufficiently pretty, to
honor Scipios Trumph, and to follow his Chariot I have seen in his eyes the
Idea of what he bears in his mind, and the disigne which he has in his heart:
But perhaps he has not discovered what I have in mine. He knows not that desire
of Liberty is much stronger in me, then that of Life: And that for preserving
the first, I am capable of losing the other with joy.

Yes I clearlie perceive my dear Massinissa that You are going to fight against
strong enemies: The Austeritie of Scipios Humor, joined to the Roman Austeritie
shall doubtless make him give You a sharp Reprimand: he will think it strange,
that in the very day of your Victory, and in the very day of your Re-taking
the Crown which belonged to You. You should have thought of Marriage: And have
chosen for you Wife, not only that of your Enemy, but a Captive, a
Carthaginean, the Daughter of Hasdru^^ll, and the Enemy of Rome.

Nevertheless my Lord, remember, that at this time, You should not look upon
me, nor as the Wife of Siphax, nor as a Captive, nor as a Carthaginean, nor as
Hasdruballs Daughter, nor as Enemy of Rome, though I Glory in being so; But
as the Wise of the Illustrious Massinissa.

Remember also, that I consented not to receive that honor till after that you
promised me that I should not fall in the Romans power: You have engaged your
word, be sure then not to faill, I desire not that You expose your self to the
loss of the Senats Friendship for preserving me, because your hard Fortune has
made You need it. But I only desire, that in pursuance of what You have sworn
to me, you will hinder me from falling alive in Scipios power.

I doubt not but Siphax in the condition he is in, will say to his Conqerour,
that I am the cause of his Misfortune; That I have loaded him with Irones, that
I made him friend to Carthage, and Romes enemy.

Yes Generous Massinissa, I avouch all these things And if I could rob the
Romans of You, I would esteem my self happy: And believe that my death should
be truly worthy the Daughter of Hasdruball. Pardon me, my dear Massinissa,
for speakieg so boldly to You. But since this is the last time, perhaps that I
shall ever see You, I shall joyfullie tell You what have always been my
sentiments: To the end, that by the knowledge I shall give You, of that
aversion which I ever had to bondage, You may be the more easily induced, to
think of my Liberty. How soon I had opened my eyes to the light, the first
thing I learned, was that there Were a People, who without anle right, but what
the strong imposes upon the weak, would make themselves Masters of all others:
And while my infancy lasted. I heard no discourse but of the Roman Triumphs;
Of Kings whom they had chained; Of famous Captives which they had made; Of the
Miseries of these unfortunate men; And of all the things that are done in those
fatal Spectales, where the Romans pride makes up the Noblest fruit of the
Victory.

Those images were so early Imprinted in my mind, that nothing could ever
banish them thence. Since I became more Reasonable by age, I have had more
Aversion for that Roman Eagle; which sees nothing but the rapines it makes: And
which flies not above the heads of Kings, but to take off their Crowns. Perhaps
it will be said to me, that the Romans give so many Kingdoms as they Usurp?
And that they make as many Kings as they (...) to their Chariot.

But my dear Massinissa, if you will rightly Consider the business, You will
find that they give, no Scepters, but to have the more famous slaves: And that
if they put Crowns upon their Vassals heads, it is but to have the pleasure of
seeing them laid at their feet; because that by their orders, they will have
hommage paid to them.

Vanity is the Soul of that Nation: It is its only work: It is but for it
that it makes Conquests; Usurpes Kingdoms; Desolates all the World; And
unsatisfied in being absolutely Mistress of all that great Part of the Universe,
which is of its Continent; Passes the Seas to come and Disturb our Repose.

For if only a desire of augmenting its Confines, and encreassing its riches,
caused it make War, it would be content to overturn Thrones, and putting them
to death who Lawfully Possessed them. But because pride is their chief
instigator; A simple Citizen of Rome, must for his Glory, and for the Peoples
divertisement, Drag Kings chained after his Triumphing Chariot. O Gods! Is it
possible that Conqueros can be so inhumane! Is it possible to find Conquered
Kings so cowardly to endure such cruel Usage? Yes, without doubt, and too
many examples of this kind, have made it known, that all Princes are not
Generous.

Nevertheless it is certain, that Irons and Crowns, Scepters and Chains, are
things which should never be seen together: A Chair drawn by Elephants, should
not be followed by Kings; And by Kings tied like Criminal, with whom no signs
of Royalty are left, but to signalise their shame, and the Glory of their
Conqueror. But what Glory can he have who Triumphs in this sort? For if these
whom he has overcome are baise, (as there is great appearance because they
live:) It is no just Subject of vanity to have outbraved them.

And if these unfortunate men, testified courage in their defaite; It is great
inhumanitie in him who treats thus Princes who have done nothing, but defend
their Crowns; Their Country; Their Wifes; Their Children; Their Subjects; And
their Domestick-Gods.

But if for the Glory of their Conquerors, and for the Pleasure of the People
they would have Triumphs; It would be more Glorious for them, to cause carry
the Enemies arms whom they have killed with their own hands, then to have
themselves followed by Kings whom they have not fought. Chariots filled with
broken arms, Bucklers, Lances, Javelins, and Standards taken from the
Enemies; Would make a show less Lamentable and more agreeable to the eyes of
the People.

But Gods! Is it possible that Kings are destined for such infamy? That these
same People, who have Combats of Gladiators and of wild Beasts given them for
their divertisement; Should also be the cause of such fatal Ceremony; And
extract their pleasure from the ignominy and misfortune of Kings; That it
should be, that they who delight in seeing four thousand men, by a horrid
brutalitie kill one another in one day; And who find their happiness in seeing
Tigers and Lions devour each other; Is it possible (I say) that Kings opressed
with Irons, should be draged for these same People?

For me, my dear Massinissa, I find something so strange in this sort of
Triumph, that I doubt if it be more disgraceful to the Conquered, then to the
Victorious; and in my particular, I know very well, that I shall neither do
the one nor the other. Judge then my dear Massinissa, if a person who would not
enter Rome in a Triumphing Chariot, followed by a hunder chained Kings; Could
resolve to follow with Irons, that of the proud Scipio. No, Sophonisbas Soul is
too great for that; If I were but a Carthaginean, I shall never be capable of
it: If I were but Hasdrubals daughter, I shall never resolve to do it: If I were
but the Wife of the unfortunate Siphax, it is a weakness that shall never come
in my mind: And If I were but the slave of the Illustrious Massinissa, I shall
not follow any other Conqueror. But being both together, a Carthaginean;
Hasdruballs daughters; Wife to Siphax, and Massinissa, and Queen of two great
Kingdoms: Scipio needs not think to make Triumph of Sophonisba. No, Generous
Massinissa, if the chains they would give me were of Diamonds; And all the
Irons Glister with Gold and precious Stones; And if they would assure me that I
should be immediately restored to the Throne, how soon I were untied from the
Triumphant Chariot, I would choose death in prejudice of Royalltie: And if my
hand should once carry Irons, I should no more think it worthy to carry a
Scepter. In fine, I have so strong an aversion for slaverie and bondage, and my
Spirit is so delicate in such matters, that if I thought Scipio would cause
carry my Picture in Triumph, I would pray you to put all the Limners of
Numidea to death. But no, I condemn my self for that thought: For if the
insensible Scipio does carry my Image in his entering into Rome, he shall
rather publish my Glory then his own; It will be seen that I could die, when I
could live no longer with honor: And that a Feminine courage surpassed the
Roman Vanity.

I doubt not Generous Massinissa, if you do not with all your force oppose
Scipios severitie, but that you will be compelled to give me death, for
acquitting you of your promise; For besides the public interest, there is also
his own particular. He Remembers that his Father and Uncle are formerlie dead
in Africa: He looks upon me as a fit victime to appease their Ghosts: And
Joining together in his heart, Romes Glory and his own vengeance, it is not to
be believed that Hasdruballs Daughter shall obtain her Liberty. Yet Generous
Massinissa, I think, it will be very unjust, if in the same day wherein you
Re-take the Crown of Numidea, your Wife should be tied to a Triumphing Chariot:
It is me thinks, to make you at once, a King and a Slave: Because if (what you
have said to me be true) that my sorrow and tears, added to the little beauty
I have, has touched your heart, and forced you to love me as much as your
self; This will be a Triumphing over you as well as me. Consider well
Massinissa, If you can be my Spectator that day: Or if you will not think me
unworthie of having done me the honor to Marry me, if I should be capable of
disgracing you so much: But do not fear that I shall expose you to such sorrow:
If Scipio be inexorable, and you keep your promise to me, my death shall
vindicat what choice you have made. How ever before we have recourse to this
last extreamitie, do all you can to move the heart of that insensible Creature:
Tell him I have wholly rendered my self to you: That of all the booty, which
your Valor has acquired to the Romans: You ask only one slave from them.

But if his unjustice would oblidge you to deliver her into his hands, as if
you were the meanest Soldier of his Legions; Tell him then that this slave is
your Wife: And that she cannot be made Triumph of without Triumphing over you:
And that the Blood which you have lost, in the service of the Reipublick,
deserves their giving you Permission to let her live in Freedom. Let him know
that you have found her in your Kingdom, in your Palace, and upon your Throne:
That in Reason she belongs to you; And cannot be taken from you without
injustice. But if these weighty Reasons prevaill not, pray him tenderly: And
if at last you cannot make him flexible, Remember your promise, and fail not to
keep it. I perceive by your eyes, my dear Massinissa, that it will grieve you
to present me with such a lamentable gift: I well see (I say) that it will
trouble you to send poison to her, to whom you have given a Diadem, your heart
and liberty: I know that it is a rigid thought, and that it will be a
doolefull sight to you to see those same Torches which gave light at my
Marriage, must burn at my Funerals: And that the same hand which you gave me
in pledge of your faith, must be that which must open my Tomb: But in fine, all
those things shall be more supportable to you, (if you be Generous as I believe
you are) then to see me chained: They who say that true Generositie consists in
undergoing fatal accidents with constancy; And that abandoning life for
eviting misfortune, is according to their opinion a yielding the Victory to
Fortune: These People (I say) knows not what is the true Glory of Princes.

This thought is good for Philosophers, but not for Kings, whose whole Actions
should be Heroic Patterns of Valor. But if quitting of life be allowed (which
I doubt not) it must assuredly be, to shune the infamy of being led in
Triumph. It is a great unhappiness to a King, to have his Subjects revolt: But
if he should then think of dying I would esteem him baise: Because he may fight
and punish them. It is a great misfortune for a Prince to loss a Battle: But
because it is often seen, that they who are conquered to day, may be Victorious
to morrow: He must stand firm, and not abandon himself to despair. In fine,
all misfortunes that can have an honorable remedy, should not make us have
recourse to the Tomb: But when all things are lost, there remains no more for
our choice, but enains or death; We must break the cords of life to escape
those of bondage. Behold my dear Massinissa, all I had to say to you: Remember
it then I conjure you: And do not Listen so much to what Scipio will say to
you, as not to Remember your promise, and the discourse which I have made to
you. It is (if I be not deceived) so just and rational, that you cannot
dissaprove of it. Go then, my dear and well beloved Massinissa, go fight for my
liberty and your Glory, against the insensible Scipio. Ask him Venerablie, if
after he was not willing to see the fair prisoners he has made, in his new
conquests, why he should desire to see a Woman tied to his Chariot, whose looks
had power to conquer Massinissa? Let him fear that I become not his conqueror,
in stead of his desiring to be mine: And that at least the austere Virtue which
he professes, should serve to hinder his desires of Triumphing over me.

You may well perceive, my dear Massinissa, that my mind is not troubled, and
that I speak to you with abundance of tranquillity: And I do also assure you,
that in the condition I find my self, there is nothing I regrate, but my being
constrained to be so soon separated from you. Doubtless this is the only thing
can touch my heart: For having seen my Country desolated; Siphax prisoner; The
Crown fallen from off my head; And what is yet worse, Sophonisba ready to be
Scipios Captive: After (I say) all those things; My Tomb shall be a refuge, and
resting place to me, if I could enter there without abandoning you. But I have
this comfort in my misery, that having ever had an Irreconcilable hatred to
the Romans Tirranie: I have at least this advantage to have been the captive of
a Numidean and not of a Roman: But also of a Numidean who is my Husband and
Liberator: And whose slave I no sooner was, but I was absolute Mistress of his
Soul. Go then my dear Massinissa, and faill not to keep your promise to the
unhappie Sophonisba: Who will with much impatience expect Liberty, or Poison.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE
THis beautiful and deplorable Queen obtained her desire, because Massinissa
obtained nothing from Scipio. He sent death to her, because he could not
preserve her Liberty free from danger. And this Sluggard, preferred his
interest, and the Romans Friendship, to the life of that Generous Person. I
should have patiently endured his losing of it to have preserved his Glory,
if he could do it no other way: But that this Gallant man should have lived
eighty years after such a loss, and still friend to the Romans; Is that which
has made me Chollerick against him, every time I see this accident in
History: And which also makes me Silent, because if I had writ more, I must
have reproached him. Pity Sophonisba with me my dear Reader, and because I
endeavor to divect you, be at least so complacent as not to approve of the
action, of the insensible and too wise Massinissa.

ZENOBIA TO HER DAUGHTERS. THE SIXTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
THis Discourse and the Precedent, lets us clearly see, that all things have
two Faces: And that we may arrive at the same end, by different ways, I mean
at Virtue. Sophonisba would die, the Valiant Zenobia would live; And both would
live and die by Principels of Generositie. The one beholds Liberty as the
Chief good: The other believes that Chief good consists in Sovereign Wisdom.
The one could not endure the Idea of a Chariot, because she believed it
Ignominious to its Followers: The other followed the Chariot without trouble,
because she thought nothing shameful but crime. The one beheld a Conquerors
Triumph with despair, as a mighty disgrace: The other considered it with
disdain, as a chance of Fortune. The one died, the other lived: The one
searched Glory, where the other believed it Infamy: However as I have said,
the one and the other had a Virtuous Subject: So true is it that all things
have diverse Faces, according to the bias they are regarded. You have heard
the Reasons of the one, hear also the other, and then judge of both:

ZENOBIA TO HER DAUGHTERS.
IT is now a long time, dear and unfortunat Princesses, that I have seen your
tears trickle in vain: My Constancy has to no purpose taught you, that
Heroic Spirits can endur great sorrows without despair: The Idea of the
Throne which you have lost, and of the chariot which you have followed, being
always fresh in your memory, makes my example Fruitless: And all the days of
your life, renew your affliction. You still carry in your hearts the Irons
which you had on your hands, that cursed day wherein you entered Rome: And
without losing any of that Noble pride, which Illustrious Birth inspires in
them who are born with that advantage; Aurellian Triumphs yet over you, every
time you call to mind his Triumph. I am very sorry, O my Daughters, that
having made you partakers of my disgraces, I cannot give you constancy
necessar to support them. Yet its the only heritage I can leave you a dying,
and I do most affectionatlie wish that that Virtue may pass from my heart into
yours: To the end that being unable to live as Queens, you may at least reign
over your selves, If through excess of misfortune, any could with Reason
despair, it is certain Zenobia may do it: For as she has had more Glory then
any of her sex could ever obtain; So her misfortunes have been more
deplorable, then any was ever heard of You know that on my side you may reckon
the Ptolomees Kings of Egypt for your fore Fathers, and that I am come of the
Illustrious Blood of Cleopatra. But alace! It may be said that the Triumphant
Chariot which Augustus appointed for her, is come to me by right of succession:
And that I have only followed what was prepared for her. Yet Fortune has
treated me with greater inhumanitie: For you are not ignorant that I followed a
chariot, which I thought I led, and which I had caused do with design to make
Triumph of him, who Triumphed over me. You also know, that the beginning of my
life, was full of happiness; The Valiant Odenat your Father, and my dear Lord;
After he had given me the Crown of Palmiranea would also make me partaker of
his Glorious conquests. And I can say without vanity, and without wronging
that Heroes that if he gave to Zenobia the Crown which she carried; She did also
with her own hand add leaves of Laurel to that which Victory had put upon his
head. Yes my Daughters, I can say without offending the memory of Odenat, that
we together conquered all the East: And being encouraged by just resentments we
did undertake to revenge upon the Persians the indignities they made the
Emperor Valerian suffer whom Sapor kept prisoner; When in the interim the
infamous Galienus his Son abandoned himself to all sorts of delight.

Yet Odenat did not forebear to send him all the prisoners we made in that War:
We took the best places in Mesopotamia; Carres, and Nisibea rendered to my dear
Lord: And pursueing the Victory, we routed at Ctesiphont, an innumerable
multitude of Persians; We made many Satrapps prisoners; their King also fled
away: And continuing almost wholly Victorious, in all our Encounters; Renown
made such Proclamations of Odenates Valor, that Galienus in fine roused
himself. Then stimulated by fear rather then gratitude, he made him Colleague
in the Empire: And to give him also more honor, you know he caused Medalles be
made, wherein my dear Odenat dragged the Persians captives, ever till then I
had felicity: Victory and Fortune equally favored me: But alace! And must I
say it? When my dear Odenat was assasined with the eldest of my Children; I
past from one extreamitie to an other: And became as miserable as I had been
happy. Then was it my Daughters, that I had need of all my Virtue, to endure
that misfortune: And certainly Odenates death, is that, which has made the
loss of my freedom the less rude. I had more trouble to follow my dear Lord to
the Tomb, then I had to follow Aurelians chariot: And his lamentable Pomp,
made me shed mere tears, then did all the Magnificence of the Triumph was made
of me. But though my grief was excessive, I spent not too long time in weeping:
I thought of preserving the Empire for my Children, and of washing of the Blood
which he shed, with that of his enemies. And as it might have been said, that
Valor was the Soul of that Heroes; I made vows to pass my Life time, in
gathering Palms to put upon his Tomb: That it might be one day said, my hand
alone had revenged his death; Preserved the Empire for his Children; And
Elevated a Trophie to his Glory. I believed (I say) that it was more worthy,
to hang above his Coffine, the spoils of these enemies I should conquer, then
to drown his Ashes with my tears: And being this resolved I took arms in one
hand, and the reins of the Empire in the other. I was always of the opinion,
my Daughters, that all Virtues could not be incompatible: That it was not
impossible for one Person to possess them all: That those of men might be
Practiced by Women: That true Virtue affects no Sex: That one may be both
chaste and Valiant: testify great courage at one time, and humility at an
other: Be severe and meek at several Occasions: Command and obey: Know how to
carry Irons and a Crown with the same countenance: It is by this
consideration; (my Daughters) that I have done things so appearentlie
different; though I have ever been what I am to day. But to recount all my life
to you, you know that death, which robbed me of my dear Odenat, did not take
the happiness of his arms from me. On the contrate, I though his valtor joined
it self with mine: I slighted the Army which Galienus, sent against me, under
the conduct of Heraclean: And unsatisfied with this first Victory, I went into
Egypt, and made me absolute Mistress of my Predecessors Kingdom. From thence I
was at Ancyre, the Metropolis of Galatia: I carried likewaies my arms through
all Berhinea, to Calcedonea, and below Bosphore, and after I had conquered the
Persians diverse times, and spread the noise of my Victories over all the
Universe; Aurelian, guided by Fortune, and being more capable of useing a
Sword, then Galienus was; Came at last in Person to stop the course. I should
Exactlie re-count all my misfortunes to you, as I have done my felicity, if I
did not know, that you remember them but too much: Nor should I have undertaken
to Repeat my Victories, if your extreme Melancholy made me not think, that
your thoughts entertaining nothing but sorrow full imaginations, you had forgot
them. Surely you are not ignorant which way Aurelian conducted me to Rome:
Doubtless you remember, how Herclamones Perfidie, made him take the City of
Theanea: How Mauger my conduct and courage, Aurelian by his craft gained the
Battle of Antioche: How Zabas Industry put my Person in saiftie: How I
retreated to Emesa: How I rallied my Troops: How I gave Battle to Aurelian a
second time; who after thinking he had lost, was in fine Victor in spite of
all my endeavors. You know also I abandoned Emesa, and went to shut my self up
in Palmiranea, wating for the succourss which the Persians, the Sarasins, and
the Armenians promised me: You know (I say) that Aurelian came there and
besiedged me, with a strong Army which was composed of Pannoneans, Dalmatians,
Mesiness, Celtes, a quantity of Mores, and a multitude of other Troops, drawn
out of Asia, Theanea, Mesopotamea, Sirea, Phenitia- and Palestina. You know (I
say) that I saw at that time, as great Preparation of War against me: As there
needed be, to conquer the whole Earth. However I lost not my heart at that
time: You know that I defended the Walls of Palmeranea, with so much courage as
conduct; That Aurelian himself was dangerously wounded thereby an Arrow, which
may be was drawn at him by my hand: For the gods knows, if I spared my life, to
preserve your Liberty: And further, I know since my having been at Rome, that
Posterity will know. I did not forsake the Throne, which belonged to you,
without defending it. Aurelian having writ to his Friend Macapor, Said, It was
true, that he fought against a Woman: But a Woman who had more Archers under
her pay, then if she had been a man, against a Woman who has Prudence in
danger, and who by her foresight, has made so great Preparations of War, to
Oppose his conquest, that it was impossible to imagine, what prodigious number,
of Darts, and Stones she had provided. In fine (said he speaking of me) there
is no place about the Walls of Palmiranea, that is not defended by many
Machinations: Its Veins Lenches every hour Arteficiall sire upon us, and in
few words, she fears like a Woman, and fights like a Person affeared. Behold my
Daughters, what my Enemy has said of me: And surely he had not Reason to
say, that I feared, because when he sent to offer me life and pardon, (for his
letter was writ in these terms) if I would render him the place, and if I
would deliver into his hands all my Jewels and Treasures: I answered him so
resolutelie, that Aurelian was offended. I remember among other things that I
said, I told him, that never any but he sought of me what he desired: Remember
you (said I to him) that Virtue should as well govern affairs of War. as those
of peace; And further, I let you know, that the Persians assistance, which we
expect, will not faill us: We have on our party, the Armenians, and Sarasines:
And Aurelian, since the robbers of Sirea did beat your army; What shall we do
when we have all the forces, which we wait for from these places? Surely you
will then abate some of that great pride, with which as if you were wholly
victorious, you command me to render. You see, my Daughters, that while you was
in the Temple praying to the Gods, I did all things possibly for your
Preservation, and never did any unglorious action. Finalie you know, that
Aurelian did defate the Persians, who were coming to our relief: And seeing it
absolutely impossible to save that place, I was at least desirous to secure my
Person: But Fate which had resolved my Ruin, made Aurelian at last my
Conqueror, and me his prisoner. How soon he saw me, he asked' from whence came
it, that I had the boldness to attack the Roman Emperors and despise their
forces: Aurelian (said I to him) I acknowledge you for a lawful Emperor,
because you know how to Conquer; But for Galienus and such as he, I never had
that esteem of them. Till now, my Daughters, you cannot accuse me of cowardice:
I have formerlie carried a Crown without vanity; I have had my hand
sufficiently firm, to hold at once a Scepter and a Sword: I have equally
known the Arts of fighting and of reigning: I have known how to Conquer, and
which is more, I knew how to use the Victory: I have received good Fortune
with Moderation: And in the very time, wherein Youth and the weakness of my
Sex, might have made me proud of that little beauty I had: I have without
pleasure heard, all the flatterers of the Court, paint me in their verses, with
Lilies and Roses; say that my Teeth were Oriental Pearls: That my Eyes, black
as they were, shined clearer then the Sun; And in fine that Venus her self was
not so beautiful as I My Daughters I have told you all these things and I have
extended my self more then I ought: To make you comprehend that in all the
actions of my life, I was never guilty of Imbecillitie: Think not then, that
in the most important of all the actions I have done, or wherein there was
greatest need of courage, that my heart ever failled me, more then at other
times. No, my Daughters, I have done nothing in all my life, that gives me more
Satisfaction of my self, then that I had power to follow a Triumphing Chariot
with constancy. It is truly, at such times, that a great Spirit it
requisite, let it not be said to me, in such encounters that despair is a
Virtue, and constancy a weakness. No, Vice can never be Virtue, nor can Virtue
ever be Vicious. Let none say to me, that such constancy is more proper for
Philosophers then Kings: But know, my Daughters, that there is no difference
betwixt Philosophers and Kings: If not that the one teaches Veritable Wisdom,
and the other should practice it. In fine as Sovereigns owe their example to
their Subjects, and because they are in the sight of all the World; There is no
Virtue, which they ought not to imitate. Yet among all these that are most
necessare for Princes, Constancy is the more Illustrious, as being the most
difficile: But for that despair, which puts the dagger in the hand of them who
would evit Bondage, it is rather infirmity then Virtue. They cannot look upon
Fortune when it is Irritated: It would no sooner attack them, but they shun
fighting it: It would no sooner destroy them, but they promot its designs: By a
weakness unworthie of them, they yield the Victory to this airy thing: And by
a Precipitous action, without knowing often what they do, they quit the Irons,
in abandoning their lives, whose sweetness they only loved, without being able
to endure the bitter. For me, my Daughters, who am of an other opinion; I
mantain that they who live with Glory, should die as slowly as possible: And
that to speak rationallie, a sudden death is rather a sign of Remorse of
Repentance, and Imbecillitie, then of great courage. It may be, some will say
to me, that I am of a Race which should never carry Irons: That since
Cleopatra would not follow Augustus his Chariot, I should never have followed
that of Aurelian: But there is such a difference between that great Queen and
me, that all her Glory consisted in her death: And I made mine consist in my
life. Her reputation had not been advantageous to her, if she had not died by
her own hand; And mine should never have been at the height it is come to, if I
had deprived my self of the Glory, of knowing to carry Irons, with such
Grandeur of Courage, as if I had Triumphed over Aurelian, as he did of me: If
Cleopatra had followed Augustus his Chariot, she would have seen a hundred
odious objects in her traversing Rome, which would have reproached her of her
former Imprudences: The People would have certainly caused her understand by
their murmurings a part of her wanting conduct: But for me, I was very
certain, that I could see nothing about the Chariot which I followed, but men
whom I had formerly conquered and witnesses of my Valor and Virtue. I was, I
say, assured to hear no Contumely, and to Understand no Speeches but of my
present misfortune, and of my former Victories. Behold, said the People, the
Valiant Zenobia: Behold the Woman who did gain many Victories: Admire her
constancy in this encounter: Might it not be said, that these chains of
Diamonds, which she carries, do rather seen to adorn then bind her; And that
she leads the Chariot which she follows? In fine, my Daughters, in the time I
was all loaded with Irons, or to name them better, Chains of Gold and Jewels,
like a Noble Slave; In the time of all that Magnificent Triumph, which is
undoubtedlie the most unpleasant day of Bondage; I was at freedom in my heart,
and had my mind quiet enough, to see with pleasure, that my constancy, drew
tears from some of my enemies, Yes, my Daughters, Virtue has so strong
charms, that their Roman austeritie could not resist them; And I saw some
among them weep for Aurelians Victory and my misfortune: Moreover, none should
be so cowardly, as to let the mind be troubled, with things that do not at
all touch it, if they be perfectly wise. All the great preparations that are
made for these Triumphs should not fright a rational Soul: All these gilded
Chariots, these chains of Diamonds, these Trophies of Arms, and the
multitudes of People who flock together, to see that fatal Ceremony, should
not make a Generous Person time^ous, It is true, my chains were weighty; But
when they hurt not the mind, they do not much incomode the arms that carry
them: And for me in that deplorable state, I many times thought that as
fortune had made me follow a Chariot, I my self had done it for Triumph; By
that same Revolution which befalls all things in the World: You may perhaps one
day have Scepters made to you, of these same chains which I carried. But in
fine, if this should not come to pass, afflict your selves moderatlie: Be more
careful to approve your selves worthy of the Throne; Then to remount it: For
in the humor I am of, I have more esteem of a simple slave, if he be faithful,
then of the most potent King in the World, if he be not Generous. Think then my
Daughters, of enduring your Bondage with more constancy: And believe
certainly, that if I have been conquered by Aurelian: Mine surpassed fortune,
it may be seen through all the course of my life, that death did not fright me,
if I could have had Glory by it: I have seen it a hundred times under a more
terrifying countenance then the most desperate have ever seen: Cato his dagger,
Brutus his sword, Porcias burning coals, Mithradates his poison, nor Cleopatras
aspes, are any way so fearful. I have seen greeles of darts and arrows fall
upon my head; I have seen the points of a hundred lances presented to my
heart; And all this without any thoughts of fear. Think not then, if I had
believed death could have been Glorious to me, but that I could have found it
by my own hand. It was accustomed to conquer others; And it would have broken
my Irons if I would: But I thought my shaire of Glory would be greater, to
carry them without weeping, then to spill my Blood through feebleness or
despair. They whose satisfaction only consists in themselves, quits the Throne
with less regrate then others: They who encounter nothing but contentment in
their minds, are constrained to seek their happiness, in things that they are
strangers to. It may be then you will ask me, what remains for Princesses to
do, who have lost their Empire and Liberty? I shall answer you reasonably,
that since the Gods were desirous to give your courage so Noble a Subject, you
are obliged to use it well: And to make all the World know, by your Patience
and Virtue, that you merit the Scepter which is taken from you; And that the
Irons which were given you, were unworthie of you, This, my Daughters, is what
remains for you to do: And if you could let your selves be moved by my example
and reasons; You should find that your life might yet be pleasing and Glorious
to you. At least you have this advantage, that in the condition your Fortune
is, it cannot become worse then it is: So that if you can but once accustom
your selves to it, nothing can afterward trouble your repose. Remember that of
the many millions of men whom the World contains, there are not an hundredth
who carry Crowns: And do you believe, my Daughters, that all these men are
unhappie, and that there is no pleasure but on the Throne? If it be so, O how
you are deceived! There is no condition of life, but has pain and pleasure:
And it is true Wisdom, to know how to use all equally, if Fortune bring you to
the trial of it. They who kill themselves, know not that while People are
living, they are in a state of acquiring Glory: There is no Tyrran can hinder
me from Immortalising my name every day, if he let me live, and if I be
Virtuous: And if my very silence, do make me suffer any punishment, while I
endure it with constancy, it shall not forebear to speak of me. Let us live
then, my Daughters, because we can do it with honor: And because we also have
the means left us of testifying our Virtue, the Scepter, the Throne, the Empire
which we have lost, were they not given us by Fortune: But constancy comes
directly from the gods. It was from their hands I received it: And for that
cause you ought to imitate it: It is the true sign of Heroes, as despare is of
the weak or inconsiderat. Trouble not your selves then, for what posterity
will say of me? And do not fear that the day of Aurelians Triumph, has
obscured my Victories; Since as I said to you, it was the most Glorious of my
life. And moreover I know that Aurelian has made a picture of me at his
speaking to the Senate which shall make me known to Posterity: Preserve it
then, my Daughters, that when I shall be no more, the remembrance of what I
have been, may oblidge you to be always what you ought. Behold the culores
wherewith Aurelian has painted his tablet: I have learned (said he) that I be
not reproached of doing an action so little worthy of great courage, by
Triumphing over Zenobia: But they who blame me, knows not what Praise I Merit,
if they knew what a Woman she was: How well advised Counsels she had: How
courageous she showed her self, and constant in keeping good Order: How
Imperious and Grave she was among Soldiers: How Liberal when her affair
oblidged her: And how severe and exact, when necessity constrained her: I could
say it was by her assistance, that Odenat conquered the Persians, and pursued
the King Sapor to Ctesiphont: I could affirm that this Woman had so possessed
all the East and Egypt with the terror of her arms: That neither the
Arabians, Sarasians nor Armenianes dared to move. Let them who are displeased
with these Actions be silent; For if there be no honor in having Conquered and
Triumphed over a Woman what will they say of Galienus in contempt of whom she
mantained her Empire. what will they say of Claudius a Holy and Venerable
Prince; Who being employed in the War with the Goths, by a laudable Prudence,
suffered her to reign; To the end, that this Princess employing her arms
elsewhere, he might with the greater facility accomplish his other enterprises.
Behold my daughters, what my conqueror has said of me, though I followed his
Chariot. Have the same Equity, I conjure you: And believe that whosoever lives
thus, need not kill himself to Immortalise his Name.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THis Discourse lets it be seen, that a per suasive Orator, may prevail with
others: These Princesses lived, as their Mother had no desires of death; And
the Gardens that Aurelian gave them for their dwelling place, and which are
called to this day Tivoly, seems more pleasing to them, them the Coffine.
History gives account that this Generous Queen was highly esteemed by all the
Roman Ladies: And that her Daughters were Married to the most Illustrious
Families. It was little for their Birth, but much for their misfortune: Because
these same People thought Anthony and Titus unworthily Married, though they
espoused Queens. This was a Noble thought; But it was that of the Masters of
the World. And who says that, says all.

PORCIA TO VOLUMINOUS. THE SEVENTH HARRAN^UE.

ARGUMENT.
AFter that Brutus and Cassius were defaited and killed: Porcia Wife to the
first, and Daughter to Cato of Utica, testified by her discourse and actions,
that she would follow her Husbands fate, and that she would live no longer. Her
Relations who were willing to hinder her from dying, after they had taken all
things from her, thas could advance such fatal designs, sent Voluminous the
Philosopher, who had been the intimate friend of Brutus, to endeavor to
persuade her by reason, that she ought not to abandon her self to despair. But
this Generous Wife, after she had most impatiently heard him answered him in
this manner.

PORCIA TO VOLUMINOUS.
IT is in vain, O wise Voluminous, that my Relations have chosen you to persuade
me to live after the loss I have had: Seeing it is incredible that the same
Philosopher, who put the Sword in the hand of the Illustrious Cato my Father,
and afterward in that of my dear Brutus, can make me believe that it is just or
possible for me to preserve my life. No Voluminous, in the state I am Reduced
to, I neither can nor ought to live: You know that contrare to my Sex, that
Philosophy which you employ against me, is not altogether unknown to me; And
that the Virtuous Cato my Father, madh me learn it with greatcare. Think not
then that the Resolution I take, is the Effect of a Spirit blinded with its own
grief, and of despair without Reason. I have meditated upon it a long time: And
in the Vicissitudes of things, I have formed a design, which I shall execute to
day. Any other but I might satisfy their Husbands Ashes, with shedding of
tears all the rest of their days, but the Daughter of Cato, and Wife of Brutus
should do it an other way. Also I am very well assured, that Porcia has too
great a Soul, to lead a Life Unworthie of her Birth; And of the honor of having
had for her Father and Husband, the two most Illustrious of the Ancient Romans:
But for them who live to day, they are the Remains of Julius Cesars slaves; or
to say better, they are enraged Tigers, who tear their Mothers bowels, by
desolating their Country. Woe is me! Who could ever have thought, that the
Roman People, were become enemies of their own Liberty? That it could be they
themselves, who not only forged the chains which did captivate them; Who not
only set upon the Throne him who was the cause of so many men's deaths, that
he might come to it; But who was also capable of weeping for the death of a
Tyrran; Place him in the rank of the gods; And criminallie pursue, a man, who
to give them liberty, hazarded his life and despised Cesars Friendship? For
what would not he had obtained from him, if he could have submitted to Bondage?
His Irons should have been certainlie-lighter then others: And for a little
pains which he might have taken, he might have been Master of him who was of
all the World. But Brutus was too Generous, to establish his particular
felicity, upon the Ruin of the Reipublick: He knew that the first duty took,
or ought to take away all other: That owing all things to his Country, he owed
nothing to Caesar: That being born a Roman Citizen, he ought to hate Tyrranie:
That not to be ungrate to his Country, he must be partly against Caesar: And
that being of the first Brutus his Race, he owed the assistance of his Arms and
Valor, to the oppressed Reipublick. Nevertheless after he had done all these
things, these cowardly and insensible People, exiled him, for whom they should
have erected atues in all their public places. Yet this great ungratitude
wearied not the virtue of Brutus: you know, O wise Voluminous! All that he has
done for his Country: Nor do I tell it to make you learn; But to employ that
little life that remains in me, to speak of his Heroic Actions, and to conjure
you, to make them known to Posterity. Remember then, Voluminous, that though
all the Romans were ungrate to him, he desisted not to do all things for them:
And when these Sluggards, in place of one Tyrran had suffered three; He had
more compassion for them, then resentment of their ungratitude: And without
thinking of his own Preservation, what did he not to make them happy? Maugre
what they had been? But these enemies of Virtue are so well accustomed to
slaverie, that they hoard up their chains as their de^^est Treasures: And all
along, after that Brutus had broken them, they themselves renewed them with
care: And Rome which many ages bypast commanded all the Earth, now
voluntarlie submits to Tyrranie. O Cato, O Brutus! Who could ever have thought
it? And who could believe, that the gods would protect crime, and oppress
innocence. Yet I plainly see what it is that provockes Heaven to p^mish us:
The death of Brutus is Romes chastisement, and the greatest unhappiness that
can ever besail it: And certainly it is for Romes punishment, that the gods
permitted him to end his days. For Brutus, his pains are his reward: The
Romans ungratitude contributes to his Glory: And his very death does so
Illustrate his life, that it is almost a shame for me to weep. Moreover I
assure you, that I have weeped more for his absence, then death. I then looked
upon my (...) as being unlimited: And my Soul being balanced between hope and
fear, I solaced my self with weeping. But to day when I have no more to loss,
and when I see an infallible way of ending my misery; My Soul is more
tranquil: And though my grief be greater then any was ever felt, I endure it
with less impatience; Because I know it shall be quickly finished. Do not then
tell me that I ought to live, for preserving the memory of Brutus: The action
he did is so Heroic and Noble, that it shall ever be remembered by all men. He
shall always be regarded as the first and last of the Romans. And the Tyrrans
who shall reign after this we have now, shall likewaies serve to preserve a
Glorious remembrance of him; So long as there shall be Kings seen in Rome, it
will be remembered, that the Old Brutus chased them, and that the last died in
saving that liberty which the first had acquired. For I doubt not but Rome
shall be continually in slaverie: Being undoubtable, that if its freedom could
have been recovered, Brutus would have restored it: But since he could not do
it, he had at least the Glory of dying without being a slave. Think it not
strange then, that being Daughter and Wife to two men, who were even free to
death, I would partake of that Glory with them. And yet to speak truly,
Brutus shall not be altogether at liberty, If I were so base as to live a
Captive. There will be somewhat wanting to his Glory, if I forget mine: The
affection that he had always to me, makes our interests unseparable. I was of
the conspiracy, because I knew it before it was executed: It is but just then
that I should follow Brutus his destiny: And know Voluminous that she whose
mind was resolu^e enough, to stab her self with a Proigniard, to endure and
suppress the smart, thereby to testify to her husband, that she could conceall
a secret; Will not easily change her resolution of dying. The images of Cato,
and of my dear Brutus, do so fill my spirit. that I see no other thing: And me
thinks their death is so worthy of envy, that I took upon it as the chiefest
good can ever befall me. Remember, Voluminous, that the true zeall of Virtue
consists in the desires of imitating it: For they who praise Virtuous People,
without traceing them so much as they can, deserves blame raither then praise,
because they know the good and do not follow it: Cato is dead with this
advantage, to have had it said by Caesar, that he envied his death, because it
deprived him of the Glory of his Pardon: And I wish that Octavius may envy
Brutus, for having chosen a Wife abundantly courageous to follow him to the
Tomb. It is there we shall enjoy a liberty which we can no more loss; While the
Romans shall groan under the weight of their Irons. But a day will come, when
the name of Brutus shall be in veneration among them: When they shall desire
that good which they refused: And when the blood of Cato and Brutus shall
confound and make them blush. Yes, these Roman Citizens, who saw themselves
Masters of the Earth; Who had Kings for their Subjects, whose Glory was
without tashe, and whose power had no Authority above it but that of the Gods,
shall become infamous slaves: And their Bondage shall be so rigid, that they
shall not be Masters of their own will. They shall take from the Tyrrans all
their vices: And Rome which was a Seminary of Virtue, shall be a receptacle of
vile Adulatores. O Heavens! That the Inclinatons of such mighty People, should
be thus altered in an instant? All these millions of men, who fought on the
plains of Pharsalia, under Pompeyes coulors, were they all killed in that
battle? Or have they lost their hearts in losing it? All these Kings who hold
their Crowns, of the Senats authority, are they all ungrate? And is there none
who could suffer Brutus to unburthen them of their chains? The desire of
freedom, which is so strong among all the creatures who live upon the Earth, is
it extinguished among men? And is the blood of a dead Tyrran, so dear to the
Romans, that to honor his memory, and to wear mourning, they must load
themselves with chains all their life? Yes, all the Roman Legiones have lost
their hearts; All the Kings own Vassals, are ready to lay their Crowns at
their Tyrrans feet; All the Romans do prefer servitude to liberty; Cesars
Ashes are in veneration among them; And for their last misfortune Brutus has
abandoned them. However, do not think, Voluminous, that he desired to forsake
me: It is true when we parted in the City of Elea, he would not let me go with
him, although I did all things possible for it; Because said he the journey
would be very troublesome to me: And because I might be of more profit to him
at Rome; Then in this army. But at that time it was not so: I know Brutus
minded me a dying: He expects me in the place where he is; And he doubts not,
but Porcia remembers, that the Illustrious Cato loved better to tear his
entrails, then to surrvive his contreyes freedom: And that she having more
valide reasons to persuade her; will not faill to follow the way that he has
pathed for her. When life can be neither honorable, nor happy, it is great
wisdom to abandone it: Being certain, that it should be no longer dear to us,
then when it can serve for our Glory, or that of our Country: Since it is so,
I ought no more to preserve mine. Yes, Voluminous, I owe my death to my own
Glory; To that of Cato; To that of Brutus: And to that of Rome. But do not
think that this death shall be rude to me: I go to a place where Virtue is
certainly known, and rewarded. That terrifying apparition which Brutus saw,
without being frighted at the Town of Sardis, and afterward at Philippes,
appears not to me, I see but my husbands ghost calling me; And which seems to
be impatient till mine be with it. I see that of Cato, which retaining a
fathers authority, seems to command me to make haste and quite a place
unworthie of Porcias Virtue. Judge, Voluminous, if this Vision affrights me: And
if in the two ways I have to follow, I can have any difficulty in, choosing;
From one side, I see my country desolated: All the Earth covered with the
blood of our friends; Our persecutors became our Masters; All my relations in
Bondage: And to say all, nothing in the World can be more dear to me then the
Ashes of Brutus. Behold, Voluminous, what I see from that side: But from the
other, I see nothing but felicity: My Father and Husband wait for me; The
first requires the fruits of the instructions he gave me; And the other, the
reward of the affection he testified to me. Yes, Generous Cato, yes Illustrious
Brutus, Porcia shall do what she ought at this time, and nothing shall be able
to hinder her. For think not. O wise Voluminous, that inclinations can be
compelled: Because by it, we partly resemble the Gods: It is a privilege
which Heaven has given us. Tyrranes cannot force it: It is not under their
domination: And when the Soul is (...) and resolute, the designs are never
changed. Believe not then, that my Relations care can hinder me to die. Or that
your reasons can any way brangle my Spirit. Cato would not let himself be
moved with his sons tears, and Porcia shall not yield to those of her
Relations, nor your discourse; Brutus to escape Bondage could resolve to leave
me; And by what reason, should it not be easier, and also juster for me then
him, to end my life. My freedom is as dear to me, as his was precious to him:
But I have this advantage, and pleasure in death, that whereas he could not be
free without aband oning me: I need but follow him, to pre^erve my liberty.
You see then, O wise Voluminous, after all that I have said to you; That death
is glorious. ^ecessare, and pleasing to me. Think not then of hindering me,
because your care will be also to no purpose. They who have been made change
such reso^utions, are certainly subject to persuasion: They have ^n the bottom
of their heart a secret resentment, which opposes their desire; And their own
Timeritie is a strong enough defense, to preserve their life. They are of such
People that would die, to the end that some or other might come and hinder
them. But with me, it shall not go so: I conceal not my design; I will not
deceive my Gaurds: I tell them freely, that I shall escape from their hands:
And that death shall free me from the pain I am in. Yes, Voluminous, I do to
die. O Illustruous and great Cato! O Generous Brutus! Come and receive my Soul.
See dear ghosts, if I be worthy the name ^ear, do not disown me for what I am.
For if I be not mistaken, my death shall not be unworthie of a true Roman. See
my dear Brutus, if I have any faintings in this last hour: Or rather if I have
not great impatience to be with you. O Generous Cato, you see, that daggers,
poison, and every thing that could seem to assist my design, are taken from
me: My Chamber is become my prison; I have neither precipes, nor cords; And I
have Gaurds who are careful of me. But by taking all those things from me,
they cannot take away my desire of death, nor the memory of your Virtue. I
remember, O Illustrious Cato, of that Glorious day; Wherein you excelled Caesar,
by ^^mounting your self. You then told your Gaurds, that your life was not i^
their power; Because to finish it. you needed but stop your breath, or dash
your head against the Wall. It is then in imitation of so Generous a pattern,
that I go to find my dear Brutus. Behold, O Illustruous Husband, the last
action of Porcia; Judge of her life, by her death: And of the passion which I
have had for you, by these burning coals, which I hold, ready to choke me.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
IN saying these last words, She did what she said. And by a steadfast courage,
which procures admiration and horror, she made it appear, that things are not
easy and impossible, but according to the manner they are looked upon: And
that when any body loves one better then their life, they have no pr^uble in
following their death.

BERINICEA TO TITUS. THE EIGHT HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
IN the time of the Judean War, Titus became passionately in love with
Berinicea, Queen of Chalsis, Daughter of Mariamne: And according to the opinion
of some he Married her Secretly. At his Return to Rome, where he brought her,
the Roman People, who treat all strangers like Barbarians, and Queens as well
as others, did not approve of that alliance: so that the Emperor Vespasian
ordered his Son to send her back; It was in that troublesome conjuncture, that
this afflicted Princess, speak thus to the great Titus.

BERINICEA TO TITUS.
THink not, O Illustrious and generous Titus, that I complain of your parting
from me: Siuce on the contrare, knowing you as I do, I rather Pity then
Accuse you: And without saying any thing against you, I only desire your
liberty, to complain of Fortune: Which having favored you so much in all
actions of War, does treat you so cruelly to day in my person: For I doubt
not but you shall be more sorrowful to abandone me, then you was joyful in
all your Victories. I know that though ambition be as strong a passion as love;
It does not surmount it in your Soul: And I will also believe to comfort me in
my disgrace, that if you were in condition to dispose absolutely of your self,
you would prefer the possession of Berinicea, to the Empire of all the World.
But this reason of state, which Authorizes so many Crimes, and so much
Violence, cannot endure that after the invincible. Titus, has so many times
hazarded his life, to secure the Romans felicity, should think of his own
particular. Yet I have never heard it said, that love was a shamfull passion,
when its object was honest: On the contrare, I thought it a sign of great
Spirits, because all the Horces of antiquity were capable of it. I thought (I
say) that when this passion reigns in a Generous Soul, it inspires it with new
desires of acquireing Glory: Nevertheless, I plainly see that this is not the
Emperors, nor the Senates opinion; And that I am deceived in my conjectures.
Had you chosen for the object of your love, a person absolutely unworthie of
you, their complaints should be more tolerable, and I should merit the
treatment I receive, if I had in fused any baise or shameful thought, in the
Soul of Titus: but if I be not mistaken, they cannot reproach you of having
made an Alliance too unequal. Alexander thought that he did nothing against
his own Glory, when he Married Roxana, though she was both a Captive and
Stranger: And that error which love caused him commit, hindered not the noise
of his Victories, from coming to us: Nor his being ranked among the most
Illustrious Heroes. The fault which you are reproached off, has nothing
comparable to that: For in fine, you know, I am Mariamnes Granddaughter; I
have all the ancient Kings of Judea, for my Predecessors, and I my self do
carry a Crown, which me thinks should oblidge the Senate, not to treat me so
cruelly. Yes Titus, Palestina has had Heroes, as well as Rome. The
Jonathanes, the David's, the Solomon's, from whom I am come, have perhaps done as
brave actions, as the Romules, the Numa Pompiliuses or the Cesares: And the
Noble and Rich spoils, which you took in the Temple of Jerusalem and wherewith
you adorned your Triumph, makes Rome too much see the Grandeur, and
magnificence of my Fathers. If I were of a blood that were enemy to the
Reipublick, as formerlie Sophonisba Hasdruballs Daughter was, I would say that
they had reason to fear, that after having conquered the Generous Titus, I
would make my Victory fatal to the Senate: And at last, cause him do actions
contrare to his Authority. But I am of a Race accustomed to receive Crowns
from the Roman Emperors: The great Agrippa my Father, did hold the Kingdom of
Lisania, of Cajus his liberality, as well as that of Chalsis, whose Scepter I
carry this day, The second Agrippa my Brother, received the same favor from
the Emperor your Father: And his death made it sufficiently known, that he
was not ungrate. It was in your presence he lost his life, having a desire to
oblidge the inhabitants of Gamalia to render themselves, and acknowledge
Vespasians authority: However to comfort me for his death, they banish me like
a Criminal. They say I would overthrow the Empire; And scarce can they find a
corner of the Earth, fart enough from Rome, wherein to send me in exile. Yet
you know, O my dear Lord, that I have committed no other fault, but the
receiving the honor which you have done to me, by giving me the Glorious Tittle
of your Wife: the innocent conquest that my eves made of your heart, is that
which makes me culpable; The Romans would have you be their Captive, and not
mine: They would (I say) dispose of your love, and hatred as they please; And
choose a Wife for you according to their fancy, and not according to your
inclinations. Moreover, my dear Lord, I know my tears may be suspected, by them
who know me not: They of my enemies who will see my grief, doubtless will say,
that I regrate the Empire as much as Titus: And that Ambition has a greater
share of my Soul, then Love, But if you truly love me as much as you have
told me, You will judge my thoughts by your own: And You shall certainly know
that your person only causes all my sorrow, as it did all my felicity. No,
Titus, the Roman Magnificence has not transported me: The Throne which You
expect; Contributed nothing to the affection I have for You: And the Virtues of
your Soul, and the love which. You testified to me, were the only things I
considered, when I did resolve to love You. Take then when You please, a Person
with whom You shall divide, the Sovereign Power You shall one day have, without
thinking I wish her any harm; But for favors sake, never divide the heart
where You made me reign. It is an Empire which belongs to me, and which You
cannot take from me without injustice, You cannot, my dear Titus, accuse me of
asking too much; Because I demand nothing but what you gave me. No more can you
say, that this heart is not in your power; That Vespasian holds it in his
hands; That the Senate disposes of it; And in fine, that you are not its
Master. All slaves, though as strongly fettered with chains as they possibly
can, enjoy this privilege: They love and hate what seems good to them: And
their will is as free in the Irons, as if they were on the Throne. Since it is
so, you must certainly enjoy the same freedom, and shall not resuse me the
favor I ask from you. You may get a Wife for the Illustrious Titus, to content
the Capricoes of the People: But you must not give a Rival to Berinicea. She
must be single in your Soul, as you are in hers: And though she be separated
from you, yet she shall ever be present in your mind: If it be so I shall
patiently endure my exille. But Gods! can I think never to see you again. No,
Titus, it is absolutely impossible for me: my fate is inseparable from yours:
and though Vespasiane and the Senates authority do all they can, I must not
quit you. It would be imbecility to abandone you: you might reproachfullie say
to me, that fear of being male-treated, made me too ready to obey the order I
received for going out of Rome, and in fine, you might accuse me of little
love, But no, I will contradict that thought: It would be ingratitude to use it
so, Berinicea must not cost you the Empire: Preserve it then, and let her
depart. It is enough to her that you complain: And that when you are arrived to
the Crown, you then call to mind that the possession which you shall have, did
cost you Berinicea. Truly, Titus, there is some strange thing in our
adventure: For it should be the least thing to think, that these same people,
who already prepare themselves to acknowledge you for Master of all the Earth,
would be Law givers to you, in an affair of such importance to you, and of so
little to them? And that these same persons, over whom you shall have an
absolute power, to dispose of their fortunes and lives; May not suffer you to
love me? Am I Wife or enemy of all the Romans; Have they jealousy, or hatred
to me? Fear they that I will prevaill with you to rebuild the walls of
Jernfalem? Have I interprised any thing against the common good, or have I
offended any of them in particular? No Titus, I have done nothing, I have said
nothing, I have thought nothing against them: And my greatest crime is that I
am unhappie, and that you love me. But would to Heaven, that I be in that
manner Criminal all my life: Continue, my dear Lord, to give them, new subject
of hateing me by loving me always: Testify to them, that the Victime which
you sacrifice for them is dear to you: And for your glory as much as mine,
make them know that the affection you have for me, has lawful fundationes.
Conceall my faults, and carefulie exaggerate the few good qualities are in me:
tell them that the affection which I had for you, served in stead of merit. And
in fine, that you have found in my person, she object worthy of your love.
For me, I am not troubled to justify what I have for you; your Valor and
Virtue are so equally known through all the Earth, that I need not tell for
what reasons I love you, This sentiment is so universal, that though you were
not infinitely Good, you should not be oblidged to me. But my dear Titus, shall
I tell you something, that is in my mind! Yes because my affection has caused
it, you cannot be displeased and you are too just to condemn Berenieta, when
you shall know that she is only guilty of excess of Love. I would not in the
condition that things are in to day, robb you of the Crown which you ought to
carry, by oblidging you to follow me: For, my dear Lord, there is no corner of
the Earth, where the Illustrious Titus can live unknown. But if it be permitted
me to tell you all that I think, I wish that being born without Crown, without
Kingdom, and without Empire, we could leave together in some place where Virtue
alone should Reign with us. I wish (I say) that you were not what you are. And
yet I would not have you changed, In fine, the excess your grief and affection,
makes that finding nothing that satisfies me, among all things possible, I am
constrained for my consolation, to make wishes which are impossible to execute,
Pardon me, my door Titus, If I would rob you of a Crown: I reprehend my self
because I know by your eyes you are no off^^^ded. Till now I never thought that
I could see you greived, and not be a partaker with you: Yet surely that which
I see Painted in your face, sweetneth my affliction: Your tears diminishes the
bitterness of mine: And in the condition my Soul is in, I can have no
reflection so pleasing as to see you infinitely afflicted. Yes Titus, my despair
is so great, that since I cannot live happy with you, there are moments
wherein I shall wish that we were always unhappie, so that we could but be
together. Yet this unjust thought does not last long in my mind: And passing
from one extremity to another, I shall wish that I were yet more unfortunate,
and that you were not at all. Methinks then the Romans have reason to exile me,
because I am capable of disturbing the repose of their Prince. I wish I could
depart without afflicting you; Carry away in my heart, your sorrow with my
own: And by so tender a thought, I pity you more then my self. Moreover, if I
can possibly live without you, I am sure I shall hear often news of you,
though you your self should give me none: Fame will tell me of ail your brave
actions: And I heartily wish that it would load it self with my tears, as well
as with your exploits, thereby to let you know that neither time nor absence,
had any way Diminished my sorrows or affection. Remember, my Dear Titus,
every time that your heart makes you do a brave action; That there Berenicea
shall find both a subject of joy and of grief. She shall rejoice at your
glory, and afflict her self for the loss she has had: But when that does come
to pass, she shall ever love you equally. Nevertheless, I think I shall not be
long in pain, to partake of what befalls you: for my grief which I feel is so
great, That I believe it cannot be long. If my exile had been caused by your
inconstancy, that you had changed your thonghts of of me; That your disdain
had been the cause of my disgrace; I should have comforted my self by
complaining of you; I should mitigate my Torment, by calling you ungrate and
perfidious: Choler and despite should devide my heart: I might one day hope
to love you no more: And whether by resentment or glory, I should almost
depart from you without weeping. But as matters go, I se call over subjects to
afflict me; And nothing that can sweeten my grief. I not only loss a lover, I
loss a Faithful lover; And I loss him in such a manner, that it permits me not
to complain of him, I accuse the Senate and the people, that I may not complain
of the Emperor, because he is his Father: And without being able to accuse him,
If not of his having loved me too well, I depart the unhappiest woman that ever
was! But unsensible that I am, what do I say? By that I find some cause to
comfort me: Because I quit Titus, and he not me fortune plucks me from him
against his will: It threatens to take the Crown from him, If he consent not to
my banishment: And at this time I have the satisfaction, of seeing my dear
Titus esteem me more then the Empire of all the World. However it is true, that
I must forsake him: Yet I have this little comfort at our parting, to know that
I dwell in his heart, and that nothing can chase me thence. If I be not
mistaken I see by your silence that you consent to what I say; Your sighs does
assure me, and your tears permit me not to doubt. You have too delicate a Soul
to be capable of infidelity or forgetfulness: Unconstancie is a fault, which
cannot be fouud in you, be cause it is certainly, a sign, of imbicilitie or
little Judgment. The heart must not be given without a long premeditation: But
when once given it must never be retaken. For me, I find we have more right
over others goods, which belong not to us; then we have of the presents which
our liberality gives Others things may sometimes come under our power without
injustice: But what we once give, should never again be ours. It is a
renouncing of all right we have to pretend to it; And no Law can with equity
put us in possesion of it. Since it is so, I am assured to have always the
possession of your heart: It is by that thought that I can hope to live in my
exile. It is the only thing can support my life: And for that only can I, say
that I am not absolutely unhappie. I hope the Romans will in time know, that as
your love to me had nothing of injustice, sol have inspired you with nothing
but rational thoughts. I desire not Titus, that you loss your self for
preserving me; I will not have you oppose the Emperor; I will not have you
acquire the Senats hatred; I will not have you irritate the People against you;
I will not have you endeavor to make the Legions Rebel; I will not have you
refuse the fair Arricidea, who I know is appointed for you; I will not (I say)
have you lose the Empire for love of me. On the contrare I counsel and conjure
you to obey the Emperor, to follow the Senats advice; to content the humors of
the people; to keep your legiones, to make new conquests; to receive on the
Throne the too happy Arricidea: and preserve the Empire which Fate promises,
and birth gives you. But when to my prejudice you have satisfied all the World,
be so just as to remember, that Berenicea should by your only passion. If I
obtain this favor from you, I shall depart with some pleasure Maugre all my
sorrows: and so far from making imprecationes against my Enemies, I shall make
Vows for their felicity, as I shall do for your preservation. May you then O
Titus, gain so many Victories as you give Battles? May you Reign over your
people with as much Authority as clemency? May you be feared of all the Earth?
May you have so much Glory (...) you merit? May your Reign be as happy, as I
am unfortunate? In fine may you do so many brave actions both by your
excellent Valor, and rare goodness: That by consent of all Nations you may
one day be called. The love and delight of mankind.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THese wishes were too passionate, no to be ex^^ushed, Titus, Was as great, and
as much beloved, as Berenicia did wish: And if the since of History deceive me
not, she was his last passion, according to her desires, So that it may be said
that she obtained all that she asked, though she parted from R^me and abandoned
Titus.

PANTHEA TO CYRUS. THE NINTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
PAnthea Queen of Susania, being taken prisoner of War by the great Cyrus, was
favourablie treated, in acknowledgement of which courtesy, she obliedged
Abdradates her Hushand, to for sake the Lydeane party, and join his Arms with
those of this invincible Conqueror. But that mighty man of War, to signalise
his gratitude and courage, asked permission from Cyrus to fight in the advance
guards in the day of Battle: That glorious favor being granted to him, he did
prodigious, things and so little spared himself, that he gained the Battle and
loft his life. His body was brought back all covered with wounds to ^he
inconsolable Panthia: And Cyrus having gone to comfort her. or rather to hear a
part of her affliction for a loss equal to them both, this sorrow^^ll Princess
spoke to him in these words.

PANTHEA TO CYRUS.
YOu see, O Great a^^ Generous Cyrus, what the Victory has cost you:
Abdradates has been the Victime, which has made the Gods Propitious to you His
Blood has dyed the Laurels, which are wreathed about your head. He is dead in
Crowning of you: And to speak truly of the matter, Cyrus and Panthea, are
rather the cause of his death, then the Lydeans Valor. Yes, Cyrus, your
Generositie, his gratitude and mine, have put him in the deplorable condition
that he is in. You see him all covered with his own blood, and with that of
your enemies. The great many wounds he has received over all his body, are
certain proof of what he gave to them who fought him. His mighty Courage,
changed that of the Egyptians into despair: And that Illustrious hand, which
they have almost separated from his arm, (alace! what an object to Panthea!)
makes it sufficiently seen, that he quitted not his arms but by quitting his
life. He was seen, Generous Cyrus, fight with such Ardencie, that it was said,
that the gaining of that Battle, ought to put the Crown of the World upon his
head. He has retributed the obligations I had from you, with his person, his
blood, and his life: And in this manner, O invincible Cyrus, (as I have told
you already) your Generositie, his Gratitude and mine, have caused his death
and my misery. However I do not accuse you; I am too just to do that: On the
contrate, I thank you kindly, for offering your assistance to comfor me, I
praise in you, O Cyrus, that Generous sentiment, which makes your shed tears,
the very day of your Victory: And which makes you greive more for the death
of your friend, then rejoice for the gaining of the Battle, and defaiting all
your enemies. But after I have done your Virtue this justice, suffer me,
without either accusing you, or repenting me, to complain of the rig our of my
fate, which owing the preservation of my honor to you, would oblidge me my
self to expose my dear Abdradates to a fight, where multitudes made him
Succumb. It was only for the love of me, that he abandoned Cresus forces: For
though he had just enough cause not to serve him, the memory of the dead King
his Father, who loved him dearly, made him not abandone the Son, though less
Virtuous. But I no sooner made my obligations from you known to him, then he
freely offered to acquitt me with you, for so sensible an obligation. Your
fame had formerlie disposed his heart, to consent to what I asked: And having
already esteemed you infinitlie, it was easy for him to love you. In fine,
Cyrus, you know, he testified at that time, great Gratitude to you, and great
love to me. No, said he to me, Generous Panthea, Abdradates cannot be your
Protectors enemy: He has dried up your tears, and I must spend my blood in
his service, he has been careful of your glory, and my Valor must increase
his: He has lost a man whom he very much loved, by Protecting you I ought to
repair that loss; And if it be possible, not let it be perceived in the day of
Battle, that Araspes is not there. Yes, said he to me a loud, I shall loss my
life, or I shall testify to Cyrus, that they who receive benefits as they
ought, are some times as generous as they who give them. Woe is me! Must I tell
it, I never gainsaid this discourse: And without apprehending any fatal Event
from so Noble an Intention, I praised his resolution and design I thanked him
for that, which was to become the cause of my supreme misfortune; and
contributing to my own unhappiness, I excited his courage to do thins which
have caused his death to day; And yet which will make him live Eternally. O
cruel Remembrance! O injustice of Fortune! of all the Conquerours, why should
Abdradates only been overcome? And having so profitably shed his blood, for
gaining of the Battle, why should he almost have been the only one, who
enjoyed not the Fruits of the Victory? But it was not in this encounter alone,
that I contributed to my own Disaster: So great was my blindness, that I
expected that fatal day, like a day of Triumph: My spirit was filled with
nothing but hope; My imagination presented me with nothing but what was
agreeable; I looked upon the conclusion of the fight. as the Commencement of my
(...): Me thought I saw, Abdradates returning all garnished with Palms, and
his Chariot overloaded with the spoils of his enemies: And in that
consideration, I took more pains to make his Armor Glorious then strong. I
knew Abdradates his Valor, but I did not also know Fortunes Malice. I had so
much fear that his brave Actions, should not be sufficiently known, that I
employed all my Jewels, to make his Coat of Armor the more remarkable. But
insensible that I am, what do I say? Doubtless I was in paction with his
enemies: I was minded to show them where to strick: I was the cause of all the
wounds that Abdradates received: It was I who peirced his heart: And covered
all his body with blood and wounds, I guided all his Assailants hands: And as
if it could not have been enough that the Generous did fight him, in emulation
of his extraordinary courage: I would also make the Avaritious and Mercenarie
have the same designs. In fine, I armed all Cresus army against him: Some
only by desiring to conquer a man, who seemed to be the God of War; And others
by the Richness of the Booty. It was my hand put on Abdradates his Armor that
cursed day: yes Generous Cyrus, I my self brought the cause of my ruin to him:
and though in that very instant, a secret horror seized me, which foretold my
misery. I despised a revelation, which was sent me by the Gods, and though I
could not restain my tears, I was so unjust as to conceal them from my dear,
Abdradates. Me thought it would be a robbing him of his heart, to testify to
him that I wanted one at such a time: But imprudent that I was? I ought to have
showed him my Tears with all their bitterness: For I doubt not, If by my grief
I had let him know, that my life depended upon the preservation of his; But he
would have taken a little more care of himself then he did. He would have
equally considered your glory and my life: But O Illustrious Cyrus, it seems
at that time that I neither cared for that of Abdradates nor my own: For when I
had made an end of arming him, and had led him to the Magnificent Chariot that
waited for him; I did neither speak to him of himself nor of me; But Wholly of
your obligations to me, I remembered him that when you might have used me as a
slave, you treated me like a Queen that having had the misfortun of displeasing
a man whom you loved better then your self, you was so generous, as to defend
one from him; and that after so heroic an action: I promised to you that he
would be as faithful and profitable to you, as Araspes had been, Behold.
Generrous Cyrus, what I said to my Dear Abradates, being ready to depart from
me for the last time. And as his thought were never differing from mine, Would
to the Gods (said he to me, putting his hand upon my head and lifting up his
eyes to Heaven) That I may show my self to day as a deserving friend to Cyrus,
and as a husband worthy of Panthea. And having so said he left me; And looking
upon me so long as it was possible when he was in the Chariot, he commanded
his Postilion to drive. And being depryved of embracing my dear Abdradates any
more, all I could do was, to kiss the outside of the Chair wherein he did sit.
Adieu, Would I have said to my dear Abdradates; When an excesive greiefe, which
surprised me all at once did hinder me. And although the Chariot did begin to
go away from me, I did not forbear to follow it: But when Abdradates perceived
it: Go (said he to me) generous Panthea, expect my return with hopes of seeing
me a^one, Woe is me? I did not then know, that the Chariot whose magnificence
atracted the eyes of all its beholders, and which seemed to have been made for
a day of Triumph; would be Abdradates his coffine: However I did no sooner lose
sight of him, when my waiting women having put me in my Litter, and brought me
back to my Aunt: I ceased to hope, and began to fear, My imagination, which
till then had entertained me with Crowns and victories, then presented nothing
to my view but dooleful objects: and according to the acount is given me of the
business I saw in my Melancholy, revenge all that has befallen my dear
Abdradates, Yes Cyrus, I saw him in the front of the Battle, impatient to shed
his blood for your glory. I saw him furiously repulse the Lydeanes; I saw him
break the Battalions he attacked: I saw him give Death wheresoever he carried
his Arm, pursuing his flying enemies, covering the fields with dead bodies: and
in my Vision, me thought I saw his Chariot conduted by Victory. But alace!
That apparition was quickly defaced by an other? I saw of a sudden that that
which should have oblidged Abdradates his soldiers to stick close to him, made
them abandone him. The great dangers wherein he did cast himself, daunted his
followers courage, and augmented that of the Egyptianes. I saw him abandoned by
the most part of his Suoldiers, and invelopped among his enemies. yet I saw him
make bright day through the lances, the darts and the javelie of them he did
assaulte^ saw him like in l^ghting among the ranks: Overthrew all that he
encountered: Break the Chariots that opposed him: Kill the men who drove them,
attaque and defend himself at once: And in fine conquer all that withstood his
Valor. But after he had with his own hand erected a trophy to your and his own
glory and had taught your Soldiers, which way they should obtain the
victory. After (I say) he had covered all the fields with blood, dead bodies,
broken arms, and Chariots dashed to pieces: These same men whom he had killed,
These Arms which he had broken, and these very Chariots which he destroyed:
Did (O Cyrus shall tell it) overturn that of my Abdradates. If he had conquered
fewer enemies, he had not been overcome: They whom he had surmounted, were more
fatal to him, then they he had to fight: But in fine I saw Abdradates oppressed
by the crowd, I saw him all overwounded, disputing for his life, even to the
last drop of his blood! O terrifying vision! I saw him fall dead, and a dying
conqueror them who caused him dye, and in effect, O Cyrus, you know that your
Soldiers fought better to have the dood body of Abdradates, then they did to
save Abdradates his life. Judge what condition could my Soul be in dureing such
a lamentable sight: But that was nothing in com parison of what I suffered,
when I saw Abdradates his Chariot return all loaded with the spoils of his
enemies: And above that fa^all Trophie, the body of that Illustrious Heroes all
covered with wounds, pale, dead, and bleeding, O Cyrus! O Panthea! O doleful
victory! What object to my eyes! And what grief to my soul! It is so great,
that I wonder it has not already deprived me of all sorrow, every thing I
see Torments me, and every thing I think of makes me despair, for Cyrus, when
the unlawful passion of Araspes. gave me cause to complain; If I had then had
my recourse to Death, I had preserved Abdradates his life I had secured my
honor, And you should not have had cause to accuse a man who was beloved of you
I should have altogether satisfied my husband, my own glory, and the great
Cyrus I owed him that respect not to have complained of his favorite and if I
had been rational, death should have hindered my complaints then, And my tears
to day. But fate had otherwise resolved it: Would t the Gods in so sad as
adventure, that as Abdradates showed himself, a husband worthy of Panthea and
worthy of Cyrus, his friendship I may also manifest to posterity, that Panthea
was a wife worthy of Abdradates; And that she was not unworthie of Cyrus his
protection. I well perceive. O excellent Prince, by the many sacrifices that
are prepared, and by the magnificent ornaments; That are brought to me upon
your account: That you design to make the obsequies of my dear Abdradates, such
as are suitable to this Illustrious Conqueror: But because his Glory is the
only thing, that I ought to care most for; O great Cyrus, let Posterity know,
by a Glorious Monument, and by true Inscriptions, what Abdradates was. Eternise
altogether, your glory, his, and my unhappiness. The Gold and the Marble which
you will make use of in it, will not be unprofitable to you: And the Tomb which
you cause build, to Immortalise Abdradates, shall make your self immortal.
There are more People who can do a brave action, then give account of it
themselves: Who can acknowledge and publish it as it ought to be. Have not that
Jealousy, which Glory gives to the most Illustrious: And believe that if You
take care of that of Abdradates, the Gods will also take care of yours. The
blood which he has lost for you, merits me thinks this gratitude: Nor shall I
doubt my obtaining what I desire of you. I see that you consent to me; And that
I have no sooner thought of my request, but your goodness oblidges me to thank
you. However I have another yet to ask of you: It is, O Illustrious Cyrus, that
without hastening the doolfull Pomp of my dear Abdradates, I may be yet
suffered a while to wash his wounds with my tears. All the Victims that are
necessare for appeasing his Ghost, are not yet in that order they should be: O
Cyrus, let them not then be pressed: I shall not make them wait long, my last
fare-wells shall be quickly said. And moreover, it is very just that since he
died for me, I shed so many tears as he did drops of blood: And since I ought
to see him no more in this World, I may enjoy the sight of him so long as it is
possible for me. Yes Cyrus, that lamentable and most pitiful object, is the
only good I have remaining. It is both my despare and comfort: I cannot see it
without dying, and perhaps I shall die how soon I am deprived of seeing it any
more. Wherefore I (...) you that I be not pressed: And because you ^^tyed me to
tell you into what place I would go; I promise to you, that you shall quickly
know the place that I shall choose for my retirement.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
ALace! This beautiful and sad Queen, was but too true: For scarcely had she
deceived Cyrus, by making him believe that she was capable to live after the
death of Abdradates; (And that Generous deceit was the issue of her Harrangue)
but she choose her retiring place; I mean her husbands Tomb. I say Cyrus was
not well gone from her, but she plunged a Poiniard in her heart, and expired
upon the dead body of Abdradates. This Generous monarch was incredibly greived:
And to eternise the memory of these two rare persons, and his own gratitude
with them; He builded for them a Glorious Monument: Where many ages after his,
the Marble and the Brass, declared the Virtues of Panthea, and the Valor of
Abdradates: And the River Pactose which is there represented, upon whose banks
this Tom was builded, seems to tell that she esteems their Relics more
precious, then all the Gold that rolls on her sands.

AMALASONTHA TO THEODATES. THE TENTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
A Malasontha daughter of Theodorick the great, Reigned after the death of
Eutharick her Husband, eight years in Italy with a marvollous Splendour dureing
the minority of Athalarick her Son. But this young Prince being dead, whither
it was that she would discharge her self partly of state affairs; Or that she
believed the Goths were desirous of a King; She placed upon the Throne
Theodates, Son of Amalfreda, Sister to Theodorick her Father: Yet with
intention to partake of the Sovereign Authority with him. But this ungrate
man, had the Scepter no sooner in his hand, then he banished this great
Princess: Who immediately upon her departure, did express her self in these
words.

AMALASONTHA TO THEODATES.
HAve you forgot, Theodates, which way you was conducted to the Throne? Have
you forgot how you received that Crown which you carry? Have you forgot of
whom you hold that Scepter which I see in your hands? And that absolute power
which I so cruelly have trial of to day; Did it come to you by your Valor?
Was it given you by the Laws of this Kingdom? Or by the depopulation of all
the Goths? Have you conquered that great Extent of Earth, which acknowledges
your Authority? Are you either Conqueror; Usurper, or Legittimate King? Answer
every thing Theodates: Or at least let me answer for you: Because if I be not
deceived, you cannot make it for your advantage: And I am more indulgent then
to oblidge you, to tell any thing that would be irksome to you. They who
desire not to acknowledge a benefit, can have no greater punishment then to be
forced to publish it: Wherefore I will not constrain you, to avouch from your
own mouth, that neither by right of Birth, nor of a Conqueror, nor by that of
our Laws, could you while I am alive have any pretensions to the Kingdom of
the Goths: Because I was in possession of it, as Daughter, Wife, and Mother of
them whose in was; And who left it to me after them, as their lawful Heiress.
Nor are you ignorant that you are born my Subject: And that you would have
still been so; If by a very extraordinare goodness, I had not descended from
the Throne to conduct you to it. However after I had taken the Crown from off
my own head to give it you; After I had deposited my Scepter in your hands, and
was resolved to make a King of your Person: After all that it was, seen that I
had much ado, to make the Goths obey you; It was seen (I say) that the first
things you did, was to recall to the Court, all them whom I had banished for
their crimes: And after you had chosen my greatest enemies for your principal
Ministers. Theodates. That same Theodates, whom Amalasontha Daughter of
Theodorick the great, had made a King: Whom she by her own hand had Crowned;
And to whom as a manefest proof of her power, she demitted the Regal
authority, unjustlie exilles her, who gave him the power of banishing her. O
Heavens! Is it possible to see the like ungratitude among men? And is it also
possible that Amalasontha has made so bad a choice? No Theodates I am not like
you: I will not condemn you without hearing: You must certainly have some
reason for hateing and banishing of me. What did I against you while you was my
Subject? Or what have I done against you, since I have made you a King? I
remember very well in the time you was under my morigiration; And when I had
the power of punishing, or rewarding you; I very well remember, that
multitudes of Tuscanes, having come to complain to me, of the violences your
avarice made you commit against them, I remember (I say) that being angry no
see you guilty of a passion, unbefiting Theodoricks Nephew; I used all my
endeavors to make you comprehend, that such desires, were base and unjust. It
is true I oblidged you to restore things, which did not belong to you: But it
is also true that I did nothing but what reason and equity would have me do, I
know I told you at that time, that avarice was the infallible sign of a mean
Spirit: That almost all covetous People were cowards: That they who so
pationatlie desire to heap up Treasures, take but little care to acquire
Glory: And in fine, that Avarice for the most part was always the companion
of ungratitude. See Theodates, what I have done against you: I have endeavored
to correct a wicked inclination, with which you was born: But do you know
Theodates, what was then my intention? I thought of putting a Crown upon your
head: I thought of giving my Subjects no cause to reproach you, when you should
become their King: I thought to hinder them from fearing, that you would be
their Tyrran, rather then Sovereign: And that they should not apprehend, that
he who had already usurped their Fortunes, when he was but a Subject like
themselves, would not entirely Ruin them, when he should be their Master.
Behold Theodates, the true cause of the sharpness of that Reprimand, which has
infused that hatred in your Soul against me. Nevertheless, I wonder, that
having spent the most part of your life, in studying Platos Philosophy you
should take it ill, to be corrected by any body. They who so carefully learn
Wisdom, should me thinks practice it: And I cannot think it strange enough,
that you should so well remember, the reprehension I gave you, and not remember
more what I have done for you. When I resolved your Coronation, I did it not
rashly, I considered what you was; I endeavored to foresee, what you would
one day be. I found two inclinations in you which did not please me: The first
was that negligence, which you always have had of warlike affairs: And the
second, that insatiable desire, of acquiring every day new Riches. Yet I
thought that the one would oblidge you to be wise. And for the other, I thought
that a man who believed his avarice could be satisfied, with usurping three or
four foot of ground from his Neighbors; Would be cured of that infamous
passion when I gave him a Kingdom. I believed (I say) that when that avarice
wanted an object it would at least become a Noble ambition; That you would
thereafter take as much care to merit the Fortune I had given you, as you have
always had to purchase new. Treasures; And I believed in fine, that of a
covetous and sloathfull Subject, I should make a prudent and understanding
King. But I should have also thought, that he who could not endure Neighbors
at his Country house; And who was so unjust, to augment his Limits by paces; I
say, I might have very well thought, that a man of that humor, would never
resolve to partage a Throne with me. Truly Theodates, I do not at all think,
that you have well excogitated what you do, for is it possible, after I have
given you a great Kingdom; After I have made you Master of the Goths and all
Italy? That you can appoint for the place of my banishment, that little Island
of Bolsina, situated in the middle of a lake, where there is hardly place for
a small Castle? No, Theodatts, let us not disguise the truth: The place of my
banishment, should be rather called my prison, or rather perhaps my Tomb. May
be I shall there find my Executioners, thinking to find my guards: And it may
also be, that in this very time I am speaking to you, You are vexed at the
length of my discourse, because by it the fatal moment of my death is
postponed. However, you are not yet in condition to accomplish the crime which
you are ready to commit: Consider Theodates, what you are undertaking, Perhaps
my death may cost you your life. Eternise then your name some other way then by
ungratitude: do not begin your reign with an unjust action: And if it be
possible, let your repenting for a wicked design, make you undertake better.
Consider if I had not been willing to have you reign, I should not have made
you a King: And that it be not thought, that I did set you upon the Throne, but
to precipitate you from it. Wherefore, what do you apprehend of me? Or to say
better, what should you not fear, if you exill me? Do you think that the Goths
and Italians, will endure without murmuring, the Daughter of Theodorick, to be
unworthilie treated, by a man whom they do hate so much already, when he was
but her Subject? That secret hatred which they have to you, will appear how
soon they can find a pretext for it: They will equalie think of revenging the
abuse done to me, and also themselves: And in that manner, without Amalasonthas
contributing to your Ruin, she shall not forbear to overthrow the Throne
whereon she has placed you. The injury you do to me, does not reach me only,
all the Princes of the Earth ought to be concerned with it: And if I be not
deceived, you have Neighbors, who under the Title of Protectors of innocence,
or revengers of my death, shall make incursions into some parts of your
Dominions. If Fortune had otherways treated me, That I had lost the Throne in
some other manner, Had my Subjects revolted; Had the Emperor Justinian made
War against me; Had Bellisarius conquered me; Or had any other conquerors
usurped my Kingdom; I should have been the more easily comforted: But to see
that by my own hand, the Crown is taken from me, to give it to my persecutor;
Is that which puts a stand to my Constancy, and all my Virtue. Ha! Theodates!
Can you see Amalasontha, at the foot of the same Throne where I have formerlie
seen you, as my Subject, as a Criminal, and as a Supplicant? Can you (I say)
see me there, unjstlie condemned to perpetual banishment? Without having done
any other crime in all my life, but that I gave you the Sovereign Power?
Perhaps that is the cause why Heaven punishes me: It would revenge upon me all
the injustices you will commit; And make me myself experimently feel that, which
doubtless you will make others undergo. However because my Intentions were most
sincere; I cannot repent me of what I have done for you: But since I am so
Generous as not to repent me of a good action; Be you also so just as to repent
of a wicked design: And if you will not do it for love to me, let it be done
for love to your self. Ungratitude is a Popular vice, which has never been
seen upon the Throne but with Monsters: And as liberaltie and gratitude are the
true Virtues of Kings; Avarice and ungratitude, are vices which they should
never be capable of. They are the distributors of benefits, and rewards: That
which is avarice in the heart of a Subject, should be Prodigality, in him and
that which is ungratitude, should be Ambition in the Soul of a Sovereign. Yes
Theodates, a King may be ambitious and prodigal, without being dishonored: But
he can never be either covetuous, or ungrate, without being the object of his
Subjects disdain, and without being execrable to Posterity. Doubtless your
Books have taught you what I say, and what only experience has taught me; But
you think if I be not mistaken, that it is easier to make a fine discourse then
to do a brave action. It is not that the way to Virtue is defficile, if the
inclinations be Noble: On the caontrare, it brings its reward along with it;
And the pleasure of doing well, is the more agreeable Value. But that which
gives you the trouble of bringing your self to it, is that all your
inclinations are against you. You cannot be just, without fighting against
yourself: you cannot be thankful, without betraying your thoughts: you cannot
be liberal without tearing your heart: And to say all in one word, you cannot
follow virtue without abandoning your self. Yet consider, Theodates that you
have but one enemy to subdue: Undertake that War if you believe me, and be
assured it will be glorious to you. You need besiedge no City; You need give
no Battle: You have not Incommodious Voyage to undergo; You need not exhaust
your so much beloved Treasures, to raise arms; You need not hazard your life
on that occasion; You need not go into a far country to seek your enemies; You
need not disturb that profound repose, you so much delight in; For in fine,
without going out of your closet, you may find in yourself, your adversary and
defender. Your inclinations will oppose your reason; But if your will do but
join with the juster party, and if you will strongly dispute the Victory; You
shall no sooner design the Conquest, but you shall be Victorious: Or to explain
my self more clearlie, you shall no sooner be resolved to abandone vice: and
embrace Virtue, but you shall be Virtuous. perhaps you will say to me, that
this Civil War, which will pass without any witnesses but your self, will not
be glorious to you. because it will not be known: But think not Theodates, that
Virtue is a thing that can be hidden. You shall not sooner be of its party,
but all the Earth shall know it. You shall gather no more Treasures, but to
enrich your Subjects: You shall not let your self be oblidged, but to reward
them who Oblidge you: You shall reign over your People, with as much Equity as
Clemency, you shall behold inveneration by all the Princes your Neighbors:
You shall no more banish Amalasontha: And your name shall be glorious, in all
Ages to come. Behold Theodates, what Victorious fruits you may reap, which does
not at all depend upon the caprice of Fortune, nor of the chance of arms: It
is absolutely in your power. But to leave you the freedom, of assaulting and
conquering this enemy, whom I have Crowned; I withdraw, and does yield all the
glory of the Combat to your self.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THis discourse wrought effects in Theodates his person; But not such as
Amalasontha expected. This Monster of ungratitude and cruelty, would not so
much let himself be moved by the tears of that Queen, as to remember the
obligations he had from her: And because he was ashamed to see her, he hastened
her Departure. Yet his inhumanity dallyed not: For some few days after, he
induced them who were enemies to the Virtues of that great princess, to go and
kill her with a P^yniard in her Prison. but this did not pass unpunished: He
did not long enjoy the fruits of his crimes: He lost the Scepter and his Life:
And to speak Rationallie, his death was the Effect of this Harrangue: Which in
fine, armed his just revengers against him.

LUCRETIA TO COLLATINUS. THE ELEVENTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
THis Harrangue has need of no Argument: And none are ignorant that when the
young Traquin ravished Lucretia, she neither concealled his crime, nor her own
misfortune! She told both the one and the other to her husband: And to excit
his revenge, she made appear to him the abuse that was done to her, With all
the Circumstances that could aggravat it. Though there have been several ages
since this accident happened, and that it is almost as old, as ancient Rome: It
cannot yet be decided, if she did well in killing her self after her
misfortune, (...) as she had not done better, to have let Tarquin kill her, and
died innocent, though she had not been believed so, Reader, hear her Reasons,
and because her case is exposed to the eyes of all the Universe, and that all
men an her judges; Give your vote after so many; And make use of a privilege,
which every one has acquired: But because she is going to speak, do not
condemn her without hearing.

LUCRETIA TO COLLATINUS.
WOE is me! Can Lucretia possibly seo Collatinus, without dareing to call him
her husband? Yes. Reason will have it, and I will not oppose it. No,
Collatinus, I am no more your Wife: I am an unhappie creature, whom the
indignation of the Gods has chosen, to be the object of the most horrid
Tirranie, that ever was heard of. I am no more that Lucretia, whose Virtue
charmed you more then her beauty: I am an unfortunate Soul, which an others
crime has made culpable. But to oblidge me to speak with Tranquillity to you
in so great a trouble; Swear to me, that you will revenge the abuse I have
received. Let me see desires of Vengeance in your eyes: Show me the Poigniard,
which should obliterate the injury that was done to me: ask arduouslie the
Tirrans name from me. But alace can I tell it? Yes. Lucretia, for your
vindication and chastisement, thou must to day, be altogether thy accuser, thy
witness, thy party, thy defender, and thy judge. Know then, Collatinus, that
that Lucretia, who did ever love her honor, better then her life, or yours;
Whose chastity was always without blemish; The purity of whose Soul is
incorruptible; Has suffered in your place, a base, an infamous Person the son
of a Tirran, and a very Tirran himself. Yes, Collatinus, the perfidious
Tarquin, whom you called your friend, when you brought him to me the first time
that I had seen him; (and would to the Gods it had been the last day of my
life?) That Traitor, I say, has made Triumph of Lucretias chastity. By
despising his own Glory, he has lessened yours, by having absolutely
benighted mine; And by a cruelty which never had example, he has reduced me,
to the most deplorable condition, that Woman whose whole inclinations are
Noble, could ever see. I perseive Generous Collatinus, that my discourse
astonishes you; And that you are in pain to believe what I say: Yet it is a
certain truth. I am witness and asociate of Lucretias crime. Yes Collatinus
though I am yet alive I am not innocent: Yes my Father, your daughter is
guilty, for having survived her glory: Yes, Brutus, I merit the hatred of all
my Neighbors: And when I have committed no other crime, but the giving love to
a cruel Tirran, who by the abuse he has done to me; has altogether violated
the Laws of men of friendshp, offended the Roman People, and despised the Gods;
It is enough to merit the hatred of all the World. Woe is me! Is it possible,
that Lucretia could inspire such base thoughts; that her fatal beauty could
kindle a flame, which should be her own destruction? And that her looks which
were so innocent, could give such criminal desires? But what is thy wonder,
insensible that thou art! Rather wonder that thou did not tear thy heart,
before thy great misfortune. Then was the time Lucretia wherein you should have
testified courage, and the love that you had to Glory You should have then
died innocent; Your life would have been spotless; and without question the
Gods would have ^een careful of your reputation. Butinfine the busifiess is
not so. I am unhappie, unworthie to fee the right; Unworthie of being Spurius
Lucretius his Daughter; Unworthie of being Collatinus his Wife; And unworthie
of being a Roman. Now Collatinus I ask of you, what punishment Lucretia
deserves, Deprive her of your affection: Blot her our of your Remembrance.
Revenge the abuse that has been done to her, only for love to your self, and
not out of love her. Look upon her no more but as infamous: And though her
misfortune be extreme, deny her that compassion, which is had of all that are
miserable. But nevertheless, if it were permitted me, after I have spoken
against my self, to say some what in my defense; I would say Collatinus,
without contradicting truth; That I have not obscured my Glory, but by having
loved Glory too well. Tarquins cajolleries, did not touch my heart. His
passion gave me none: His presents did not at all suborn my fidelity: Nor love
nor ambition brangled my Soul: And if I desired to speak for my self, I can
only say, that I loved my Reputation too much. Yes Collatinus, Lucretias crime
was that she preferred fame to true Glory. When the insolent Tarquin came into
my Chamber; I being awaked saw a Poiginard in his hand; And having brought it
to my Throat to hinder my outcries, he began to speak of a passion he had for
me; The Gods knows what were then my thoughts; And if death appeared terrible
to me. In that condition I equally despised the prayers and threats of the
Tyrran: His demands and offers were equally rejected: Neither love nor fear,
had any place in my Soul: Death did not affright me, And so far from
apprehending, I many times desired it. My Virtue had nothing to fight against
at that time: I was not pendulous to preser death to the Tyrrans love: And I
know no horrid pain, which I would not have joyfullie endured, to have
preserved my honor. But when my coustancie had wearied the Tirrans patience:
That he saw neither his prayers, tears, presents, promises, threats, nor death
it self could move my heart: That Barbarian, inspired by the furies, said it I
resisted his desires any longer, he would not only kill me; But to make me
infamous to Posterity, he would (...) slave who accompanied him: To the end
that (...) him dead in my bed, it should be thought that I (...) forgot my
honor for that slave, and that he wing (...) zeal to you, had punished us, as
being guilty of that crime. I avouch with shame, that that discourse wrought
on my Spirit, what the certainty of death could not do: I lost strength and
reason; I yielded to the Tirran; And the fear of being thought infamous, is the
only thing that made me so. No, Collatinus, I cannot endure that Lucretia
should be accused, to have failled in her honor: That the memory of it was
eternally blasted: And thinking that she should be execrable to you, hindered
her from dying at that instant, and makes her live till now. I did all things
to oppose the Tyrrans violences, except killing my self. I desired to live,
that I might preserve my Reputation, and that I should not die unrevenged: And
a false image of true Glory, taking possession of my heart; made me commit a
crime, which I feared to be accused of. However the Gods are my witnesses, that
my Soul and desires are wholly pure, my consent contributed nothing to that
doolefull accident, neither in the beginning, progress nor end of it. You know,
Generous Collatinus, that when you brought the Tirran as your Friend, I was not
voluntarlie the cause of his unjust passion; I scarce lifted up my eyes to look
upon him: And that Illustrious Victory, which my Modesty gained to you that
day, should make you sufficiently remember, that I have not drawn upon my
self, the misfortune that is befallen me. After that, I did not see the
treacherous Tarquin, until that dismal day, wherein he made prise of
Lucretia. Virtue. But what do I say? Tirrans have no power over the will, I am
yet the same Lucretia who so much loved glory; Because it is certain that mine
is altogether innocent. The tears which flow from my eyes, are not the effects
of my remorse: I repent not for the fault I have committed, but only that I
died not before that of another. We were two in the crime, and but one
Criminal: And my conscience does check me of nothing, but my having preferred
my reputation and revenge, to a Glorious death. That which has caused my
misfortune, is that I believed the Glory of my death would not be known: I
doubted the equity of the Gods at that time: And without remembering that they
do miracles when they please, and that they are protectors of innocence; I have
lived longer then I ought because I have survived my chastity. Think not
Collatinus, that I will diminish my crime to appease your fury; I see in your
eyes more splen against Tarquin then hatred to Lucretia: Doubtless you rather
pity then accuse me, and all the former actions of my life, assist to
vindicate me in your heart. And moreover, as I have said already, though I am
unwillinglie guilty, yet I consent that Collatinus do love me no more. I speak
not this to flatter you; But only to carry you the more ardentlie on to
revenge. Me thinks, in vindicateing my self, I make the Tirran the more odious:
The more innocent I appear, the more guilty he seems: The more unhappie I am,
the more he deserves to be, and the more tears I shed, the more blood you
should make him shed. Behold, Collatinus, the cause of my discourse, of my
tears and of my life. Let me not be said to have lived infamous to no purpose:
Think of revenge, Generous Collatine, consider what you are, and what your
enemy is, or to speak better the public enemy. You are a Roman, you are
Virtuous, you are Noble; And if I dare also say so, you are Lucretias husband.
But for him he is of a strange race, he is the son, and Grandson of Tyrrans.
The Proud Tarquin. you know, mounted not the Throne, but by pulling a Virtuous
Prince from it, whose Daughter he married. The Scepter which he holds, cost the
life of him who formerlie carried it: And to secure himself in his dominions,
he has committed more crimes, then he has subjects. Behold Collatinus, who is
the Father of my ravisher. If I be not deceived his mother does not make him
more considerable: For in fine, I cannot be live, that the son of the infamous
Tullia who dared to drive her Chariot over her Fathers body, that she might
arrive at the Throne she aspired to; Had not so many enemies at Rome, as there
are Virtuous men in it. And more over, the Virtue of Sextus Tarquinius, did not
deface the crimes of his predecessors: The best action that he did, was the
betraying a great many People, who trusted in him. Behold Collatinus, what an
enemy you sis, go then, go and assault him courageously. You shall no sooner
speak of the abuse he has done to me, but you shall have all the Romans on
your side. It shall be both a General and Particular quarrel to them: They
will be feared for their Wives; Their Daughters; And their Sisters: They shall
all look upon the treacherous Tarquin as their enemy: And if their yet remain
any who will follow him, they will certainly be cowardly and esteminate, whom
it will be no hard matter to overcome. The Senate waits but a pretext to declare
themself: The People are weary of carrieing chains: They will seek a hand to
unbind them: And the equity of the gods shall favor your party, You shall
see that the Tirrans very Relations, shall tear the Crown from off his head.
Yes I see Brutus listening to me, with intention to revenge my abuse: Doubtless
he will follow you, in such a generous design: And if the confidence whsch I
have of Heaven deceive me not, I already see the Proud Tarquin chased out of
Rome; His infamous Son die by some unknown hand; And all bloody fall in the
dust. (For I doubt if the gods will suffer him to die by so Illustrious a hand
as yours.) Yes Collatinus, the Victory is yours, I already see all his
Soldiers revolt, and all the Citizens mutiny. Hatred to the Tirran, and desire
of liberty, shall equally press them: And would to the gods, that I may be
the Victime, to obtain from their goodness, my countries liberty. Yes
Collatine all the Soldiers who are in his camp, who fight to day under his
colors, shall become worse enemies to him, then they of Ardea whom he now
besidges. Go then and make my misfortune known over all: And believe Collatine,
that you shall not publish my crime, but only that of Tarquin. And moreover, I
am very certain, not to hear, what the People will say: For having been my own
accuser, my witness, my party, and my defender; I must be also my judge and
Executioner. Yes Collatinus I must die: Do not tell tell me then, that because
my inclinations are innocent, I ought to live, that I might have the pleasure
of seeing how you revenge my injuries It is enough that you promise me: And
therefore I can sweetly die; But I can have no pleasure in life. There is a
Lucretia within me whom I cannot endure: I must separate from her, she is
insupportable to me; I cannot see her; I cannot suffer, her; I owe herblood to
the others justification, and to the revenge which you will take, When the
Roman people shall see Lucretia killed by her own hand, because she would not
survive her misfortune; They will the more easily believe, that a Woman who
loved glory, better then life, was not capable, willingly to loss it. That
last action shall justify all mine: The blood which I shall shed, will beget
Soldiers to you, to help your punishing the Tirran: And in this manner, I my
self shall assist to my revenge. My tears shall doubtless have some effect: And
moreover, though I am unhappie, I dare believe that my death will trouble you.
Yes Collatinus, Yes my Father, you shall be sensible of my death: And finding
your selves oblidged both together to revenge the honor, and life of your Wife,
and Daughter; You shall be the more irritated against the Tirran. Say not to me
that my death is use-less, or that it will be evillie explicated. No, they who
judge sincerlie of affairs, will not take it for the effect of my crime:
Remorse does ordinarlie shed more tears, then blood: And if I be not mistaken
death is the remedy of the generous or desperate. Repentance is always a sign
of weakness: And whosoever is capable of having it, may live after they have
f^^lled. I have the Authority of all ages for me; Which lets it appear, that
almost every day, they who have employed their hands against their own life,
do it only to dissapoint Fortunes cruelty. To shun a shamofull death; Or to
hinder themselves from being slaves and not for their punishment. When we have
erred, we are always favorable judges to our selves: And there are few people
who condemn themselves to death. Let none tell me then, that the blood which I
shall shed, will rather blemish my life, then deface what the Tirran has done
to it. No, Collatin, my intention is too pure, and the gods are too just, to
suffer all men to be unjust to me. I die not through remorse, or despair, I die
with reason. I have told you what causes I have, do not then oppose my design,
for you cannot hinder it. Think of vengeance and not of my preservation:
Because the one may be glorious to you, and the other will be unprofitable.
Further, Lucretias example shall persuade the Roman Ladies never to survive
their glory: I must vindicate the esteem, that they always had of my virtue.
I owe the loss of my life to my own glory; To that of my country; To that of
Spurius Lucretius; And to that of Collatin. But as I shall do what I ought at
this time, do you the like after my death. Forget nothing to revenge me; employ
Sword, Fire, and Poison: All violences are lawful against Usurpers: Policy
must be joined to force, when valoris not sufficient to destroy. Consider the
justness of your cause; Remember Lucretias chastity; The love that you ever
had for her; And that which she had for you. Never forget the passion which she
always had for glory: And her continual hatred to vice. Believe her to be
more unhappie then guilty: And from all those things Generous Collatine, frame
in your heart an irreconciliable hatred to the Tirran. But not to delay any
longer such a Noble revenge; Go, Collatine go; I end this doolefull discourse,
with ending my life: And behold the dagger which I hold, whereby to punish my
self, whereby to revenge you, and wherewithal to show you, how the Tirrans
heart must be perirced.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THe Effect of this Harrangue, was the flight of Tarquine, the banishment of
his Father, the loss of his Kingdom, and the beginning of the Roman Reipublick.
It cost Lucretias ravisher both life and crown: And never was crime better
punished: Never was an outrage better revenged. The death of that chaste
unfortunate, put arms in the hands of a great many People: Her blood produced
such effects as she expected: And the name of Tarquin was so odious to all the
World, that being unable to endure it in the Person of one of them who had been
assisting to banish the Tyrrans he was oblidged to change it.

VOLUMNIA TO VIRGILIA. THE TWELTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AFter that Coriolanus by his Mothers entreaty, had made peace with Rome, he
caused the army of the Volsques return to their country; And would have that
People experiment the Generositie of his action. But Tullus who loved him not,
because he had been formerlie overcome by him, while they were of acontrare
party, Suscitated some seditious People, whowhen he was desirous to vindicate
himself in the public Assembly, did hinder him to speak and at last killed
him amidst the tumult. This news being brought to Rome, all the Ladies of the
City suddenly repaired to the Mother and Wife of that generous enemy: And
the first taking in hand the diseourse, did immediately speak to them in this
manner, if the conjectures of History deceive (...) a not.

VOLUMNIUA TO VIRGILIA.
LOok upon me no more Virgilia, as the Mother of Corilanus your husband, I am
unworthie of that name; You should in Reason ^ate me as much as formerlie that
unfortunate Herod's Loved me. Remember that famous day wherein I employed my
tears to dis-arme him: I weeped, I cried, I commanded; And I forgot nothing
that could make a Generous Son flexible. I begged favor for the ungrate; I
took part with Coriolanus his enemies: and though the Victory was so certain
to him, that he was ready to be revenged of his banishers; And held in chains
almost all them who did abuse him; That great heart which nothing could have
moved, was at last by his mother: I did overcome in him the conqueror of Rome:
And to my misfortune I obtained all that I asked of him. You know it Virgilia,
as well as I; Nor do I remember; all those things, but for redoubling my
grief. Alace! Me thinks I still hear the voice of Coriolanus! When he had
thrown down his arms, to come and embrace me, he cried out with sight, O
Mother what have you done to me! You have gained a Victory very Glorious for
your self, and very happy for your country; But most ^isfortunate for your
Son. Woe is me Virgilia this discourse was but too true! For these same arms
which he threw down to come to me, were employed against him. Then did the
Volsques take the Daggers in their hands, which they plunged in his heart: It
was I made them undertake that design: I was of that conspiracy against him:
For after I had surmounted my Son, I delivered him all unarmed as he was, into
the hands of his enemies. Ah insensible that I was, could I think that it would
be other ways! Was I mother of all the Volsques, to believe that for love to
me they would yield the Victory which they were ready to obtain? What right
had I to ask from them the liberty of their enemy Rome. Should not I have
thought, that they would revenge upon my Son, that loss which I caused to them?
Ah yes! Virgilia, I ought to have considered all those things: And if
Coriolanus could not return to Rome, I ought at least to have been companion
with him in his dishonor: And as he did overcome his resentments in
consideration of me, I should have quit my country for love of him. However we
did not use him so: I did let Coriolanus depart environed with them who caused
him loss his life: And I returned to Rome as in Triumph, to enjoy the fruits of
that fatal Victory. When at our return the Senate asked of us what recompense
we would have for our action, we ought, Virgilia to have desired the return of
Coriolanus; And not as we did, permission to build a Temple to Feminine
Fortune: It well appears, that that Divinity has not approved of our zeal;
Because it is so much against us. The gods would have certainly been the more
agreeable, that we had been thankful to Coriolanus: The Temple which is
builded for us, is the effect of our vanity, and not of our gratitude: We
sought our own glory, and not that of our liberator: Though to speak truly
he merited it better then we: It was to the virtues of my Son, and not to our
own that we should have erected Altars: And he who could surpass his
resentments; Deliever his country; And yield the Victory to his Mothers
tears, without doubt meritted better then we, the honor which is done to us. Me
thinks his piety should have had a more Favorable treatment from Heaven: For
though there be some Romans so unjust, as to say that Coriolanus should not
have quitted his arms, but only for his countries sake, and not for mine: And
consequently bewrayed more feebleness then generositie, in that action; I am
not of their opinion; And I hope posterity will be of mine. That strong passion
which birth inspires in them, who have a complete Soul, is not caused by the
Situation of the places where they were born: The same Sun gives light to all
the Universe: We enjoy the Elements every where: And if they have no stronger
reason then that, certainly it will be very weak. But that which makes us
love our country, is because the Citizens, are all our Relations or Allies.
The interest of blood, or that of civil Society, links us to them: The
Religion, Laws, Customs which we have common, makes our interests be common:
But the first sentiment that nature gives to them who love their country; Is
to love it cheiflie, because their Fathers, their Mothers, their Brothers,
their Sisters, and their Relations are in it. Yes, I am very certain, that the
most zealous of all the Romans, returning to Rom, after along journey will not
so soon look to the Capitol, as to that place of the Town where his Mother or
Wife dwells: Wherefore then, let ne^e wonder any more, that Coriolanus would
yield to none but to my tears: For to whom among the Romans, should he have
been rendered? All who were sent to him did abuse him; He did not see in any
of them the mark of a true Roman: They were all ungrate to him: He could not in
them acknowledge his country: He only saw the walls of Rome, but did not see
his friends which he formerlie had there. Fear made all them speak who were
sent to him: And it was only by me, that he did know he had yet in Rome,
something that ought to be venerated by him. We is me! Is it possible, That
such extraordinar Piety has been so evillie rewarded, that so courageous a
man, has so lamentable ended his days? That he should be assasinated by them
who had chosen him for their Captain, and that the Place of his refuge, should
be that of his execution? Alace, I say, that from my intentions which were so
pure and innocent, there should result so fatal an accident: However Virgilia,
the Gods have permitted all these things; And yet I see no other reason, if not
that Coriolanus and I, have too much oblidged the Romans, who have rendered
themselves unworthie. But in fine, Coriolanus is dead; And only dead for love
of volumnia. Yet his death has this advantage that it has made them shed
tears who caused it: For the Volsques after the overthrow of their Captain, did
hono^ble take him up; They no sooner did see his blood, but they saw their
crime, and elevated a Trophie to his glory, of these same arms, which they
employed against his life. They gave him a Conquerours funeral; His memory is
dear to them: They hung above his Tomb numbers of Ensigns; And all the
glorious spoills, which do usuallis signalise the valor of these Illustrious
dead, over whom they put them: And Rome which owes her liberty to Coriolanus,
knows of his death without making public mourning! She remembers no more that
she had been lost, and in slaverie but for him: All the Romans were ungrate to
him while he lived, they continue so after his death. They look upon him rather
as their enemy then their liberator: They remember more the chains which he
prepared for them, then these he took away from them: And that fear which
formerlie possessed them, of seeing him enter Rome in a Triumphing Chariot, makes
them very glad to know, that he is to day in his coffin. For me I avouch, that
though none should ever repent of ^aving dove well, I have no great trouble to
hinder me from wishing, that Rome were in Captivity, and that Goriolanus were
alive. The virtue of Brutus, who without grief saw his Children die, is not of
my knowledge: That hard heartedness has more ferocitie then Grandeur of
courage in it: There are some tears just; And compassion is not contrare to
generositie: When I told Coriolanus, that I would love better to die, then to
see him Conqueror of Rome, I said nothing against truth: And when I also say,
that I wish to be dead, and that my Son were alive: I say nothing against
natural equity nor against Rome; I give to reason and nature, what I cannot
refuse them; And I take nothing from the Reipublick. I have sacrificed my Son
for it, and it may also suffer me to weep a little over the Victime which I
have immolated for its preservation: And that after I have done all that a true
Roman could do, I may likewaies do all that sorrow can exact from the
tenderness of a Mother. All they who loss their Children have constantly just
subject of weeping: yet they have for their comfort, the liberty of making
imprecations against them who take away their lives: But for me, I not only
weep for the death of my Son, but I also weep, for being the cause of his
death: And to increase my sorrow, there is ane austere virtue, that will not
let me repent for what I have done. O my Son! O my dear Coriolanus; Can I
pursue such a ^arbarous resolution? No it is too contrare to nature and reason:
I must greive; I must weep till death for the death that I was the cause of. It
is not Romes enemy I regrate; It is he who was so manytimes prodigal of his
blood, in pursuit of glory whohath served in the wars seventeen years, with
incomparable zeal: And had no reward but the wounds which covered his body.
Further, Illustrious Roman Ladies, this man's birth does not render him
unworthie of your tears: he came of one of your Kings, and Ancus Martius his
Predecessor, having carried a Crown, it might seem that he should have had
more right to the honors of the Reipublick then any other; Because he was
incapable of useing it ill. But perhaps it was for that reason (some may say to
me) that the Romans refused him the Consulship, through fear that he would use
it as a step, to remount the Throne of his Fathers. No, this reason cannot be
good; And there needs no more but the remembrance of Coriolanus his whole life,
to make his intentions know. In that Battle which was given against the proud
Tarquin, he made it very well appear, that his ambition aimed no further, then
to merit the Crown of Bays, which the Dictator did put upon his head, without
thinking of that of his Predecessors; For having seen one of out Citizens fall
to the ground, he set himself before him to serve him for a Buckler: And
covering his body with his own, he secured him from danger: And so well
congregated his forces and valor, that he gave death to him, who would have
caused his. If the Romans, had dealt rationallie with Coriolanus, ^ at singlee
action would have sufficed to hinder them, from being desirous to have him pass
for a Tirran: Because it is not credible that he would have so much exposed
himself, to save so small a part of so great a body, if he could have been
capable of framing designs to destroy it entirely on day. But it is not in
that encounter alone, that he has made his zeal for the Reipuslick appear. Is
it not to be seen in all occasions that offered? Is it not signalised ill all
the battles that have been given? Has he ever returned to Rome, without
bringing with him some of his enemies spoilles, or without being all covered
with theirs or his own blood? Behold Virgilia, what a husband yours was: See
Illustrious Romans what my dear Coriolanus was, who in all his warlike actions,
was never conquered but only by me. The Volsques themselves, whom he afterward
commanded, judged him not worthy of that emploiment, but because by his hand,
was that Victory plucked from them, which they were ready to bear away, in
spite of Lartius his ressistance: Who going to assault the Town of Corioles,
was so courageously beat back by the besidged, that they put all our trophues
to the flight, and all our army into confusion. That was the time, wherein the
passion that he ever had for the glory of the Roman Empire, made him surpass
his own strength, and by his example, forced some of ours to turn head to the
enemy. This Generous design did so happily succeed with him, that he repulsed
them to the walls of the Town: and not contented with so brave an action; he
would have persuaded them who followed him, that the gates of Corioles, were
not so open for these who fled, as for them to enter. But seeing their fear
more prevalent then his discourse, and that they thought more of retreating
then fighting, this unfortunate whom I lament, did not forbear to pursue his
design. There did he see himself almost alone, fighting against the whole
inhabitants of a Town who fought through despair. There his hardiness wrought
terror upon his enemies; His example reinforced the spirits of our Legions, and
by the strength of his arm he made them enter that fortified Town; And in fine
made them over come those who came to conquer them. It was only then by his
courage, that Lartius had leisure to rallie his trophues, to go and reap the
fruits of that Victory, by finishing what he had so happily begun. And not
being ignorant, that the Consul Cominius, who commanded the half of the Roman
army, might be in hands with them who were coming to relieve the Town whieh he
had taken: He did cheerfullie re-take these same soldiers, who having no
desire to share in the hazard with him, were amusing themselves with dividing
the booty which he had acquired to them. But in vain did he set shame and
glory before them: So that seeing their cowardliness, he abandoned them, and
only followed by them who would willingly accompany him, (which were but a
very small number) went diligently in search of a new subject to his Valor.
He arrived just at the Camp, in the instant wherein Cominius was going to give
Battle to the enemy: And being all covered with blood and dust, his arrival
did some what amaise the Consul. But he had no sooner given account of the
action he had done, then the news of his first Victory did presage a second.
All the Soldiers reanimated their desires of fighting, hope and joy adorned
their foreheads; And only by the sight of him, did they banish that fear which
had seized their hearts. As for my Son, as if he had been very sorry, that
any other should have served the Reipublick better that day then he, having
asked the Consul what trophues of the enemy were the best; An being informed
that these of Antiates were the most courageous, Because the Volsques had put
them in the front of the Battle; he desired in recompense of his taking
Corioles, permission to fight them. You know Illustrious Romans, that he
obtained at that time what he had demanded: That his arm couducted by the
Gods, had the first honor of breaking the enemies Squadrons: that he alone did
attaque an army, thereby to show the Romans how they must despise their life,
to make themselves Masters of that of an other: And that his prodigious valor,
had a success which was likewaies so But when victory had declared it self for
us, the Consul entreated my Son to consider the condition he was in: And to
remember that by the wounds he had received, his blood dropped with that of his
enemies. But he answered him that Victores ought not to retire: In Testimony
whereof, joining effects to his words, he pursued them who fled even till
night: And as he had been the first in the Battle, he was the last in the
Retreat. It may be some will say to me, that desire of reward inspired my Son
with that valor, but none can be ignorant that he refused every thing that was
presented to him: On the contrare so great was his moderation, that after he
had taken a town by force, gained a Battle, saved the Honor of the army and of
the Reipublick, he asked no recompense for his toillings, but the liberty of
one man, who had formerlie been his Host and friend; And who was then prisoner
of Was among the Romans. I remember very well, that the name Coriolanus which
he did bear, (O Gods! Can I speak in such terms?) I say I well remember that
that name was given him at that encounter, to eternise his action. But I also
remember that the very same People who named him Coriolanus, called him
afterward the disturber of the public repose, the enemy of Rome, and the
Senates Tirran. Since that, what has he not also done in an other occasion?
Certainly you remember of that fatal year, wherein it was thought that famine
would have intirly desolated Rome: When all the People Geminated, wherein
hunger made triumph of the poor Peoples deaths, and wherein the richest
themselves were exposed to the like danger. You know, I say, that Coriolanus by
his valor and courage, brought back abundance into Rome, revived the People;
And all this with the price of his blood; And without desiring other
recompense, but that of having saved the lives of the Citizens. Nevertheless,
for the reward of so many services; Of so many brave actions; Of so many
wounds that he received And of so much blood that he shed: When he demanded the
Consullship, which was granted to many others, who did not merit it so well as
he; They treated him as infamous, and as a criminal; they put him in the hands
of the Aedilles, as the worst of men, and banished him his country. O Heavens!
Could I ask favor for them who treated my Son sounworthilie, and how could
that unfortunate Son consent to me? Further after so many abuses that
Coriolanus received, what did he to revenge himself? Has it been discovered
that he desired to suborn any of our Consulls? Has he secretly taken up
money to make the army of the Volsques subsist? Has he furnished them with
Soldiers? No, Coriolanus has done none of all those things: He was content
for his revenge of Rome, to put only the faithfullest of the Citizens in the
hands of his enemies. But if that despare which forced him to it, had succeeded
happily; that he had found more Humanity in the heart of Tullus, whose
Triumphing enemy he several times was, then in the hearts of all the People,
for the glory of whom he vanquished the same Tullus, would any, I say, that
by an extreme ungratitude, that he should have abandoned him in a just War, and
which he had undertaken in consideration of him? Would any, I say, that to
merit the base treatment, he received from them whom he had served, had him
betray them whom he protected: And who by a very extraordinary confidence had
chosen him to be General of their army? It may be some will say to me that
Coriolanus did more hurt to the Romans, in accepting of that emploiment, then
if he had suborned the Consuls of Rome; Then if he had taken up their riches:
Then if he had made the People rebel, led an army against his adversaries:
Because it was seen that his person alone, joining with the Volsques party
made an entire change in their affairs: And that they who had so many times
desired peace with Rome, were in condition to make her dearly buy it. But let
none imagine that that was a simple effect of his conduct and valor. No, our
Gods who are protectors of innocence, doubtless guided his arm, to subdue the
pride of them who thought themselves invincible not fearing to abuse their
Allayes. But in his happy succeedings, he did not forget that he was born a
Roman, and though the Nobility abandoned it to the fury of the People, he did
not forbear to preserve their country houses, against all the disorders of
War. He also had respect for them who were become his enemies; And though his
particular Fortune was in a deplorable condition, he never asked any thing for
himself in the Articles that he proposed, and desired no unjust thing for the
Volsques whom he protected. Behold once more, O Ilustrious Romans, what
Coriolans was: I recommend my Son by the picture I have made to you of him,
preserve his image in your heart: Remember that without his Generositie, the
famine would have destroyed your Fathers, your Brothers, your Husbands, your
Children and your selves: Or what would yet be word, that you have been
formerlie, partakers of their chains and bondage. Let us not imitate Generous
Romans, the ungratitude of our Citizens: Let us eternise the Glory of our Sex
to their prejudice: And for our gratitude let us Crown them with confusion:
This Temple which was granted to us, when my Son consented to the favor we
asked of him, shall not be so glorious to us, as the affection that you will
testify, in desiring to preserve the memory of Coriolanus. You owe your tears
to him who formerlie dried them up, and who has broken your chains. You also
should (if I dare say so) sweeten the bitterness of my forrow, by that which
you will testify for hls death: I have immolated my Son for love to you, you
can do no less then afflict your selves for love to him. And as you should have
all carried mourning, if it had not been for my Sons Generositie: It is but
just you should all wear it, in honor of his memory. Let us go then Virgilia.
Let us go Generous Romans, to ask this permission from the Senate. But O Gods!
Can it be possibly, necessare to ask leave, to wear mourning for our Liberator?
Yes the corruption of the age will have it so. Let us go then once more and ask
with tears, the last thing that we can seek for my Son, because he is dead. But
for his Glory, I am very much assured that Rome shall be destroyed, when the
Name of Coriolanus shall be spoken of afterward.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
SHe obtained what she desired of them: All the Roman Ladies did put on
mourning, and did wear it ten months, which was the accustomed time of wearing
it for their Fathers and Husbands. Therefore this Illustrious exile was happier
after hu death, then while he was alive; And the fairest Sex at that time, was
the most grateful.

ATHENAIS TO THEODOSIUS THE THREETEEN HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AThenais Danghter to Leontine the Philosophor, being preferred to the Empire,
by her beauty, and the rare qualities of her Soul, did not long enjoy her good
Fortune: The Emperor Theodosius her husband being some what jealous of her,
and of one of the principal men of his Court, named Paulinus, put him to
death, and deprived her of his favor, In that abandonment, the unfortunate
Athenais was skilfully made sensible, that she ought to retire from Court; So
that of her self being sufficiently troubled in mind: She asked what she did
obtain and what they would have had her demand, I would say, permission to go
and live at Jerusalem. It was then at the instane of her parting, and in her
last fairwells, that she did speak in these terms, to the Emperor Theodosius.

ATHENAIS TO THEODOSIUS
MY LORD.
BEing ready to quit the Court; And to go confine my self in Palestina; I dare
supplicat your Majesty, by the most venerable name of the Emperor Trajan, of
whom you are come; By that of the great Theodosius your Grandfather: By that
of the equitable Arcades your Father; And by that of the great Constantine, of
whom you hold the Scepter, and whose piety you imitat, to permit me this day,
to tell you all that I think, both of my past and present Fortune: That I may
at least, have the satisfaction, at my departing from you, to be thought not to
have wholly abandoned my innocence. Woe is me! If any would have said
formerlie to the poor Athenais, when her Father Leontine the Philosopher,
taught her Virtue that hers should be one day suspected, she could not have
thought it. The simplicity of her education, the little ambition that she had,
and the walls of the cottage that she inhabited, seemed to secure her against
Calumny. Innocence reigned in her Soul, She was contented with her Fortune;
She sought after nothing but the acquisition of Sciences and Virtue: And the
sole desire of learning, and practiseing good, was both her delight and
occupation. But is it not this Athenais whom they accuse: It is the unhappie
Eudosia; It is the Wise of a great Emperor; It is a person exposed to the eyes
of a great Court; It is a person to whom nature has given some advantages, to
whom Fortune has given the first Crown of the World; And the love of the most
venerable Prince of the earth. All these things, invincible Emperor makes my
disgrace the more seeminglie true: Great misfortunes are not seen but in the
houses of great Princes: Thunder falls oftener upon the statlie Palaces of
Kings, then upon Shepherds Cottages: And the Sea makes more Ship wrackes then
the Rivers. It is no wonder then, if Eudosia be more unhappie then Athenais,
though she be as innocent: And though she be as Virtuous, under the Glorious
Tittle that she bears of Emperess of the East, as she was under that Name which
her parents gave her. If Fortune, my Lord, had but robbed me of these things
over which its domination extends; Had it pulled the Scepter from me which I
carry, after I had received it from your hands; Had it taken the Crown from
off my head: Had your Subjects mutined against me, and tumbled me from the
Throne as unworthie to have place upon it; I would endure that disgrace without
murmuring: Yes my Lord, that blind thing, so much accustomed to favor vice, at
the expense of Virtue, that makes no presents but to take them away; That
establishes no Kingdoms, but to destroy them; And which overturns all that it
does establish; In one word Fortune, shall not put a stand to my patience. I
shall without regrate quit the Scepter, the Crown, the Throne, the Court, and
the Empire, and all that splendid some which accompanies Royalltie, if I could
return into my solitude, with your esteem and affection. These two things, my
Lord, if I be not mistaken, should not be under Fortunes Jurisdiction: It may
both take day and Empire from you, it may also make you a slave, but it cannot
make your unjust. You alone are the arbitrator of your will, your hatred, your
esteem and your affection. The noble privilege, that God has given to man, of
being free among chains, and of being absolute Master of his inclinations,
makes ^ou be oblidged, to answer exactlie for yours. Nevertheless. my Lord, the
respect I have to you, makes that I dare not accuse you of these you have to
me; Though certainly, my innocence renders them unjust: And for that respect I
will rather call my self unhappie then say you are culpable. I accuse Fortune
unjustlie of one thing which you alone can answer; It is not from its hand, to
speak more truly then I have done that I hold the Scepter which I carry; It
is not she has put the Crown up on my head; Her wheel has not thrown me upon
the Throne; Her caprice made me not your Wife; All these things my Lord, are
either effects of your goodness, of my merit, or of your blindness. If it be
the first, I have learned of my Father, that crime alone justifies repentance:
That it is a sentment which virtue knows not, and which should not be used but
after a wicked action. If it be the second, and if you have esteemed me, by
knowing how little I am worth, take not from me my Lord, what belongs to me:
Because being the very same that I was, you should be the same that you have
been. But if you say to me, that I am the error of your judgment and that you
have not found in my person, such merit as you did believe to meet with; I
dispute not against you, take from me all that you have given me, but take not
away my innocence, which I have only received from Heaven. When Athenais came
to your Court, her reputation was spotless: Few People that did speak, said all
good of her. To day all People speak according to their fancy, yet without
letting me know what they say: For to speak sincerlie, it is only with you
that I would be justified. They who do good, because it is good, and not
because it should be divulged, care not what unjustice fame will do to their
Virtue: They find their satisfaction on themselves, without seeking after it in
any other: So that the wise are sometimes most innocent, and most happy, when
the Vulgar who only judge appaaentlie, believes them guilty and unfortunate.
But my Lord, since the affection that you have had for me, and thrt which I
have for you, has made you (if I dare say so) a second self to me; I ought to
vindicate my actions before your eyes. Remember, my Daughter, said my Father to
me one day; That you study not so much to acquire the esteem of other, as not
to endeavor more, to obtain your own. Be you both your own judge, and party;
Think of satisfying your self; Examine your inclinations; Search the bottom of
your heart, to knew if Vertrue be Mistress of it: But do not flatter yourself,
incline rather to rigor, then to indulgence. And after having made an exact
scrutinie of your intentions, when you come to the point of being satisfied
with your mind slight the glory of the World; laugh at calumny; And be better
contented in having your own esteem then if you had that of the greatest
Princes of the Earth. But my Lord, for this reason, I cannot be tranquil, so
long as my better half does not believe me innocent; Suffer me then my Lord, to
repass exactlie, all the circumstances of my disgrace, and that dear part of my
innocence that I may thereby with some tranquillity go to my searched for
solitude. When I came to Constantinople, asking justice against my Brothers,
who refused me that right which I had to the paternall Succession, the prudent
Pulcheria, rejected not my requests: She heard me: And making me loss my cause
very advantageouslie gave me For tunes, which she ought to have preserved for
me. At that time my Lord, there was only a poor cottage in agitation, and
three foot of Earth to cover me from extreme necessity: But to day when not
only the honor of Anthenais is in question, but that of Eudosia your Wise, you
are oblidged to hear her, and to do her justice. I think my Lord, that the
cause of your anger and my grief is, because I have given a trifle which you
gave me: And that afterward, to excuse an action, which I saw by your eyes,
would not have pleased you if you had known it; I excused that innocent error
by a lie. Behold, my Lord, all the crime that I have committed: And the fear
only of dispeasing you, has made me displease you. When your Majesty gave me
that fatal fruit, which has caused my disgrace, I received it with joy; Both
for its extraordinar pleasantness, and more because it came from your hands.
The pleasure I had in seeing of it, persuading me that it was more proper to
divert the sight, then to satisfy the teast; And being irresolute to destroy
it, I examined what I could do with such an agreeable present: The unfortunate
Paulinus was then sick: So that being minded to send and visit him; I thought
the amiable gift that you gave me, could not be better bestowed, then by giving
it to a person whom you testified that you loved better then your self. But my
Lord, Paulinus made not a mystery of this liberality: For because I did not
tell him that I had received it from your Majesty, the same apprehension that
had oblidged me to send him that fatal apple, was doubtless the cause, why to
testify to me the esteem he had of the present I made him, he would put it in
more worthy hands then his own. But if you say to me, that since you gave me
the gift, I ought never to have regiven it, because every thing that comes
from the person beloved, should be held as dear as the life: I shall agree with
you, because by that I pretend to justify my self. However there is an
important distinction to be made in this encounter: For as there is great
diversity in men's loves, the things which that passion produces, should also
be all differing. The love of husband, and Wife, is no more that of Lover and
Mistress: And though they be the same persons, and though love be as ardent in
their hearts, as it was before their marriage; Yet their opinons are different
in many occasions. They have more soliditie, and less affection; And none of
all these follies which criminal loves do produce, are to be found in their
Souls. So, my Lord, if Paulinus had had a passion for me, he would have kept
the present which I made him, with care and with jealousy: Since it is most
certain, that in this kind of illegittimate affections, (which I never heard
spoken of since I have been at Court) the least things that comes from the
person beloved, are inestimable Treasures, which are never parted from, but
with the life. However Paulinus no sooner received my present, but he sent it
to you: And in that occasion it may be said, that he designed more to please
you, then to content me. For me, my Lord, I never thought, you could take it
ill, that I should have given a trivial thing, which you gave me: And that
liberality was a virtue, which I ought not to practice. For, my Lord, if I
ought to give nothing but what I have not received from you, I must give my
self: Having brought nothing into your Palace, but that simplicity and
innocence. which some would ravish me of to day. Why, my Lord, do your not
remember, that by the innumerable riches that you have given me, I have diverse
times enriched several whole Towns? Why, my Lord Theodosius has permitted me
to give Gold, Pearls and Diamonds, to a hundred people, who were unknown to
him; And could I have foreseen that he would have been dissatisfied with my
giving a simple fruit to the man in the World who had most profitable served
him, and for whom he had most affection? No, my Lord, that was not possible:
And the wise Pulcheria, howsoever clear sighted she is, and is believed to be,
and who foresees things from a far, had been deceived in it. But, my Lord if I
ought to take care of any nixt to your Majesty, it should be of Paulinus: And
if I dare say it, I owe more to him then to my Father, and more then to your
Majesty; For my Father gave me nothing but life, and having received nothing
from you but the Throne, I can say, Paulinus having inspired me with the lights
of faith, I am more oblidged to him, then to all the rest of the Earth. Yes, my
Lord, I owe the saftie of my Soul to him, and my eternal beatitude, if the
innocence of the life that I shall lead, do make me obtain it. You know, my
Lord, that it was he who converted me, that all your Doctors could not convince
me; that only he unseilled my eyes? And letting me see the absurdites of my
religion gained me to embrace yours. Believe then my Lord, that the birth of
our Friendship had too holy a beginning, to be criminal in its progress? And
that he who had opened the gates of Heaven to me, would never conduct me to the
ways of hell. And moreover, my Lord, know that when Eudosia shall again be
Athenais; When she shall I say, be again of that Religion, wherein all crimes
are authorized by the example of the Gods whom she adores: She shall not be
less innocent. Chastity is a Virtue which has been known of all Nations, and
through all ages; It is so essential to my Soul, that nothing can banish it
thence. Judge then, my Lord, if being of a Religion, where modesty is
rewarded, I could do any thing against my duty to you, and against my duty
to my self. I thing if I be not deceived, that I have made you know, that I
might have given with out crime what you gave to me: And at last that I have
made you see, with a similtude sufficiently true, that Paulinus his
liberality to you; Justifies mine toward him. Now as to what concerns the lie
that I made, in telling you that I had eat the fruit, it is certain that I
cannot deny, I would have done better to have told you the truth: But, my Lord,
all follies are not crimes. When you spoke to me at that time, I saw such
alteration in your Countenance, and so much choler in your eyes: That fear of
angering you having seized my spirit, I lost my use of reason, Consider, my
Lord, that if there had been any too particular affection, between Paulinus
and me; As Soon as you had spoken tome, I might have well judged, that you did
know something: And therefore, by an apparent ingenuitie, though artificial; I
should have told you that I sent it to Paulinus. But having nothing in my
mind, that objected any error! I told an innocent lie not fearing it was
evillie explained. I failled, through fear of being accused of a fault: And a
too fearful affection, has made me loss yours. Further, my Lord, being
unprepared for that accusation, and being ignorant of the crime that I am
accused for; I then answered you only with tears. My silence and respect, were
the only colors, that I employed for my justification: A too scrupulous and
too austere Virtue, made me believe, that I would stain my self by vindicating
me of such a thing; And I also think that I should never have spoken to you, if
I had not designed to separate from you. But venerable Emperor I reprehend my
self for all I have said; you are not the Subject of my disgrace, I accuse you
no more; I receive it as the chastisement of my past errors. I have too much
defended the cause of Idols, to gain n^y own to day: And it is very just
having so eagerly maintained a lie, that I be not believed, when I speak a
truth that is of importance to me. I have sacrificed too much to Jupiter, and
have offered too many criminal Victimes, not to expiat that fault, by some
innocent sacrifice. I my self must be my Victime at this time: And by patient
suffering, merit the pardon of my past errors. My Lord, do not think that I
bear any grudge in my Soul: I well see, that I whereas the journey I am going
to make, was undertaken by my own will; I well see, I say, that the permission
which is given me, was consented to in such manner, that I may rather call it,
a place of banishment, then of pilgramage. However that shall not hinder me
from praying to GOD, that the blood of Paulinus be not an obstacle to the
felicity of your days. I shall also make vows for the prudent Pulcherias
Reign; Whose piety doubtless does approve of the place I have chosen for my
retirment. I shall be more profitable to her at Jerusalem then at
Constantinople; And perhaps more agreeable. But in acknowledgement of the last
obligations I had from her, I shall beg of Heaven, to give her such repose, as
I go to enjoy in my solitude; Though perhaps this is not the favor that she
asks from it in her prayers. Further my Lord, I go not so far off, that fame
may not speak of me to you: And if I be not mistaken it shall tell you so many
things of my life's innocence, that you will believe it was never soilled: And
that holy land wherein I go to dwell, shall obtain for me from Heaven, the
pleasure and honor of seeing you again. This, my Lord, is the hope, which a
person who lived contented in a poor cottage bears in her mind; A person who
without pride received the first Crown of the World; Who without regrate quits
the highest Throne that is upon the Earth; And who never loved any thing but
the Emperor Theodosius and virtue.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THis disconrse was not unprofitable, though its effects were slow: It left
impressions of hot in the heart of Theodosius, which in fine rekindled his
first flames. It is true, Athenais departed: But she returned with Glory: She
saw begging pardon at her feet, him who saw the half of the Earth at his: And
her innocence and reputation remounted the Throne with her: After that time,
and reason reestablished tranquillity in the Emperors mind.

PULCHERIA TO THE PATRIARCH OF CONSTANTINOPLE. THE FOURTEEN HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AThenais being received again in favor with the Emperor Theodosius her
Husband, by the intercession of Crisaphius; Was no sooner returned from
Palestina to Constantinople, but useing her new power, she changed all order of
affairs in it, and knowing that Pulcheria did not oppose her departure, she
would not let her return be so agreeable to her, as her departing had been. She
then caused the Emperor, who was charmed with his seeing of her again, resolve
to take the Adminiflration of State from the Princess his Sister: And command
the Patriarch of Constantinople to go take her, and put her among the
consecrated Virgins. This order seemed so hard to Flavian, that he could not
resolve to execute it to the rigor: He caused secretly advertise Pulcheria of
it: That if she did not absent her self, he would be constrained to do her that
displeasure. The Princess was quickly resolved to it: And at her going to part
from the Court, and retire to the Country she did thus speak to him.

PULCHERIA TO THE PATRIARCH OF CONSTANTINOPLE.
THe advertisement you gave me, does nather astonish nor trouble me: I very
well foresaw wise Flavian, that Eudesias return would cause Puleberias
departure: And being acquairted with the revolutions of Mundain affairs; I see
without regrate a change which perhaps will not be disadvantageous but to them
who cause it. This so sudden mutation is the effect of Crisaphius his malice,
of Theodd^^^ his goodness, and of the Emperesses ambition. Flaviah, if any had
said formerlie, that this poor Athenais, who had not a cottage to cover her,
when she did cast her self at my feet, should carry the first Crown of the
World upon her head, could it have been seeminglie true? But what is yet more
strange; Who could have thought that this person whom with my own hands I have
Crowned, would violently take from me the Reins of the Empire, which I have
always happily enough held, under the Authority of Theodosius since I was
fifteen years old? No, Venerable Flavian, I desire not that posterity should
accuse the Emperor or Emperess for banishing a Princess to whom partly they
owe the Crown which they carry: For if I did put it upon the head of Athenais,
I securlie set it upon that of Theodosius. That famous Victory which he gained
of Roilas, who having past the Danube, was coming with all the forces of
Scithia and Russia, to ranverse the Imperial Throne of Constantinople,
doubtless was not the effect of Theodosius his care: And if I dare say it, I
forced thunder from the hands of GOD to knock that Barbarian in the head; For
you know, hat he died with a Thunder Bolt. Yes, Flavian, Theotdosius owes that
Victory to me, and also that which he gained of Baravanes King of the
Persians, who being in league with Alamondar King of the Sarasins, had formed
so strong an army, that doubtless there was more hen humane force needful to
oppose that innumertable multitude of men, composed of diverse Nations.
Nevertheless, a Pannik fear having possessed their Troops, they were destroyed by
themselves: And that which should have made them victorious, rendered them
incapable of conquering. Yes, most prudent, and most holy Flavian; I have made
winds: storms, and tempests, serve for the glory of Theodosius: I have made
Heaven interested with his protection: And not the bloody Victories which he
gained, were the reward of that Virtue which I taught him. You know that being
two years older then he was when he came to the Empire, I took care of his
education: I had the honor of being his Sister, but he was my Son by Adoption:
And you are not ignorant of what I have done, since Theodosius did me the
favor to divide his power with me, and make me his associate in the Empire.
Could there be a more prosperous Reign seen then his? Was there a Prince in
allthe World, who did not either love, or fear Theodosius? Did any complain of
my Government? Were not my Counsels just, or have they not been fortunate? No,
wi^e Flavian, to speak rationallie of every thing, I have done favors
formerlie to Athenais, but I never did unjustice to any body. However, think
not by what I say, that I would make you understand, the Emperess is unworthie
of the Throne: No, I will not destroy what I have established: And I was not
deceived, when I thought I saw in her a most extraordinare Virtue. Without
doubt, Athenais is a miraele of nature: She is born with advantages, which I
never saw but in her person: And if her Birth were as great as her Spirit, and
if in stead of being bred in solitude, she had been brought up at Court; she
had been incomparable in every thing: But to her misfortune, she has begun,
with what I am going to finish. Doubtless it is more easy to them who have a
well accomplished Soul, to live gloriously in solitude, after they have lived
in the World; Then to go from solitude to domination. They who have known how
to conduct manic People can certainly lead their flocks without going astray:
But all they who can industriouslie use a sheep-hook, cannot carry a Scepter
with honor. In fine, Kings may be Shepherds, but all Shepherds cannot be Kings.
The Philosophers also, who establish themselves Soverain Judges of all the
actions of men; Who beast of knowing the weight of Crowns; Who make imaginary
Republics? Who give laws to all the Earth? And who form Modeles, by which the
greatest Princes of the World should Regulate their Lives and Governments: I
say these men, who make Kings so perfect by their writings are not fit to
Reign. Athenais gives me a domestic example of this? She knows Philosophy: She
is Daughter to a man who taught it her: She is born with all noble
inclinations; She knows all that any of her Sex can know; She was without
ambition when she came to the Court; She has as much Spirit as any body can
have: But because she knows not the World but by looks, and because her
experience has taught her nothing; Her simplicity has made her listen to
Crisaphius his divices: And doubtless has possessed her with the opinion that
she has of me to day. All these things, Flavian, were not of my knowledge, when
kindled in the Emperors heart, that flame which destroys me to day: But now I
well know, that an active Philosophy is requisite to know how to reign: That
experience is the surest study of Kings; And I have also known by my own, that
none can be perfectly wise, but at its expenses, and truly I should not think
it strange, that the Emperess do every thing, to preserve that quality which
I have given her: It is so advantageous to her; That I also wonder she does not
make it more, But as I have already said to you, the change that happens to
day, does neither astonish nor trouble me: And I do yet preserve so much
affection for Theodosius, and so much esteem for Athenais, that to hinder them
from committing a public fault, I will denude my self of what power I had;
Abandon Theodosius to the affection that he has for the Emperess: And abandon
her to her little experience, and to the divices of Crisaphsus. I know not
reverend Flavian, if my conjectures will be as false this day, as they were
when I Crowned Athenais: But if I be not mistaken, the reign of these
Illustrious Persons, shall neither be long nor happy. The complacencie of
Theodosius, and the little experience of the Emperess, makes me compassionate
them: Methinks I already see her, going to consult her books, upon the least
unexpected accident: But my Father, her books were not made for our Age: And if
she have not her judgment very clear, that which was glorious to Alexander,
shall be disgraceful to Theodosius; That which made him love, shall make this
hate: And that which made him redoubtable, shall make this despised. The Throne
whereon she is to day is so high, that I fear her sight is not strong enough,
to see the cottage again wherein she did formerlie dwell. I fear, I say, she
will be transported, and abandoning the reins of State which I have forsaken to
her, fall into some important error. For me, I was never dazzled by Grandeure:
I am born among purples: The plays of my infancy past upon the Throne: And
the first thing I learned was to reign over others, and over my self. The wise
Anthemius teaching me policy, which I have happily enough practiced since,
told me one day, that to be never surprised at fortunes unconstancy; We must
always be prepared to endure, what others do undergo: And never to mount a
Triumphing Chariot, without being prepared to be tied to it, if Fortune desire
it. Wherefore, Flavian, I should not be surprised, if having partly banished
the Emperess into Palestina; She should to day send me into solitude. The sweet
pleasure that she found there, without doubt makes her wish it to me: And it is
only in gratitude, that she desires to be employed in that place which I did
hold. When she came to cast her self at my feet, and when by reasons which
would be too long to relate, I resolved to make her Emperess: I thought that
that person, who esteemed her self happy, in having a roof of straw for riches
would behave infinitlie, when she should see her self reign over the heart of
Theodosius, and set upon a throne, to which she dared not to list her eyes.
However matters go not so; And she who only desired a simple cottage for her
contentmemt, cannot find her self in a great and stately Palace, if she be not
there alone, and if she banish not her who opened the gates to her, and put her
in possession. It may truly be said for her excuse, that she does not
believe, it was from my hands she received the crown which she carries: The
assurance her Father gave her a dying, that she should be richer then her
brothers, perswads her that this Crown did fall from the highest heavens upon
her head. She believes that the influence of the stars caused her good Fortune.
And that I did nothing at that time, but what I could not hinder me from doing.
She thinks I was constrained, by that constellation under which she is born, to
make her Emperess of the East: And in this manner, believing that she holds her
good Fortune of the stars, she thinks her self thankful enough, when without
looking upon me, she has only lifted up her eyes to Heaven. But wise Flavian,
I who never believed all the miracles that have been told me of judicial
Astrology, who knows the uncertaintie of that Science: How mistie and doubious
are the predictions which it makes; And how unprofitable they are: I say, I
know very well, that I was not constrained to Crown Athenais. I designed it
not without reason, I examined the thing exactlie. And because it was of
importance to me, I did not tumultuouslie resolve it: And it might have come to
(...), that Athenais should have gained her cause, and lost the Empire that
day, in spite of the Planets and Stars. In fine, my Father, I well know, that
this Science, whose predictions are not understood, until the things come to
pass, is not a gift of Heaven: GOD did make nothing unprofitable in the World:
And yet judicial Astrology is of such a nature, that it oblidges me the more
to believe its falsitie. Who is he that has profited by the Prophesies have
been made of him? Or to say better who has understood them? Chance, that
caused the Sponge be so fortunatlie thrown at the famous Painter, which
accomplished without thinking of it, that which all his Art could not do,
doubtless makes these occurencies, upon which the reputation of this Science is
established, sometimes mervailious: But ordinarlie, they who adjust accidents
to Prophecy, must have more spirit then the greatest masters of his Art. When
Lantiue a dying said to Athenais, that she should be richer then her Brothers:
The good man said it rather in praise of her beauty and virtue, then in
assurance of the Empire. And if he had certainly foreseen, that the Crown
which she carries to day, was to be upon her head; He had but little judgment,
to a muse himself with dividing three or four foot of earth among his Sons:
Because it was very credible, that if she did become Emperess, she would not
let her brothers live in the poverty of their birth, and consequently the
paternall Succession would be of no use to them. Yes, wise Flavian, only I
have made Athenais Emperess of the East: However, I forgive her want of
gratitude: And I wish with all my heart, that in fine she may know the talent
which Heaven has given her. She is certainly proper for great virtues: And if
she attempt but to Reign over her self; She shall be the mervaill of her age.
She shall reap more Palms in Palestina, then she can acquire Glory by the
Government of affairs. And if I be not deceived, she shall there be happier.
For me my Father, who am otherways born, I should willingly put my self, as
you have been ordained, among these Virgins, who have no other care, but to
make an^ oblation of their hearts to God; If I did not think that Theodosius
and the Emperess may perhaps need my assistance: But knowing them as I do, it
shall suffice, that retiring to my solitude, I leave them liberty of acting
according to their fancies: And I wish to GOD, that same inform me of nothing
to their disadvantage. I shall be very glad that their conduct let it be seen,
that what I had of Theodosius had no evil success: And that I have not made a
bad choice of Athenais. However, Flavian, if it be possible, let the Emperor
know, that without murmuring I quit that share of domination which he gave me:
That not having taken it but only for his ease and glory, I willingly demit,
how soon I know that he thinks it no more agreeable to him. But let him
remember, that at my parting from him, I leave all his Empire in peace; That
all his subjects love him; That all his Neighbors fear him; That there is
abundance in all his towns: That Virtue is seen in every particular Family;
That vice appears no more among them; That his Court (except Crisaphius) has
no flatterers; That the Rabble are without insolence; That the great are without
pride; And that piety reigns in all the Temples of his Empire. Let him
remember, Venerable Flavian, that that great virtue (if I dare say it) has
past from my heart into his; And from his, into that of all his Subjects, that
thereby the memory of me be not troublesome to him: And also to the end, that
if it come to pass by chance, that he one day do recall me, as he has recalled
Athenais; He may see, if the Government will be then in the condition I leave
it in this day: As for the Emperess, I shall be glad she know, that though I
have not made a particular study of Philosophy, that though I be of a birth
to exile others, and not to be banished; That though I have some portion in the
Throne which she wholly this day possesses, I forbear not I say, to quit that
Throne, and endure my exile, with more moderation then she testifies by
receiving the crown which I gave her: I wish from Heaven, that I may know
better how to use my disgrace, then she has done her good Fortune: And to
conclude this discourse, remember my Father, you who have Governed my
Conscience, so long as I governed the Empire; That I never in my life proposed
any other thing to my self, then always to do what I ought, and what I
believed to be most glorious, and most just. Veritable Wisdom consists in the
good usage of what accidents befall us: There is no need of a scrupulous
atachment to one Virtue: They must be all practiced according to several
occasions. There is a time wherein humility is not laudable; And wherein
Grandeur of courage is more necessary: And others also wherein dissimulation
is Wisdom: And Freedom criminal. We must know how to change seasonablie, yet
without ever changing the resolution of doing what we ought. If a Prince with
whom I have made a just War, should by chance of Arms make me his salve; I
should then look upon him no more as my enemy, but as my Master; I would be
faithful to him in that condition; And renew the chains which he would make me
carry, if of Themselves they did break; Because I could not break them without
crime. It is by the same reason, wise Flavian, and by that same virtue, that
without making factions in the Empire; Without causing the People rebel in my
favors; And without making the Ecclesiastics remember, that I have several
times destroyed Heresy, and sustained their Altars; Without I say doing any
of these things, I do resolve after having known how to reign Soveraignlie
enough; To obey with as much submission of Spirit, as I have had Grandeur of
courage, in commanding the half of the World, from the age of fifteen years
until this day.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THis Discourse which was told to Theodosius was effectual in its time, as
well as that of the Emperess had been; And because affairs did not prosper well
under the administration of Athenais, Pulcheria after four years was recalled
to the Government; Which with much Glory she possessed till her death: After
having caused flrick of the head of Crisaphius; And the fair and knowing
Athenais molested with he changes of Court; retired of her own accord to
Palestina, where she lived and died in a mervellous Sanctity

CALPHURNIA TO LEPIDUS THE FIFTEENTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
ALl Ages all Nations, and almost all men, have made Cesars Elogy; But I know
none, that has made his Apology. They thought it was easier to praise his
Valor, then to justify his Intentions, and that his wars were mere Glorious
then was their cause. Every one believes he was a great Captain, but all do
not believe that be was a good Citizen. They who called him the Father of
Soldiers, have also called him the Tirran of Rome, and almost all have thought
that he aspired at Soveraigh power. Yet whosoever considers the business will
find, that he appeared rather innocent then criminal, and I do assure my self,
if you will hearken to his reasons in the mouth of Calphurnia, you will not
condemn him. Because our Nation was conquered by him, me thinks it is important
to our Glory, that our Conqueror be without tashe, and I think to defend the
honor of France, by defending the I li^strious Caesar. He has spoken so
worthily of the Gaul's in his commentaries, that it is just the Gauls should
speak of him, and I cannot endure it to be said that we have followed a Tirrans
Chariot. Hear then what his Wife is going to say, who knew his intentions, and
is going to make them known to you.

CALPHURNIA TO LEPIDUS.
CAESAR is revenged Lepidus; The last of his murderers has lost his life; And
all the Romans have a Master: They themselves give to Augustus the Sovereign
power, which they would have refused to the great Caesar if he had been capable
of asking it: And for the punishment of their crime, they with their own hands
forge the chains, which they not only ought to carry; But which by right of
Succession shall pass to their Postertie. Yes, Lepidus, because the Romans did
unjustlie accust Caesar, of desiring to be their Tirran, they shall if I be not
deceived, have trial of all that the cruellest Tirrany can make them endure.
We already see that Augustus has no children, and that Tiberius has
inclinations speedily to begin, what I say. And moreover, the knowledge that I
have of the innocence of the first Cesars, makes me almost certainly see the
misfortunes which shall oppress Rome. The Gods are ^oo just, not to chastise
with rigout, them who massacred the Father of his country, and the protector
of liberty. Yes, Lepidus, the great Caesar truly merited these two Glorious
Titles, and did not at all merit the treatment that he received. Truly I
wonder that the Romans have so evillie explained his intentions, since his
whole life lets them see that he loved liberty: And also that the greatest
crimes he is accused of, are the effects of his passionate desires to preserve
it. You know Lepidus that in his more tender years, he declared himself enemy
to Sy^^, and consequenclie to Tirranie. He was looked upon then as a Citizen
too passionate for liberty, and was constrained to hid himself, and also to
retire from Rome, that he might escape the Ambuscadoes that were laid against
his life. After that, he accused Doll^bel^, and Rigorously prosecuted him, for
having acted with too much Soveraignitie, in the Government of his Province:
And by that action made it sufficiently known, that he approved not in him,
what he condemned in others. In effect, while he was Praetor, there happned no
disorder in the Republic: Though that was the time wherein he might have
rather made his wicked actions appear: Because that charge was of greater
importance, then what he had formerlie possessed: However he did not abuse it: He
did every thing with prudence, and moderation: And his very enemies could not
reproach him of any thing of that time. And to speak ^atronallie, it never did
any thing but make the Romans power greater, by making new conquests for it
every day, hazarding his life in a thousand different occasions, and
generouslie opposing all the Tirrans, who minded to usurp the domination, He
did not regard their being his relations or allayes: And did so much for the
public good, that he no more considered his particular interests. Truly
Lepidus, every time I remember what Caesar has done for the Romans, of the
numbers of victories he has gained, or against their enemies, or against their
Tirrans; I immediately believe that my memory deceives me: And that it
altogether presents to me all the brave actions, that have been done since the
beginning of Ages. I cannot, I say, think, that one and the same person had
interprised so manic things, had accomplished so manic glorious designs had
made so manic Conquests, had given so manic Battles, had so much hazarded his
life, had escaped so manic dangers, and had not lived longer then others.
Nevertheless, Lepidus you know, that Caesar has done more then I say although
he has lived but fistic six years: And to recount only one part of his
victories, and of the brave actions which he has done before I undertake to
justify him, remember what he did in Spain. He subingated the Callaciens, and
the Lusitanians even to the Ocean, where the Romans had never been. The
conquest of the Gauls, you know, has immortalised his glory: For there in
less then ten years, he did take either by composition or assault, more then
eight hundred Towns, conquered three hundred different Nations; And having
seen before him in ranged Battle above three millions of armed men in manic
encounters, he killed more then one million, and did take as manic prisoners.
(O Caesar, O Illustrious Conqueror! Must the poigniard of an ungrateful
Traitor, make thee loss thy life!) But I am not yet come to the last of his
Victories: That famous Battle which he gave to Ariovistus upon the banks of the
Rhine, where more then eighty thousand men died, makes it suslicientlie seen
that Conquerours are never weary. Further Caesar did not always overcome with
case: He has some times seen victory flic above his enemies camp, and same
altogether ready to publish his desate: But his single valor forced them to
return to his party. The adventure of the Nervianes makes what I say
abundantly seen: All the Romans were desated, and the other were very like to
have been Masters of the field of battle, when Caesar did cast himself alone,
amidst his enemies with his sword in his hand, and a shield upon his left arm:
And by an action worthy of Caesar, deserved to conquer these, who had almost
conquered his People. After that, he was the first who passed the Rhine; He was
the first who sailed with an army upon the Occidentall Ocean; He conquered
England, which none believed was in being: And carried his arms and Romes
Glory, in places where the name of Romans had never been. The famous prise of
Alexia, is none of Cesars least actions: He saw in head of him, an Army of
three hundred thousand men, to make him raise the siedge: But having as much
prudence as courage, he divided his army, and acted so skilfullie, that they
who lived before Alexia, did not know there was a powerful relief coming to
the Town. They did not know I say, they were enclosed between two powerful
enemies, until Caesar had defated them; And Vercingentorix, who was in that
place, was rendered to that famous Conqueror. Ah surely! After that I doubt
not but History will one day say, that he surmounted all there Heroes: Yes,
Lepidus, whosoever would compare the great qualities of the most Illustrious
with him, will find that he has excelled them. The Fabianes, Seipioes, the
Metalles, and also they of his own time as Silla, Marius, the two invincible
Lucullus, and Pompey, are inferior to him in every thing: He surmounted one
by the difficulties of the countries he conquered: The second by the extent of
the Nations which he has put under the Romans dominion: The hird by the
multitudes of enemies he has defated: An other by the feirceness of the People
with whom he had to do, and whom he behooved both to overcome and teach: An
other in sweetness, in clemency, and in humanity, to them whom he conquered:
The last in magnificence and liberality to them who fought under him: And all
of them in gaining manic battles, in defateing numbers of enemies, and in
practicing manic virtues. Behold Lepidus, the Victories which the Romans could
not dispute with Caesar. They are reduable to him for all the blood that he shed
in the many encounters he met with. It was for them that he fought; It was for
them that he over came; It was for them that he conquered so manic countries?
And there were none to be found, until the passage of that famous River, which
Caesar traversed to come to Rome; or to say better, to come against the Tirran
of Rome; I say there was none to be found but who did agree, that the Republic
was much oblidged and indebted to Caesar. But Lepidus, I intend to show you this
day that the other Victories which Caesar gained, are these for which the Romans
are more oblidged to him. I intend to let you see that Caesar did never more
strongly testify the passion that he had for liberty, and the hatred that he
had to tirranie; Then when he fought and conquered Pompey. But to resume the
matter from its source, to justify Caesar, Pompey must be accused: And it must
be seen, that as the one did always testify his being the Protector of
liberty, the other, has still made it appear that he aspired at Tirranie. All
the World has known, that Pompey did so manic things to usurp the domination,
that to hinder him from interprising it any more they wereconstrained to
declare him alone Consul: And the Romans at that time loved better to satisfy
his vanity some way, then to oppose directly him. But they did not use Caesar
so, for so far from granting new honors to him, they ^^ragiouslie refused the
just things that he sought. Lentulus Pompeyes Parlysan, disgracefully banished
Anthony and Curio, who were constrained to disguise themselves like slaves,
that they might return with safitie to Caesar; And all that Lepidus, because
Caesar by them did ask, the continuation of the Government of the Gauls, whom
he conquered. The unjust refusal that he got, did not carry him to unjust
designs: He did at that time know, that Pompey demanded not his return to Rome,
but for his loss; That Pompey looked upon him as his enemy; And as the only
obstacle that could hinder him from obtaining the Sovereign power, which he had
so long pretended to. Caesar did then consider his particular preservation, and
also the public good. He had a mind to disarme his enemy, and the enemy of
Rome, and also disarme himself. He then caused tell the Senate, to let the
purity of his intentions be seen, that he was ready to quit the Government of
the Gauls, who had so often made him expose his life; That he was ready to
lay down his arms; That he was ready to come and give account of his actions;
That he was ready absolutely to renounce all kind of authority,
conditionally that Pompey should lay down his arms, as well as he, and that
they should both live as private persons. Me thinks these propositions were not
Tirranick: Tirrans never do expose themselves to such things: And Pompeyes
Procedour makes what I say very well seen. If Caesar had proposed to him to
divide the Sovereign power with him, perhaps he would have more favourabllie
heard him; But because he desired to put him out of condition of being able to
aspire any more at Tirranie, he could not suffer so just a proposition; He
made factions to hinder the Senate from being brought to reason; And to weary
Cesars patience entirlie, he caused as I have already told you, and as you
know, ignominiouslie banish them whom he had sent. He was treated as enemy of
the public good: And Pompey who sought but to set affairs on sire for Cesars
death, and to profit himself by the misfortunes of others, loved better to
ruin his country, then to change his wicked designs. All the Senators found
Cesars propositions just: For he cause demonstrate to them, that if they would
have him quit his arms, and Pompey not quit his: It was to give him the means
of arriving at Monarchy: But demanding that it should be ordained for them
both to quit, was asking a thing equally profitable to all the people, and
which should not offend Pompey, if he truly had no wicked intentions. his
Father in law Scipio, and his friend Marcellus, liked not to consent to it: And
also they were almost the only men who hindered Caesar from obtaining what he
demanded: And did so highly speak of Pompeys interest, that because the Senate
could resolve upon nothing, public mourning was ordained for that particular
dessention. Yet Caesar was not wearied: He writ again to the Senate; He made
just propositions to them a second time: And both these times Pompeys faction
was the strongest. Further I know not how Caesar can be accused, of having so
much as dreamed to usurp the Sovereign power; Because some time before the
last injuries were done to him, Pompey having sent to recall some Troops that
he had given him; Caesar sent them back without being pressed to it:
Sufficiently testifying by that action, that he feared not for the weakening
his own forces, nor the augmenting those of his Enemy: And did consequently
let them see, that he had no concealled designs: But morover, where are the
great preparations of War that Caesar has made for so great an enterprise?
Where are the intelligences that he has practiced in Rome or in any other
Towns: Where are his great Armies, or the manic Machines, for the battles that
he must have given, or for the siedges he must have laid? No Lepidus, Caesar had
none of all those things: And when Curia and Anthony came to him disguised as
slaves, to acquaint him of the unworthie treatment he had received in their
persons, and of the wicked designs which Pompey had both against him and
against the Republic: He had but five thousand in fantrie; And three hundred
horse with him. Do you think Lepidus that these Troops were sufficient if or a
design of that importance? If Caesar had had that intention, he would without
doubt have Leived a much stronger Army, he would have found pretexts for it;
And he was more wise then to have undertaken such a thing, without having a
long time before searched outaway to make it succeed. It was not then
apremeditated design that made him pass that River, which he has made so
famous by his passage: It was both a resentment of choler, of shame and
despite, with an earnest desire to be revenged of his enemy, and to destroy a
man who not only desired to destroy him, but also destroy the Republic, He
departed then without any premeditation; And the justice of Heaven conducting
all his designs; He made himself Master of Italy in sixty days, without
shedding the blood of the Citizens. As to Pompey, it well appeared by his
conduct, that remorse of conscience made him loss his good sense: He was no
more the great Pompey, who when he had none but lawful designs, and when he
served the Republiek, testified so much prudence and so much courage. He lost
both the one and the other at that time: For though he had more Wariours then
Caesar, and though he had the advantage of being in Rome; He no sooner
understood, that he had past the Rubicone; But he fled in disorder: without so
much as giving leisure for making sacrifices to the Gods, to calm that florme.
But the knowledge he had of his wicked designs, doubtless made him believe,
they would not be favurable to him: And there may be manic persons found, who
in so great a trouble will loss that respect, which they always did beat to
them. Some did remember at that time, that he had been heard say, formerlie,
that stricking the foot against the Earth would make Soldiers arise. That way
of speaking, which smells, of Tirranie, was he reproached with: And one of the
chiefest of Rome, seeing his astonishment. boldly said to him; Now strick the
earth, to oncrease your army, that you may oppose Caesar. He was also
reproached of ambition and unjustice: And what was said against him at that
time, makes it sufficently seen that Pompey, was the tyrran, that Caesar, was
the Protector. In effect he was no sooner in Rome, then he courtiouslie treated
all the senatores: he with a sweet tenderness prayed them to Pacify every
thing; and again proposed to them most just, and most reasonable articles of
peace, thereby to make them agree with Pompey. But they knowing that Pompey
would be all or nothing; They did not make it, and excused themselves to Caesar.
But Lepidus, when this Ilustrious Heroes, was created dictator, gave he any
marks of his having desires to aspire at tyrranie. Non at all; He recalled the
banished; Replaced in honor the children of them who had been con fiscated in
the time of Silla, who was a Tyrran, and eleven days after voluntarlie
demitted the dictatorship, contenting himself with being Consulate, with
Servilius Jsauricus. After that Lepidus, can any say that Caesar was a tyrran,
and that Pompey, was the defender of liberty. But let us finish the giving
account of his Illustrious Life in few words, that we may have the more leisure
to Lament his death, Doubtless you remember all the artifice that Pompey used,
to shun fighting with Caesar, and draw affairs to delay: and they were so
certainly visible, and his ambitione so known, that his very soldiers boldly
said, he continued not the war, but for to continue his authority, In effect,
he knew that either victorious or conquered, he must quitt the sovereign Power,
or altogether take of the Mask, that concealed him to the halph of the
Romans. But Caesar, whose confidence was in the equity of his cause, and in
that of the gods, searched after his enemies He seared not to assault and sight
him; He had nothing in his heart that reproached him of crime; He knew that he
revenged Rome, by revenging himself; And by freeing himself of an adversary,
He freed Rome of a tyrran. His hope of heaven did not deceive him: He gained
the battle and Pompey lost it. That man who had been so much favored by
fortune whille he was innocent, was abandoned by it when he became Criminal. He
did not any more know aither to fight or overcome; nor did so much as know how
to be overcome like a man of courage, Howsoon his party had gotten the worst
in the battle of Pharsalia, in sted of annimating them by his example he went
into his tent, without knowing almost what he said: And knowing that affairs
went still worse for him, that his entrenchments were forced And that Caesar,
approached, what (said he all frightened) even in our Camp, and after he had
spoken in this mannner, he again fledd, and abandoned all that remained of his
Party. Yet me thinks it would have been more glorious for him to have died by
Cesars arms then by the sword of the traitor Septimius, who formerlie
commanded under him: But this great man, having in his heart, hatred, remorse,
repentance; shame of being overcome, and ambition; We neid not wonder if losing
hopes of reinging, He, in fine lost his reason, But after we have seen that
Caesar was skilful in the art of conquering, I pray you Lepidus let us look if
he did also know the use of victory; if he was inhuman or clement; If he was
just or rigorous? If he was tyrran or Roman Citisen. How soon the field of
battle was left to him, and the eagerness he had to fight was mitigated when
he saw such multitudes of dead soldiers round about him, he shedd so many
tears, as he had caused them shedd blood: O gods, (cried he weeping,) Ye know
it was their desire and that they Compelled me to be their conqueror! For Caesar
after having gained so many Illustrious victories, doubtless would have bein
blamed, if he had abandoned his army. Any other Conqueror but Caesar, would
shedd tears of soy, after having gained the battle: But for him, He could not
rejoice in his Victory, because it had cost the lives of some of his citisens.
Believe me Lepidus, Tyrrants do not weep for their ennemies: And clemency and
pity are sentiments which they know not at all. However you know that Caesar,
almost pardoned all his: He also had a particular care to cause search for that
prefidious man, who afterward caused him loss his life: And when the traitor
Brutus, rendered himself to him, he treated him as if he had bein his son: Woe
is me! me thinks I see my dear Caesar, going from rank to rank asking from his
people news of Brutus, looking among the dead bodies, if he was not yet there
in condition to be suceoured, and doing all things possible to save him, who by
a horrid ungratitude, thrusted a poigniard into his breast. O gods! is it
possible that Caesar, could make so bad a choice? That among all the Romans he
loved his murderer, better then any other, and that the gods who testified
their having such particular care of his life, did not advertise him, that he
whom he loved best of all men, should of all men be the most cruel against
him. But it is not yet time to speak of Brutue, his ungratitude; The clemency
and the goodness of Caesar, furnishes me With too good a subject to leave it so
soon: And to let his affasinates crime appear as great as it is, his virtues
must appear with all the splendor that they had. Tyrrans have some times put a
price upon the heads of their enemies, they have promised abolitione of all
sorts of crimes to these who would bring them: And sometimes when they have
been satisfied, they have looked upon that fatal present with joy. But Caesar,
used not his so; He would not see that of Pompey; He weeped bitterly; He
treated him ignominiously who presented it to him, and forced him to the
necesity, of making his recourse to flight, thereby to save his life. For me, I
find that action more glorious for Caesar, then if he had overcome Pompey: But
though he was alone to weep for his enemy; He was not alone to fight. Further,
He well testified that He did not so much regaird Pompey, as to his own
Particular, then as to that of the Republic? For he not only pardoned all them
of his party who would render themselves? But he took a particular care of all
Pompeys friends: And by that made it seen that he hated not his person, but
only that He desired to destroy his unjust and pernicious dessignes. Any other
but Caesar, after having been victor, would have considred his own security; By
banishing some, by putting others to death, and by putting himself in a
condition to defy the rest. But for him, He considered nothing but the
gathering the ruptures of Pompeyes naufrage. It might have been said that it
was his army that was defated: And that He stayed in that place, to railly his
troops, He testified so much swetnesse and goodness to them who came and listed
themselves under his coulors. He did also wreat to Rome, That the sweetest
fruits he receved of the Victory, was that every day, He saved the life of
some of their Citizens. O Lepidus. Tirrants have no such words! Further to
demon^^ rate the equity of his intentions, and to show that his victory was
not a change of Fortune, but an effect of the will of the Gods; he continued
happy in other things that he enterprised. The War of Egypt, and that of
Armenia, from whence he writ to Rome, that he was come, that he had seen, and
that he had overcome, makes what I say abundantly seen. After that, in one
single day, he made himself Master of three Camps; killed fifty thousand men;
And lost but fifty Soldiers. In your opinion Lepidus, was it Cesars arm that
fought so, or rather was it not that of the Gods? That Illustrious victory
made him no more inexorable then the rest: For when he was told, that Cato was
killed by his own hand? O Cato! (said he) how I envy thy death, because thou
have envied my glory of saving thy life. Perhaps some will say, that if Cato
had lived. Caesar would not have done what he said: But it is easy to imagine,
that he who pardoned Brutus and Cicero, who carried arms against him, would
have also pardoned Cato. But Lepidus I will have none judge of Caesar by the
knowledge I have of him; I will have none judge of Caesar by what his friends
will say of him; But I will only have them judge of him by the honors that the
Romans have done to him, dureing his life, and after his death. And truly, it
was not without reason that there was a Temple of Clemency builded in
acknowledgement of his; Because there was never a conqueror, who did so
perfectly know the practice of that virtue. But pray you tell me Lepidus, how
is it possible that these same Romans, who since the ending of the Wars, could
not reprocah Caesar of any act of Soveraignitie; how is it I say possible, that
these very men who builded this Temple of clemency, by the knowledge they had
of his goodness, could call him Tirran; It might be found in History, that
Triumphant Arches have been erected for Tirrans: That by their orders, and by
their violence, their statues have been placed upon the Altars: But that by a
voluntary gratitude, Temples have been builded to their glory, and Temples of
Clemency; Is that which will not be found in all Ages, and which will be found
of Caesar: For in fine, he was no Tirran, and doubtless, merited more then was
given him. Do you not remember Lepidus, of the day wherein he caused redress
Pompeyes statues, and wherein Cicero said, that by re-elevating the, he seeured
his own: That action was then found as brave, as it was; All the Romans spoke
of no other thing, and all did agree, that Caesar was the most Illustrious of
all the Heroes, And truly at that time Caesar seemed as just as generous: For
whereas these statues were erected for Pompey, in the time that he served the
Republic; He would have no mark of honor taken from him. which he did
effectually merit. Further Tirrans are never in safitie: They fear every
thing, and trust themselves to no body: They judge themselves worthy of a
violent death: And by the pains they take to shun it, they make it appear that
they know they merit it. But for Caesar, because he trusted to his innocence, he
also trusted to all People: For he put Brutus and Cass^us in authority by
making them Pretors and would take no care of his safitie. Ah would to Heaven!
That he had followed his friends counsel at that time: But he was too
Generous, to be capable of such prudence, as does so stranglie resemble fear,
that it does very often produce the same effects. And moreover, he thought
that having made known to the Romans, the sincerity of his intentions, he
should have no need of any other provision for his safitie. He lost not one
single occasion of testifying to them that he preferred the quality of a Roman
Citizen to all other: As you know, when he returned one day from Alba, when
some did salute him, they called him King; But he answered them, that he was
named Caesar and not King. Yes, Caesar you had reason to prefer that name to this
of King: You have rendered it so famous that you cannot quit it without losing
by the change: You must having lived Caesar, die Caesar. Do you also remember
Lepidus, that when the Senate decered new honors for him, he said with an
extreme moderation, that his honors had rather need of being retrinched then
augmented: Nor are you ignorant, that when Anthony by an inconsiderate zeal
caused present the Royal Bandeau to him, he twice refused it: And commanded it
to be carried to Jupiters statue: As if he would have said, that the Romans
should only be commanded by the Gods. What could he do more at that time to
testify to the Romans, that he aspired not at Tirranie, then Publicly to
refuse the badge of Royalty? Would any have had him cause put Anthony to
death for that crime? No that would not have been just: and he who had pardoned
his enemies of a hundred crimes, ought also to pardone a rash zeal in on of
his friends. I well know that Pompeys partisans have said, that Caesar,
contributed to some excessive honors that were done to him, thereby to essay
the peoples good will: But know, Lepidus, if he had contributed to them, his
refuseing of them would have been with design, to justify his intentions, Ah,
Lepidus, to speak truly of the matter, the friends, flatterers, and enemies
of Caesar, are they who equally oppressed him, with the Crowns of flowers, that
they did throw upon him The first by excess of affection: others, by the
desire of pleasing and making themselves great, and others, by design of giving
pretexts to the people, to murmr against Caesar; And of having some coulor for
the villainies which they under hand devised against him. But tell me, Lepidus,
what other thing could Caesar do, then refuse the honors that were offered to
him! Moreover if Caesar, had a desired to be King, it would not have been
impossible to him: That same arm that made him conquer so many countries, and
gain so many victories, would have secured the Empire to him. He was too well
instructed in worldly affairs, to belive that by meekness, and the suffrage
of all the Romans, he could arrive at the throne: Doubtless, he knew that
crowns are taken by violence, and are never given: And if he had intended to
make himself King, He would have used force and not meekness. France would have
furnished him with ane army strong enough for that: And if with five thousand
foot and three hundred horse he put Pompey to the flight, and made himself
master of all Italy; It would not have been more difficult for him after the
battle of Pharsalia, to have usurped the sovereign authority. The Gauls, would
have followed him with joy, and would have come unto Rome, to retake the
booty, which the Roman Legins had for merlie taken from them. In fine Lepidu;
He would have acted like a tyrran, and usurper, and not like a citizen. I do
avouch that Caesar, desired to reign, but it was in the Romans hearts, and not
in Rome: He did them every day new favors; He considered only their felicity
and their glory: And in the very time wherein they were meditating his death
he employed all his pains to make them live happily. Lepidus, was there ever a
more Ilustrious Hero then Caesar? Repass all his life with himself, you shall
not find on single blemish, but you shall their find all virtues in the highest
degree the victorys which he gained were not of those which fortune gives
blindlie to them who confide in it absolutely: He gained them both by valor
and reason: and when he gave any thing to chance, it was because reason would
have it so. The stadefastness of mind, that he always testified, in all the
dangers wherein he exposed himself for the republic, is ane incomprehensible
thing: He ever beheld good and evil fortune with the same countenance. Love,
Choler, Hatred Revenge, and Ambition, did never make him guilty of any
imbecillitie: He was always. Master of his passions, and did never let himself
be surmounted but by Clemency. Nevertheless, there are men, there are Romans,
who have been so wicked, as to look upon Caesar as a Tirran. But no, Lepidus,
the business was not altogether so; The particular ha^red which Cassius did
bear to Caesar, because he preferred Brutus to him, in designing to make him
Consul to his prejudice, was that which made the conspiracy. It was not for
having violated the Roman Laws; it was not for having male-treated the
Senators; It was not for causing put citizens to death: It was only for
revenging Cassius. But if Caesar was to die, for preferring Brutus to Cassius,
it should not have been Brutus, who was to stabb Caesar for revenging Cassius,
whom Caesar did not abuse but by oblidgeing Brutus. No, Lepidus, if Caesar had
been what he was not, I would say the cruellest Tirran that ever was, the sword
of Brutus ought not to have been tainted with his blood: And he should have
been the last of all the Romans, in abandoning him, after what he had done for
him. Ah let none say to me, that the more ungrate he appeared to Caesar the more
thankful did he seem to his country: No, Lepidus Generositie is not
compatible with ungratitude, Vice and Virtue cannot be together: And none can
be ungrate and thankful equally. Whosoever receives an obligation engadges
themselves to the person oblidging: Therefore they who have a high spirit do
never receive benefits but from their friends: and in the choice of the two,
they love better to oblidge their adversaries, then not to be oblidging. If
Brutus could not have lived happy, while Caesar was alive, he should have
always appeared under his enemies coulors; He should have refused all the
honors which Caesar gave him; He should not have rendered himself to him; And
rather then to have received that life which Caesar gave him, he should with his
own hand have killed himself, as the generous Cato did. But having received his
life from Caesar; Having accepted the first offices of the Republic; After that
by a kindly resentment, Caesar had preferred him to Cassius; That he should
have let him self been persuaded by Cassius, to stab Caesar; Is that which
cannot comprehend; Is that which cannot be approved off by any rational
person; And is that which could not have been glorious to Brutus although Caesar
had been a Tirran. Nevertheless Lepidus, that was the ungrate, this is that
Traitor, who was chief of the conspiration, who gave him his deaths wound. Why
Brutus! Why cruel! Could thou strick him who saved thy life? Why Barbarian,
why did not the sword drop from thy hands, when the Illustrious and Great
Caesar, seeing you come to him like the rest, did forebear to defend himself,
and also said to you with more affection then splen,

And thou also my Son! Why Tiger, these words touched not thy heart, and thou
could strick Caesar? Ah no Brutus! It thou hadest had any reason thou should
have changed such a wicked design; Thou should have fought for Caesar,
rendered to him that life which he gave thee, or if thou could not, thou should
have deleated thy ungratitude with thy blood, and killed thy self upon the dead
body of Caesar. But what do I Lepidus? My grief transports me: That doleful
image of Cesars death, irritates my displeasure and anger, every time that it
comes in my mind; And without having any dessign to it, I change both discourse
and subject Let us return then to my first intention: And say that if Cesars
innocence, could be questioned, by the actions he did dureing his life, it hall
be fully justified by what is come to pass at his death, and after his death.
The extraordinare care that the Gods took to advertise him of the misfortune
that was to befall him, lets the purity of his Soul be sufficentlie seen: All
those signs which appeared in Heaven; Those defective Victimes, those dreams
which frighted me; The hands of these Soldiers which appeared in fire; He who
Prognosticated to him that the ides of March would be fatal to him; And all
these other things which thought to impede the effects of the conspiration:
makes it abundantly known that Caesar was not an ordinaric man. If Cesars death
could have been for the good of the Republic, the Gods would not have given so
manic presages of it. They foretell misfortunes, thereby to make men shun them;
But of the felicity that they send them, they never give so manic signs.
Perhaps it may be said to me, that Brutus was sufficiently forewarned of his
death? But that horrid Phantasmc which a p^eared twice to him, was rather sent
for his chastisement, then to give him means of escaping the misfortune that
was prepared for him. Further who did ever see dead Tirrans venerated? When
they are alive they are feared, but when they are dead, their bodies are
dragged through the public places; they are torn in pieces: The laws which
they have made are changed; Their statues are demolished; Their memories are in
execration; And they who killed them, live insastie and with honor. But for
Caesar, all dead as he was, he has been respected: The places which were marked
with his blood, were worshipped by the Romans, and seemed to be sacred Nis
bloody Gown all peirced with the wounds he received, excitted sorrowin the
Souls of all the Citizens: His Testament which enriched them all, was given
carto as that of the Father of the country: The People made him a pile, more
Glorious for his memory, then if they had given him the noblest funeral, that
Kings are honored with: Because this was an effect of his affection; And that
because the same fire that did consume my dear Caesar, desired to embrace the
houses of his murderers. The Senate changed none of the ordinances which he
made; They gave him new honors; All his assasinates took the flight, and by an
universal consent, he was ranked among the Gods. Who ever faw a Tirran deified
after his death? Alexander himself, who was the greatest Prince of all
Antiquity, did not pass for Jupiters son, but dureing his life: But Caesar has
that advantage above this Illustrious Here Is that what Alexander; friends did
while he was alive, the witnesses of Cesars merit have done to him, after he
ceased to live. The Gods also, after they had given sinister presages of his
death, desired likewaies to testify; That it had infinitlie offended them.
That terrifying Comet which appeared seven whole days after his death, was
already a sign of the vengeance they would take: The Sun also that was a whole
year, without giving his accustomed hear and brightness, has made it known to
all the earth that by Cesars death, the Republic had lost its greatest
ornament and best luster: And also to testify his innocence better, the
vengeance of Heaven has pertinaciouslie pursued even to death, all them who
only by their Counsels, had contributted any thing to that unjust
conspiration. They all died violent deaths, without so much as one escaping;
They found to Element, where they could live quietly; The Sea was fatal to
them as well as the land, they who escaped the fury of their enemies, killed
themselves with their own hand; Cassius peirced his own heart, with that same
sword, wherewith he struck Caesar; And in that manner, he is punished with these
same arms with which he committed the crime. Brutus you know ended his days
that same way: And in fine I know that none of Cesars murderers, remains any
more in the World. Judge from that Lepidus, if he is not fully justified. If
his death be not as Glorious to him as his life, because it has shown to us
that all nature was interessed in it! And to speak rationallie, if Caesar was
not (...), the (...), and Father of his country, then the Romans Tyrran.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
IT belongs not to me to tell you the effect of this Hard range, it belongs to
you, to let me know it. For its object, it has had the design of perswadeing
you, it belongs to you then to let me understand if you be. It is you she has
spoken to under the name of Lepidus, it belongs to you to tell me if it has
hits its aim. For me, I do assure you, if I have seduced your reason, it is
but because my own is seduced: And because I do not endeavor to make you
believe, but what I believe, my self. I have so great veneration for Caesar that
I can have noevil thought of his intentions: And Me thinks we owe that respect
to all great men, not to condemn them upon slight conjectures They are
deceitful; Great men's designs are fecret; Let us then respect them, and not
onterprise to judge them.

LIVIA TO MECENAS THE SIXTEENTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
IT is to the glory of good learning, that this Harrangue is consecrated. But
though this be its principal object, it may be said that it does not alienate
me from the General design of my Book, because Poesy being one of the most
agreeable emploiments of Ladies, and one of their dearest divertisments; It
vindicates their pleasure, to make the merit be seen. Beheld them what I have
proposed to my self by this discourse, which if I be not deceived is ra^ier
more reasonable then interessed: At least I know, if I defend this cause, it is
because I think it good, and also because I do not contravert the oath of
Orators, which oblidges them not to defend any that they find evil. Judge of
it Reader, and hear Livia speak to Mecenas upon his subject, the famous
Protector of the Muses. But be not astonished to hear her speak to the depth of
this matter, Augustus loved verse too much, and(...) them too often, not to
haveinspired that same inclination, in her who possessed his heart, and she was
too industri^^ not to be complacent. So then if I have chosen, I had reason,
and none shall have any to blame me.

LIVIA TO MECENAS.
I Know Illustrious Mecenas, that Augustus owes the Em pire to your Conselles:
That the Romans, owe to you the felicity they enjoy, under a reign so
differing from Tyrranie; And also that I owe to you that quality I have to day.
Yes, Mecenas; it was you who surmounted the powerful reasons of Agrippa, in
that day, wherein Augustus, becoming enemy of his own glory, and of the Romans
repose, disputed with himself; Whither he should preserve the supreme power,
or whither he should remit it into the disposition of the people. That great
Emperous would with his own hand have taken off the crown that was upon his
head for saken the reins of the Empires descended from the throne whereon he
was seated by so many toylings; And by a retreat more shameful, then Anthonies
flight was from the battle of Actium; Altogether lost the fruits of so many
victories that he gained: It might be said that at that time, love caused
Anthonies flight: But in this encounter can Augustus, be accused of any thing
but imbecility. It might have been said, that his hand was not strong enough to
carry the scepter which it held: and that he only abandoned what he could not
keep, However, Mecanes you had no feeble enimes to fight with at that time:
Augustus, and Agripp^^ that is to say, the two first men of the world, were
they who opposed you: their opinion seemed to be the juster, as appearing the
more generous: And it has been said, that heshould have had more glory by
destroying the Empire, then by establishing of it; And more advantage in
obeying then in commanding. Nevertheless, you was conqueror in that famous
battle: And yet by a most extraordinar chance, the conquered continued crowned:
And you contented your self, with obeying him for whom you preserved the
authority. That obligation which the Emperor, has to you, doubtless is veric
great: But in my opinion, he is more redeuable to you, for the care you took to
reconcile him to the good will of the Muses, then for all the things which you
have done for him. It is truellie, by that mean, that you can give him
immortality, and also give it to your self: It is for that, that Augustus, his
age can call it self happy: And I mantain it to be more glorious for the
Emperor, to be beloved of Virgill, of Horace, of Titus Livius, and of the
famous Mecenas, who is protector of these favorites of Apollo; then if he had
bein feared of all the earth. Fear by rendering him redoubtable to all nations,
doubtless would have made him obeyed while he was alive: But the praises of
Virgil, and of Horace, shall render him venerable to all ages to come.
Certainly Mecenas if all Kings were truly inspired with desire of glory,
they should carefulie consider, how to acquire the affections of them whom the
gods have chosen to distribute it. It is by history and polisie, that they can
obtain the immortalising of their names: And that they may pretend to conquer
after their death both time and fortune.

But betwixt those two famous ways that conducts to eternity, Poesy seems to
have a particular privilege to deifie men: It is wholly Celestial and
divine; The fire that it animates does purify and clarify all them whose
Elogies it makes; And without abandoning truth, it excuses faults, and makes
good qualities seen with all the advantages they have. History demonstrates to
us virtue all naked, and Poesy adornes it with its best ornaments. History is
so scrupulous, that it dares not determine any thing: It gives asimple
narrative of things. but does not judge them: But poesi^ judges Soveraignlie of
all. It praises, it blames, it punishes, it recompenses, it gives Crowns, and
chastisments, it Illustrates or stains the lives of them whom it speaks of: And
to speak all in few words it has equally the advantages of History and
Eloquence: And disposes absolutely of that immortal Glory, which is the
noblest reward of all the Heroes toillings. Further, a Historian looks upon so
manic things, that it is impossible, that the Prince whose reign he describes,
be not as it were enrolled among the number of his subjects. He owes his pen as
well to all the criminalls of these times, as to all the Illustrious: He has
not the liberty of choosing his subject: He must take it as fortune and time
do give it to him: And the prince and his subjected are so strongly mingled
together, that almost He can never been seen, But in Armies, in public places,
and and in a popular multitude. On the contrare, the Poet, separates the Prince
from the people; He choose^ object and subject; He follows his Heroes to the
Tomb: He speaks of noihing but what pleases him, and yet speaks all when he
finds it convient. In fine the historians object is simply verity: And that
of the poet is the glory and immortality of his Heroes. You see I do not much
differ from your thoughts: And that the conversation of Augustus, and Meccnas,
have given me knowledge enough, in every thing that concerns Poesy, to speak
rationallie of it. Wherefore, I think I may say, that Kings should employ all
their care, to make themselves beloved of poets: And that Augustus is more
oblidged to you, for the freindship of of Horace and Virgil, then for your
having constrained him not to denudehimself of the Empire that he possesses
Doubtless Alexander, had reason, to envy Achilles his destiny, because he had
the advantage, of having Homer to proclaim his glory; But Augustus, shall have
non to complain of his age, because the gods have given him for friends,
Virgile, Horace and Mecenas. However I certainly mantain, that he has some
subject to accuse fate, for having compelled him to banish Ovide. Yet you know
to excuse the Emperor, the regrate that he testified; And how much pain he had
to refuse you his pardon. I avouch Mecenas, that I fear the banishing of such a
brave spirit, will one day be a greater reproach to Augustus, then all the
proscriptions of the Triumvirate. These men who can illustrate or denigrate the
whole life of a great Prince, should me thinks be much feared or much beloved:
And whither by generositie or interest they should be in veneration among all
the Kings of the Universe. Conquerours think^ well erecting Trophies of
building Triumphant Arches, causing put their statues in public places,
engraveing magnificent inscriptions upontheir Tombs for imoralising their
glory; All those things fall successivelie into ruin, they destroy
themselves, they bury themselves under ground and in oblivion: And their
memory perishes with the Marble that is elevated. But when a Poet who is
truly worthy of that name, undertakes the protection of a Hero; He is in
condition to defy, envy, time, and fortune. Nothing can any more obscurate
his reputation; His protector refutes all his enemies; And from age to ages, He
renewes his life, and acquires for him a new splendor. The writtings of Virgil
and of Horace, shall not only be glorious for Augustus, by the places which
speak of him; but by every thing that will be admired, in these famous
Authors. They who read with astonishment, and admiration, Virgills divine
Eneides, shall find the lost of his Prince, worthy to be envied by all the
Monarchs of the World; In having meritted the praise and friendship, of the
most excellent man, that all ages have ever produced. The who shall read Horace
his works will find them very advantageous to Augustus, in having meritted the
good will of a man, who could conduct the spirit so agreeably to virtue, by
reprehending of vice: Yet to have had a greater share in his Odes then in his
Satyrs. Every time that I consider the advantages and charms of Poesy, I
become the more passionate of it; And if the decency of my Sex would permit
me, I would say that Didoes chastirie pleases me less in History, then her
weakness and despire does in the Encides. Judge then Mecenas, if they who can
render vice so agreeable; Cannot make virtue appear with all the Ornaments: And
if they who can impose Fables, cannot persuade to truth. You know Mecenas, that
some are bold enough to affirm, that the Scamander is but a rivolet; And that
Troy is of the number of things which never have been. Yet Homer found credit
in all Nations: All the Heroes whom he introduces in his Iliades, or into his
Odyses, have their friends and partisans: And the truest history does not so
much interess his Readers, as the one and the other of these mervailous works.
Let Princes learn then from thence, that they who can so well immortalise their
fancies and imaginations, can with much stronger reason make them live
eternally, when they render themselves worthy of it, both by their merit and
by their Benifices. Doubtless it belongs to them to publish the Victories of
their Princes: But it also belongs to their Princes, to make them reap of the
fruits of their Victories. They who say that the Muses desire not abundance:
And that solitude and poverty are not unprofitable for the production of their
works; Perhaps will loss that opinion when they know that the liberalities of
Augustus and Mecenas, have not hindered Virgill from making of Master pieces;
Horace from acquiring Universal esteem: And Titus-Livius from having merited a
glory which shall not die. In effect it is easily comprehended that they who
do brave things, when they work but for necessity; Will do miracles if they
work only for glory. Such a Noble object will exalt their spirits to the
very heavens: Whereas sadness disturbs the hearts, and makes them rampe upon
the earth. All the watchings they employ, in complaining of fortune; in
accusing the unjustice of their age, in blaming the ignorance of the times
wherein they live: And in publishing the avarice of their Princes; Doubrless
would be employed in more famous subjects. I know very well, that solitude,
fountains, rivers, groves, and woods, have been always looked upon, as places
proper for the composition of fine works: But if all those things do belong to
him who makes them, I do not see that it can be any obstacle to his glory:
And if I be not mistaken, he shall better describe the beauty of his own
praierie, then that of an other; The shades of his own woods shall defend him
better from the scorching heat of the Sun, then these of his Neighbors: The
noise of his fountains shall yield him more agreeable fancies, then those of
the public can give him; a river to which he has some right, will seem more
proper for his making a fine description, then if he looked upon it with an
indifferent eye: And in fine solitude, which is not by constraint, will
certainly afford more agreeable Ideas, then these whereto he is forced. It is
true that shepherds cottages renders pesantry most agreeable: But painters when
they are skillful, do always place them a far of; So then to do things
according to reason, ^oets must never see a roof of straw, but in their
journeys, or from the windows of their Palaces. For it is not to be imagined,
that a man who passes all his life time incemmodiouslie, in chagrine and
solitude; Can speak of abundance which he has not, of Magnificence which he
sees not, of the Court which he never frequents, of Kings whom he knows not but
only by their names, of war which he has not seen but in books, and of a
great manic other things which are strange and new to him, if it be true that
he is poor and solitary? Believe me Mecenas, Poets in such encounters are like
painters, who reprefent nothing perfectly but what they see. Great Princes
then must always have them to be witnesses of their actions, if they would
have them leave tablets of them to posterity. For it is not to be thought,
that they to whom just subject of complaint is given, can elegantlie praise
them whom they do secretly accuse in their heart? It is not to be thought I
say, that they who praise for gain, do praise so arduouslie as they who praise
for thanks? No Mecenas, that cannot possibly be so. Further, as dreams are
ordinarlie formed by the thoughts of the day, so these agreeable
transportations which Poesy gives to them who meddle with it, when they are
happy; Losses all their brightness by the Authors chagrine, when he is not,
but always laments his evil fortune. He would do well to strive to be divided
from himself, for he is seen by all; He carries his discontent even into the
hearts of the Heroes, whose lives he writs; And does not writ one verse which
his heart does not secretly diffavow. In fine, Mecenas, I am persuaded that a
rich Poet, lodged in a statly palace will with more ease make apicture of
poverty and solitude; Then a poor lodged in a cottage, shall make of the
magnificence of the Court, of the virtues of Kings, of policy, and all those
other things, which are not perfectly learned, but in the society of men and
in abundance. There is this difference between the rich and the poor, that the
one are solitary when they please, that they have rocks and caves when they
will: And the others cannot have a palace, and that their solitude is forced.
And moreover, who can comprehend? That Poesy which is the Noblest effort of
imagination, may not some way need beautiful objects, either to excit, to
divert, or to recreat it? They who have assigned woods and rocks to the Muses,
have doubtless been of his opinion, yet without making their consideration
destroy mine. They have spoken of forests and rivers, because these universal
beauties are in the power of all the World: But that does not hinder, that
these same Muses who search the woods, may not walk in a cultivated Garden. Art
does not spoill Nature, it perfectionats it: And trees regularlie planted,
hinder not if I be not deceived, the Poets from working under their Ombrages
with pleasure and with glory. It is true, Mecenas, that these nine famous
Sisters, from whom our Muses draw their Origin, had no habitation as is said,
but woods and mountains, and did not devert themselves but beside fountains:
Yet these woods, these mountains, and these fountains, belongs to them:
Parnassus is of their dominion: The waters of Parmessa are also theirs; And
Apollo nor the Muses, borrow nothing of other divinity. After all Mecenas, it
is for the Grandour of Princes, not only to know how to conquer their enemies
in war, not only to know how to reign dureing peace; Not only to make
themselves to be feared of their Neighbouts; Not only to make themselves be
beloved of their subjects; But also to make themselves surpass all other men in
liberality. They must give like Masters of the Universe; They must when they
make presents, look rather to themselves, then regard others; And proportionat
their gifts to their own Grandour only. They who receive go halfes with
profit, but ordinarlie they have no share in glory. It belongs wholly to the
giver: And to speak rationallie, the most glorious conquests that Kings can
make, are these which they make by liberality. In war, success is always
dubious: There is no battle so advantageous in its beginning, whose end may not
be fatal: But here we are always assured of Victory: A liberal Prince does
equally make to himself, slaves, subjects, and friends of them to whom he
gives: And this is the only way whereby he can merit the rank of the Gods. But
among all men, Princes should choose for the principal object of their
liberality, these famous dispensatores of glory, yet with this difference,
that what is pure liberality at other occasions, is gratitude in this? For
what is not due to them who give immortality. They have been formerlie,
stupide, ignorant and covetous Princes, who have let the Muses languish in
poverty, without giving a just subject of astonishment. But if Augustus having
such insights as he has, in all brave Sciences; Loving fine works at the rate
he does; Making Poesy his divertisement; Being a lover of glory, as he has
always made appear; And making of things himself, which may place him in the
rank of the most Ilustrious Authors: I say, if Augustus having all these
advantages, do give but meanly, to the professors of good learning, he shall
be dishonored by it, and it should be almost less shameful for him, to be both
stupide, ignorant, and avaritious, then to be knowing and not to be liberal.
But thanks to the Gods, his inclinations and your counsels, have well hindered
that blemish from poluting one of the special passages of his life: And to
know if Augustus has known the price of all brave Sciences, we need but
consider the rewards he gave to them who practiced them. But among all them who
are careful of this mervaillous Art, which the Gods have taught to men, it
must be avouched that they whose spirits are sublime enough, for being capable
to undertake a Heroic Poem, deserve the first rank near Kings: And doubtless
it is principally of them, that they should have a particular esteem. For of
all the various species of Poesy which we admire, this work is the greatest,
the most Illustrious, the most Difficile, the most Glorious, both for him that
makes it, and for the Heroes whom he chooses. To speak rationalie, and Epique
Poem, contains wholly in it self, all others beauties, and something more.
They who make Elogies, do eternise rather their mistrises, their passions, and
their languishings, then the merit of their Princes: We see but short tablets
in Odes, wherein the most part of things are not distinguished: One single
action is sometimes too ample a subject for that work: And its limits, in fine,
are too much contracted to boast of its having conquered time and fortune.
Eglogues can do no more, then make posterite imagine, that the reign was
fortunate, dureing which the Muses might employ themselves, to make shepherds
speak, and not in complaining of theviolence of their Kings.

The Satyrs, these bold painters, wherein all the world find their picturs;
Cannot be glorious for Princes, but when their images are not found in them:
And to speak more clearlie, their silence is the greatest glory that they can
give, Epigrames for the most part, are but sparkles of diamonds, whose
brightness though splendid, cannot furbish the life of a great prince: They are
a simple pastime of the spiritr and of the imagination: which at most, cannot
preserve but the glory of him, who has fortunatlie acquitted himself of that
sort of work; A Tragedy, which is certainly one of the noblest employments of
the Muses, although it do bragg of teaching by its diverting, and though it
pass among the most learned, for the Master-peice of this art; Yet should not
be so considerable to a Prince, as a heroic poem. He who makes Tragedies,
works more for himself then for his King: He makes tablets, but his Master can
pretend to have no other glory in his work, but that, of having known all the
beauty, of preserving these rare paintings with care, and in buying of them
magnificentlie. It is not so with ane Epique Poem: It is truly it, that
deifies Princes, for whom they are composed; all their virtues appear
splendidlie there; Their conquests are there painted forth in their finest
luster: Their faults if they have any are skill sullie minced; fortune,
victory, and fame are always of their party; They have no enemies in it
whom they excel not; They are happy, in war, and in love; Their splendor,
contrary to custom, returns from them to the Origin of their race; And
whereas children did use to dervie their glory from that of their
predecessors; on the contrary, here the predecessors, extract their greatest
advantages from the virtues of their Children.

The goodness of Augustus, caused Virgil, eterrnise the piety of Aeneas: The
conquests which he made, shall make these of his fore fathers live eternally:
It is for love to him, that this great Poet has conducted that Illustrious
Trojan, even upon the throne: And to speak true lie, it is he who has saved him
from the conflagrations of Troy, with his father, and his domestic gods:
Because without him, doubtless, He should have continued buried under these
mighty ruins: At least posterity should no more have heard his valor spoken
of, then if he had never been.

It belongs then to Princes, to make a dilligent scruting through all their
provinces, after them who are capable of such a noble occupation: To the end
that having found them, they may b^ their benefits oblidge them, to undertake
so great a work.

They who make Hector Achilles, and Agamemnont speak in a Tragedy, with the
same spirit that Homer has given them, doubtless are capable of acomplishing
so long ane enterprise with glory, if they be oblidg ed to it by allurements.

But they not to engadge themselves, in so long a course, without being assured
to find a prise at the end of the Careere.

They who run at the Olimpique games, find Crowneat the end of the list:
wherefore then would any des fire, a man to bestow his pains, his watchings,
Hi fastings, and all his life for a poem, without pretending to any other
advantage by it, but only the glory of having made it. No, Mecenas, it would
not be just, and I say again, that it belongs to a prince to make choice of
him, whom he would have to praise his victories; That it belongs to this to
make that happy, if he desire that he should render him immortal: And in fine
that it belongs to him, to do, what Augustus, and Mecenas, have done for the
incomparable Virgil, You see (as I think I have already said to you) that I
differr not from your sentiments, and that the conversation that I have had
with Augustus, and you, has made meknowing enough in poesy, to dare speak to
you

But nevertheless if you are surprised at it, you will easily find the reason
of it, if you consider, that the Emperors, glory wasing itatione.

It was for it, that I have examined all these things: And it is for it, that I
conjuere you, to continue to en^ tertain him in so brave ane inclination.

Pursue then Mecenas, such a noble design: Enrich all the Muses with Augustus
his treasures: In imitation of the gods, give them gold for incence: And know,
that if you cause give them Kingdoms, they shall again give you more.

Yes Mecenas, you shall reign over the most Illustrious of all ages: And if
conjectures deceive me not, your name shall be so venerable to posterity,
principally among the learned; That all they who render themselves their
protectors, shall esteem it ane honor to bear it.

They shall be called the Mecenaes of these times: And from age to age, that
glory renewing it self every day, your name shall be in the memory, and in
the mouths of all men, so long as the sun shall give light to the World.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
I Know not what effect this Harrange will have among the Grandes, of this age:
But I very well know, that it shall have a most advantageous, one if their
Magnificence do but come near to that of Augustus, and Mecenas, neither the
one nor the other of these great men needed to have their liberality excited:
Nor have they been spoken of, but thereby to speak to others; And the literal
sense is but the pretext of the Allegorik.

CLOELIA TO PORSENNA THE SEVENTENTH HARRANGUE!

ARGUMENT.
When the Romans had made peace with Porsenna, they sent their Daughters to
him in hostage, for assurance of their treaty. But when they were come to that
Princes Camp, one among them named Cloelia, judgeing that their chasti^ie Was
not secure, among so manic wariours, exhorted her Campanions to deliver
themselves from so just an apprehension, and that they would rather expose
their lives then their honor. She gained them all to be of her opinion and by
a prodigious hardiness, they did undertake to cross the Tyber by swiming. Their
resolution was as fortunate as great, they all passed without any misfortune,
under the conduct of that courageous Maid, and returned to Rome. There Parents
did trualie admire such brave temerity, but the Roman severity, that would not
endure the public faith to be violated, made them be sent back to the King,
that thereby he might punish their perfidie, if he had a mind to it. When they
were before him, he asked them who had been the first among them, that proposed
so dangerous an enterprise: But they all imagining that he only asked but for
to punish her, none of them would answer. Then this Generous Maid, took upon
her the discourse, and almost spoke to him these words.

CLOELIA TO PORSENNA.
THe action that I have done, having too noble a cause not to be Glorious, the
silence of mycompanions is injuriousto me, though their intention be innocent.
I would have hoped Porsenna, that they should have Acknowledged me for their
liberatrix: And that they should have published aloud before you, that it was
under my conduct, and by my counsels, that they went out of your Camp,: But
since they put me to the necessity of praiseing my self because they fear you
will male-treat me; I shall freely tell you, that it was I who did withdraw
them from your hands. Do not think that what hindered them to name me, is a
remorse of what they have done. No, they do not doubt my enterprise having been
just? But they doubt will be generous enough to reverence virtue in your very
enemies. For me who am incapable of fearing any thing, if it be not the loss
of my honor, I tell you again, that it was by my counsels, by my care, and
under my conduct, that these generous Romans resolved to go out of your power;
And abandone themselves to the impetuousness of the water to follow me;

And courageously expose their lives, to deliver themselves from the fear of
suffering some treatment unworthy of their virtue. Why! Illustrious Romans,
(said I to them, to encourage them to cast themselves in the river, as I did
propose to them) can you put your lives in the balance with your honor: And in
fear of losing the one or the other, can you have any trouble in choosing? No,
no (pursued I) your are Romans, and my companions: And consequently too
Generous, not to love better to put your selves in hazard of dying gloriously
then of living with infamy.

Who did ever hear it said (insisted I) that Virgins were in good repute in a
Camp, where shame and modesty are not to be found? We are in ane army,
continued I (which I hope your Majestre will pardon me for speaking so) whose
General, is Protector, of the Tarquines: It is for them that King Porsenna,
has undertaken the war: And by what means then do you think to find a place
of fastie with a Prince, where Lucretias, ravisher has found a refuge and a
defender? No, my companions, flatter not your selves: If the blood of that
chaste unfortunate had not power to hinder a Prince from opposing the revenge
that the Romans, were taking? Our tears will never prevail with him to revenge
us of them who would abuse us.

It may be you will say to me, that we were given to him in hostage, and that
the public faith is engadged to him by our persons: But know my companions,
that whatsoever is done for honor, cannot but be glorious.

We will not break the peace; we will not cheat Porsenna; we will only shun
shame and infamy, or die with the same glory wherein we lived.

Let us go then, Illustrious Romans, so long as we have liberty.

Heat the noise, that the Soldiers make in their camp, and be a feared of
their insolence.

They are altogether soldiers, strangers, our enemies and the defenders of the
Tarquins Consider in fine my companions, that in the place where you are, you
may lose your honor: But in that wherein I will conduct you, you can lose but
your life.

Behold, Porsenna, a part of the reasons I used to persuade these Generous
Virgins to follow me; And I shall say for their glory and for that of my
country, that it was easy for me to persuade them to my inclinations. I was
not contradicted in my opinion: They looked death in the face with constancy,
and quitted the banks of the river with joy, though according to all liklie
hood, they almost saw their death assured. But because our intentions were most
innocent, the Gods did take care of conducting us; They assisted our feeblness,
they sustained us upon the waters, and happily brought us to the other side.
Yet we did not find there all the repose that we expected: For that austere
virtue, which all the Romans do profess, made our Relations have no joy at our
return: They admired our resolution, they have also praised our design: But to
satisfy the public faith that they had engadged to you, they would have us
brought back to your Camp: And for that effect, they have given us a convoy to
conduct us hither, See Porsenna, by this adventure, what the Roman Virgins are,
who loved better to hazard their life, and break their word, then expose their
honor: And again see, what the Roman men are, who love better to expose the
lives and honor of their Daughters, then to break their word. Yes, Porsenna,
these two actions are equally praise worthy: And to be just at such a time,
we render to our parents the same honors which they gave us. They have praised
our flight, though they have not foreborn to remit us into your hands: And we
also admire their virtue, though it deprives us of that liberty which we had
acquired to our selves. The design of preserving our honor, caused our flight:
And that of not lofting their reputation has caused out return. Perhaps you
will say to me, that it will be hard to comprehend how one and the same action
can be both worthy of praise and of blame; And in fine that our return is an
infallible sign, that our flight was criminal. No, Porsenna, the business
should not be so considered: It must be better examined, to judge of it
equitablie. And I am very certain, that if it be regarded with an uninteressed
eye, it will be found that our flight was glorious to us, and that our return
is so to our parents, I avouch that in some manner, we seem to have broken the
public faith: But before we be convinced of that fault, I must be permitted to
defend our cause. Doubtless it cannot be denied that honor should be the rule
of all the actions of men: It is for it that life is exposed in war! It is for
it that sometimes all the sentiments of Nature are renounced: It is for it that
men do voluntarlie devout themselves to the safety of their country: It is for
it that the public faith is exactlie kept; And in fine, it is for it that
all tings ought to be done. Wherefore, let none wonder, if for preserving our
honor we have exposed our lives, and broken the public faith. For seeing it
is not kept but only for honor, it was permitted to us to violate it;
Because we could not keep it, but by exposing our selves to infamy. Further,
since our Sex is deprived of all public charge, as to our particular we had
promised nothing: And we thought, that for the iuterest of Rome, we ought to
have gone out of your camp, because if misfortune had happened, to us it might
have suffered an ^utrage in our persons. Its glory then finding it self
^^gadged with ours, we believed that it was just, to ^^^pose our lives for
preserving both the one and the ^^^^er: And doubtless we shall do the same
thing, if (...) same occasion does offer. Lucretias misfortune (...) but too
much taught us to prevent such disasters; (...) I can assure you, that if we
had death in our option, (...) should at least die innocent. Further, there is
(...) from which an exception cannot be made: (...) which is doubtless
baseness, is sometimes (...), and I am assured that no body blames that which
(...) generous Mutius told, when seeing his hand (...), with a prodigious
constancy, he assured you that (...) were three hundred in our camp who
designed to (...) you, though effectivelie it was only he. That (...)
hardiness that made Horatius Cocles (...), to stand himself alone unmovable
against all (...), and oblidged him at last to cast himself all (...) as he was
in the Tyber, shall not be put in the number of ridiculous temerities. The
firm resolution of Brutus, himself to see his children die, because they were
Traitors to their country, shall rather pass for the zeal of a good Citizen,
then for the inclination of an un-naturall Father. Wherefore, why would any
that the interest of honor and of the public, justifying Mun^tius his lie,
Cocles his temeritie, and the insensibilitie of Brutus, should not also
justify the flight of Cloelia and of her companions; Since they had no other
object, but the preservation of their honor, and that of their country? If
Mutius did courageously burn his hand; If Cocles be entitlie devoted to the
public safitie; If Brutus gave the blood of his children, for these two things
only; We have also exposed our lives for the same cause, and may consequently
pretend to the same glory. Why, Porsenna, Lucretia has merited an immortal
reputation, for having killed herself after her crime, and are we laughed at as
in famous, for having exposed our lives, to the end that we might die innocent?
No, no, it is impossible that it should be so: Posterity will be more just:
And I do verily believe, that if you examine your thoughts exactlie, you will
find that they do not condemn us. We have never seen that the gods who are so
jealous of their authority, have caused Thunder fall upon the Victimes, which
escape from the Altars: And wherefore them Porsenna, would you unworthilie
treat Virgins, who having seen themselves abandoned of their guards, or to
speak better their enemies; Went in quest of saftie, at the expense of their
lives? Perhaps it will be said to me, that it seems by my reasons, that we had
no wrong done to us: But if it be so, it seems likewaies that our parents had
no reason to send us back. yet this consequence is not well grounded: And if I
be not mistaken, I shall destroy it in few words. I have already told you,
that honor caused our flight, and that this same honor has caused our return:
For to speak rationallie, it was our Fathers who engadged their words to your;
It was they who gave us in pledge, it was they who treated with you; It was
they who consented to the articles of peace; And it is also they, who should
exactlie perform all that they promised to you, thereby to oblidge you to do
the same thing, The public faith engadges them to it: the public interest
desires it; Their countries honor requires it; Their own in particular oblidges
them to it. and in fine nothing can exempt them from it. For they very well
know that these same Virgins, who have despised the impetuositie of the Tyber,
only through fear of receiving an abuse; Will again contemn their lives,
rather then do any thing unworthie of Roman virtue; And in that manner shall
they keep their word, without hazarding their honor or that of their country.
See, Porsenna, what our Parents opinions are, and also what ours are: It
belongs now to you, to consider if you will treat us like fugitives, like
enemies or like Romans. Yet I hope that you will take the juster and most
advantageous party. But know, that if by violating the laws of men, you
should treat us unworthilie, and break the peace that you have made, your
designs shall advance no further then they have done. That which Mutius and
Cocles did undertake against you a thousand Romans shall yet attempt. They are
all born for great actions; All of them have an obstinat virtue, that blushes
at nothing: Despair does nothing, but corroborate their courage; Fear of death
is unknown to them, They, endeavor to live with glory and not to live long;
Particular interest can do nothing in their spirits; They do every thing for
honor, and do never any thing that can blast it. See Porsenna, what the Romans
are: See what sentiments they have given to us: And see in fine, that which
has both caused our flight and our return. it is true that at first flight, I
had great repugnancie to return under the power of a Prince, whom til then I
had not considered, but as the protector of the Tarquins, and as the enemy of
Rome: But coming to ponder the matter with a more tranquil spirit; That last
quality did begin to give mea better opinion of you. Yes Porsenna, I found that
you must doubtless have a great and bold spirit, in having attempted to make
war with Rome: And consequently I believed. that if you had not been worthy
of the rank that you keep, the Romans would not have made peace with you, and
would not have received you into their Aliance. So that after I had persuaded
my companions to go out of your Camp; I have likewares persuaded them to return
^cit. Let us go (said I to them) let us go, and satis fie the public faith,
which our parents have engadged: Let us go and confirm the peace that they
have made; And let us no more look upon Porsenna, as the protector of the
Tarquins, but as their greatest enemy, because he has abandoned them. Let us
believe my companions, that if this Prince had no virtue, the Romans would not
have remitted us in his power. And moreover if it should come to pass that he
have not so much as he ought, to treat us as he should; We shall always have
enough, to have our recourse to death, rather then preserve a life unworthie of
what we are. let us go then my companions, let us go and ask from that Prince,
the recompense of our flight: He has been here a long enough time, within the
territories of Rome, to have learned, that virtue should be loved and rewarded,
in his very enemies: he has freely pardoned Mutius, who attempted his life;
Yet it will be easier for him to forget our flight, and grant us the favor, of
sending us back to our parents. It belongs to you now Porsenna, to tell me if I
have had reason to persuade these generous Virgins to trust themselves to your
goodness; For me, if I were not concerned in the thing, I would counsel you to
use it thus. For it is not only glorious to you, to have been enemy of the
Romans, and to be at present their Allay: But it shall also be more to you, if
you undertake to dispute virtue with them. That is the thing wherein it will be
brave to outdoe them: For that sort of war, has this particular privilege,
that the conquered as well as the Victorious, shall always acquire abundance
of glory. The sole desire of surmounting at such occasions, is more
advantageous, then the gaining of a battle. undertake then Porsenna this famous
combat, trust your self absolutl; to the Romans faith, and send us back to our
parents.

Methinks they have kept their word to you in a Generous enough manner, not
to permit you to question it: Yet that does not hinder, But you shall do a
brave action, if you restore us to liberty. But to give liberty to Roman
Virgins, and to Virgins, who can despise death to shun infamy, is to give them
more then Kingdoms, more then Empires, and more then life. That place of
History, shall be so advantageous to you, that your reign shall have nothing
more brave^ You shall gain the hearts of all the Romans; And by this means, you
shall have fewer hostages in your Camp, but you shall have more intelligence in
Rome. We do not pray to the Gods here, but only for our country: But in Rome we
shall daily offer them vows, for your glory. You shall be our protector, and
without our having been slaves, we shall not forbear to consider you with the
same sentiments, as if you had broken our chains, and as if you had relieved us
from servitude. Resnse not Porsenna, the glorious title of our Liberator,
because we earnstlie desire to give it you. Perhaps you will say to me, that we
abused you by our flight, because we would not have fled, but for having feared
you, and because we looked upon you as a Prince cruel, barbarous and Tirranick:
But remember Porsenna that the virtue of Women should be scrupulous and timide,
They should almost look upon all People, as if they were their enemies: And
because by custom arms are forbidden to them, fear must serve in stead of
prudence: And it was more worthy for them to flee, or to have died a little
too soon, then to have lingered, or to have lived a little too long. Further,
we had evil thoughts of you, because we did not know you, but by the name of
the Protector of Tirranie, and I declare to you presently, that I do not yet
know who you are: Speak then Porsenna, that I may thereby know you: Remember
that you are within the fight of Rome, that you have all the Romans for your
spectators; that you are to speak to Virgins, who can always live or die with
glory; That same attends our arrest to publish it over all the Earth; That the
Gods who see you, do already hold Crowns to put upon your head, if you can
surpass your resentment; And overcome the virtue of our Fathers and ours, by
trusting to them, and by granting us our liberty.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THe Sublime Virtue of that Generous Virgin made him an Illustrious slave,
though ^^ was Crowned. Porsenna was ravished ^^ her; He ordained infinite
praises to Cloelia He rendered unto her, her liberty, and that of her
companions; And to signalise the Grandeure o^ her action, he made a present of
a Cataphractarie horse which was the recompense of a Valiant man, who ha^ done
brave actions in the wars: As if he would have said, that her action equalled
that of the most generou^ In sine, he sent them all back to their parents: And
al^^ permitted Cloelia, to choose among all the other hostag^^ them whom she
pleased to deliever. This Illustrious P^^ son made choice of all the young
children, as being most (...) posed: And in that manner returned to Rome, (...)
the Allegress and Magnisicence of a Triumph. She (...) there received with a
joy equal to what she had: A^^ the Roman austeritie yielded at that time to
the rese^^ments of Nature and Reason: They erected for her, (...) public
market place, a statue on horse back, thater^^ equauie, her virtue, her
boldness, and the generositie Porsenna.

OCTAVIA TO AUGUSTUS THE EIGHTEENTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
AFairs being allwaies in agitations betwixt Augustus, and Mark Anthony, and
both the one and the other being making preparations to renew a war; The first
would have oblidged his sister Octavia, to depart from the house of a housband,
by whom she had been unworthily used.

But this verteous wife, who could not approve of that counsel, did with all
her strength oppose it: And spoke in these terms to that Illustrious and Dear
Brother.

OCTAVIA TO AUGUSTUS
I Pray you my Lord, command me not to quit Anthonies house: And force me not
to the necessity of disobeying you. the vertuethat Iprofesse, will not permit
me to commit such a fault; And the excess of the frindship that you have for
me, doubtless is that which carries you on to give me this counsel, It is true
that Anthony, robbs me of his heart, and of his affection, to give both the
one and the other to Cleopatra: But my Lord, will it be convenient that if the
Love of that Queen has caused Anthony, commit a fault, that Octavias,
jealousy should carry you to do ane other! No it will not be just: Consider
then if you please, the public interest, and not mine, and think also, that it
will be equally disgraceful to Caesar, and to Anthony, to begin a war, and to
destroy the Empire, for the Love of on woman and for the jealousy of ane
other. But nevertheless if you cannot be equally blamed for it, I dare say,
that you shall be more justly accused then Anthony; Because he is no more in
condition either to hear, or understand reason: And yours cannot be disturbed
but only in consideration of me. The love of Cleopatra, has in such manner
obscured his judgment, that he is blind to his own interests: He has not
considered that he has done me ane injury, when he refused the presents that I
made to him: And that in stead of letting me see him, he is returned into
Alexandria. I say he has not dessigned to offend Octavia, but to please
Cleopatra. He has feared that the sight of me would give him other
inclinations; And doubtless he knows that he has suficiently loved me already,
not to be able to endure my presence without confusion and repentance. In fine
my Lord, his imbecility, and his blindness must be p^^^ed, and he not imitated
in his fault. The passion that ^am (...) ^o follow, is yet more dangerous, then
that which possesses Anthony; And if it should (...) from my he^^t into yours,
doubtless you shall Act with more violence, and with more unjustice then it
does: Because it will certainly communicate to you, a part of that fury, that
does allwaies accompany it. The injury that I have receved, requires not the
blood of the Romans, to blot it out: That will not be the way, of restoring
Anthonies, affection to me, to declare war aginst him for my sake: On the
conrtare, it will be ane authorizing his fault and unconstancie; Because it is
certain, that I should merit the treatment I receve, if for banishing of me
from his heart, I should banish me from his house, and should join with his
enemies party. I know that I am a Roman, and that I have the honor of being
your sister, but I also know, that I am Anthonies wife; That his interests
ought to be mine; And that though He has not for me, all the affection that He
is oblidged to have; My own virtue does not permit me to despense with that
which I owe to him: And if I use it any other way, it will be the acknowledging
of Clopatra, for Anthonys lawful wife, and a voluntary yielding a quality to
her, which she cannot take from me. Let me then conceal my grief and tears in
the house of my husband: My Lord, let me then absconde my affliction, and my
resentment: And if it be true, that my interests are dear to you, as you have
always testified to me; Assist me in excuseing Anthony, to the Senate. Tell
that this Love is too violent, to last long time: And that as the great Jnlius
Caesar, had strength enough to dissipate the charms of that fair Egyptian which
had surprised him: Anthony, having the same feeblnesse, will at last have
courage enough to break that enchantment as well as he. But in fine, my Lord,
see that that Love be not the beginning of war: Remember that glorious day
wherein my tears made the arms fall from the hands of the two greatest
Emperors that ever was. you was then environed with your Legions; your army
was all in a readynesse to fight; The three hundred ships which Anthony led,
were in sight of your troops: Their was then to be seen in both parties, that
fervor, which the sight of enemies gives in such encounters; Desire of
victory was in the hearts of all the soldiers: They had already considered
the richness of the booty; Eagles were seen against ^agles; Romans agitnst
Romans; Citizens against Gitizens; Friends against friends: Relationes against
relations: And in fine to say all, the battle of Pharsalta, did make nothing
more terrible to the sight, then what my eyes saw at that time. However though
Anthony, appeared the agressor, because he came to attaque you? My tears, my
reasons, and my prayers surpassed your resentment. You embraced Anthony, in
stead of fighting of him: You receved him as the husband of your sister, and
not as your enemy: And these two puissante armies, which you had raised to
destroy your selves served but to give you reciprocal marks of a perfect
intelligence. For you have not forgot, that Anthony, gave you a hundred
Galies, and twenty Brigantines: Also that you gave him two Legions: And
besides that, you granted also to me for him a thousand of your best soldiers.
Think you, my Lord, that that first victory, does not make me hope for a
second. You love me as much to day, as you Loved me at that time? The sight of
your enemies does not acerberate your resentment: You have no Legions about
you, who presle you to give them a new subject to their courage: You are alone,
you are unarmed, I am unfortunate and afflicted, and my tears, my reasones, and
my prayers, should also be more powerful with you, then they were that day,
because there is nothing in agitation but my interest.

Further, it is casier to hinder ones self from taking up of arms, then to
quit them: And it should have been then more difficult for you, to have made
peace with Anthony, then it can be to you now to begin a war: It is
Anthonies, passion, and not his person that must be fought against; And for
that effect, I ought to endure his unconstancy without complaining, I ought to
preserve my heart for him, though he robbes me of his; I ought to have
compassion of his weakness; I ought to have respect for him, though he despises
me; I ought to dwell in his house, ^o long as he does me the favor, to suffer
me there; And to say all, I ought to opposeyou, every time that you would
oblidge me to doethings which might be dishonorable to me. If Anthony, would
desire to carry me on to a design of hurting you I should oppose him, as I do
oppose you: And with the same arms wherewith I fight you now, would I fight
his unjustice and his obstinacy. Yes my Lord I shall always be Cesars sister,
and Anthonies wife: And let fortune do what it will, I shall never do any
thing unworthie of these two glorious qualities. pardon me then, if I tell you
boldly, that I will not go out of my Husbands house, unless he command me; And
if it should also come to pass, that Cleopatras Love, do even carry him to
such ane irregularity, as to ordain me to quit it: I shall abandon it with
shedding as few tears as is possible for me, for fear that the compassion that
will be had for me, do not augment the hatred that will be had to him. Behold
my Lord what Octavias thoughts are and what they shall always be. And
moreover, to speak rationallie, Anthony, is not ane ordinary man: The great
qualities: which are in him, merits the excuse of his imbecility: And the
brave actiones which he has donein the wars should doubtless obtain from the
equity of all men, some indulgence for these which love makes him do. The
affection that he always had for the great Julius Caesar, should oblidge you
not condemn him slightlie: Because being his sone by adoption, and his lawful
successor, me thinks you should be heir to his inclinationes and to his
friends, as well as to his riches. When Anthony, fought for Julius Cesoer, He
fought for you, you ought to reward him for all that he did for him: For in
sine, of all Cesares debts, the most just and most glorious to pa^, are
doubtless the good offices which his friends have rendered to him. Remember
what Anthony, did for that Excellent man: it was he who did generouslie oppose
Pompeyes faction, when it would have had Caesar lay down his arms, and his
enemy not lay down his: He spoke zealouslie at that time, and feared not the
exposing of himself, to receve an outrage; as in effect he was unworth^lie
used, in consideration of that: And was constrained to disguise himself like a
slave, to go and seek a refuge, in the Camp of him whom he had protected. But
what He did at that time, He did also at a hundred others as important; He
has repayed with his blood, and with his person, the friendship that Caesar did
bear to him. He was seen several times to rallie his troops, bring them back
to the battle, and render them victorious, when they were almost ready to be
conquered. He was seen at the battle of Pharsalia, command the right wing of
Cesars army fight for glolrie, and expose his life, to secure in his hands,
that sovereign Power, which at last has come to yours. Further, if he fought
for Caesar, dureing his life, he has also caused Caesar conquer after his death:
His eloquence did that, which the valor of any other had not power to do:
For you are not ignorant, that without that fervent zeal that made him speak,
the Roman people dared not to testify, how near the blood of Caesar did touch
them. They would have bein contented with shedding of tears, and would not have
set fire to the houses of his murderers. You see then my Lord, in what manner
he erected the first stepp, by which you obtained the power that you have? But
if after what he has done for Caesar, it be permitted to put in account, what
he has done for the common cause, both against Cassjus, and against Brutus;
You will find that he was always their conqueror: And that in some encounters
wherein you was not in condition to fight he was as advantageous to you, as he
was to your friends: Because that without his valor, they should have
doubtless gained a victory, which perhaps would have put them in condition of
not being any more conquered. I well know my Lord, that since that you have
not still being equally well together: And that this noble jealousy that
inseparably follows them, who are lovers of glory, and who aspyre at great
things, has altered your freindship: But if I be not mistaken, this kind of
hatred, should not so much as reach the person: Ane enemy must be excelled in
grandour of courage and in generositie: He must be opposed, if he attempts to
destroy us: But for particular causes the public repose must never be
troubled: nor for every flight reason, should a war be begun, whose success
is allwaies dubious. Hatred is a pass on for particulars: And if it be
permitted to persons who have the supreme power to have it, it should be a
hatred of vice, of slaverie, and of infamy; Other ways if they fight not
against that passion, and if they let it bear sway with them, they shall
doubtless be capable of all sort of unjustice. For revenging their own
injuries, they will make no difficulty to violate the laws of men, to forget
natural equity, to infringe the justest Laws, to destroy their country, and
to despise the power of the gods. Behold, my Lord the disorders that hatred may
cause sometimes in the most steaddie mind; And to hinder you from falling in
the like misfortune consider a little what ane excess of love makes the
unfortunat Anthony do. Think you my Lord, that ^atred can give you juster
sentiments? And that jealousy, if I were capable of it, permitts me to act
with less violence? No my Lord, these three passiones being put in opposition
to one another, as they will be in this encounter, will be capable of
destroying the whole earth. Do not engadge your self then, in such a perverse
design; but how ever if you will revenge your self of Anthony, abandone him
to his own judgment, and to the charms of Cleopatra. Let him preserve that
fair conquest in repose: And do not fear that he will attempt to oppose yours,
if you let him enjoy that peaceably. But my Lord consider if you do jrritate
him, he may parhaps give you much trouble: Anthonies first valor is not dead,
it is but benumed: Perhaps it may at last rouse it self with fury: And without
quitting the passion, that reigns in his soul, he may oppose your designs,
with all the fervor that man can have, who fights to defend himself, to
revenge himself. for his own glory, and to preserve his Mistress. Make not
then a redoubtable enemy of ane unfortunat friend: I conjure you never to let
me see you undertake a war, wherein it will not be permitted me, to have the
power of wishing you to gain the victory. Consider I pray you in what
condition my soul will find it self, if I should again see you ready to come to
shedding of blood. But with this cruel difference from the first that that was
but for love to you, and that this will be for love of me. No, No, revenge not
the injury that is done to me, and seek not a remedy worse then the desease.
The sole thought of seeing my brother and my husband, ready to give death to
each other for my sake, transports me with horror; I almost know no more what I
say: And in so greata trouble I am ready to give my blood and my life, to
preserve yours and that of Anthonies: But since you would naither accept of my
blood nor of my life, see my tears with with compassion; At least hear my
prayers and my sighs; And since by your command, I am Anthonies wife: Do not
command in^e to quit his house, as that of my enemy. Consider I am mother of
Anthonies, children: And that in that quality I should natther forsake them nor
make them go out of their fathers house. That will be almost to say, that they
are not legittimat successors if ^^ should cause them depart; And it will be
also my giving of arms to destroy my self, to all Anthonies flatterers, and to
Cleopatras ^^aves. But I am very well assured not to use it so; my patience
shall la^^ ^onger then Anthonies love: And let the contempt he has of me go to
what height it can, my virtue shall yet go further. yes my Lord, though his
affection should never return to me; And though he should live and die in
Cliopatras arms? I shall shed tears for his death: His memory shall be dear
to me: The children of Fulvia and also of Cleopatra, shonld become mine; I will
take care of their education, and of their fortune: And so long as Octavia
shall be alive, she shall never forbear to give new proofs of her constancy.
Since I am of a Sex to whom valor is forbidden, at least patience may be
permitted me, and that that virtue may serve me for courage. There is sometimes
as much generosity, in knowing how to endure misfortunes, as in knowing how to
fight enemies: Do not you then oppose the victory, that I will have of my
self: And to make it more glorious, let me surmount you as well as my self. Do
not expose your self to be conquer ed by Anthonies power, and let your self be
overcome by Octavia. But because I do not see in your eyes, that you are yet
in condition of yielding your self, to my prayers and tears; Suffer me my
Lord, to go and wait for your resolution in my husbands house, becauseit is
the only place wherein I can dwelwith honor, so long as Anthony permitts me.
However I do assure you, that whereas I do make no vows against Anthony,
while I Im in your palace; I shall make none against Caesar, when I am in the
house of Anthony.

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THis fair and Virtuous person obtained from the freindship of Augustus, all
that she asked: And he permitted her to live in her husbands house, so long as
she could conveniently Yet she was not there long: For Anthony, was so unjust
to her, and so complacent to Cleopatra, that he sent her a command to go out
of it: She did it with the same modesty that she had always testified: And
for all the disgraces that burried after this unfortunate, both dureing her
life and after his death; she was ever what till then she was I would say
afamous and rare example of conjugal friend ship.

AGRIPINA TO THE ROMAN PEOPLE, THE NINTEENTH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
After the death of Germanicus, Agrippina his wife carried his Ashes back to
Rome, to put them in the to mb of Augustus. All the people did go with her
even to Brundusium, and testified by their sadness that they complained of the
malice of Tiberius. That generous wife, whose imperious and bold spirit, could
never disguise its thoughts did no more conceal them at that time: But on the
contrare, letting her self be transported with grief as with her natural humor
she thusspake to the Roman people who were hearing her.

AGRIPPINA TO THE ROMAN PEOPLE,
GERM ANICVS, the Grandson of Augustus, and the Nephew of Anthony;
Germanicus, the terror of Germany, and the love of the Romans; Germanicus, in
whom all virtue shined equally; Germanicus, whose whole Actions have been
glorious, Germanicus, husband to the unfortunate Agripin. Granddaughter to
Augustus; In fine Germanicus, the bravest, the most valiant, the most modest,
the most equitable, and the most accomplished that shall ever be; Is now no
more but a few ashes and this Urne contains, (O pitiful accident!) him whose
valor might have conquered all the Earth, if he had been but suffered to have
lived a little longer. Yes Romans, see your Germanicus in a state of needing
you, to make him live eternally. See him there equalie incapable to serve you,
and to revenge himself of his and your enemies: See him now in condition not to
excit any more envy against his virtue: He has conquered this Monster by
death: For the least circumstances of his life are so glorious, that calumny
it self can find nothing in them to repeat. Lament then Romans, our common
misfortune: Because if I have lost a husband, you have lost your Protector.
Look I pray you, round about this Urne, upon Germanicus his six Children all
clouded with tears: Take pity of their youth, and of their misfortune: And
fear with me that by their father his abandoning of them, he has not taken
from them all their virtue. If his life had been so long, as rationallie it
might have been, his example, if they had had perverse inclinations, would have
always led them to good: But to day, in the condition that things are, who
shall he be who can instruct them? Who shall he be who will correct them? Who
is he who will lead them into the War? Who is he who will make them hate Vice,
and love Virtue? I doubt not but that Tiberius will have for them, the same
sentiments which he had for their father: For his inclinations are not easily
changed: But since the Emperor did not hinder him from having enemies,
envyers, persecutors, and from dying by poison, it may also be, that the care
he will take for their education, will not be profitable: And I wish to heaven
that all I apprehend of Caligula do not come to pass: Let us Romans, let us
leave what is to come under the providence of the Gods: And let us only speak
of the misfortunes which are befallen us. They are great enough to merit all
our tears: Divide them not I conjure you: Let them all be shed for my dear
Germanicus, and remember that he was of the blood of the Julius Cesareses, of
the Anthonies, of the Marcelluses, and of the Augustuses. It belongs to you
Romans, to weep of his death, and to Celebrate his memory. And for the
stronger testifying the esteem you had for him, hate them who hated him; Detest
his enviers, his enemies, and his murderers: Fear not to speak of the
wickedness of Piso, nor of the ambition of P^ancina, publish without
apprehension, that these dead bodies which were found without their Tombs;
That these imprecations which were made against Germanicus; That his name that
was engraven upon blades of lead; And all those signs of enchantments which
have been known, are manifest proofs of the designs which were had against his
life. Publish I say, that poison has finished what charms could not do: And
do not fear that you will be punished for this crime; The death of Germanicus
has so over joyed them who caused it, that for a long time they shall not be
in condition to take notice of your sadness nor of your discourse. This
Victory that they have gained of the most valiant man that ever was, doubtless
gives them vanity enough to slight your resentment; And not to trouble
themselves, for what you will think of that accident. I do also believe, that
they are so much blinded by their ambition, as to be very glad, that
posterity should know, that they have put Germanicus to death. They aspire
more to the reputation of great Politicians, then of virtuous men: And
conditionally that it be said, that they did know how to loss him who could
oppose their unjust authority, it is no matter to them, to pass for ^ruell,
for un-naturall, for impious, for perverse, and for bloody. yes treacherous
Piso. Yes cowardly enemies of Germanicus, it will be said that you did know
how to reign, it will be known that you put him to death; It will be known that
you have violated by his person, all sorts of Laws: It will be known that you
have not respected in him, the Noblest blood among the Romans; It will be known
that you have cut the thread, of the most Illustrious life that shall ever be;
It will be known that the number of his virtues, has shortened that of his
days; It will be known that you did not extinguish that bright light, but
because it made the blackness of your lives the clearer; And in fine it will be
known that the excess of your crimes, and that of his Virtues, are the true
causes of his death. I shall make no stope O Generous Romans, to repass
exactlie to you, what all the enemies of Germanicus were: It is not that fear
does hinder me from naming of them, for Agripina is incapable of it: But it is
because I know that they are all known to you. You know the cause of their
hatred nor do I speak to you this day, but of the pitiful effects of that
dangerous passion, But ye Gods! How is it possible that Germanicus could be
hated? What had he done in all his life; That could have acquired enemies to
him? Let us repass it, I conjure you: Let us be rigid Judges to him: And let us
see if he could have merited the punishment that he suffered. First as to
abmition, never was any man so void of it: And all the earth has seen, that
the more opportunity he had to pretend to the Empire; The greater affection
did he testify to Tiberius, and did deviate himself the more, from what would
have conducted him to the Throne. Ah! would to the Gods! That he had rather
followed my counsels, then his own inclinations! It was he who caused present
an oath of fidelity, to the Bdlgiks, a Neighboring Nation of Germany. It was
he who appeased the revolr of the Legions and who rather then listen to the
offers which they made to him, of following him every where, would pierce his
heart with the blow of a dager. Behold Romans, what Germanicus did for Tiberius
at that time. He would die for him: And perhaps by another way, and by other
sentiments, has he had the same destiny. But though it be so, let us not
continue. upon such a doleful discourse. Let us remember that Germanicus
commanded me a dying to lose some of that noble serocity that innocence gives
me, and the illustrious Blood from which I am descended. Let us ^ay then
simply, that without lying it may be affirmed that Germanicus preserved the
Empire for Tiberius: because it was he who remitted obedience and military
Discipline among the greatest part of the Legions, with out whom the Emperors
could not have enjoyed the Sovereign power. The disorder was so great, the
complaints which were made against Tiberius so injurious; the demands of the
Soldiers so insolent, their proceedings accompanied with so much violence;
that Germanicus was conitrained to cause me go out of the Camp, searing I might
receive an abuse in it: However I did what I could, that I might not be
separated from him at that time: For as I have already told you, fear had no
place in the heart of Agrippina: and no humane power could oblidge her, either
to be silent or to speak, until that it pleased her, and that Reason required
it. But generous Romans, Germanicus did not only appease the sedition of the
Soldiers, but he caused the same Soldiers, who would no more know a
Commander; who only followed their own fancies; who would hear nothing but
their own fury, who did not arm themselves but to oppose the Emperors will;
return under their Colors, render themselves capable of Reason, hear the
commands of Germanicus, and take up their arms, to follow him with fervency,
in all the dangers wherein he exposed himself at that time, and from which he
retired with glory It was with these same Soldiers that he revenged the defate
of Varus, that he did retake the Eagle of the nineteenth Legion; that he past
through the Brustores; that he wholly ransacked all that is betwixt the Rivers
Amisa and Luppia; and unsatisfied with testifying his valor in the Wars, he
did let his piety be seen as well as his courage. For coming to the same place
where Varrus had been defated, and where there is yet to be seen an infinite
number of blanched bones, scattered upon the plain, or cumulated together in
great heaps, according as the Soldiers fled or fought: Where I say there is
yet to be seen shivered lances, and quantities of other broken arms, horses
heads tied to trees; altars whereon the Barbarians had immolated the Tribunes
and the Centurians; where they who had escaped from the defate, showed the
places, where the Commanders had received their deaths wounds; where the Eagles
had been taken, where Varrus had received his first wounds; and where quickly
after he died by his own hand. I say Germanicus being come to that horrid
place, and there seeing such fatal Relics of a Roman army, expelled bloody
sighs, poured out tears, and abandoned his invincible Soul to sorrow and
compassion. He exhorted the Soldiers to render the last duties to these
unfortunate men, of whom some had been their Relations and their Friends. he
inspires their hearts with sadness, thereby to carry them on afterward with
the more zeal to revenge: and with his own hand did lay the first turf to the
tomb that was builded for these unfortunate worthies. However Tiberius did not
approve of that laudable action. He did not comprehend that a man could be
equally valiant and pious; give burial to his Fre^nds, and conquer his Enemies;
and in sine he belived that Piety was a Virtue unworthy of a great Spirit. he
wished that Germanicus had trod upon these dead mountains, without remembering
that they had been Romans like himself, that they had fought, as he was going
to fight: that the same ^nemies waited for him: that to render him victorious
over them, who had conquered these, he must make the Gods propitious to him;
and infuse desire of vengeance into the souls of his Soldiers, thereby to
increase that of fighting, and of gaining the victory. But the maxims of
Tiberius, and these of Germanicus were very different: they did also lead them
to very different ways. Romans, Tiberius reigns, and Germanicus is dead.
Render to him at least the same honors, which he gave to Varrus his Soldiers;
and because he had courage enough to revenge their death, be you at least so
generous as to mourn for his. Nevertheless let us not leave him any longer in
the shad of this terrifying field all covered with dead bodies: let us behold
him in hisconquests: let us lock how the Valiant Arminius dares not wait for
him: and let us see with what skill, what conduct, and with what courage he
pursued and excelled so generous an enemy. Germanieus at that time joined
prudence with valor: And surprising the Cattaneans, when they least thought of
him, he ransacked all their country: took the town of Martium Capitol of the
Province. He set it on fire, he had many prisoners in it: And after he had
carried terror every where, he retook the way to the Rhine, without the
enemies dareing to follow him. From thence he relived Segesta, which they of
his country hold besidged, in favors of Arminius, who afterward, by a
tromperie of war, seemed rather to flee, then to retire. But it was only
until Germanicus was arrived at an Ambusca do that was laid for him: and I
wish from heaven that he had so happily evited all the ambushes which were
laid a against his life. He paid for his valor at that time: And seeing the
Germans who followed his party, going to cast themselves in a Marrish most
advantageous for the enemies; he caused all the Legions advance in Battalion,
which did put terror among all Arminius this troops, and assurance among
^urs. Germanicus his good-fortune, went even to Cecina his Lieutenent: For he
surpassed all difficulties which he encountered; Fought with glory, the
troops of Inguiomere, and these of Arminius: and in fine the Roman arms were
but too fortunate at that time: Because if Germanicus had acquired less glory,
he would have been less suspected. I have cheiflie known, that I contributed
somewhat to his death: His valor was thought to be as contagious, as vice is
in this age: And that he had communicate a part of it to me. it has been
thought (I say) (...) since he had made me courageous, he would make Heroes of
all the Soldiers who fought for him. ^ut they who believe that, remember
member no more that Agrippina is of the blood of Augustus: And that Germanicus
had more trouble to retain her courage, then to excit it. And moreover at that
time, I did nothing that could give any shadow: It is true that when the noise
did run that the Roman army was beaten, and that the enemy were coming to
pillage the Gauls: I hindered that any who was too fearful of that false
news, should break the bridge that crossed the Rhine: And by that means, I did
in some manner serve the Roman Legions. It is also true, that when they were
returning; I kept my self at the end of the bridge, to thank the Soldiers:
To praise some, assist others, comfort the wounded, and in the end ^o do every
thing that compassion and Generositie counseled me to do in favors of them,
who had fought for the advantage, of their country, for the safitie of
Tiberius, and for the glory of Germanieus: But if I be not deceived, I ought
rather to have been thanked for that action, then to have been looked upon as
an enemy. Further the freindship that the Legions had, both for Agrippina and
for Germanicus, has only served for the advantage of his enemies: For though
he knew as well as I, that they had but very unjust inclinations for him: He
made use of that freindship or the Legions, to enga^ge them ^^ his designs: And
his designs had no other object but the glory of them who loved him not; It is
true he was obstinate for the German War: But it was only, because he believed
it convenient to do it for the public good: As in effect, the event at last
made what I say appear: For after the valiant Arminius and the generous
Inguiomere had done their last endeavors to raise an army, capable of
conquering that of Germanicus: And that by all stratagemes of war; which great
Captains do use, they had considered how to takefull advantages, which the
situation of the place could give them: Germanicus ceased not to gain so manic
Victories, as he made fights, or as he gave battles. Never were enemies seen
defend themselves more obstinatly: It seemed that they did not sometimes flee,
but to return with the greater courage to fight: The defaiting of their troops
did on lie augment their courage: And the nearer they seemed to be conquered,
the more they to put themselves in condition of being victorious. It might have
been said that the valor of the Soldiers who were killed, past into the hearts
of their companions to revenge their death: And therefore, Germanicus merits
not a little glory for having conquered such enemies. Among the things which
were found in the booty that was taken from them, after one of the battles
which was lost; There were a great manic chains to be seen, which they carried
with them, to fetter the Roman Soldiers, whom they should take prisoners; For
they doubted not, that they should gain the victory. However, after that
Germanicus, by his valor and conduct had revenged the death of Varrus; The loss
of his Legions; had again found the lost coulors; And carried horror amongst all
the Barbarians; What did he for his particular interest? What did he for his
own glory? Shall I rell it generous Romans. Yes let us tell it for his honor,
and for the ^ame of his enemies; He erected a Magnificent Trophie, with an
inscription that simply said: That Tiberius Cesars army, had consecrated these
monuments to Mars, to Jupiter, and to Augustus: For the victory that it had
obtained, against these Nations which inhabitated bet wixt the Rhine and Albis.
And all that, Romans, without speaking of himself, more then of the me^^st
Soldier of the army that he commanded. I shall not tell you exactlie all the
actions which Germanicus has done: Fame has reached you it: And the hatred
that has been had to him, should also persuade you that he merited your
freindship. Further, when Tiberius judged, that it was convenient, for the
designs which he had, that Germanicus should return to Rome, to receive the
honor of the Triumph; That unfortunate Hero did well know, that they desired
they should Triumph before the victory. nevertheless, he did not forbear to
obey them, he left that imperfect war which he was going to finish so
profitablie, and so gloriously for you: And without desiring to use all his
prudence, he listened only to his generositie. You saw him, invincible Romans
in the Triumphing Chariot: But in the very instant wherein you was sheding
tears of joy, perhaps there was some of the Magicians of which Rome is
plentifully furnished, who then foretold, that you should very soon shed
tears of sorrow upon the Ashes of Germanicus. You also know, that he was not
recalled to his country, to permit him to live in it: On the contrare, he was
sent to a place very far off: And it was found convenient, or to speak better,
necessar; Whither for the public good or for particular reasons; To banish him
from Rome, upon some honorable pretext. Let it be what it would, he did what he
was desired he was as fortunate in pacifying the interests of the princes
allied to the Roman people, as he had been in fighting his ene mies, and if the
treacherous Piso and the ambitious Planeina had not attempted his death?
Perhaps they might have had rouble enough to have brought it to pass.
Germanicus was so unversallie beloved, that it would have been a hard matter
for them who put him to death, to have increased the number of their accomplices.
He knew what was thought of him: And the esseem that he had acquired, could not
make him suspected. For every time that he went into the war, he was
accustomed, to go alone in the night disguised like a simple Soldier from tent
to tent to hear what was said of him. yet it was not that he delighted in
hearing the praises, which were given to his valor: On the contrare, he said,
he searched to be instructed of his faults, that he might amend them. Behold
Romans, what Germanicus was: His Soul was wholly Noble and Generous: And under
whatsoever form death did present it self, he looked upon it with a fixed
countenance. he has seen tempest disperse his army, and drive his ship
against the rocks, without having any other fear then that of seeing the Roman
Legions perish. He has beenseen after shipwreck, repay to all the Soldiers
who escaped; what the storm had made them loss: He was seen while he
livedserve his greatest enemies: And that which is morestrange, and more
mervalous, he is dead, without having said any thing, against the chief of the
conspiracy, that was done against his life: And he is contented with having
prayed his friends, to cause punish the accomplices. Me thinks Romans, that it is
the least thing, can be granted to the Ashes of Anthonies Nephew, of Augustus
his grandson, and of Agrippinaes husband. yes Romans, if Tiberius were chief
of that conspiration, (which none among you dare say) that it be by his order,
that Germanicus is put to death; Being a great Politician as he is, he ought
always to put the accomplices of his crime to death. Piso and Plancina should be
sacrificed to Germanicus: though it should be but for to hinder them from
speaking, and to dry up your tears, their blood ought to be shed. All they who
concern themselves with doing of horrid Villainies have always used to let the
executioners of their wicked designs be lost, to the end that they be not
suspected. Piso has already had the audacity, to say to Marsus Vibius, by an
insolent rallerie, that seems to be like a person whom I name not, because I
have more respect then he; that he would come to Rome to justify the death of
Germanicus, when the Praetor informed of the poisons had summoned there all the
criminals, and all the accusers. Yes Romans, I tell you again, that whatsoever
way Germanicus was put to death, Piso should die; And I have so much hope from
the prudence of Tiberius, that I doubt not but Piso shall die: And that in some
manner the death of Germanicus will be revenged. But to obtain this
satisfaction, employ your tears and prayers: Let the name of Germanicus be
heared over all: Do not enclose your sorrow in the tomb of Augustus, with those
pitiful Relics which we are carieing to it. Follow me Romans; Let us go to
the Senate and demand justice for Germanicus: Let us represent that it will be
disgraceful to it, not to revenge the death of a man, for whom Triumphant
Arches were erected; Who was seen enter Rome, in a Triumphant Chariot; And who
past among all Nations, and among the Barbarians themselves, for the most
accomplished among mortals. Let us not use charms nor enchantments, for
destroying our enemies, as they have done to destroy Germanicus, Let us not
revenge his death by the same arms which caused it; let us trust to the
justice of the Gods, to the prudence of Tiberius. and to the Senats authority:
The justice that we desire cannot be refused to us. You Soldiers, who have
followed him, ask the blood of Piso, to revenge the death of your Captain,
Recount to the Senate the perils wherein you did accompany him, show the
wounds you received in the fights where he was: Tell truly the things which
you was witnesses of: And in fine, desire, that the death of the Father of his
Legions and your General may be revenged. You generous Citizens who hear me,
desire boldly that the death of Germanicus may be revenged: Remember what he
was; Remember his virtue, his modesty, his goodness, his courage, his
liberality, and his moderation. Say that he was the Model by which you hoped
to regulate the lives of your children, and to hinder them from following the
perniciousexamples which they see every day. Tell that you have lost your
Supporter, and your upholder? And desire at least, that they may revenge on the
person of the treacherous Piso, him who is taken from you. in fine, who ever
you be that hears my voice, employ yours, in asking this equitable vengeance.
Echo over all, the names of Julius Caesar, of Anthony, of Marcellus, and of
Augustus, thereby to obtain what you desire. Speak of Tombs, of Urnes, and of
Ashes, to excit compassion in the most cruel heart. Join also some menaces with
prayers, if they be unprositable: And forget nothing of all that can cause Piso
his death, comfort Agrippina, and ^^venge Germanicus

THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
THis Harrangue failed not of an advantageous Effect, all the Senate, and all
the Roma People were sensibly touched with it: The one and the other shed
tears, breathed complaints, and abandoned themselves to forrow: And it was said
that all the glory of Rome entered the Tomb, with the Ashes of Germanicus.
Every on called Agrippina, the honor of her country, the blood of Augustus,
the only and last example of the ancient Roman Virtue: And every one prayed
the Gods that they would preserve her Race, and make her live beyond, and after
the entire ruin of these wicked men. In fine, the public zeal. was so arduous
for Germanicus, and for Agrippina, that Tiberius was constrained to abandone.
^iso to the rigor of justice. But he prevented his judgment by the wound of a
sword which he gave himself in the throat, and whereof he instantly dyed.

SAPHO TO ERINNA THE TWENTIETH HARRANGUE.

ARGUMENT.
You are to hear that Illusticus Woman speak, of whom all ages have said so
much: Whom Plato himself admired; whose image was engraven, like that of a
great Prince of whom we have yet remaining a species of Poesy, whose verses
are called Saphick, because it was she who invented their measure, and whom two
great men of Antiquity a Grecian and a Roman, called the tenth Muse. I cause
her take occasion to exhort her friend to make verses as she did, thereby to
make it appear that Ladies are sapable of it: And that they wrong themselves by
neglecting such an agreeal^ occupation. It is the Argument of this Harrangue,
that I give in particular to the glory of this fair Sex; as in general I have
given all this Volumn.

SAPHO TO ERINNA
I Must Erinnae, I must this day overcome in your mind that disttrust of your
self, and thatfalse shame, that hinders you from employing yourmind with things
which it is Capable of. But before I speak to you particularly of your merit,
I must let you see that of our Sex in general, that by the knowledge thereof I
may the more easily bring you to what I would. They who say that beauty is the
portion of women; And thatfine arts, good learning, and all the sublime and
eminent sciences, are of the domination of men, without our having power to
pretend to any part of them; Are equally differing from justice and virtue. If
it were so, all women would be born with beauty and ^ll men with a strong
disposition to become learned; Otherwise nature would be unjust in the
dispensationes of her treasures. Nevertheless we see every day that ugliness
is seen in our Sex, and stupidity in the other. But if it were true that beauty
was the only advantage which we receive from heaven; All women would not only
be fair, but I also belve they would be so till death; That time would respect
in them what it destroys every moment; And that not being sent it to the
world, but to let their beauty be seen; They would be fair so long as they
should be in the world. In effect, this would be a strange destiny to survive
ane age, for one only thing that could render us recomendable: And of the many
years which do conduct us to the tomb. not to pass but five or six with
glory. The things which nature seems to have made for the ornament of the
Universe, do almost never lose that beauty which it has once given them.
^old, Pearls Diamonds presetve their brighstn^^^e^o long as they have being:
And the ^^cuix her self, as is said of her, dies with her beauty that it may
resuscitate with her. Let us say then after this, that because we see no roses
not lilies upon the faire^^ complexiones; which the rigor of some winters will
not blast; that we see no eyes, which after they have been brighter then the
sun, do not coyer themselves, with darkness; And which after they have made a
hundred famous conquests, do find themselves to be in condition of almost no^
seeing any more the conquests of others; I say, let us say, that since we see
every instant of our life rob us in spite of our selves, and in spite of
our cares of the finest things which we have; That tine makes our youth
impotent; That these threeds of Cold, wherewith so many hearts have been caught
shall be one day no more then threeds of silver; And in fine that this air of
beauty, that so agreeablie mixes with all the traits of a fair countenance,
and where a ray of divinity seems to appear, is not strong enough to conquer
diseases, time and old age: Let us conclude I say that wein ust of necessity
have other advantages then that. And to speak rationalie of it, beauty is in
our Sex, what valor is in that of men; But as that quality does not hinder
their loving the study of good learning, so this advantage does no^ hinder us
from learning and knowing of it. But if there be any difference betwixt men and
women, it should only be in affairs of war: It belongs to the beauty of my
Sex to conquer hearts, and to the valor and strength of men to conquer
Kingdoms: Natures intention does appear so clear in this encounter, that it
cannot be opposed: I consent then that we let towns be taken, battles given,
and armies conducted by them who are born for it: But for things which do
only require fancy, vivacity of spirit, memory and judgment, I cannot
endure that we should be deprived of them. You know that men for the most part
are wholly our slaves or our enemies, if the chains which we cause them wear
seem to be too weighty for them, or if they break them, they are the more
irritated against us; however let us not dispute, neither the beauty of
imagination, the vivacitie of spirit, nor the force of memory; But for
judgment some have the unjustice to maintain that they have mo^e of it then
we. Nevertheless I think that the moderation, and modesty of our Sex, makes it
sufficiently seen that we do not want it; And moreover if it be true, that we
posiess these first advantages in the highest degree; it is almost impossible
for us not to possess the other. But if our imagination demonstrat things to us
as they are, if our spirit understand them perfectly; And if our memory serve
us as it ought: By consequence our judgment cannot err? The imagination when
it is livelie, it is a faithful mirror; the spirit when it is enlightened,
does so deeply penetrate t^ings; And the memory when it is fortunate and
cultivated, Instructs so strongly by example that it is impossible for the
judgment not to form it self. Believe me Erinna, it is impossible to make
shipwreck when the Sea is calm; the worst Pilor can enter the harbors And
there are no rocks but may be shunned when they are seen, and when the waves
are not swelling. For me, I avouch to you, that I do not comprehend, how they
who leave imaginarion, spirit and memory for our po^tion, can boast of having
more judgment then we. For it is not to be thought, that their imagination not
showing them things as they are That their ^p^^it not knowing them perfectly,
and that their memory, not being fair full to them: I say it is not to be
thought that upon such false similitudes, their judgment can act equitablie?
No Erinna, that is not possible: And that we may be more ration all then any
among them; Let us say that among them and among us, there are persons who have
both fancy, spirit, memory and judgment. It is not if I would, but I could
make appear, by a strong and puissante inducement that our Sex can boast: of
being more richly furnished with spiritual treasures, then that of men. For
conside Erinna, that almost universal order, which is to be seen among all
animals, who live in woods and in caves; you see that they who are born with
strength and courage, are very often unskillfull and of little understanding,
and ordinarlie the weak have a stronger instinct, and come nearer to reason,
then they to whom nature has given other advantages. Judge you then that
according to this order, since Nature has given more strength and more courage
to men, then to women; It should have also given more spirit and more judgment
to us: But again Erinna, let us grant to them, that they have as much as we,
provided that they also consent to our having as much as they. Perhaps you will
say to me, that when by consent of all men. I have obtained that declaration, I
shall not for all that be able to perswad, that the knowledge of good learning
is decent for a woman, because by an established custom of men, for fear of
being excelled by us, study is as much forbidden to us as war. making of
verses, is the same thing as to give battles, if we will believe them: And to
say all, we have nothing permitted to us, but what should be rather forbidden
to us. See Erinna, we have a good fancy, a clear sighted spirit, a fortunate
memory, a solid judgment, and must we employ all these things to frisle our
hair, and to seek after Ornaments which can add something to our beauty? No
Erinna, that would be an unprofitable abuse of the favors which we recive from
Heaven. They who are born with eyes to make conqu^ need not join art to graces
of nature: And that would be a giving of an unworthie employment to the spirit,
to give it no other work all our life, but such occupation. it might likewaies
be said, that if things were ordained as they should, the study of learning
should be rather permitted to Women then to Men: For because they have the
guiding of the universe Some being Kings, others Governors of Provinces, some
Sacrificers, others Magistrates, and all in general Masters of their Families:
And consequently taken up aither with public affairs, or with their own in
particular They doubtless must have bu^ little time to bestow, upon this kind
of study. They must substract from their subjects their friends or from
themselves: But for us, our leisure and our retirement, gives us all the ease
that we could wish. We take nothing from the public not from our selves in the
contrare, we enrich our selves without empow^^^ng others; We Illustrate our
country by ma^n our selves famous; And without wronging any b^d^^e, we
acquir^ abundance of glory. It is but very just, me thinks, since we quit the
domination to men, that at least they allow us, the liberty of knowing all the
things, which our spirit is capable of: The desire of righteousness should not
be forbidden us: And consequently it can be no crime to practice it. The Gods
have made no unprofitable thing in all nature: Every thing follows the order
that has been given to it. The Sun enlightens and warms the Universe: the Earth
gives us flowers and fruits every year: The Sea gives us of all its riches; the
Rivers water our meadows; The woods lend us their shades: And in fine, all
things are useful forpublick Society. Wherefore then, if it be so, should it
bedesired that we should the only rebels and ungrateful creatures to the gods!
why I say, should it be desired, that our spirits should either be unworthilie
employed, or eternally unprofitable? What improvement can there be had, by
despising what is honest: And how can it agree with reason, that what is of it
self infinitlie laudable, does become wicked and damnable, when it is in our
possession? They who have slaves, do caus^ instruct them for their own
advantage: And they whom Nature or custom has given to us for Masters, would
have us extinguish in our souls, all these lights which heaven has put there:
And that we should live in the thickest darkness of ignorance. If this be for
obtaining our admiration the more easily, they shall not come to their
purpose: Because we do not admire, what we know not: But if it be also to
render us more subject to them, that is not a generous sentiment: And if it be
true that they have any Empire over us, it is the making of their Government
the less glorious to reign over stupid and ignorants. Perhaps you will say to
me, that all men are not so rigid to us: And that some do consent to Women's
employing of their spirits, in the knowledge of good learning: Provided that
they meddle not, with desire of making works themselves. But let them who are of
that opinion, re member, that if Mercurius and Apollo are of their Sex Minerva
and the Muses are of ours. nevertheless I avouch that Having received so much
from heaven as we have, we should not slightlie engadge our selves, in such
things, As for example it is no shame, to make verse, but to make them evil:
And if mine had not had the good fortune of pleasing, I should never have shown
them ^wice. However this shame is not particular to ^s, and who ever does a
thing evilie; that he volutarlie undertakes: Doubtless merits to be blamed, of
whatsoever Sex he is. A perverse Orator, an evil Philosopher an evil Poet do
acquire no more glory, then a woman who with no good grace does acquit her
self of all those things: And of whatsorver Sex any is, they merit reproof
when they do ill, and great esteem when they do well: But to give something to
the custom and depravedness of the age, leave, Erinna, all those thornie
Sciences to them who love not to seek for glory, but in difficult paths.

I will not lead you unto places where you shall see nothing agreeable: I will
not have you spend your life in importunate inquires after secrets which are
not to be found: I will not have you unprofitablie employ all your spirits to
know the place whereto the winds retires after they have made shipwrackes: And
in fine I will not have you consume the rest of your days, in divyning
indisserently upon all things, I love your repose, your glory and your beauty
equally: I do not wish to you such studies, as make the complexion yellow,
the eyes hollow, the countenance ghastly, which make wrinekles on the
forehead; and which make the humor melancholy and unquiet. I will not have you
flee society nor light: But I only will have you follow me to the banks of
Parnassus. It is there Erinna, that I will conduct you; it is there that you
shall surpass me, how soon you arrive at it: It is there, that you shall
acquire beauty, which time, years, seasones, old Age, nor Death it self can
robb you of: And in fine it is there, that you shall know perfectly, that our
Sex it capable of every thing that it would undertake. It may be you will say
to me, that by my desiring to engadge you to poesy, I do not keep my word to
you: Because in the descriptions which are given of them who make verses, it
seems that beauty cannot correspond with the grimaces which itcauses them
make; But know Erinna, that this is but ane invention of men; who would make us
belive that as we see them who give oracles troubled by the presence of the god
that makes them speak; The same way, poesy being wholly divyn, troubles them:
who practice it. But though that were so, your eyes shall not be less bright:
For how soon the Oracle is given, the Priest is restored to his former
tranquillity; So shall you also no sooner quit the pen, then you shall resind
all your premire urbanities: And moreover, I do not think that you will
replenish your spirits with so dooleful images, as may cause any forrowful
thing result in your eyes. You shall be absolute Mistress of the subjects you
wonld treat of: And of the manic beauties which are in nature; you may choice
what pleases most your inclination, the description of a wood, or of a
fountain, the complaints of a lover and of a Mistress; Or the Elogie of some
virtue will give you ample enough subject, to make the talents appear which
heaven has endued your person with. You are born with such glorious
advantages, as that you will be ungrate to these who have given you them, if
you know not the good use of them. Perhaps you will ask of me, if it be not
sufficiently glorious for a fine woman, that all the brave spirits of her time;
make verses in praise of her, without that she meddle, to make her own Pictur
her self: I say you may ask me, if her glory be not better established this
way then the other; But I have this answer to give you, that what ever Elogies
can be given to you, it will be more glorious for you, to have made verses for
all the Illustrious of your time, if you do them well then it can be to you,
when they have all been made for you. Believe me Erinna, it is much better to
give immortality to others, then to receive it from any other: And to find
ones own glory with themselves, them to hear of it elsewhere the pictures
which shall be this way made of you perhaps shall not pass one day with
posterity, but as tablets made for pleasure. The Poets imagination, will be
more admired then your beauty; And the Copies in fine shall pass fore the
original. But if from your own hand, you do leave some signs of what you are,
you shall still live with honor, in the memories of all men; They of your age
who have praised you, shall then p^s^^ for true; And they who have no^ done it
for stupid or envious. Nevertheless do ^ot pretend that you should make your
own ^^cture; That you shonld speak of your beauty; O^ your virtue; And of all
the ^^re qualities that me in you: No I will not impose such a hard thing upon
your modesty. Poesy has manic other privileges, you need not speak of
yourself, to make posterity know you: You need but speak^ legantlie, and you
shall be sufficiently known. Yes Erinne, when you make no other use of your
pen, but to blame the vices of your age, your praise shall not be forgotten.
Consider also again I conjure you, how feeble and undureable is the reputation
that is founded upon beauty. Of all the infinite numbers of beautiful women,
who doubtless have lived in these ages which preceded ours, we have scarce
heard two or three only spoken of: And in these very ages, we see the glory
of most men, solidlie established by the wreatings which they have left behind
them; let not Erinna, time, old age and death robb you of any thing but Roses;
And not take away all your beauty. Triumph over these enemies in every good
thing: Put your self in condition to sustain the glory of our Sex by your
example: make our common enemies avouch that it is as easy for us to conquer,
with the force of our spirits, as with the beauty of our eyes: Let your
judgment appear, by despiseing the sottisness, that the vulgar will say of
your resolution: Let all the earth see such fine tablets of your imagination;
such noble efforts of your spirit; Such brave effects of your memory; And such
good testimonies of your judgment; that you alone may have the advantage, of
having reestablished the glory of all women. Do not contemn then what I say
to you: But if for a false shame, you will not resolve to follow me; And will
make all your glory consist in your Beauty you shall lament while you are
alive the loss of that beauty. You shall be spoken of, as if you had been of
ane other age, And you shall then find that I had reason to say to you this
day, what I think I have said formerly in some of my verses.

Your looks, and all that charming grace,
Of rose and lilies in your face;
Your heavenly orbs so clear and bright.
Tho'emblems of Eternal light,
Must all decay; your beauty wither,
Death makes you both forgot together:
But learning does immortality gain
Andvictory o'rdeath and the grave make obtain.
THE EFFECT OF THIS HARRANGUE.
IT cannot be said that this harrangue had no Effect; If things be taken
literally: For it well appears, that she to whom it was adrest let her self be
carried where it was desired, because a Greck Epigrame has told us; that by how
much Sapho excelled Erinna, in Lirick Poesy, so much Erinna did surpass Sapho
in hexami erverse. But if any differ from the literal sense, to come nearer my
intentions, I shall be very happy, if I can persuade our Ladies, to what this
fair Lesbian persuaded her friend: But yet more if I could persuade all the
earth, that this beautiful Sex is worthy of our adorations That thereby
Temples and Altars, might be one day consecrated to them, as I do now
consecrate, THIS TRIUMPHING ARCH, WHICH I HAY ELEVATED TO THEIR GLORY.

FINIS.

