AN ANSWER TO Dr. SHERLOCK's PRESERVATIVE AGAINST POPERY.

SHOWING, That Protestancy cannot be Defended, nor Catholic Faith Opposed, but
by Principles which make void all Reason, Faith, Fathers, Councils, Scripture,
Moral Honesty.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688. They are also to be sold at Lime-street
Chappel-door.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. SHERLOCK's Preservative against POPERY. SHOWING, That
Protestancy cannot be Defended, nor Catholic Faith Opposed, but by Principles,
which make void all Reason, Faith, Fathers, Councils, Scripture, Moral Honesty.
TRUTH being all of a piece, has this advantage, that it can never be opposed
by Truth and Reason: whatever charge is drawn up against it, must prove either
false in the Premises, or erroneous in the Consequence. The first Opposers of
Catholic Truth in England being sensible of this, fell presently to Forgeries,
clipping of Texts, Fathers and Councils, and by Misrepresentations to cast so
much dirt upon the face of Truth, as disfigured so her native Beauty, that the
common Herd not discovering so soon the Cheat, were frighted into the opposite
Errors, glazed over with a false varnish. This method they still followed on,
as long as the liberty of Press and Pulpit was denied to those who could easily
have wiped off that dirt, and laid open such gross Cheats. The Advice to Roman
Catholics, though reprinted since, yet first set forth by Dr. Cumber in the time
of the pretended Plot, when whatever was boldly sworn or said against Innocence
and Religion though false to the degree of impossibility, was greedily swallowed,
is a fair instance in this case, whence such false Citations, though they bore in
the front of a Preface all assurance of Truth, can be produced by dozens. Now
that Innocence and Truth have room to gather breath, and speak for themselves,
the method is somewhat altered* and those who write against Catholic Verities,
though they cannot wholly forget the old trick of Misrepresenting, ever
continued, from Tyndall and Jewel to Dr. Tenison; yet generally they make use
of the second shift of erroneous Consequences and false Inferences, not so
readily seen through by less cautions and prepossest Readers: From particular
Propositions true in themselves, they infer such general Assertions, or join
Principles so loose, wild and erroneous to a plain Text of Scripture, that any
Error may shelter it self in the Close, though the meanest Logician cannot but
blush at so open a Fraud. I happened to be lately present at a full mixed
Assembly in the City, where this method, well followed by the Answerer unto the
Address to the Ministers of the Church of England being fairly laid open, most
of the Protestants there ashamed of it, found no better salvo than to disown
the Answerer as an ignorant Scribler who had betrayed his Cause. The Name of
him that licensed the Paper should, I conceive, have covered it from such
reproaches. I know not the Answerer, and will not charge him with any other
fault, than of having undertaken the defense of a bad Cause, which may as well
be the effect of Engagement and Prejudice, as of Ignorance. To justify him so
far, I will give an instance taken from the Preservative against Popery, that
the Cause bears no better defense, though it might otherwise have been expected
from so famed an Author as Dr. Sherlock, who yet could not support it but by
such Principles as make void all use of Reason, Faith, Fathers, Councils,
Scripture, and moral Honesty, as I shall make appear in few lines, enlarging my
self somewhat more on Reason, the Gift I perceive which he most values himself
upon, especia^ly in a Cause in which he tells us, ( (...) ^eanest Tradesman
can now dispute against Popery with sufficient skill, and undertakes to teach
such how to baffle all the Catholics.

Principles of Dr. Sherlock which overthrow all right use of common sense.
He charges Catholics with this great Crime, ( fol. 3.) That they will not
allow the reading heretical Books, and proves his Charge because God not only
allows, but requires it. Since one Error may infer another, that Congregation
indeed which allows to each man, and even obliges him, to stand to his own
Choice and Judgment, must allow that liberty; and how his Fellow-Ministers can
justify themselves, who use all endeavors to hinder their Flock from hearing
Catholic Sermons, and reading Catholic Books, I know not; much less how the
Congregation established here lately by Law, having declared that each man was
bound (as Dr. Sherlock often repeats it in his Preservative) to judge for
himself, yet could force all Dissenters not to stand to that their Judgment,
but to comply against it, and that by Excommunications, Sequestrations,
Imprisonments, Exclusion from all the Preferments and Advantages of a freeborn
Subject, even by Hanging and Quartering: this, I confess, comes not within the
reach of common sense and reason. But for us Catholics, who have inherited from
St. Paul (Gal. 1. 8.) that Faith, that if an Angel from Heaven should teach us
any thing in opposition to it, we ought not to mind him, or return him any
other Answer than Anathema. How God should require from Us to read heretical
Books, I confess my reason cannot teach me. He blames then this Inference, You
have an Infallible Guide, therefore you are no more to seek.

Fol. 4. Ask them, Whether they will allow you to judge for your selves in
matters of Religion? If they do not, why will they trouble you with disputing?
you cannot be convinced unless you judge too, and thereby resolve Faith into a
private Spirit. -- Here let our Protestant fix his foot, and not stir an inch
till they disown Infallibility. This is to say, it is impossible to convince a
man that in reason he ought to submit his Judgment to that of any other, though
infallible. Does not this pretty Logic make void all the right use of common
sense and reason, when it should lead us to submit to any just Authority? We
find St. Paul Act. 19.) frequently disputing in the Synagogue; he pretended to
Infallibility through the Spirit of God who directed him: But Dr. Sherlock
takes the Jews part against him, bids them not stir an inch, not hearken to
him, till he disowns Infallibility. Spoken like a Christian Doctor.

Fol. 6. What difference is there betwixt men's using their private Judgments to
turn Papists or to turn Protestants? The same, as betwixt two sick men, the One
whereof chooses to put himself in an able Doctor's hands, whom he knows to have
an Infallible Remedy, whilst the other chooses his own Simples, and makes his
own Medicin; as between two at Law, the One whereof is guided by his reason to
take Advice from a Wise Counselor, the Other to be his own Counsel; as between
two Subjects, the One whereof is guided by his reason to take up Arms for his
King, the Other to judge of his King's Right and Command.

Fol. 9. Now the Doctor takes the Catholic's part, and though saintly, yet speaks
well in so clear a Cause: The intention of these Disputes is only to lead you
to the Infallible Church, and set you upon a Rock, and then it is very natural
to renounce your own Judgment when you have an Infallible Guide. But now for
convincing Reasons against this plain Truth. The first is,

They cannot with any sense dispute with us about the particular Articles of
Faith, because the sense given of Scripture and Fathers takes its Authority
from the Church understanding it so. This is false. The sense takes its
Authority from God who spoke that Word, though we are certain that we have the
true Sense of that Word because we receive it from the Church, which is
protected and guided, in delivering us both the Letter and Sense, by the
Infallible Spirit of God, that is to abide with her for ever, according to
Christ's promise, Jo. 14. 16. If John and William dispute which is the right
way to a place, is John disabled from convincing William of his mistake by
Reasons, because he has with him a Guide who certainly knows the way, and that
he would himself pass by those Reasons, if his Guide assured him that he
applied them ill and wrongly to that way?

Fol. 11. Must the belief of an Infallible Judge be resolved into every man's
private judgment? Must it not be believed with a Divine Faith, and can there be
a Divine Faith without an Infallible Judge? There can be no Divine Faith
without a Divine Revelation, nor a Prudent One without a moral Evidence in the
motives of Credibility, on which may be grounded the evident Obligation to
accept of it. The Judgment being possessed with that moral Infallibility, rests
not there, but observing that Goodness and Mercy of God, which cannot permit
that Falsehood should be propounded in his Name, with all the apparent Marks of
his Hand and Seal, and without any like appearance on the contrary; inclined by
a pious motion of the will, called by the famous Council of Orange affectio
credibilitatis, and strengthened by that Grace of God which bestows the Gift of
Faith, fastens on God's Veracity, and with a submission not capable of any
doubt, embraces the revealed Truth. If the Infallibility of the Church were
more than morally evident, it were impossible that any Heresy should be.

Fol. 17. No understanding Protestant can be disputed into Popery, which owns
an Infallible Church: First, because no Arguments or Disputations can give me
an Infallible certainty of the Infallibility of the Church. We saw Dr. Sherlock
just now pleading for the Jews against St. Paul; now he reasons even against
Christ our God blessed for evermore. His words prove that Christ, who owned
himself Infallible, did imprudently to Preach, or work Miracles; for since they
could not give an Infallible Certainty, (an evident one he means by his whole
Discourse) no prudent Jew or Gentile could be disputed by him into Faith.
Arguments so offensive to pious ears ought to meet with no other Answer than
Prayers for him who offers them.

It Is impossible by reason to prove that men must not make use of their own
Reason and Judgment in matters of Religion. That men must use Reason to come to
the Knowledge, that God has revealed what they believe, is very certain, as
the Jews (Exodus 14.) Crediderunt Domino, and Moysi servo ejus; did believe God,
and Moses his Servant; all Nations, Christ and his Apostles; so each Christian
now, Christ and his Church; the first as Author, the second as Witnesses
(commissioned from God) of their Faith; by conceiving the Proofs they offered
of their Commission. So far Judgment: So the Apostles believed Christ saying of
himself that he was the Son of God; their Judgment being convinced that God
spoke by him; which method appears most particularly in the man born blind,
whom he cured, and who was thereby convinced, that God was with him, Nisi Deus
esset cum illo: but after that, there is no further use of Reason, if we
believe St. Paul, but in order to the bringing into Captivity all Understanding
into the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.

The Doctor frames a Dispute ( fol. 21.) betwixt a sturdy Protestant as he
calls him, and a Catholic. You may guess how well he manages the Catholic's
part. In the Couclusion he gives this topping reason for the Protestant
Religion: We have as much assurance of every Article of our Faith, as you have
of the Infallibility of your Church. This is the great point indeed, which if a
Protestant loses, he loses all; for it is certain and evident, that the Catholic
has the same assurance for each Article of his Faith proposed by the Church,
which he has of the Churches Infallibility. He proves it, first, because we
are in general assured that the Scriptures are the word of God. Hitherto there
holds some parity, though but lame; but suppose it were entire? The Conclusion
would be this: Catholics are as certain of the Sense of Scripture, as
Protestants are that they have the Letter; whence it follows demonstratively,
that when Protestants differ in the Sense from Catholics, they have less
assurance for it than Catholics, who have always as much as the Protestants
have for the Letter, whereas Protestants must never be more certain of the
Sense of the Letter, than of the Letter it self.

2dly, And in particular we are assured, that the Faith which we profess is
agreeable to Scripture. If he means they have the same proofs for this, which
Catholics have for the Infallibility of the Church, that is, for the being of
that Church which declares her self Infallible, (for a Church erring in such a
point would cease to be the Church of Christ) then it is evidently false, since
each Christian in this Age has the same Evidence of her being the Church of
Christ, and of her teaching Truth, and consequently of her Infallibility, which
he has of Christ, viz. Prophesies, Miracles, etc. which no Protestant as much
as challenges for the Certainty of the particular Sense of Scripture. What
other Sense this Proposition can have, I do not conceive.

Fol. 23. If you must not use Reason and private Judgment, then you must not by
any Reason be persuaded to condemn the use of Reason. I never read so much and
so little of Reason; there is such a rumbling of the word, which for eight or
nine lines occurs at least once in each, and yet so little sense. All he says
might be with equal weight said by a sick man, who dissuaded from choosing his
own Remedies, and desired to send for a skilful Doctor, should answer, It Is
impossible by reason to persuade me not to use my reason in governing my self
by reason as my own reason teaches me, which would be to condemn reason, and
yet be guided by your reason. Such Discourse would prove the sick party at
least somewhat lightheaded; what it is a Symptom of in Dr. Sherlock, I will not
be positive in.

Fol. 25. We must allow of no reason against the Authority of plain and express
Scripture; we may reasonably conclude that God understands the Reasons and
Nature of things better than We. This is a very true and Catholic Principle,
whence I may infer, That our Doctor, when he comes to apply it, will sure
enough be guilty of some most illogical Inference. And behold I am in the
right! But, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
is such a plain and express Scripture. Well, go on, therefore without any
exposition, no Reason can justify the Worship of another Being. A rare
Consequence, to infer a Negative from an Affirmative Antecedent! It Is like
this: A Subject must love his King, and owe Allegiance to him alone; therefore
no reason can justify the love of a Child for his Father, or of a Wife for her
Husband. St. Augustine (Q. 61. in Gen.) drew the contradictory Conclusion from
that Text; he takes off all blame from Abraham, who is said in Genesis to have
adored or worshipped the people, because it is observable, says the Saint, that
in the said Commandment it is not said, thou shall worship God alone, as it is
said, and him alone thou shall serve, which in Greek is (...), for such a
Service (of Latria) is given to God alone.

Fol. 26. The Sense of the Law is the Law -- But when the Law is not capable of
a different Sense, or there is no such Reason as makes one Sense absurd and the
other necessary, the Law must be expounded according to the most plain and
obvious sense of the words. This Principle is sound; you may then be sure of a
false Inference at the heel of it. He gives us that part of the first
Commandment, which he calls the second, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven, etc. and concludes, so express a Law against Image Worship, that no
reason must be admitted for it. What if you be told that although the Jews had
perhaps a Command of making no graven Image, etc. yet this being a positive
Law, and not confirmed in the Gospol, does not oblige us? will this reason be
admitted? No. And yet you have no other motive to pass by as express a Law of
sanctifying Saturday. What if it be rejoined, That only the making to
themselves (by private Authority) an Idol to adore it with Divine Worship is
forbidden? Can none of these Reasons be heard? No. Then ^el^ze^^ by God's
Command making several Liknesses of things on Earth, Solomon placing such in
the Temple, sinned against the first Commandment; so do all Painters, and
Carvers, and those who employ them, and each Subject who stands bareheaded
before the Chair of State. The truth is, what sense they put on any Texts is
the express Law against which no Reason must be heard; so they challenge to
themselves the Infallibility which they so sturdily deny to the Church of God.

Yet this Topic he notably pursues for some pages against the Author of the
Reasons for abrogatng the Test, and in as many more against Catholic Tenets,
all and each misunderstood, or misrepresented, or no Articles of Catholic Faith.

I conclude his admirable Principles and Inferences with one so singular, that
it deserves to be observed by all. It Is this, ( fol. 45.) No Argument from the
necessity of a thing, must be admitted to prove it is. He instances thus: If
there be no Infallible Judge, there can be no certainty of Faith, which is
required in all Christians. Though it be true, and you think it to be true, you
must not allow this Consequence, Therefore there is one. The reason he gives
for it is admirable: Such Arguments do not prove that there be such a Judge,
but that there ought to be. This is not only to misuse Human Reason, but to
deny Wisdom and Reason in God. Alphonsus the Royal Mathematician was ever
looked on as guilty of a horrid Blasphemy, for having said he thought he could
have ordered some things better than God did at the first Creation: It Is one of
as deep a dye to think God ought to have done what we believe that he has not
done.

Principles of Dr. Sherlock which make void all Faith.
The Catholics prove that an uncertain or wavering Faith is no Divino Faith,
which the Protestants can never have of any one Article of their Religion,
because they never can have a certain One. It Is easily proved, because they
cannot have an Act of Faith of any One Article, till their Rule of Faith
proposes it, i. e. till they know certainly what Scripture teaches of it, not
by any one Text, but by comparing all the Texts that speak of that Subject: For
the sense of a single Text (for Example, My Father is greater than I, cannot be
had, but by expounding it by other Texts on the same Subject: Till a Protestant
then has a certain Knowledge, first, That he has all the Books of Holy Writ;
secondly. That all those he owns for such, were really written by inspired
Pens; thirdly, and (since the Letter kills) That he understands the true Sense
of each Text which relates to the Object of that Act of Faith; fourthly. That
he remembers them all, so as comparing them, to see which is the clearer that
must expound the obscurer, and what is the result of them all, (for any one he
understands not, or has forgotten, may possibly be that One that must expound
the rest) he cannot have One Act of Faith. Now Catholics say this is impossible
to any, or almost any man at least, therefore very few Protestants (if any at
all) can in their whole life have one Act of Divine Faith concerning any one
Mystery, though their Rule of Faith be never so good. Now what says Dr. Sherlock
to give Protestants any Certainty?

Fol. 78. Suppose the Protestant Faith uncertain, how is the Cause of the
Church of Rome the better? -- Is Thomas an honest Man, because John is a Knave?
If Thomas and John be accused severally of a Theft, and the stolen Goods be
found with John, I conceive though this prove not Thomas so assuredly an honest
man, yet an honest Jury would I conceive bring him in Not Guilty. That there is
a true Faith, and consequently a certain Rule of Faith, all Christians
acknowledge: Protestants on one side choose one Rule, (how differently ever
they apply it) Catholics another. I conceive then that if the Protestant Rule
be proved uncertain, it is plain the Catholics Rule must be the certain One.

Fol. 80. This may signify two things, first, That the Objects of our Faith
are uncertain, and cannot be proved by certain Reasons; secondly, That our
Persuasion is wavering. One of the three modi sciendi, or ways to come to the
Knowledge of any thing, Known to every Logician, is Division, But our Doctor it
seems is not so far advanced; for besides the Two mentioned, it signifies a
Third thing also; to wit, That whatever reasons there may be for a thing, he
who believes it, has for the motive of his Belief those certain Reasons. There
are, for Example, certain Reasons whereon to ground a Faith in Jesus Christ;
yet he that believes in Christ because his Mother has taught him so, has a
very uncertain, and no Divine Faith.

We believe the Apostles Creed, and whatever is contained in the Writings of
the Evangelists and Apostles. This is all we believe, and I hope they will not
say these things are uncertain. They are in themselves very certain, but not to
any Protestant, whose Rule of Faith cannot make him certain of any one Article.
But the pleasant Answer! which justifies Turk, Jew, and Gentile. For this is
the Rule of Faith, according to Dr. Sherlock, most sufficient: We believe all
that God has revealed, and nothing else: Is not all that He has revealed
certain? Here lies the Doctor's gross mistake, that no one is an Heretic for
not believing what God has revealed to be true; it is impossible to come to so
mad an Heresy: But They are so for not believing him to have revealed what in
effect he has, and has given sufficient methods to come to the knowledge of,
if they would but use them.

Fol. 81. If these things be not built upon certain reasons, their Infallible
Church can have no certainty of the Christian Faith. Even this is most
notoriously false; since she is not Infallible by any Light of her own, but by
the Guidance of the Spirit of Truth. Were not the Apostles certain of what
Christ told them, when they had acknowledged him the Son of God, before he gave
them certain reason for it? It Is a blind Impiety even to think so.

Fol. 82. It Is their common Argument, That there is a great variety amongst
Protestants, and that they condemn one another with equal confidence and
assurance. It Is one of your usual Artifices to leave out always the pressing
part of our Arguments. You should have added, though they use the same Rule of
Faith, and apply it by the same means. Thus proposed, it is an unanswerable
Argument against your Rule of Faith, and evidently proves it uncertain.

Fol 83. Were all Protestants of a mind, would their consent and agreement
prove the certainty of the Protestant Faith? Not at all. Yet it is a most
ridiculous Inference of yours ( fol. 84.) This is the same Rule, and their
disagreement proves not their uncertainty. All Union is no Argument of the
Spirit of God, for people may combine to do ill; yet St. Paul assures us,
Disunion and Dissension is a certain Mark of the absence of the Spirit of God.

Dr. Sherlock's Position which makes void all Scripture Proof.
It Is this, ( fol. 72.) If a Mystery appear against sense and reason, we must
have a Scripture Proof as cannot possibly signify any thing else, or else it
will not answer that Evidence which we have against it; Sense and Reason
proving it naturally impossible. A Text which cannot possibly have another
sense, does not leave it in any ones liberty, who owns Scripture, to be an
Heretic; therefore the Church produced no such Text against the Arians or
Nestorians, whence it evidently follows, That according to Dr. Sherlock the
Arians and Nestorians were bound not to believe the Trinity, and the
Incarnation of Christ. A happy Ministerial Guide! and well led those who follow
such!

Dr. Sherlock's Position making void all use of Holy Fathers and General
Councils.
It Is this: After he has most respectfully told us, ( fol. 73.) That Learned
men may squabble about them, he gives these Rules, without which they be of no
use. We must know, first, That the Father is really Author of the Book, (or the
Council of such a Decree;) secondly, That he was not corrupted by the Ignorance
or Knavery of Transcribers, while they were in the hands of the Monks, (and to
make this impossible, he assures us, they not only pared their Nails, but
altered their very Habit and Dress, to fit them to the modes of the Times;)
thirdly, That the Father does not in some other place contradict what here he
says; fourthly, That he did not alter his Opinion after. That Is to say, some of
these requisites not being possibly to be known, no use is to be made of any.

Dr. Sherlock's Principle making void all use of Civil Charity and Moral
Justice to our Neighbor.
It lies in his last Chapter, in which he attempts in vain to color the
Misrepresentations his Party has ever been guilty of.

It is, when a man's exterior Actions are naturally capable of a good and pious
meaning, and he ever and clearly declares that it is his, yet to fasten upon
him another opposite design and meaning, taken from his Opposers contrary
Principles; than which there cannot be a greater, or more unjust disingenuity.
This he calls to join Protestant Principles with Popish Practices. Then he
gives several instances that he is as good at the Practice as at the Theory of
this his Maxim. For Example;

To insinuate ( fol. 89.) that a Catholic thinks the Blessed Virgin more
powerful in Heaven than Christ, he tells you that he says ten Ave Maria's for
one Pater Noster; though he knows that half the Ave Mary is in Memory of, and
Thanksgiving for the Incarnation of Christ; the other asks of the Virgin only
to pray for us to Christ, which is all the Power we give her. His other
Instances have more of Malice yet, and less of Truth.

To conclude, in the very Chapter where he would excuse Misrepresentations, he
proves the continual Practice of his Party for it so to the full, that to be
thorough-Sherlock, and thorough-Protestant-Minister, he concludes with the most
disingenuous Misrepresentation and the most false Calumny imaginable, as a
supposed and owned Truth; to wit, That Catholics worship the visible Species in
the Eucharist. A most impudent Slander! no Catholic being guilty of it, no more
than the Apostles of worshipping and adoring the Clothes of Christ, when they
adored him upon Earth.

An Advice to Protestants, In Dr. Sherlock's words, only putting the word
Scripture in lieu of Fathers.
Fol. 76. Amongst Christians there is not one in a hundred thousand who
understand all Scripture, and it is morally impossible they should, and
therefore certainly there must be an easier and shorter way to understand
Christian Religion than this, or else the generality of Mankind, even of
professed Christians, are out of possibility of Salvation. Think well on it, as
you will answer at God's Tribunal for the care you took of the One only
Necessary, the saving of your Souls: Seek out that easier and shorter way, and
walk faithfully in it.

Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam.
FINIS.

