A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable Military Company at St.
Clements-Danes: July 25.

BY JOHN SCOTT, Minister of St. Thomas Southwark.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Tailor, at the Hand and Bible in the New Buildings on
London Bridge. 1673.

To the Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT PEYTON, President, and one of the Stewards
elect. Captain JOHN PERRY. Lieut. GEORGE CLERK. Lieut. THOMAS LOW. Lieut.
WILLIAM PEPPER. Ensign JOHN MERYDALE. Sergeant RALPH HOLLAND. Stewards of the
Honorable, the Military Company, and to the Stewards elect. Sir RICHARD
COMBS. JAMES LONG. Esquire. CHARLES HUMPHREVILE. Esquire. CHRIST OPHER VANE. Esquire. JOHN
AYLOFFE. Esquire. and to Captain JOHN HOOKER, Treasurer.
Worthy Gentlemen,
EVer since I consented to your desires, to Print this rude Discourse, I have
been hardly put to it, to make an Apology for it; at first I resolved to go the
way of all Authors, and indite my Patrons, for committing a rape upon my
modesty, and dragging this poor offering, like an unwilling Sacrifice to the
Altar; but upon second thoughts, I could not but disapprove such a kind
address, as too disingenious, and unmannerly; for to avouch your importunities
for the publication of so mean a discourse, I might reasonably think, would be
to libel your Judgments, and to make the world believe, I designed Revenge,
rather than Obedience; and therefore, in conclusion, I rather resolved to take
all the blame upon my self, hoping that in the great crowd of silly things that
come abroad into the world, this little trifle may pass unobserved; but if it
should be so unhappy, as to be taken notice of, I hope the world will not be so
unconscionable, as to deny me the privilege of playing the fool, as well as
others; whatsoever imperfections there may be in the Sermon, the subject of it
is so great and excellent, that it is no shame for any man to lie prostrate
under it, for entreating of such high Arguments insufficiency, is both Art, and
Rhetoric; If therefore I have not given it a Character as great as it
deserves. I hope this will in some measure excuse me, that I am a man, and not
an Angel, but however I fare in the esteem of others; this comfort I have, that
the weaker the Discourse is, the greater Argument it will be, of the gratitude
and obedience of

Your humble and affectionate Servant, JOHN SCOTT.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. for aley, read, aloy. line 5. for our bodies, r. as for our bodies. p.
5. and us. p. 8. for menaceth, r. means, and, to be left out. p. 9. for infer
r. infere. put in, can. p. 10. for understa. understandings. p. 12. for By, r.
A. p. 13. add, all other. p. for ride r. run. p. 15. for clutering, r.
clattering. p. 17. acknowledge.

Epes. 6. 11. Put on therefore the whole Armor of God.
THat which gives us the advantage of Brutes, and ranketh us in a form of
Beings above them, is the Rational and Immortal Spirits we carry about with us;
for our Bodies they are but clods of earth steeped in phlegm, and kneaded into
Humane shapes, and do derive their Pedigree from the same Principles with flies
and scare-bees, and the most contemptible Animals: but our Souls are of a purer
alley, and by their nature are allied to Angels, and do border upon God
himself; and it is by the Title of these Rational Natures that we are now
superior to Beasts, and hope hereafter to be equal with Angels; and yet
besotted Creatures that we are, how do we prefer our Bodies before our Souls,
employing all our cares in providing for, and pampering of our flesh, as if our
Reason were given us for no other end but to be Cook and Tailor to our Bodies,
to study Sauses and fashions for them; whilst our Immortal Spirits pine and
famish, and like forlorn things are wholly abandoned by us to wretchedness and
misery: that it is so, is apparent by too many woeful instances: the poor
Labourer that sweateth, and toileth all day for his Body, thinks much at
night to bestow upon his Soul a Prayer of a quarter of an hour long; the
Tradesman that thinks no Industry too much to make a fair and ample provision
for his Body, grudgeth to expend a few good thoughts and endeavors in the
purchase of an eternal Inheritance for his Soul; the Soldier that shuts up his
Body in ribs of Iron and Coats of Male to secure it from the Sword and Bullets
of his Enemies, exposes his Soul unarmed to all the fiery darts of the Devil;
and though his understanding has as much need of Knowledge as his Head has of
an Helmet, his Will as much need of Justice as his Breast of a Bucklen, his
Affections as much need of Fortitude and temperance as his Legs and hands have
of Greaves and Gantlets, yet he ventures them all naked amongst a thousand
Enemies, as if his little Toe or Finger were more dear and precious to him,
than his Immortal Soul. But if we would be good Soldiers and good men too, we
must arm our selves with in as well as without, and as we harness our Bodies in
Iron, so must we put on upon our Souls the whole Armor of God, and this is the
council of the Apostle in the Text, which I have chosen for the subject of my
ensuing Discourse: Put on therefore the whole armor of God. By the whole Armor
of God, here we are to understand the Christian Religion, that is, the Doctrine
and Duties of Christianity, as you may see at large from the fourteenth to the
eighteenth Verses of this Chapter, where the Apostle instances in the
particular parts of which this whole armor consists; the first is the Girdle
of Truth, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel, in opposition to all Heathen
errors, and heretical insinuations: The second is, the Breastplate of
Righteousness, that is, sincere and faithful obedience unto Christ: the third
is, the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, that is, the practice of Christian
Charity and Peaceableness: the fourth is, the Shield of Faith, that is, the
belief of the Promises, and threats of the Gospel: the fifth is, the Helmet,
that is, the hope of Salvation: the sixth is, the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God: and the last is, Prayer and Watchfulfulness. These are the
several parts of this Divine armor; in which you see are reckoned both the
Doctrines and Duties of Christianity; by the putting on of these therefore
nothing else can be meant, but only our hearty belief of the Doctrines and our
sincere Practice of the Duties of Christian Religion; for to this sense the
Phrase is frequently used in the New Testament: thus when the Apostle exhorts
us to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, in Romans 13. 14. it is plain he means
nothing else but believing in Christ, and obeying him. And so also when in
Ephesians. 4. 22, 24. he exhorts them to put off the old man, and put on the new,
he means nothing else, but that they should forsake their Heathen
Superstitions and Idolatrous uncleanness, and conform all their actions to
the new Rule of Christian purity.

In the words thus explained, you have first something implied, which is, that
the Christian Religion is armor of defense unto the Souls of men.

Secondly, something expressed, that if we mean it should arm and defend us, we
must believe and practice it.

First, that the Christian Religion is armor of defense unto the Souls of men,
that is, it is of the same use to men's Souls as Armor is to their Bodies; for
as the end of armor is to defend men's bodies, and secure them against the
weapons of their Enemies, so the great end and design of the Christian Religion
is to defend men's Souls from whatsoever is hurtful and injurious to them. Now
there are but two sorts of evils in the world, both which are injurious to the
Souls of men. The first is the evil of sin, and the second is the evil of
misery, and against both these Christianity does strongly arm us.

First, for the evil of sin, which upon several accounts is injurious to men's
Souls, it overthrows the Order and Economy of their natures, inslaving their
Reason to their Passions and Appetites; as it discomposeth the tranquillity of
their minds, by inspiring them with wild and inconsistent passions, and it
disturbeth the peace of their Consciences, by suggesting black thoughts, and
horrible reflections to them; these and several other ways is Vice injurious to
our Souls. And therefore it is the design of Christianity to arm us against this
great evil, to secure and defend us against all the Weapons of unrighteousness.
Hence the Apostle tells us, that the Grace of God, that is, the Gospel, was
revealed from Heaven, for this very end, to teach us to deny all ungodliness,
and worldly lust, and to live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this
present world, Tit. 2. 11. and St. John tells us, That for this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy tha works of the Devil, 1 John
3. 8. this was the errant of the Son of God into the world, and the design of
that incomparable Religion he taught, to destroy the works of the Devil: And
indeed if we consider what an effectual course Christianity takes to defend us
against sin, we must confess it to be the most excellent armor in the world;
for,

1. First, It restrains us from it by the purest Laws: the Laws of Christian
Religion have made so great a gulf between our sins, and separated us from
them by such an infinite distance, that it is impossible for them to come at
us, or for us to go to them, whilst we persevere in our obedience to them, for
they do not only forbid us that which is really evil, but do also command us to
abstain from all appearances of evil, and do remove us so far out of the
territories of sin, that they will not permit us to approach the borders of it;
and lest we might unhappily go farther than we should, they forbid us to go as
far as we may, and will not allow us so much as to come within the skirts, and
suburbs of iniquity. For in moral actions the distance is frequently so small,
between the utmost of what is lawful, and the nearmost of what is sinful, that
there are very few men in the world can set a rule to themselves, hitherto may
I go and no farther; and therefore without an infallible guide to point out to
them the just and particular limits of lawful and unlawful, men can hardly be
secure, whilst they dwell upon upon the frontiers and neighborhood of sin; and
therefore the Gospel commands us, at least, to endeavor to keep at distance
from sinning, and not come near the pitch, lest we be defiled by it; neither
does it only restrain us from outward acts, but also from inward inclinations
to evil; we must be so far from murdering our Brother, that we must not hate,
or wish ill to him; so far from practicing rapine and oppression, that we must
not so much as covet our neighbors Possessions; so far from acting adultery,
that we must not look upon a woman to lust after her: thus the Laws of our
Religion you see do strike at the very root of sin, and choke the very springs
from whence those bitter streams derive; and do not like other Laws merely
restrain our outward practice, but also lay reins upon our desires, and extend
their Empire to our freeborn thoughts, In this respect therefore Christianity
does most effectually arm us against sin, as it restrains us from it by the
purest. Laws that ever were.

Secondly, By dissuading us from it with the most prevailing Arguments. There
is no Article of the Christian faith but is a copious Topic of motives to
Virtue; and if men would but take the pains to extract from each their proper
and just inferences, and to ponder those great obligations to gratitude, and
duty which the several Articles of their Religion do devolve upon them,
Christianity must necessarily do wonders in the world, and work strange
alterations in the lives and manners of Christians; for there is no stone that
it leaves unturned, nothing within us that is capable of persuasion, but it
addresseth to, to win upon our hope; it proposes to us a happiness so
extensive, that we can neither desire, nor imagine beyond it; a happiness that
is equal to the utmost capacities of our natures, and parrallel to the longest
duration of our beings, that has not the least tang of misery in it, no bitter
farewell nor appendant sting to it, but is all quintessence composed of the
purest extracts of joy and pleasure, what greater motive can be urged to
dissuade us from sinning, than the hope of such a happiness as does so
infinitely out-bid all that vice can proffer us, and is weighty enough to
preponderate all its temptations, though all the world were in the
counterballance: but if we are so wedded to our lusts that no hope of advantage
will disingage us from them; Christianity thunders against them all the
dreadful threats that are capable of scaring us into sober purposes; it
denounces unquenchable fire, and eternal vengeance against all unrighteousness
and ungodliness of men, and allarms our fears with all the inconceivable
horrors that an everlasting hell menaceth; and that this may not scare us only
from open profaneness into close and secret hypocrisy, it assures us that
there will be a day of fearful account, and wherein all that we acted behind
the Curtain, shall be brought into public view, upon an open Theater, and
proclaimed to all the world by the Trumpet of God, and the voice of an
Archangel; and that we may be assured that these terrors of the Lord are not
mere bugs, and scare crows, it gives us a fearful example of Gods severity
against sin, in the death and sufferings of his own Son, wherein he has
proclaimed himself an implacable enemy to vice, in that he would not pardon it
without the blood of the most beloved darling of his Soul; and certainly he
that after this assurance of Gods severity against sin, can dare to be wicked,
is a most valiant and courageous sinner; and if after he has confronted the
Tribunal of God, and out-saced the the flames of Hell, he can laugh at this
fearful example of the Divine severity, he is fit for a Reserve, or a
forlorn-hope, and may boldly venture to be wicked through all the terrors in
the world: but if men should be so senselesly wicked as not to be persuaded
either by hope or fear, yet perhaps ingenuity may prevail; which that it may,
Christianity presses us with the most endearing motives in the world, it sets
before us the infinite obligations which God has laid upon us, in bestowing
upon us our beings, in surrounding us with his careful Providence, but above
all in giving his Son to die for us; and to infer this last, it represents
our most kind and merciful Redeemer groaning under the cruelty of our sins; it
brings forth his bloody garments, as Anthony did those of the murdered Caesar,
and spreads them before our eyes, and in the most passionate manner, accuses
our sins for being his Assassines and murderers, and we find in our hearts to
hug his Executioners, to harbor the ^^aitors that slew our Friend, our Friend
that loved us a thousand times better than we love our selves: Surely if we
should, we (...) for the most disingenious (...) in the world; for it is (...)
should oblige us, if we find (...) spite of all the love of (...) and blood of
our Redeemer. (...) powerful Arguments Christian^^^ (...) sin.

Thirdly, (...) it with the most powerful Grace and (...) (...) Christianity is
animated with a Divine Spirit, tha^ (...) along enlivened and actuated it, and
rendered it in (...) (...) so successful and victorious, 'twas by virtue of
this (...) Spirit that it triumphed in its very infancy over all the power and
malice of the world, that like the Palm (...) it grew by depression, and
conquered in the midst of flames; insomuch that within less than an hundred
years after the death of Christ, it had made successful inroads into the
remotest Kingdoms, and captivated a great part of mankind into the belief and
obedience of it; and though it found the minds of men prepossessed with a
contrary Religion, and conseqaently had mighty prejudices to combat before it
could come to lay siege to their Reason; yet it charged like a Thunderbolt
through all these obstacles, and with its spiritual Artillery battered down all
opposition before it, and wrought such strange alterations in the world, that
the world scarce knew her self, and stood admiring at her own change: She saw
the thronged Temples of the Heathens unfrequented, the adored Gods derided, the
celebrated Oracles ceased, the wise Philosophers puzzled, the enraged
Magistrates disheartened, by the unsuccessfulness of their own cruelties, and
all this done by a few despicable and illiterate fisher men, and yet all this
had not been so strange, had it won men only to an Opinion or a Faction; for
such chaff will soonest catch small birds, a giddy and a hair-brained
multitude; but the wonder of it was, that Christianity converted men from folly
and vice, to a sublime pitch of virtue, and substantial goodness; and of
vicious, deboyched, and dissolute, made them sober and temperate, and
righteous, which is so clear an evidence of that extraordinary power and
efficacy that accompanied it, that the Heathens attributed its successes to
the power of Magic, as St. Austin has observed, concluding that 'twas
impossible for it to conquer through so many difficulties, without the
assistance of some mighty and powerful Spirit: and though it does not now
convert men so miraculously as it did at first. but proceeds in more rational
and humane methods, by joining in with our understandand leading us forward by
reason and sobriety, by instructing our faculties in the right perception of
things, and by discovering a fuller evidence, and stronger connection of Truths;
so that whatsoever assistance it now affords us, it works in the same way,
and after the same manner, as if they were all performed by the strength of our
own Reason, yet still there are mighty assistances accompanying all its
ministrations, and it is enlivened with a Divine Power and efficacy; for still
those Promises are in force, to him that has shall be given; and he will give
his Spirit unto every one that asks; so that Gods Grace is wanting to none,
but to those that are wanting to themselves; for if we will be so ingenious as
to do what we can, God will be so gracious as to help us to do what we cannot;
if therefore we do not do all, it is our own fault, since we may do all through
Christ, who will strengthen us, if we do what we can. What therefore may we not
do who are thus armed with Divine assistance? What sins are there so strong,
that we may not mortify? What Passions so violent, that we may not tame? What
habits so inveterate, that we may not vanquish, who are thus backed, and aided
with auxiliaries from above? And thus you see what impenitrable armor the
Christian Religion is against all the darts and weapons of sin, and how able it
is to render us shot-proof, and invulnerable against all its temptations.

I come now to the second thing proposed, which is to show you that
Christianity is armor of proof against the evil of misery, that is against all
those cares and fears, those griefs and sorrows, vexations and anxieties
wherewith we are here encompassed on every side; and indeed there is nothing in
the world can give so much ease unto the minds of men, and fortify them so
impregnably against the miseries of the world as true Religion. Hence is that
of our Savior, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
refresh you, Matthew. 11. 28. that is, all you that are tired out with the
crosses and troubles of this miserable world, do but become by Disciples,
believe my Doctrine, and obey my Commands, and I will give ease and refreshment
to your minds. And in the following verse he tells us, that by taking his
yoke, that is his Religion upon us, we shall find rest for our Souls: and of
necessity his yoke must mightily contribute to the arming of Souls against the
troubles of the world upon these following accounts.

1. First, in that it naturally inspireth us with true courage and magnanimity;
there is nothing in the world so valiant and heroic as a true Christian
spirit; for its courage is composed of the best Metal in the World, of Patience
and Temperance, of Constancy and Resignation to the Will of God, all which
mingled together do beget in the Soul an invincible firmness and staiedness of
mind against all dangerous and dolorous accidents whatsoever: for what accident
can daunt a Soul that is weaned by temperance from the pleasures of the body,
and hardened by patience against the pain and displeasures of it that has so
subdued her passions as to be always present to her self, and constant to her
own Reason, and having resigned up all to the Conduct of Divine Providence,
receives every accident as a token of love, and gives a hearty welcome to
whatsoever befalls her? Such a Soul as this stands firm as a Rock,
out-braving all the storms of Fortune, making its envious waves retire in empty
foam, and insignificant Passion: but wheresoever these brave Qualities are
wanting, it is impossible a man should be truly courageous; for intemperance,
impatience, and diffidence will let in every trouble that assaults us, to spoil
and ravage us at pleasu^e, and expose all the peace and tranquillitity of our
minds to the mercy of every trifle, so that we shall not be able to abide the
shock of any cross accident that encountereth us, but like cowardly Poultrons
shall lie down vanquished at the feet of every trouble that befalls us; and
there is no greater sign of cowardice and weakness of spirit, than an aptness
to be discomposed with trifles; for as sick persons are offended at the light
of the Sun, and the freshness of the air, which administer pleasure and
recreation to those that are in health; even so persons of weak and
pusillanimous spirits are easily offended; their minds are so tender and
effeminate, that they cannot bear the least air of trouble without disturbance;
and what would be a diversion to a courageous Soul, grieveth and incommodateth
them. But when we are once arrived to a due pitch of patience, temperance and
confidence in God, all the troubles of the world will be but like flea-bites to
a sleeping Lion, and we shall no more be concern^d with these little crosses
and mischances, than the Moon is with the yelping of those whiffling Curs that
bark at her from below. For true Christian Courage is the most heroic of all
other: for Courage is merely brutal consisting in heats and serments of the
blood and spirits, in which Game-cocks and Mastives out-vy the greatest Heroes
in the world: but the Courage of a Christian is truly Rational and manly,
founded in Religion and true Principles of Reason, and so as a thousand times
more manageable and useful than that which arises only out of temper and
complexion; for this sort of Courage is headstrong and unruly, and like an hot
metall'd Horse, does oftentimes ride away with the Rider, and instead of
securing us from, carries us headlong into mischief; but true Christian courage
is gentle and obsequious to the Commands of Reason, and upon that account is
far more useful in our extremities, and is more applicable to our necessities.
Since therefore Christianity inspireth us with such an excellent Courage as
this is, it cannot but render us invincible, and effectually shield us against
all the blows of Fortune.

Secondly, It armeth ns against the miseries of the World, by reconciling us
unto God; it is impossible a man should be free from trouble and anxiety of mind
whilst he is in a state of emnity with God: for there is grafted within our
very natures such a natural awe and dread of a Divine Power, as does
necessarily alarm all that sear and horror that is within us, whenever we
knowingly provoke that Power we so much dread and tremble at; and our
Consciences being thus in a tumult and uproar, will give a sting to all our
miseries, and render all our dangers more terrible and amazing; 't will
represent every cross accident to us as a Messenger of God's vengeance, and
every little danger as an approaching storm from Heaven; and then how must
every danger affright, and every misery oppress us that comes with a Commission
from that Almighty Vengeance, which we so naturally dread and tremble at? How
can we but sink even under our crosses when we think what a load of wrath there
is in them? How can we but quake at our dangers, when we look upon them as so
many thunderbolts, which Omnipotent fury is hurling at our head; the thought of
this will imbitter all our miseries, and make the most trifling dangers to look
stern and terrible; hence it is that of the Wiseman, The wicked flee when no
man pursues, but the righteous are bold as a Lion: For though no man pursues
them, yet their own Consciences like restless furies haunt them whether ever
they go, and this makes them flee before a shadow, and when none pursues them,
they run away from themselves. Thus whilst we are in hostility against God, we
lie open to all weathers, and our own Consciences do betray us to the sury of
all those troubles and dangers that surround us. But the great end of Christian
Religion is to reconcile us unto God; in order to which it both proposes a
peace to us, and the terms and Articles upon which it is to be obtained; which
terms when we have performed, the Quarrel presently ends in a mutual
Confederacy; and of enemies we become the friends and favorites of God; upon
which there follows a Jubilee of joy and peace within; the Conscience smileth
and grows calm, as the Ocean when the wind is laid: and now, if troubles
besal us, if dangers encounter us, it is all but like the rattling of Hail upon
the tiles of a Musick-house, which with all their cluttering and noise will not
be able to disturb the Harmony within. For a quiet Conscience will be a
Paradise in a wilderness, a Haven in the midst of storms; it will make a man
fearless in danger, joyful in tribulation, and enable him to sing with a thorn
at his breast; and when troubles and crosses surround him on every side, that
will be a Sanctuary to him, whereunto he may retire, and be merry in spite of
Fortune: Thus by reconciling us unto God, the Christian Religion armeth us
against all the miseries in the world.

Thirdly It does it also by assuring us of that special care and regard which
the Divine Providence has of us, and our affairs: Christianity assures us,
that all things shall work together for the good of them that love God, and
keep his Commandments: that even their afflictions shall prosper them, and all
the cross-winds conspire to blow them to the right Port; and what greater
security can a man desire, then to have all his affairs managed by a Providence
that is infinite^y wise, and knows what is best for us; infinitely k^nd, and
wills what he knows best; and infinitely powerful, and does what it
wills; this is the utmost that any modest or reasonable man can desire for
his security, and he that firmly believes this, most necessarily be happy
whatsoever betalleth him: for whatsoever happens, he takes as a favor,
because it comes from the hand of that wise and merciful Providence, which he
is well assured does both know and do that which is best for him: and is it not
a thousand times better that our affairs should be managed as God thinks fit,
who is ^o much wise^ than we, and loves us far better than we do our selves,
than that they should always jump with our childish hopes, and keep pace with
our extravagant fancies; and if the Government of all events that besal us were
put into our own hands, would it not be our wisdom and our interest to resign
it it back into Gods hands again, who, as we must needs acknowledged can carve
a thousand times better for us, than we for our selves? why then should we be
troubled that our affairs sometimes run counter to our humors and fancies; did
we understand the reason of Gods dealings, and see what he sees, and know what
he knows, we should praise him on our bended knees, for those crosses which
are now the innocent causes of our repinings against him. This therefore in
Reason ought to satisfy us that we are under the Protection of a most wise and
gracious Providence; and that if afflictions do befall us, they are but Rods in
the hands of our Benefactor, and tokens of love from a reconciled Father. For
what reason can we have either to fear or complain, when we know our selves
sheltered within the bosom of that Providence, in which all the Divine
Attributes, like so many Guardian Angels do pitch their Tents, about us. Within
this blessed Ark, if we please, we may live securely, whilst all the floods of
misery do swell, and rove about us; here we may sing Requiems in the loudest
Thunders, and sleep securely in the midst of storms; for what should we be
afraid of, when we have Omniscience for our Pilot, Omnipotence for our Convoy,
and All-sufficient Goodness for our Purveyer and Caterer: by the help of this
one confideration a man may bid defiance to misery, and stand impregnable
against all the Batteries of the world.

Fourthly, and lastly, Christianity armeth us against the evil of misery, by
assuring us of a blessed Immortality; and verily were it not for the hope of
this, man were of all Creatures the most miserable. For his very Reason, by
which he is capable of a larger happiness, does most commonly, in this life,
prove an Instrument of grief and vexation to him: and as for the Beasts they
are as sensible of sensual pleasures as we; they relish their morsels with as
great a gust, and enjoy their delights with as quick a sense, as the greatest
Epicures in the world. Besides which, their Harmony is not mingled with the sad
discords of a wounded Conscience, which often interrupts our mirth, and puts a
sting to all our pleasures: And as for troubles the beasts only feel them
whilst they are present, and are not alarmed with fear at the approach of them,
nor vexed with despair in the presence of them, nor wracked with fruitless
cares of removing them; to all which inconveniences our Reason exposes us. So
that were it not for the hope of a future happiness, man, that is the top of
this lower Creation, would be the most miserable part of it, and we should have
reason to envy the happiness of the pretty Birds, that sit merrily singing on
the trees; and to wish that we could change conditions with the Fishes, that
sport and play in the silver-streams, devoid of all those griefs and sorrows,
cares and anxities with which we are wrackt, and tortured every moment: the
only thing therefore that makes our life desirable, and gives it the
advantage of Nonentity, is this, that how mean soever our condition is here,
yet we are born to higher hopes, and are now but Candidates for an Immortal
preferment; and of this the Christian Religion gives us the most certain
assurance, even by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. By this it is that
we are begotten into a lively hope of an eternal Inheritance, as the Apostle
tells us, 1 Peter 1. 3. and indeed this is a proof of the Immortal state beyond
all other Arguments, whether Moral, or Physical; for had not this Doctrine of
Immortality been true, it cannot be imagined, that the God of Truth would have
sealed and confirmed it, as he did, by raising the Author of it from the dead;
since in so doing he must have been guilty of cheating the world, and seconding
the most rank Imposture, than which we cannot form a conceit more black or
incongruous to the nature of God. Wherefore now life and Immortality are as
clear and evident as the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, of which we have
as full assurance as we can possibly have of any matter of fact in the world:
for the eyewitnesses of it confirmed their Testimony with their blood, which
is the highest pledge that a man can give of his honesty, and there is no
credit to be given to men, if they may not be believed upon this security. Thus
Christianity, you see, has sounded our hopes of Immortal happiness upon the
surest Foundations in the world; which hope is sufficient to raise any
considering man above the reach of misery. For would we but keep our thoughts
within those higher and untroubled Regions, we should be able to look down upon
these little affairs, about which poor mortals scramble, with as much contempt
and scorn, as we do upon the toils and labors of a little world of Ants about
a Molehil, who are not altogether so ridiculous, because they do not divide
their molehil into little Empires, nor desraud, and murder, nor be false and
treacherous to one another for the greater share, nor were they ever so
extravagant as to march out in Armies to kill their neighboring Ants, so to
extend their Dominion over the next handful of a turf: but he whose hope hope
has mounted him to Heaven, can from thence look down and sigh, and smile at
all these fooleries, and slight, and undervalue whatsoever sensual men, poor
souls do fear, or hope, or long for, or pursue: for he has such a glory within
the prospect of his faith and hope, as do at one glimpse foil all the glory of
the world, and unsting all its miseries. The sight of that flowery Canaan of
Rest and pleasure that lies before him, incourageth him to march on with joy
and alacrity through this howling desert of sorrow and misery, and make the
wilderness to seem a Paradise to him; and at worst, all the ill usage that he
meets with here, will but make earth more loathsome now, and Heaven more
welcome to him hereafter. When therefore he is tossed in this tempestuous Sea,
he considers with himself, that a few Leagues farther lies that blessed Port
where he shall be crowned as soon as he is landed; and concludes that when he
is gotten safe on shore, he shall then look back with pleasure and delight upon
those threatening waves he now encountreth, and for ever bless the storms and
winds that drove him thither, and so resolves with St Paul, That the
sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with the Joys
that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. and thus you see what incomparable armor
the Christian Religion is, both against sin and misery. But yet we must not
think it will defend us, if we only keep it by us to look on; there never was
any Soldier so foolish as to think himself secure in a Battle because he has
excellent armor at home locked up in his chest, or closet, and yet so besotted
are many men, as to expect defense and security from their Religion because
they are baptized Christians, and have a Scheme of Christianity in their
Bibles: as if Religion were nothing but a Charm or Amulet, which being hung
about their necks, must immediately disinchant them of all their maladies: but
be not mistaken, if ever you mean this armor of God should do you good, you
must put it on, you must transcribe its Doctrines into your belief, and its
duties into your practice: which is the second thing I proposed to discourse
of, that if we would have Christianity armor of defense unto us, we must put
it on, that is, we must believe and obey it; for unless we believe the
Doctrines of Christianity, how can they defend us, either from sin, or misery;
for our holy Religion does not work magically upon men, nor make them
invulnerable, as the Witch did Achilles, merely by Charms and Enchantments; but
it proceeds by rational and accountable Methods and fortifieth our minds by
Reason and Arguments; but no Proposals of Reason can work upon the minds of men
that do not believe them; and though the things proposed be never so true in
themselves, yet unless we assent to the truth of them, we shall be no more
concerned in them, than if they were the grossest fictions. For no man will be
moved by those things in which he thinks he has no interest: but in pure
falsehoods we can have none, because they are pure Non-entities. To what purpose
therefore is it that Christianity has armed us against sin with the strongest
motives in the world, if we do not believe them, all the Glories it proposes
will signify no more to us, than the promise of a fair Inheritance in Utopia;
and we shall be no more concerned in all the terrors it denounces, than if we
were only threatened with an invasion from the world in the Moon; and what
though Christianity fortifies us against misery, with Arguments strong enough
to create comfort in hell, yet if we give no credit to them, they will be as
far from comforting us, as the festival dreams of a starving man, are from
satisfying his hunger: if therefore we intend that Religion should secure us,
either from sin or misery, we must embrace its proposals with a hearty and
lively says, and as we must believe it, so we must practice it, else it will
be as insignificant to us as the Dreams of the Alchoran: for the way of
Christian Religion is not to hale and drag men out of the arms of their lusts
by force, and irresistible power, but by Arguments to solicit them to the
practice of those duties it enjoyneth, and by that to wean them from their
vicious inclination. For our Religion walks in the Methods of our nature, and
carries us on by degrees, from Acts to Habits of Goodness: and in this Method
it is, that the Divine Grace, which accompanies Christianity does work its
effects upon the spirits of men; not by an instantaneous infusion of virtuous
Habits into their Wills, but by making effectual addresses to their Reason, and
Consciences to persuade them to thwart their vicious inclinations, by
practicing those virtues that are contrary to them: and so it goes on, moving
us to a continued repetition of those virtuous acts, until all our evil Habits
are gone out, and expired into the contrary Habits of Virtue and Goodness. For
the Grace of God is like a grafft put into a stock of another nature, it makes
use of the faculties and juice of the stock, but by degrees converts all into
its own nature: and therefore we usually see that when a man has been wicked,
the beginnings of his Reformation proceed not from habit and inclination, but
from fear and terror; and whilst he does obey God, he would rebel if he dared;
but persevering in his obedience, he grows more habituated to it, and so by
degrees it becomes his nature. This therefore being the ordinary Method of
Christianity to carry us on by repeated acts to permanent habits of virtue, our
obedience to its commands is indispensably necessary, if we expect it should
either rescue or secure us from sin; for no man is secure from fin, until he is
habitually virtuons; which state without a Miracle no man can arrive to but
through intermediate acts of Obedience; and as without the practice of it
duties Christianity cannot arm us against sin, so neither can it against
misery: for all those gracious Promises, and comfortable Proposals by which our
Religion arms us against the misery of this world, are suspended upon the
condition of our obedience to its Laws, and whilst this is wanting, there is
not one word of comfort for us in all the glad Tidings of the Gospel, there is
no Promise in it will open a door of hope to shelter us from the storms of
trouble; but all its dreadful threats will be perpetually thundering out their
terrors upon us, so that if we are resolved to be wicked, we can never expect
comfort from Christianity; for it has set up a flaming Sword to chase all
wickedness out of the Paradise of its joys: so that we may as soon suck Balsom
out of a Scorpions sting, or gather Nectar from a nest of Wasps, as joy or
comfort from the Christian Religion, whilst we persevere in our wickedness:
thus you see how necessary it is that we should believe the Doctrines and
practice the duties of Christianity, if ever we mean that it should arm and
desend us. To close up all therefore, as you hope to be the better for your
Religion, to be defended by it, either srom sin, or misery, do not content your
selves any longer, either with the empty name of Christians, or the formal
Profession of Christianity, but endeavor seriously to work your minds into
such an effectual belief of it, as may thoroughly mould you into an hearty
compliance with its duties; for which end let me persuade you to shake off all
that prejudice against Religion, which lewd and vicious Principles may have
infused into your understings, and to consider seriously with your selves,
whether it be not a thousand times more for your interest that Religion should
be no imposture, than that you should enjoy your lusts, and whether all those
comforts that Religion administers in this life, and all those hopes it gives
of a glorious Immortality in the life to come, be not infinitely more valuable
than the short and fulsome pleasure of a few paltry vices, and sure if you are
wise, when you have thoroughly considered this, you will heartily wish that
Christianity were true, though you should not be able to believe it so; but if
when you have quitted all your prejudice, you will but impartially survey those
many and mighty evidences upon which this excellent Religion is founded, you
will soon find all that infidelity which now hovers over your understandings,
vanish, and fly away like shadows before the Sun; and your minds being once
persuaded into an hearty belief of its Truth and Divinity, you cannot imagine
what force you will find in all its motives, and Arguments, then will its
promises tempt ye a thousand times more than all the lures, and blandishments
of vice, and its threats will overpower you with such an awful dread, that
nothing in the world will be so terrible as sin; and you will find more life:
(...) one word of Religion, than in all the address and Rhetoric of Vice; then
you will no longer complain of the difficulties of Religion, nor be startled at
the steep ascents in the way to Heaven; for your faith will every moment supply
you with new strength and vigor to carry you through all the weary stages of
your duties; and having thus put on Christianity by says and obedience, you
will find your selves instantly inspired by it with such an invincible courage,
as will enable you to conquer all the malice, and triumph over all the miseries
of the world. For now we shall be Mrs of our own Fortunes, and we need no
longer be Tenants at will to the Chances and accidents of the world, but all
our happiness in our own hands, and may choose whether we will be miserable,
for whilst we keep peace with God and our own Consciences, and do not through
our own wilful folly forfeit the blessed hope of Immortality; it is not all the
power and malice of the world can threaten our ruin, or shake the foundation
of our happiness; and therefore as we would be happy both here and hereafter,
let us put on the whole Armor of God, and sincerely submit our faith to the
Doctrines, and our practice to the Laws of Christianity; then may we bid
defiance to all misery, and march triumphantly through Heaven to Heaven, and
pass through one Paradise into another: and our Religion having armed us
against all the troubles of this life, shall in the end crown us with the Joys
of the life to come.

FINIS.

