Dr. SHERLOCK'S PRESERVATIVE CONSIDERED.

The First Part, and its Defense, Proved to contain Principles which destroy
all right use of Reason, Fathers, Councils, undermine Divine Faith, and abuse
Moral Honesty.

In the Second Part, Forty malicious Calumnies and forged Untruths laid open;
besides several Fanatical Principles which destroy all Church Discipline, and
oppose Christ's Divine Authority.

In Two Letters OF F. LEWIS SABRAN of the Society of JESUS.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.

TO THE READER.
YOU will find in the Postscript an Answer to the Preface set before the
Defense; which being a Heap of undigested Untruths, and ill-contriv'd
Calumnies, I conceived it most proper to expose them that relate to me in
particular, after I have wiped off the Dirt which the Defense has cast upon
the Churches Doctrine. Besides, I thought my self bound in Justice and good
Manners to yield the Preference to the Honest Footman, whose Style is not near
so Lewd and Unmannerly as the outrageous Preface-maker's, who may with reason
be supposed a Minister, that CANONICAL GOWN having these late Years been a
constant Sanctuary to so many Libelling, Slandering, Profane, Reviling,
Peevish and Uncharitable Pens, that the greatest part of those Books which in
any of these kinds have appeared of late Years in this Kingdom, have been the
notunnatural Issues of these Meek, Charitable, Humble and Loyal Levites.

SIR,
THOUGH you have declared to some Friends, That you do not conceive your self
under any Obligation of Answering my first Letter, the Licensing of a Book
being (I perceive) but a Friendly Office, and a cheap one too, when Conscience
only and Reputation may be concerned in it, and not obliging the Licenser to
boggle at any Calumnies he meets with in it, nor at any Falsehood that imposes
upon the Readers, though in a Concern of so high a nature as the True Faith and
Eternal Salvation: However, I will tempt your good Nature and Civility once
more, hoping that you may at least make use of Dr. Sherlock's happy
Contrivance; and when you are sensible that Five or Six Weeks Endeavors cannot
suggest any Answer that may appear to Public View, without betraying the
weakness of your Cause, and the unwarrantable Methods used in its defense, you
will find out some Honest Footman, who will not blush to own all the Wrong, and
impertinent Reasoning which must make up a seeming Answer.

I am confident, how unkindly soever you may deal with others, that you owe Dr.
Sherlock so much Deference, as not to License a Book Printed in his Defense,
without his Perusal and Allowance. Wherefore not to trouble the Footman, whose
Circumstances (as we are told) can expect but a small allowance of time, I
shall look on the Answers given by Dr. Sherlock's Second, as offered, or at
least owned by him, and Examine how he supports those Principles by which I
pretend that he overthrows, First, All right use of Common Sense.

It is a Catholic Principle, That he who has an Infallible Guide, need not
mistrust him so, as to enquire farther, whether he be in the right Way, though he
may and ought to improve himself in the knowledge of the Way he is directed in.
Dr. Sherlock, in opposition to this self-evident Principle, Preservat. Fol. 3.
charges the Catholic Church with this great Crime, That it will not allow the
reading of Heretical Books; adding, That God not only allows, but requires it.
This seemed to me extravagant, not to say impious, and to all those who have
inherited from St. Paul that Faith to which he exacts so firm and unwavering an
adherency, that if an Angel from Heaven should teach us Gal. 1. 8.
any thing in opposition to it, we ought not to mind him, or to return him any
other Answer than Anathema. How can, said I, this positive Certainty stand with
an Obligation of reading Heretical Books which oppose that Faith, to frame by
them, and settle a Judgment? By what Text does God deliver this Injunction? I
asked farther, how standing to the first Principles of Common Sense, a Church
that declares all Men bound to Judge for themselves, could Countenance Laws
which exact of Dissenters, that they stand not to that their Judgment, but
Comply against it; and that constrain their liberty of Judging by the dread of
Excommunications, Sequestrations, Imprisonments, Exclusion from the chiefest
Properties of freeborn Subjects, even by Hanging and Quartering: which is to
make it Death not to act against a strict Duty of Conscience, acknowledged by
the Persecutors to be such. These were three material Questions; I waited Six
Weeks for an Answer, and he returns me at last by his Footman this wonderful
one: That I leave out what was said of the Bible. Dr. Sherlock blaming the
Church of Rome, for not suffering her People to dispute their Religion, or to
read Heretical Books, nay not so much as to look into the Bible it self; that I
take it for granted, that all the Writings of Protestant Divines are Heretical
Books, nay the Bible it self too. I wonder not the Doctor should give this his
Answer by a Footman; he has yet, I conceive, some remnants of Modesty. But is
there here one word of Answer to my three Questions? No, not a syllable, nor of
Truth neither. I reflected on no Divines of any Persuasion; I found Heretical
Books in the number of those which he blames our Church for not recommending,
and which he assures us God requires the reading of. This being an Objection of
a new Coin, and a Proof of his own Invention, I showed the Unreasonableness of
the one, and asked an Instance of the other, passing by that trivial Calumny so
often Answered, That the Catholic Church suffers not her People to look into
the Bible it self; which supposes that we lock up the Bible, as the Romans did
their Sybillin Books, whereas many thousands are commanded by the Catholic
Church, setting aside all temporal Concerns, to make the reading of the Word of
God their continual study, and to teach daily the Doctrine of it to those who
not having learnt to read, or being of too weak a Judgment to carry away the
Sense of a Book, or too much taken up by their Trades and Employs, by which
they support their Families, and earn themselves a necessary Livelihood, have
not the Leisure or Capacity to gather the Articles of Christian Belief, or the
different Parts of Christian Duties from it: for to all others, who conceive
they may reap a Benefit from it, leave is never denied to read the Bible,
translated to that end into all vulgar Tongues.

In the close an Answer is attempted, and the Author of the Defense tells me,
He is not content with an Implicit Faith; That we are commanded to try the
Spirits, and to try all things. These are the Texts produced to maintain Dr.
Sherlock's three Positions, That we are obliged to read Heretical Books, That
God commands it, That each one is to judge finally for himself. I offer the
following Observations on these Texts to your second thoughts.

With reason St. Paul commands each Christian to try all Omnia probate, quod
bonum est tenete. 1 These. 5. Nolite omni Spiritui credere, sed probate
Spiritus, si ex Deo sunt. 1 Joan. 4. Quoniam multi Pseudo-Prophetae exierunt in
Mundum.
things, and to retain what is good: And St. John in plainer terms, Not to
credit every Spirit, but to try the Spirits, if they be of God; for, as St.
John observes in that very place, many false Prophets have appeared in the
World: And since ' it is necessary that Heresies arise, there will ever be many
such, the Ministers of Satan, as St. Paul minds us, 2 Cor. 11. 15.
transfiguring themselves like unto the Ministers of Justice. We ought not then
to believe each Man that pretends to the pure Word of the Lord, to the Spirit
of the Lord. The Question is, How we ought to try these different Spirits? Each
Man, says Dr. Sherlock, is to read all Heretical as well as Orthodox Books, to
hear all False Prophets as well as the Teachers of Truth, Each ignorant
Tradesman, Husbandman, Day-Laborer, having read the Bible, heard and read what
the Dissenting Divines can say, is to Decide as Sovereign Judge, without
Appeal: Alii Prophetia, alii discretio Spirituum. 1 Cor. 12. 20.
All are to choose thus their Religion. Not so, says St. Paul; On some only is
bestowed the Gift of Interpreting, on some only the Gift of discerning Spirits.
A necessary Caution; for as St. Cyprian observes, Hence arise all Heresies,
that People Hinc Haereses ortae quod unus in Ecclesia Dei ad tempus Sacerdos,
and ad tempus Judex vice Christi non cogitatur. l. 1. c. 3. cont. Haer. De
Ecclesia in Academiae porticum descendunt, sensui communi sed suo, non
Ecclesiae se sistunt. Contr. Hermog. Nil laborant nisi non invenire quod
credunt. l. 2. c. 2. de Genesis con. Man. Semper discunt and numquam ad scientiam
veritatis perveniunt. 2 Timothy 3. Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis. Act. 15.
do not consider that there is one Priest in the Church of God for the time,
one Judge in lieu of Christ; but challenge each of them the Prerogative of
Judging for themselves. Heretics (says Tertullian) abandon the Church, repair
to Schools of Philosophy, (or Natural Discourse, and the Judgment of their
Reason) appeal to Common Sense, but to their own, not to that of the Church.
They profess in their Creed to believe the Catholic Church, but as St. Augustine
said of the Manicheans, All they endeavor is not to sind what they believe: and
having left the School of Christ, and those Teachers he had appointed them,
they make good by their continual Debates about Religion, (without any fixure
on a certain and unwavering Faith, without any secure Principles to build on)
that Character which S. Paul gives of all Heretics, They are ever seeking, ever
learning, and never attain the science of truth. What is their Duty then, but
to seek out those to whom the infallible Direction of the Holy Ghost is
promised by Christ our Lord, and accordingly given; so that they have Authority
to resolve all Doubts with a The Holy Ghost declares this, and we declare it.
That no other Method can bring us to a steady and unwavering Faith. St. Paul
did acknowledge to the Ephesians, when having warned them To be careful to keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, he Ephesians. 4. 3, 11.
declares that God gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and other Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints unto the work
of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the Body of Christ, and that not for some
Age or Ages only, but until we meet all unto the unity of Faith, and Knowledge
of the Son of God, into a perfect Man, into the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ; that is, to the last day of the General Resurrection, this
Method of standing to the Decisions of such lawful Pastors being necessary:
That we be not children, wavering, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, in the wickedness of Men in craftiness, to the circumvention of Error.
That this is the Sense of the two Texts cited in opposition to it, is most
evident from the very places whence they are taken; for St. John having advised
Christians to try the Spirits, gives this standing Rule and Method for all
Ages: He that knows God (by a true Faith,) hears Us; he that is not of Qui
novit Deum audit nos, qui non est ex Deo non audit nos: in hoc cognoscimus
Spiritum veritatis and spiritum erroris. 1 Jo. 4. 6.
God, hears us not: By this Mark you shall discern the Spirit of truth from the
spirit of error. Behold St. John condemning Dr. Sherlock, who will have each
Man Judge for himself of the Doctrine; whereas St. John declares we must try the
Spirits only by this Mark, That they have the Spirit of God who hear with
Submission their lawful Pastors, whereas those who Judge for themselves without
that Deference, are certainly possessed with the Spirit of Error. It Is also
evident, that by US he means all lawful Pastors, and not the Apostles only; for
they were all dead when he writ that Epistle. Could any Text be a fuller and
more pressing Evidence for me, or assure us more positively, that an unerring
Spirit guides the Pastors and Teachers in the Church of God; and that whoever
will not fall into Error, must submit by an Implicit Faith to that Churches
Authority, and embrace the Doctrins which she teaches by her Prelates. The
other Text (so unhappy these Men are in their choice) is as full and plain to
the same effect: for St. Paul having first warned the Thessalonians in the
foregoing Verse, not to despise the Gift of Prophecy or Interpretation given to
the Teachers of the Church for the Instruction of others, he bids them by this
Text, not to receive all sorts of Interpreters, but such only as had received
from the Holy Ghost the Gift of Prophesying, and were Commissioned by a lawful
Authority to Preach: But so far he was from advising them to converse with, or
read the Books of those that were Aliens and out of the Church, that he had
warned before the Ephesians, with caution to converse with such. But let us In
sapientia ambulate cum iis qui foris sunt. Ephesians. 4. 5. Si quis Evangelizaverit
praeterquam id quod accepistis, anathema. Gal. 1. Irreformabilis fides.
observe the several Marks given by the Apostles and by Christ, whereby to
distinguish those who are to be admitted of, from those who ought to be
rejected. St. Paul gives the Galatians this Rule, Whoever Preaches beside what
you have received, be he accursed; that is all the regard St. Paul bids us have
for all such Innovators, as pretend to a reformation of Faith, which, as
Tertullian teaches, is not liable to any, because it is not exposed to the least
danger of failing, the Gates of Hell (Errors) not being permitted ever to
prevail against the Church: which moved St. Augustine to declare thus his Sense:
We are certain, Certi sumus neminem a communione genium se separare potuisse,
nam non quisque nostrum in sua justitia, sed in scripturis sacris quaerit
Ecclesiam, and ut promissa est reddi conspicit. Epist. 48. Dic Ecclesiae, si
Ecclesiam non audierit sit tibi velut Ethnicus and Publicanus. Mat. 18.
that no one can divide himself from the Communion of all Nations; for not any
one amongst us must seek the Church in his own Justice, (such as his own
private Judgment frames) but in the Holy Scriptures, and he will find the
Church, such as she is there promised. What Mark did our Blessed Lord set? In
whatever Offense received from a Brother, whatever Scandal (and there is not
any greater than Heresy and Schism) in case he hearken not unto, obey not the
Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen or a Publican; that is, have no
Converse with him, separate thy self from him. Certainly this Advice of Christ
is perfectly opposite to that Obligation Dr. Sherlock would impose on all. St.
Irenaeus who received the true meaning of Christ's Doctrine from St. Polycarp,
St. John's Disciple, understood it in a very different meaning, when in his
Fourth Book against Heresies he thus expressed himself: ' It Is necessary Qui in
Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obaudire oportet, qui successionem habent ab
Apostolis; qui cum Episcopali successione charisma veritatis certum secundum
placitum patris acceperunt: reliquos vero, qui absistunt a Principali
successione and quocunque loco colliguntur, suspectos habere vel quasi
Haereticos and malae sententiae, vel quasi scindentes and eiatos and sibi
placentes, aut rursus ut Hypocritas quaestus gratia and vanae gloriae hoc
operantes, qui omnes decidunt a veritate. l. 4. c. 42.
to obey the Priests of the Church, who have their Succession from the
Apostles, who with Episcopal Succession have received a certain Grace or Gift
of Truth according to the Will of the Father, all others who Separate
themselves from the Principal Succession, in whatever Place they may Combine
together, we must suspect as Heretics, and of a wrong Opinion; or as
Schismatics, proud Men, full of the love of themselves; or again as Hypocrites,
thus dividing themselves for Interests sake and Vainglory; who all of them are
fallen from the Truth. Is this to send us to read their Books? St. Augustine
also must be owned of a very different Principle, who having stated the Case as
it is at present in this Nation, gives this opposite Advice in his Third Sermon
on the 30th Psalm: Many Tongues contradict, diverse Heresies, diverse
Contradicunt multae linguae, diversae Haereses, diversa Schismata personant,
linguae multae contradicunt veritati: tu curre ad tabernaculum Dei, Ecclesiam
Catholicam tene, a regula veritatis noli discedere, protegeris in tabernaculo
Domini a contradictione linguarum. CC. 3. in Ps. 20.
Schisms and Divisions speak loud, what Method is to be followed in this Case?
Run you to the Tabernacle of God the Catholic Church (of which no Heresies
contradicting one another can be Parts.) Do not depart from that Rule of Truth,
(behold what Dr. Sherlock blames, and calls Implicit Faith) you shall be
protected in the Tabernacle of God from these contradicting Tongues. This is
the true way, taught and followed from the beginning, of Interpreting
Scripture, of adhering to the genuin word of God, when the Letter bearing
several Constructions, cannot reconcile different Opinions as the same holy
Doctor observes; We follow in this also the Authority of Canonical Scriptures,
when we follow what is Decreed Sequimnr sane in hac re etiam Canonicarum
Authoritatem Scripturarum, cum hoc facimus quod universae Jam placuit Ecclesiae
quam ipsarum Scripturarum commendat Authoritas, etc. L. 1. Cont. Cresc. c. 31,
32, etc.
by the Universal present Church, which the Authority of the Scriptures
themselves recommends unto us; and because the holy Scriptures cannot deceive
us, whoever fears to be misled by the obscurity of this (or any other)
Question, let him consult about it that Church, which we are without the least
obscurity directed unto by the holy Scriptures. This he had learned from St.
John, who assures the Members of that Church, That they are not to seek any
other Masters to teach them, having that Holy Spirit Non necesse habetis ut
aliquis vos doceat, unctio enim ejus docet vos de omnibus. 1 Joa. 2.
(promised unto, and guiding that Church) which teaches them all truth. St.
Paul was of a very different mind as well as Religion from Dr. Sherlock, when
he orders even the Learned Bishop Titus, to avoid an Heretic after one or two
endeavors Haereticum hominem post unam and secundam Correptionem devita, sciens
quia subversus est qui ejusmodi est and delinquit cum sit proprio Judicio
condemnatus. Tit. 3. 10, 11.
to reclaim him, knowing that such an one is cast off, and is in sin, being
condemned by his own judgment; which he opposes to that of the Church. The
first General Councils, and the first Christian Emperors, were of a different
Religion and mind from this Doctor, who Commanded all the Books written by
Heretics to be burnt. I will conclude this Point with St. Augustins Advice,
perfectly opposite to these unreasonable Principles, a seasonable advice given
to all Heretics wearied out with seeking in vain the truth by their own
judgment, without the direction of this unerring Guide, Return and lie at
Revertere and sede in portu Catholicae fidei ubi nulla te possit fluctuosae
curiositatis tempestas turbare Aug. in Hypognost.
Anchor in the Haven of Catholic Faith, where no storm of a wavering curiosity
can disturb you.

Dr. Sherlock in his Preservative, f. 4. gives his Protestant this advice. Ask
them whether they will allow you to judge for your self in matters of Religion?
If they do not, why will they trouble you with disputing? You cannot be
convinced unless you judge too; and thereby resolve Faith into a private
Spirit. -- Here let our Protestant fix his Foot, and not stir an Inch till they
disown Infallibility. I observed that this was to say, it is impossible to
convince a man that in reason he ought to submit his judgment to that of
another, though infallible. That such a Principle makes void all the right use
of reason, when it should lead us to submit to a just Authority: that St. Paul
pretended to Infallibility through the assistance of the Spirit of God who
directed him, and consequently, that if this Principle of Dr. Sherlock be
reasonable, the Jews ought when he disputed in their Synagouge, not to have
stirred an inch, not to have hearkened to him, till he had disowned
infallibility. In the Defense, the Honest Footman is ashamed of so unchristian
a Principle, and would disown it, saying, That it appears plain and natural to
him, that he may submit his judgment to an Infallible Judge, and yet the Church
of Rome may not be that Judge, true: but this is contrary to Dr. Sherlock's
Principle: For, how long is the Protestant not to stir an inch, till the
Catholic has proved his Churches infallibility? There would have been some
common sense and reason in that Advice: but, not so, says Dr. Sherlock, but
till he disowns infallibility. It Is as evident then as Noon-day-light, that Dr.
Sherlock looked upon infallibility pretended unto, as inconsistent with
disputing, and pretending by reason to convince an other of the truth, and that
consequently he takes the Jews's part against St. Paul. The Footman Mistook
here his Masters Errant.

Preservative, fol. 6. Dr. Sherlock asks this Question, What difference is
there betwixt men's using their private judgment to turn Papists or to turn
Protestants? I answered: the same as betwixt two sick men, the one whereof
chooses to put himself in an able Doctors hands, whom he knows to have an
infallible Remedy, whilst the other chooses his own Simples, and makes his own
Medicin. As between two at Law, the one whereof is guided by his Reason to take
Advice from a wise Counselor, the other to be his own Council, etc. The
Doctor's second Answers by this Question, And is not here private Judgment used
all this while? A shrewd Question indeed. Dr. Sherlock had asked what
difference there was in these two uses of private Judgment; I produce the
difference, then as if the Question had been forgot, still says the Footman,
there is use made of private Judgment: it were as nice a Reply, had one asked
what difference is there betwixt an Ounce of Gold and an Ounce of Silver, if
when the different value is expressed, he should wisely return this answer, why
there is still an Ounce in both cases. Is there no difference then betwixt one
who follows his fancy in choosing his way, and him who chooses a good Guide,
and follows him, because both choose? do both equally rely on their fancy? What
Position can more abuse common sense? Certainly the Ingenious and Learned
Gentlemen of the Temple, cannot but smile at this strange way of Reasoning in
their Master, so different from theirs.

Preservative, fol. 9. They cannot with any sense dispute with us about the
particular Articles of Faith, because the sense given of Scripture and Fathers,
takes its Authority from the Church understanding it so. I Replied, that the
sense takes its Authority from God who spoke the Word, though we are certain
that we have the true sense of that Word, because we receive it from the
Church, which is guided in delivering to us both the Letter and Sense by the
infallible Spirit of God, that is to abide with Her for ever, according to
Christ's promise, Joh. 14. 16. I added that if John and William dispute, which
is the right way to a place, John is not disabled of convincing William of his
mistake, because he receives the Reasons he uses from an infallible Guide. This
was plain and full: what answers the Doctor's second, He cites some Catholic
Divines (how truly, it belongs not to my present purpose) saying, that the
words of Scripture brought in proof of Transubstantiation might be taken in a
different sense from that which the Catholic Church has ever received and
delivered: and that had not the Church ever taught that sense, one might
believe otherwise for all the Letter of Scripture. Let it be so; but what
follows here? But the necessity of an unerring Interpreter? So, that Text 1 John 5. 7, 8. There be three which give Testimony in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three be one, and there be three which give
testimony on Earth, the Spirit, Water, and Blood, and these three be one, in
the sense the Church has ever received it in, proves the strict Unity of God
in the Trinity of Persons: The Arians gave it a contrary, and as natural a
sense; does this prove that we follow not Scripture, and this very Text in our
belief of the Holy Trinity? Once more I appeal to the Learned Gentlemen of the
Temple, hoping they will join with me, maintaining against their Master, that
all the Judges of the Land may very reasonably convince by Law an impertinent
Party, though he should oppose that they may not do it, because their
Interpretation of the Law, is to deliver the true sense of it.

The Preservative, fol. 11. moves this Question. Must the belief of an
infallible Judge be resolved into every man's private judgment? Must it not be
believed with a Divine Faith, and can there be a Divine Faith without an
infallible Judge? I gave this answer; There can be no Divine Faith, without a
Divine Revelation, nor a prudent one without a Moral evidence in the Motives of
Credibility, on which may be grounded the evident obligation to accept it. The
judgment being possessed with that Moral infallibility, rests not there, but
observing that goodness and mercy of God, which cannot permit that falsehood
should be propounded in his Name, with all the apparent marks of his Hand and
Seal, and without any like appearance on the Contrary, inclined by a pious
motion of the Will, called by the famous Council of Orange affectio
credibilitatis, and strengthened by that Grace of God, which bestows the Gift
of Faith, fastens on Gods Veracity, and with a submission not capable of any
doubt, embraces the revealed truth. If the infallibility of the Church were
more than Morally evident, it were impossible that any Heresy should be. To
this the Second of Dr. Sherlock has nothing to oppose, and is willing to
submit if I can show a Revelation that there is an infallible visible Church. I
will comply with so reasonable a demand: and since not one in a thousand of
those who oppose our Doctrine in this fundamental Point, which once being
cleared, bears away all disputes, understands what that infallibility means, on
which we ground the admirable certainty of each Point of our Belief, give me
leave Sir, to be somewhat more prolix on this Subject than the narrow compass of
a Letter would otherwise allow.

What is, and whence proceeds this infallibility? Many do suppose and object
unto us, that we hold a Man, or many to be infallible in themselves, a Title to
which God alone can lay a Claim, who only as he is truth, so he is alone
infallible. They wilfully suppose, that we place this infallibility in the
sense and judgment of men, so that whatever by their own Light they resolve and
order, must infallibly be true and just; that such may frame new Articles of
Faith, and a new Religion; or at least Phanatick-like by Enthusiasms, and new
marvelous Revelations, make new additions to our Faith, so that we may have
daily a different one; their Votaries like a blind Herd, being driven now to
one Opinion, then to another, yet still supposing themselves infallibly right;
all this is a monstrous misrepresentation, without one word of truth; but men
who themselves follow a lawless fancy, and loose liberty, must thus disfigure
that admirable Guide which God has left us, otherwise they would soon be
without any followers: this account I shall deliver here of the infallible
Guide, which Catholics follow, the Church of God, will I am sure represent her
in very different, because in her true proper Colors.

Our Guide then is the Catholic Church, either diffusive in its whole extent,
or representative in its Head, and Bishops, the Pope, and a General Council;
for as in the State here in England, we have a Common Law, and a Statute Law,
the first not compiled by any one Lawgiver, but delivered by all the Judges and
Sages of the Law, and preserved in all Courts, and the daily use of the whole
Kingdom; the second delivered particularly by the Kingdoms Great Representative
in its Head and Members, the King, and lawfully convened Parliaments. So in the
Church there is a general Faith, first received from Christ and his Apostles,
and preserved by all Bishops in their respective Diocesses, and in the mind and
actions of each faithful Believer in the whole Catholic Church; and when any
difficulty arises by the opposition of new Heresies, then the Church
Representative the Pope, and a General Council, or Synod of the ablest and
Holiest Bishops of the Catholic Church, deliver their Sentence in favor of the
ancient Truth ever followed in the Church, which Decisions, or Canons, are like
our Statute Law, only declaring, and applying to particular instances the
Common Law, or Belief of the Church. We hold that this general Faith received
from the Apostles, and preserved in all the Members of the Catholic Church,
explained upon occasion by the Church Representative is infallibly true, and
this is all the infallibility the Catholic Church pretends unto, neither the
whole Church, nor any person, or persons in it, are held to possess any
intrinsic infallibility, which we own to be proper to God alone. Nay no man in
this present state or condition of life, as our Divines observe, can be in
himself impeccable, or infallible, all are of themselves subject to Error,
Scotus in 2. diff. 2, 3. Q.
as well as to sin, and whatever God does in favor of his Church, does no more
alter her defectibility, than a strong man lifting up a great weight with a
Child, takes away the natural weakness of the Child, which remains still the
same, though the weight not moveable to the Child, be in effect drawn or lifted
up. Hence Rufinus observes, that we do not say in our Creed, I believe in the
Holy Catholic Church, as we say I believe in God the Father, In Jesus Christ,
In the Holy Ghost. By that Preposition, that syllable in, we separate the
Creator from his Creatures, Divine help from In Symb. art. Eccless. S. Cat. Hac
prepositionis syllaba Creator a Creaturis secernitur, and divina humanis
separantur.
Humane means, but we say of these humane means appointed by Almighty God, that
although they be fallible, and exposed to error in their own nature, yet by
Gods appointment and Grace, they will prove infallible as to us, and certainly
lead to the knowledge of truth. We do not say that they cannot of themselves
deceive us, but that God according to his promise directing them by his
infallible Spirit; it cannot possibly happen that they should deceive us: If
then says S. Thomas our Creed (as many understand it) teaches us to believe in
the Catholic Church, this is the sense of it. That is to say, our Faith leans
on the Holy Ghost, and the meaning of these words are, I believe in the Holy
Ghost, who sanctifies the Hoc est intelligendum secundum quod fides nostra
refertur in Spiritum sanctum Sanctificantem Ecclesiam.
holy Church, and Guides her. When God revealed to St. Paul that he should come
to Rome and die there, or to St. Peter, that being grown old he should be
Crucified: were either of them immortal, the one till he came to Rome, the
other till he became old? not the least, they were as srail as before, as
exposed to Diseases within, as capable of being wounded and that mortally, yet
in a true sense they were immortal for that time, because that by reason of the
Revelation and protection of God, it was impossible they should die before they
came the one to Rome, the other to old Age, according to the Revelation. Thus
should God reveal to a Traveller in a wild Wilderness full of wild Beasts, and
beset by Thieves, that he should pass certainly unhurt, and not fall, he, nor
those who follow him, into the Hands of these, or Claws of those; this man
would remain as weak, as ignorant of the ways, as exposed to danger as before,
yet would prove an infallible Guide to those who would follow him. So supposing
(which I shall presently prove) that God has promised to the Catholic Church,
that his holy Spirit should guide her in all truth; that she shall follow that
true Guide, and ever avoid falling into Error, though each Member of the Church
remain as fallible, as weak, as subject to Error as before; yet it evidently
follows, that this Church will infallibly avoid all Errors, never lead any of
her followers into it; and this is all we mean by the Churches infallibility? A
thing when thus rightly understood, as clear, as evident, as certain, as that
God's Revelation cannot prove false, as that the Holy Ghost and Christ himself
(who remains with the Teachers of this Church) be in themselves infallible. We
do not expect any new Revelations or Lights; we do not admit any new Article of
Faith, though, where a doubt arises the Church has infallibly power to declare
what has been revealed by Christ to the Apostles, and Preached by them, which
perchance some part of the Church might have had a less clear understanding
thereof, and though when the sense of Scripture appears doubtful to some, this
Church can explain infallibly what the true sense and meaning is, and deliver
more explicitly what is employed in the Word of Scripture: for example, if some
doubts whether in the Mystery of our Lords Supper there be a true Change of the
substance of Bread, into that of the Body of our Lord. This Holy Church can
declare, that these plain words, This is my Body, do declare it, and to avoid
further mistake, may give a new clearer Name to the old Mystery so revealed by
Christ, and Preached by the Apostles, calling it Transubstantiation; as She
calls the Mystery of God, one in Nature, and three in Persons, Holy Trinity, a
Name not found in Scripture, which so displeased the Arians heretofore, and
Calvin of late; not by making any new Article of Faith, but more clearly
delivering what was ever believed by the Apostles, and all Catholics from their
time to this: so that still we own Sanctae Scripturae sufficienter Continent
omnem scientiam Necessariam Scotus Q. 2. prologi.
Viatori. That Holy Scripture contain, all that is necessary to a Christian to
know in this life; and with Bellarmin, Non est de fide nisi quod Deus, per
Apostolos, aut Prophetas revelavit, aut quod evidenter inde deducitur. That
nothing is of Faith, but what Christ revealed by the Prophets, or Apostles, or
what is Evidently deduced from it. The Church being only our Guide to the
understanding of the true and full sense of Scripture. This Pope Celestin owned
to the General Council of Ephesus; Agendum nunc est ut Labor Ep. 7.
Communi Credita and per Apostolorum successione detenta servemus. That the
whole work of the Church representative is only to Conserve by a clear
Exposition of it, what the Church diffusive retained in a continual Succession,
as first taught by the holy Apostles, and so continually by their Successors.
This is all the Council of Trent pretended unto: For Councils, says an Eminent
Member of it, have the assisting presence of the Holy Ghost, only to declare
those Articles infallibly true, which Christ from the beginning revealed; And
Secondly, When Errors and Abuses arise to a growth, to gather infallibly from
what has been revealed, those Truths, which all Christians are bound to
believe, and to follow in Faith and Manners. Ad Extirpandos errores, and abusus
infallibiliter, etiam ex revelatis Colligere populo Christiano credenda and
Vega.
usurpanda in fide and moribus. Then continues the same. They are gathered in
the Name of Christ, when they declare only such things, as were revealed by
Christ, and brought down to us in the Holy Scripture, or certain Apostolical
Traditions. The Apostles themselves used no other Method, and St. Paul as
Infallible as he was, owned, That he presumed Romans 15.
to teach only what he had from Christ, to which witness was born by Miracles.
Non Audio aliquid loqui eorum quae Per me non efficit Christus in veritate
signorum. And this infallible Certainty we allow to the Church only in such
things, as She declares necessary to be known, and believed in order to our
Salvation, not in impertinent or indifferent things; For we say still with
Tertullian, Nobis curiositate non opus est post Christum, inquisitione post
Evangelium. We seek not curiously into any thing, but what is clearly revealed;
but what was taught when the Gospel was first preached. Our Church then has
not power to make new Articles of Faith, nor ever pretended to it, but is a
mere yet infallible Witness to the anciently revealed ones: In Her Name
Tertullian declares, Ibidem.
Nobis nihil licet ex nostro arbitrio inducere, Apostolos Domini habemus
Authors, qui nec ipsi quidquam de suo arbitrio elegerunt quod inducerent.

We can bring in nothing of our choice, the Apostles are the Authors of what we
teach, who themselves taught nothing of themselves. Christ promised to be with
them, and their Successors Mat. 28.
till the end of the World, only in order to the declaring of these things,
which he himself revealed and taught especially in those forty days betwixt his
Resurrection and Omnia quaecunque mandavi vobis. Et loquens de regno dei.
Ascension, when he taught them all that concerned the Kingdom of God on Earth,
his Church.

The infallibility of the Church being thus Expounded, and such is that which
Catholics believe, and are guided by; I cannot conceive how any Christian can
object any thing against it, who believes that what God revealed must
necessarily be true, and that Christ and the Holy Ghost be infallible. I
proceed then to prove that God has revealed the Catholic Church should ever be
guided by his holy Spirit, and ever follow that Guide, and never fall into any
Error in Faith, and to do it most convincingly against all Sectaries, I will
prove it by the Texts of Holy Scripture, such as their very Bible offers, and
this not by two or three, which would suffice, but by a number, and that I may
not seem to give my own sense to those Texts, I will join to them the
Exposition of the Holy Fathers, given in all Ages, according to the sense of
the Catholic Church.

By the Catholic Church I mean not only the Church of all Ages, but the whole
Church of any Ages, and consequently the Catholic Church of this Age, for it is
the same Church, there being but One, as all our Creed teaches us. I say as the
Jews did yield a full belief to God, and his Servant Moses; to God as the
author of their Faith, and to Moses as the Exodus 14. Crediderunt domino and
Moysi servo ejus.
Propounder and Witness of it; so each Catholic in any Age believes God and the
Church of his Age, that Church being Causa Exemplaris, the Pattern and
Exposition of his Faith.

That this Church is an infallible Witness to all that Christ did teach, is
evident from the Commands laid upon us by the Prophets, by Christ our Lord, by
the Apostles, to receive with an entire submission all that it delivers, for it
is inconsistent with Gods infinite Veracity, that he should oblige us to
believe an Error. Almighty God by Isay, teaches us, that all Nations shall
resort unto Her as a Judge. Adding, Every Isay 2. 3. 54. 7. 60. 12. Ezech. 44.
tongue resisting thee in judgment, thou shall condemn; and, the Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish. The plain reason for it is given
by Ezekiel, where God promises that when Controversies arise, he will decide by
his Churches Verdict, They shall stand in judgment, and shall judge according
to my Judgment. Hence St. Augustine looking upon the judgment of the Church as
certainly that of God, declares; the only reason, why St. Cyprian, though in an
Error, yet was no Heretic, to be, because his Error was not yet Condemned
Nondum plenario Concilio decisus. l. 1. c. 18. de Bapt. Certissimam fidem.
ibid. c. 9. c. 4. Nolle primasdare vel sumae impietatis est, vel praecipitis
arrogantiae. De util. Gred. c. 17. Donec plenario rotiqs orbis Concilio, quod
saluberrime sentiebatur etiam remotis dubitationibus firmaretur. Habere Jam non
potest Deus Patrem, qui Ecclesiam non habet Matrem, etc. Neque enim vivere
foris possunt, cum Domus Dei una sit: Et nemini salus esse nisi in Ecclesia
possit. Cypr. de Unit.
by the Churches Representative, a General Council: That a most firm belief is
to be yielded to such Decisions, and that Not to submit to the Church is the
highest impiety, or the most rash arrogance. In fine, that by the Authority of
such Councils, Truth is settled and confirmed, and all doubts are removed. The
Oracle of Christ our Lord in this case stands, Mat. 8. If he submit not to the
Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a Publican. This St. Cyprian was
convinced of when he declared, That no one can have God for a Father, who pays
not to the Church the submissive Duties which a Mother has right to challenge;
that as no one out of the Ark escaped death in the Deluge, so no one can avoid
perishing, if he revolt from the Church, that no one can live (to God) and be
out of her Obedience, because that God has but one House, and no body can be
saved out of the Church. Next the practice of the Apostles, for as we find Acts
15. there being a debate about the Obligation that Christians lay under in
reference to the Law, they appointed Paul and Barnabas to go up, and certain
others of the rest, to the Apostles and Priests unto Jerusalem upon this
Question -- There was made a great disputation, and the Conclusion was, this
Decision of the Church; It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and unto us, etc.
according to the Promise made by Christ, Joh. 15. 16. When the Paraclite comes,
He shall give testimony to me, and You shall give testimony to me; which words
assert the future perpetual union in the same sense, betwixt the Invisible
infallible Spirit, and the Visible Church: Hence St. Cyril, Patriarch of
Jerusalem, owned the true Church to be called Catholic, not only by reason of
her Continuation in all Ages, and extent into all places, but also by reason
that She teaches Catholicly, that is, Universally, without Ecclesia vocatur
Catholica quia docet Catholice, hoc est, universaliter and sine ullo defectu,
vel differentia, omnia dogmata quae debent venire in cognitionem. -- Omne
hominum genus pie subjugat Principes and privatos. Cyr. Hier. Catech. 8.
any Error or Variance all that a Christian ought to know, submitting piously
to her Authority all sorts of men, both Princes and People. St. Paul though an
Inspired Scripture-writer, owned this Ordinary Authority as the only sure
Guide, saying of himself ( Gal. 2. 1. I went up according to Revelation) God
ordering it for our Example, and instruction) and conferred with them the Gospel
which I preached -- lest perhaps I should have run or had run in vain. Not that
the Churches approbation added any thing to the truth which had been revealed
to him, whence he says, To me those that seemed to be something, added nothing.
So now the Churches Authority adds nothing to the truth revealed in
Scripture, but offers infallibly that truth to be obeyed. In which sense St.
Augustine owned, that he would not believe the Gospel, were Ego vero Evangelio
non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ec clesiae commoveret Authoritas ad Ep. fund-
c. 5. Etisi contumax and superba obundire volentium multitudo, Ecclesia tamen a
Christo non recedit; Et illi sunt Ecclesia plebs sacerdoti adunata, and Pastori
suo grex adhaerens. Ep. 69.
he not moved to it by the Authority of the Catholic Church; to wit, the
present one then declaring against the Manicheans: for the Church, as St.
Cyprian had observed before him, that is, the people united to their Priest,
the Flock adhering to their Pastor, never falls off from Christ, though
stubborn and proud multitudes of men fall off from Her. How can God abandon the
Church to Errors, and yet give her Teachers and Pastors the Power to exact a
full submission of judgment, this St. Paul bears witness unto (2 Cor. 10.) The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, casting down all
imaginations or reasonings, and every thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge, and bringing into Captivity all understanding in obedience to
Christ, and he declares to the Ephesians, (4. 11. before cited) that these
Pastors, whose teaching will preserve us from wavering, and from being tossed to
and fro, will still be until we all come unto the unity of Faith, until the
Body of Christ be built, which will not be complete till the Worlds End.

Yet our Merciful God to bear away all cavilling excuses of those who should
pretend the Church to have been lest and abandoned by her Teacher, the
infallible Spirit of God, has most clearly engaged his unerring Word for the
contrary. This is my rest, (says he by David) for ever and Psalm. 132.
ever here will I dwell, because I have chosen it. And St. Paul assures us,
that this House of God is the Church of the living 1 Timothy 13. 15.
God, to omit the greater number of these Promises by Isay, he offers these:
Thou shall be no more for saken (as the Synagogue) Isay. 60. 10. 62. 3.
but thou shall be called my delight in her: upon thy Walls, Jerusalem, I have
appointed Watchmen all the day and all the night, (in the calm of Peace and in
the storms of Persecution) for ever they shall not hold their peace. -- There
shall come Idem. 59.
a Redeemer to Sion, and to them that shall return from iniquity in Jacob, says
our Lord, as for me, this is my Covenant with them, my Spirit that is in thee,
and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, from
the present and for ever, by Hieremy he promises, I will give them one Hier. 32.
heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, but will put my fear
in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. By Ezechiel he thus
expresses himself, There Ezech. 37. 24.
shall be one Shepherd over them, all they shall walk in my Judgments. -- I
will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them for ever. By Malachy thus, I will
make her who was cast off (the Church gathered amongst the Gentiles) a strong
Nation, and the Lord shall reign over them, from hence forth and for ever. And
by the Prophet Osee, he assures that Church, That he has Espoused her in Faith
for ever. Was it possible that God should reveal more expressly, more fully,
that his Church should never fail to follow the directions of her Guide the
Holy Ghost? what wonder that all holy Fathers should continually deliver us a
truth, of which they had received so frequent and plain Revelations? St.
Cyprian following the Prophet Osee, assures us, that this Spouse of Christ can
never fall into Adultery, must remain Chaste and unstained, ever dwell in One
House, and Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi, incorrupta est and pudica,
unam domum novit. -- Quisquis ab Ecclesia segregatus Adulterae jungitur, a
promissis Ecclesiae separatur. Cypr. de Unit. Eccles.
that consequently who ever forsakes her, and adheres to an Adulteress (any
Heretical or Scismatical Congregation) looses all right to the Promises made to
the Church. So certain was St. Gregory Nazianzen that this Si nunc vel ante
suscepti sunt qui Apollinaris placita sectantur, hoc ostendant and nos
aquiescemus. Perspicuum enim Erit eos ut rectae Doctrinae assentientes
susceptos fuisse, nec enim se res aliter habere potest (...) hoc consequuti
sunt.
Church could never admit any Heretics into her Communion, That as zealous an
opposer as he was to the Apollinarists, he owned he would acquiesce to them if
they could prove they had ever been received into the Catholic Churches
Communion, which would be an undoubted proof that they were fallen into no
Heresy. And in that case it could not be otherwise but that they did assent to
truth. St. Athanasius owned this Rule so infallible, that he conceived no other
Arguments ought to be used against Heretics but this, which alone, Epist. ad
Cledon. Tantummodo ad ea respondendum est, quod ipsum per se sufficit, ea
Ecclesiae Orthodoxae noti esse, nec Majores nostros it a sensisse. Epist. ad
Epist Epist. Corim.
is sufficient; that their Opinion was not the Doctrine of the Orthodex Church,
that our Ancestors were of another persuasion. But what debate can there be of
this truth amongst Christians after so plain a decision of Christ's own Divine
Mouth ( Matt. 16. 18.) The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her; having
first assured Peter that he was a Rock (unmovable) and that on that Rock he
would build his Church. On Peter then and his Successors, not on their
Shoulders indeed (as a Protestant Divine very briskly proved) but on their
personal unmovable Faith this Church is ever to be built; whence all holy
Fathers have ever derived the Infallibility of Doctrine promised to the Church:
Let the great Patriarch of Alexandria S. Cyril be an Instance of it: T^^s
Surname Petram opinor per agnominationem nihil aliud quam inconcussam and
firmissimam discipuli fidem vocavit, in qua Ecclesia Christi ita fundata and
firmata esset, ut non laberetur and esset inexpugnabilis inferorum portis in
perpetuum manens. Cyril. in Dial. ad Prin. l. 4.
of Rock (says he) is the unmovable and most firm Faith of this Disciple, on
which the Church of Christ should be so founded and settled, that it should
prove impregnable to the Gates of Hell, lasting for ever. And that all might
know, that it is the virtue of the Holy Ghost, by whose Infallibility in
Guiding, the Church remains Infallible in being Guided, our Savior informs his
Apostles of it, and us by them, Joh. 14. 16. He (my Father) will give you
another Paraclite, that may abide with you for ever, (and consequently with
their Successors, as a Land given to one for ever, by force thereof belongs to
his Heirs) the Spirit of Truth, whom the World knows not. St. Ambrose, who
observed no such Promise made to particular Men reading Scripture, had hence
reason to conclude, Let no Man make the Law the measure of his Faith, but
report it to Nemo fidem suam intra mensuram legis includat, sed ad Ecclesiam
conferat, in qua septiformis Spiritus gratia relucet, uam Princeps ille
Sacerdotum fulgore supernae divinitatis illuminat. Lib. 7. c. 11. in Luc.
the Church in which the Grace of the sevenfold Spirit shines, whom that
Prince of the Priests does enlighten with Rays of the Divinity from above.
Hence Origin concuded, That the Son of God, as the Scriptures teach us, is the
Soul of the Body of Lib. 6. contra Gels.
Christ, which is the Church of Christ. -- That the Word of God by a wonderful
Virtue moves together all the Members of his Church: And can it enter into a
Christians thought, that a Body guided by the Holy Ghost, moved by Christ,
shall ever go astray? But Tertullian represents with a most sensible Energy the
weakness of those who can harbor the least suspicion of it. The Holy Ghost
(says he) to this intent was sent by Christ, to this end was asked of the
Father, that he should be the Teacher of Truth; Did this Steward of God neglect
his Office? Did this Vicar of Christ permit the Church to believe, to teach
otherwise than Christ himself Preached by his Apostles? St. Paul did not
believe it possible, when he called the Church not only the House of God, but
also the Pillar of Truth. I omit here those plain Texts of Scripture to be
found so frequently in it, by which Christ declares this Churches Perpetuity,
only minding you, Sir, of that Saying of one of the most famous and Learned
Primates of this Kingdom, ' It Is the same in the Church to Err and to Perish.
Idem est errare and perire Ecclesiam. -- Hanc sacrilegam vanitatem evertit
Evangelica veritas, and Prophetarum atque SS. Patrum non violanda authoritas.
Lanfranc. contr. Bereng.
Wherefore since the latter cannot happen, if God in revealing cannot Err, we
may conclude with him, that to say it can Err, is a Sacrilegious Vanity which
the Authority of the Prophets, of the Gospels, of the Fathers utterly reproves.
That what Promises were made to the Apostles for the Support and Continuance of
the Church, are made good to their Successors, the lawful Pastors, Reason it
self evidently makes out, God not withdrawing the Means whilst he designs the
End. And St. Augustine expresses it fully in these words, Commenting on those of
the Royal Prophet, For thy Fathers, Children are born to thee: The Apostles did
beget thee, they were sent, they Preached, they were thy Fathers, but Genuerunt
te Apostoli, ipsi missi sunt, ipsi praedicatores, ipsi patres; sed numquid
nobiscum ipsi semper esse potuerunt. Ergo eorum discessu deserta est Ecclesia?
Absit, pro Apostolis nati sunt tibi filii, constituti sunt Episcopi, etc. Aug.
in Psalm. 44.
could they remain for ever with us? Was then the Church deserted by their
departure? God forbid! For thy Fathers, Children were born to thee, Bishops
were Constituted. -- Think not thy self abandoned, because thou see not
Peter, thou see not Paul: Out of thy Issue Fathers are given thee. Hence in
his Dispute he wondered at the senseless Position of Gaudentius Lib. 2. c. 8.
contra Gauden.
the Donatist, teaching that the Church had Perished, and yet owning their
Congregation to be the true Church; since Donatus could not be a Father in the
true Church, had he not been a Son thereof, had she Perished before he laid the
Foundation of his Schismatical Body? Against the same Heretics and the
Schismatics of these Days he is as plain on the Psalm. 103. What mean some (says
he in the Name of the Church) who abandoning me, murmur against Quid est quod
nescio, qui recedentes a me murmurant contra me? quid est quod perditi me
periisse contendunt? certe enim hoc dicunt quia fui and non sum. Annuntia mihi
paucitatem dierum meorum, quam diu ero in hoc saeculo, and annuntia vit, and
dixit, ecce ego vobiscum sum usque ad consummationem saeculi, totius orbis
Communio. Aug. l. 2. c. 2. cont. Gaud.
me? How do those lost Men pretend that I Perish? for they say I was and am
not. T^ll me (O Lord) how short are my days, how long I shall last on Earth:
And he announced it to me, and said, Behold, I am with you to the end of Ages.
What can be said more plain? This Church then, or this Communion with lawful
Bishops, this Universal Communion, as St. Augustine calls it, will ever be
guided by the Holy Ghost infallibly in the of Truth. They believe right who are
in this Communion, they are in Error who are out of it: This is the most
palpable and most secure way of discerning the Truth. Wherefore St. Augustine
tells us, that disputing against Fortunatus an Heretical Bishop, he pressed him
(but in vain) to answer one Question, pretending that the Answer to it would,
as it was manifest to all, clear their Controversy, Whether he could give
Letters of Communion (which should be accepted of by Bishops in all Parts of
the World) whither ever he should assign him. We ask Protestant Bishops here
the same Question; and because there is not One Bishop in the whole World, out
of his Majesty's Dominions, that will own their Doctrine, and acknowledge
himself of the same Church with them, we conclude with St. Augustine, that there
is no need of Quaerebam utrum Epistolas Communicatorias, quas formatas dicimus,
posset, quo vellem, dare; and affirmabam, quod manifestum esset omnibus, hoc
modo facillime illam terminari posse quaestionem. Aug. Ep. 163. Huic generali
Ecclesiae communicans Christianus Catholicus est, ab hac segregatus Haereticus.
S. Prosp. in dim. temp. c. 5.
a farther Debate, it being evident they belong not unto, and are no part of
the Catholic Church: and they may share betwixt us and themselves this Sentence
of St. Augustin's Scholar S. Prosper: A Christian in Communion with this
Universal Church, is a Catholic, if separated from it, an Heretic.; which is
the very Sentence of St. John in the very Text which Dr. Sherlock's Footman
cited against me. I have been somewhat profuse on this Subject, because it is
of the greatest importance, and to show what silly Questions are proposed unto
us as unanswerable, to which each Leaf of Scripture, each holy Father yield a
ready Answer against them, and for us.

No understanding Protestant can be disputed into this kind of Preser. Fol. 17.
Popery, which owns an Infallible Church: First, because no Arguments or
Disputations can give me an infallible certainty of the Infallibility of the
Church.

I observed, that this way of Reasoning was a Plea for the Answer.
Jews against Christ our Lord; this Position proving, that Christ our Lord, who
owned himself Infallible, did imprudently to Preach or work Miracles, by which
he exacted a certain firm Faith grounded upon his Infallibility in Teaching:
for since his Preaching and Miracles did not give an Evident infallible
certainty of his Infallibility, (and such an evident one Dr. Sherlock must
mean, for the certainty we have of a real Infallibility cannot be in reality
Fallible) no prudent Jew or Gentile could be disputed by Christ into Faith.
Arguments so offensive to pious Ears, ought to meet with no other Answer than
Prayers for him who offers them.

First, he tells me the Arguments which I call offensive to Defense Fol. 7.
pious Ears are mentioned 2 Timothy 4. 3. Next, he asks me, Whether my Reasons and
Arguments for my Churches Infallibility, and those which Christ offered with
the addition of Miracles, hold a Comparison? Thirdly, he tells me, that Christ,
though Infallible, though he wrought Miracles to confirm his Doctrine, did not
command them to be content with an Implicit Faith, but the contrary: Search the
Scripture, Joh. 5. 39. and Mark 12. 24. tells them they Erred, not knowing the
Scripture. Then he concludes, that Dr. Sherlock did not say that the Jews could
not be disputed into Faith, unless that Faith were infallible: No, he leaves
that to be talked of by us, who are the great Pretenders to it.

An Error ever draws on a greater to its defense, and Heresy Answer.
seldom supports her self without Blasphemy; we have both here in store. As for
his first Observation, I understand not the meaning of it, the Text hinted at
being this, There shall be time when they will not bear sound Doctrine, but
according to their own desires they will heap to themselves Masters, having
itching Ears. I blamed not the Hearers, but the Teacher; and in this particular
Case I am very well satisfied, that the witty and Learned Gentlemen of the
Temple, are so far from hearing this Doctrine of Dr. Sherlock with itching Ears,
that they pity his Ignorance, and blame his forwardness, and blush at so weak
and ill-knit a piece of Sophistry; and therefore I willingly submit what I
write in this Engagement, to their Censure. As to the Question he asks me, his
ignorance of our Belief prompts it to him: For we believe our Church Infallible
by the Infallibility of Christ who remains with her, and of the Holy Ghost who
guides her into all Truths: And for this we bring the same Proofs, to wit,
Prophecies, Christ's Preaching it, and his Miracles Confirming it, besides the
continual visible Event of Christ's Prophecies concerning his Church. This
Question then is very silly.

But his two Proofs are in another Strain; by the First he intimates, That
Christ could not have challenged an Implicit Faith reasonably from the Jews: A
Position which, to the shame of Christianity, this last Age and pretended
Reformation has often offered and supported: Contrary to Christ's own Sacred
words, who often urged the Jews to believe his words on the account of his
miraculous Works, by which if he had not proved the truth of his words, he
owned that they had not had sin. The Matter is finely mended, and Christianity
is brought by these Men to a fair pass, when Christ's words are not to be
believed by an Implicit Faith. The Church of God, though Infallible, sends as
much to the Scriptures as Christ did, since that she offers each Point of the
Faith she teaches, as delivered immediately or mediately in the Holy
Scriptures. The Prophecies of himself which Christ cited, were indeed to be
sought and found in the Scriptures; but it is a pleasant Fancy to apply those
words, Search the Scriptures, to all that Christ did teach; as if the Gospels,
and whatever Christ did Preach, contained no new Revelations, nothing but what
could be found in the ancient Testament. A great stock of Patience is necessary
to answer calmly such Impertinencies as are brought to support the Errors with
which these late Heresies are patched up. But the last Defense brought for Dr.
Sherlock is surprising, and I could well quarrel with you, Sir, (as a
Christian) for Licensing it. What, do you own that we only are to look on the
Faith even as Preached by Christ, as necessarily Infallible? Is it no part of
your Belief that you are any way concerned in, that that certain Faith which
Christ exacted from the Jews, St. Paul from each Christian, must of necessity
be Infallible?

It Is impossible by Reason to prove, that Men must not make use Preservative.
of their own Reason and Judgment in Matters of Religion.

That Men must use Reason to come to this Knowledge, that Answer. Fol. 5.
God has revealed what they believe, is very certain. As the Jews, Exodus 14.
Crediderunt Domino and Moysi servo ejus, Did believe God and Moses his Servant;
As all Nations believed Christ and his Apostles; So each Christian now believes
Christ and his Church; the first as Author, the second as Witnesses
(Commissioned from God) of their Faith, being moved by the Proofs they offered
of their Commission. So far Judgment: Thus the Apostles believed Christ
teaching himself to be the Son of God, their Judgment having first been
convinced that God spoke by him; which Method appears more particularly in the
Man born blind whom Christ our Lord cured, and who Nin^ Dominus esset cum illo.
was thereby convinced that God was with him, taught by him; and in consequence
to that Conviction, having barely heard from Christ, that he was the Son of
God, he fell prostrate and adored him, not exacting any farther proof beyond
his Word. After a full conviction that God speaks by those who Preach to us,
there is no farther use of Reason, if we believe St. Paul, but in order to the
bringing into captivity all Understanding in obedience to Faith. 2 Cor. 10.

Defense f. 7, 8. If my Sense and Reason will serve me to find out an
Infallible Church, it is a little severe to renounce it when I come there. --
The Apostles were as Infallible as the Church can pretend to be now, yet 1
Epist. John 4. 1. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, if they be of
God. 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak to wise Men, judge you what I say. And Acts 17. 11.
we have this particular Commendation of the Bereans, that they were more noble
than those of Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily to see whether what they heard, were
conformable thereto or no.

Answer. Do I renounce my Reason, when I embrace what my Reason has convinced
me to be infallibly true? Sure, Sir, you have too much Sense, not to own this
to be a senseless Position. But let us apply it to another Case. When a
Protestant is convinced, and that, if you please, infallibly, that the Word of
God in the Bible delivers a Truth, and his Reason has convinced him of it, is
he not to abandon whatever Reason can object against the Mystery? If you say he
is not, then a Man may doubt of the truth of Gods Word. A very Christian
Protestant Principle! If you say he is, then it is not severe, but most
reasonable, to renounce Reason when it opposes it self to a Truth infallibly
Preached, and received from an Authority acknowledged Infallible. As for the
three Texts, I have before showed how the First is wrested from its plain
natural Sense to the opposite. The Third is against him; for the Bereans
received (First) the Word with all readiness of mind, and (then) searched the
Scriptures, to see in them those Texts which the Apostles used to convince the
stubborn, and so do Catholics. The Second is neither directly nor indirectly to
the purpose: For St. Paul having brought a Reason why they were to abstain from
such Meat and Drink as was offered to Idols, to wit, that since they did
partake of the true Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, they could no more
use what was Sacrificed to Idols, than serve at two opposite Altars, and adore
the true God and the false ones, he asks them, Whether this Reason is not
convincing? Now I would know whether a Supreme Judge (much more an infallible
one) does disclaim his own Power, because he offers evident Reasons for the
Sentence he gives, and shows the Parties obstinacy, that should refuse to
submit to them? As for those words, As to wise Men I speak, the honest Footman
little understands the meaning of them; it being the Language of the Primitive
Church, when any thing was touched concerning the great Sacrament of our
Blessed Lord's Body and Blood, not to publish that high Mystery, but to refer
to the private Instruction about it, which was given after Baptism, and never
trusted to the Catechumens: an evident Proof, that in this Sacrament there was
a high Mystery beyond the Faith in Christ our Redeemer, as Savior of the
World, and Food of our Souls by his Passion, without which no one was admitted
to Baptism. Thus St. Augustine ever expressed himself in this Subject: The
Norunt fideles, norunt qui Initiaati sunt. In Ps. 39. and 33. and Ps. 109. Hom,
42. c. 4. l. 50. Hom. Orig. in Levit. Hom. 9. Chrysostom. Hom. 27. in Genesis Hom. 5.
ad Antioch, etc.
Faithful know what I mean, those understand me that have been Christened. Thus
Origin and St. Chrysostom before him, and St. Paul himself: I speak to you more
boldly of this Mystery, as to the wiser and more fully taught. Pray, Sir, leave
off Licensing such wretched Trifles, and such wonderful wrested Texts, or never
expect there should be any Answer returned to them; though how far this Motive
will prevail with you, I have some small reason to doubt.

Preserv. f. 21. We have as much assurance of every Article of our Faith, as
you have of the Infallibility of your Church; First, because we are in general
assured, that the Scriptures are the Word of God.

Answer f. 5. This is the great Point indeed, which if a Protestant loses, he
loses all: For, it is certain and evident, that the Catholic has the same
assurance for each Article of his Faith proposed by the Church, which he has
of the Churches infallibility, (as I have the same certainty of all that my
Friend says to me, which I have that he speaks nothing but certain truth.) He
proves it first, because he is in general assured that the Scriptures are the
Word of God; Hitherto there holds some parity though but lame; but suppose it
were entire, the Conclusion would be this, Catholics are as certain of the
sense of Scripture as Protestants are that they have the Letter; whence it
follows demonstratively, that when Protestants differ in the sense from
Catholics, they have less assurance for it than Catholics, who have always the
same assurance for the sense as Protestants have for the Letter.

Defense, f. 6. and 7. You are Judges in your own Case (about infallibility) --
We have the concurrent testimony of all Churches, that we have those Canonical
Books. -- But let us suppose a while, that your Church were infallible, what
greater certainty ( for that is the point you know which the Doctor was upon)
have you of it, than we have of any particular Point of Faith? as for the
certainty of Reason and Argument, That we have, and would fain see you show
more. What we believe is according to Scripture, and does not Contradict either
Sense or Reason, nor any other Principle of Knowledge.

Answer. Never was a starved Cause so pitifully defended: No wonder a Footman
only does not blush to appear in its Defense; the Learned and judicious
Gentlemen of the Temple had each of them too much Honor, Conscience, and Wit,
and therefore none of them would Patronize so wretched a Cause, and support
such weak Contradictions as the Excellent Master of the Temple, (so the
Preface-maker calls him) had blundered out. Pray Sir review this last
Discourse, blush that your License Authorizes it, and hereafter have some care
of your Reputation, and set not your Name to such Stuff. This is the Case: on
one side, there is supposed an Infallible Interpreter of the Christians great
Law-Book; (for thus Dr. Sherlock states the Case) on the other are some men,
(far the greater part unlearned and weak) who allow not any sense to this Book,
which seems to them to Contradict either (their) Sense or Reason, or any other
Principle of (their) Knowledge. And I am asked whether I proceed more prudently
in receiving the sense of the Law from that Interpreter (which is actually
supposed infallible) or in proceeding by the second method. Sir, if you are so
weak or wilful, as not to declare that I have a greater certainty in submitting
to that infallible Interpreter, your Counsel is not worth the asking, and I
appeal to that of the judicious Gentlemen of the Temple. But I must not omit
the untruth couched in those words, We have the Concurrent Testimony of all
Churches, that we have those Canonical Books; For no part of the Catholic
Church, no part of the Greek Scismatic Churches, own the same Canon of
Scripture-Books which you do.

Preservative, Ibid. In particular we are assured that the Faith which we
profess is agreeable to Scripture.

Answer, fol. 5. If he means they have the same Proofs for this, which
Catholics have for the infallibility of the Church, that is, for the Continued
Being of that Church, which assures us that She is infallible in directing us,
(for a Church Erring in so Fundamental a Point, would cease to be the Church of
Christ) then, it is evidently fase, since each Christian in this Age, has the
same Evidence of Her being the Church of Christ, and of Her teaching all Truth,
and consequently of Her being (as She declares) infallible in thus teaching,
which he has of Christ, to wit, the ancient Prophesies, those of Christ
himself; his Miracles, and the Miracles wrought in that Church, according to
the Promises of Christ, besides the Conversion of Nations to Christianity, etc.
These things Protestants do not so much as pretend unto, as Proofs of their
particular Sense in Interpreting Scripture.

Defense, fol. 10. This is a pretty Conceit, the infallibility of the Church,
that is to say, the Being of the Church; cannot a Church be without being
infallible. -- We have heard much of Miracles, but could never see any.

Answer. Do you allow such Answers Sir, that have so little of Sense and less
of Piety? Can a Church remain the Church of Christ, and yet teach her self to
be infallibly guided by the Spirit of Christ, whilst she is abandoned to the
Spirit of Error, and that so far as Idolatry, and the Evacuating of the Passion
of Christ? Are we come to own that Herod might well be excused from believing
in Christ, because he had heard much of his Miracles, but could never see any?
Well Sir, when you License such an other Discourse, add to your Titles that of
a Christian, that we may think you are one.

Preservative, fol. 23. If you must not use your Reason and private judgment,
then you must not by any Reasons be persuaded to condemn the use of Reason.

Answ. f. 5. I never heard so much, and so little of Reason. -- All he says,
might with equal weight be said by a sick Man, who dissuaded from choosing his
own Remedies, and desired to send for a skilful Doctor, should answer, ' It Is
impossible by Reason to persuade me not to use my Reason, in governing my self
by Reason as my own Reason teaches me, which would be to Condemn Reason, and
yet be guided by your Reason, or the Doctor's Reason. Such a Discourse would
prove the Sick party at least somewhat lightheaded: What it is a Symptom of in
Dr. Sherlock I will not be positive.

Defense, f. 11. Is this Sick Man persuaded to renounce his Reason, or rather
is it not that he should submit his judgment (not renounce his Reason) in that
case to that Person whom he has all the reason in the world to believe has
better knowledge, and understanding of those things which are to be used for
his recovery than himself? And all this while methinks he is governed by
Reason, though he does not think fit to trust his own skill. -- But this bears
no comparison, Religion is, or ought to be the Concern of all.

Answer. The Footman prevaricates here, or is ashamed of his Master's gross
Sophistry, and will not stand by it. It Is Dr. Sherlock who pretends that a
Catholic by following an infallible Guide renounces his Reason; I contend that
all the while he is governed by Reason, and chiefly, because that in a matter
of that Concern, he thinks not fit to trust his own skill: which God has as
often declared to be too weak in any private person, as he has declared he
would give to all, such Pastors and Teachers as should guide them, and
Commanded each to repair to them, to be guided by them. But Religion is or
ought to be the Concern of all, a wise Observation!. So is, or ought to be each
ones health, and the preservation of his life: as therefore each one ought to
advise with a good Doctor concerning his Health, a good Lawyer for the
preservation of his Fortune; so, and much more with a good Guide, and (since it
can be had) an infallible one, for the securing of his Souls eternal happiness:
the Practice of Religion is the duty of all; but the teaching it, of those
Doctors whom God has appointed to that end, as St. Paul teaches us Ephesians. 4. is
not this Sir, a most evident truth?

Preservative, f. 25. Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve; is such a plain and express Scripture, that no reason can justify
the Worship of another Being.

Answ. f. 6. A rare Consequence! to Infer a Negative for an Affirmative
Antecedent, that bears no opposition with it. It Is like this, a Subject must
love his King, and pay Allegiance to him alone; therefore no Reason can
justify the love of a Man for his Wife, or of a Child for his Father. St.
Augustine drew from that very Text the contrary Conclusion, he takes off all
blame from Abraham, who is said in Genesis to Q. 61. in Genesis
have Adored or Worshipped the People of the Land, because it is observable
(says the Holy Doctor) That in the Commandment it is not said thou shall Worship
God alone, as it is said, and him alone thou shall serve; which in Greek is
(...), for such a service (of Latria) is given to God alone.

Defense, f. 12. What a delicate piece of Sophistry is here? The Commandment is
to serve God only, which service we must of necessity understand to be that
which is Divine, but Worship is so. -- Therefore the Text is plain against the
Worship of any other but God.

Answ. All that is plain in this Answer is, that men necessarily want a Guide
in the interpreting of Scripture, and that an infallible one also, for such is
the pride of some men, that even an ignorant Footman (as you see) thinks he
understands the Bible better than the Holiest and most Learned of Doctors S.
Augustine, and what reason teaches of the Service of God better than the most
enlightened Patriarchs. Abraham Worships men: S. Augustine declares that the
Commandment has nothing against it, there being an inferior Worship, which is
far below Divine Service: but the Protestant Doctor teaches his Footman to
aver, that all Worship (so he should have said to have spoken sense) is Divine,
that the Text is plain against the Worship of any other but God. How likely is
it they shall by their own judgment and reason understand the Bible, who cannot
construe right, the Commandments, no, not the first of them! and if Dr.
Sherlock and his Footman understand right the first Commandment, St. Augustine
did not. Do you not blush Sir, to License the boldness of such ignorant Pride?

Preservative, f. 26. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. -- Is
so express a Law against Image Worship, that no reason must be admitted for it.

Answ. f. 6. What if you be told that the Jews may perhaps have had a Command
of making no graven Image, etc. yet this being a positive Law, and not renewed
in the Gospel, does not oblige us: will this Reason be admitted of? No, no
reason; and yet you have no other reason for passing by as Express a Law of
Sanctifying Saturday. What if it be rejoined that only the making to themselves
(by private Authority, making that to be which is not, a Statue for Example,
which of its nature is the representation of a Man, or a Calf, to be to them a
true God) an Idol to adore it, which divine Worship thus misapplyed is
forbidden. Cannot this Reason be heard? No, then Belezeel by Gods direction and
Command making several likenesses of things on Earth below, and in Heaven
above; Solomon placing such in the Temple, sinned against the first Commandment
(for the making of such is as distinctly forbidden as the Adoring; So if a Law
thus says, Thou shall not carry any Arms, thou shall not strike: the carrying
of Arms would be as directly against the Law as the striking) so do all
Painters and Carvers, and all our London Merchants that hang out a Sign-post.
The truth is, what sense they put on any Text, is the express Law against which
no reason must be heard, so they challenge to themselves that infallibility
which they so sturdily deny to the Church of God.

Defense, f. 13, 14. It Is held on all hands, that the keeping of the Seventh
day was Figurative, and so abolished at the death of Christ; but as far as it
was Moral, namely, that a Seventh Day should be kept, that still remains.
Besides, Christ and his Apostles were Authors of this change; Christ as he rose
on that day, so he usually did appear on that day to his Disciples; and
Scripture maintains the Celebration of it by the constant practice of the
Apostles, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 21.

Answ. We have four untruths in very few lines. The first, that it is agreed on
all hands, that the keeping of the Seventh day was Figurative; all that
understand Scripture right, say the contrary, to wit that it was not a mere
Shadow of a thing to come (as Figurative speaks) but a Memory of the past and
never to be forgotten benefit of the Creation, from the work whereof God rested
on that day, and (says Moses) blessed the seventh day. It Is a second Untruth
then, that the Moral part of it was only the keeping a seventh day, and that
Christ our Lord altered it. It Is an untruth that Christ our Lord usually
appeared on that day to his Apostles, for Acts 1. 3. S. Luke assuresus he
appeared every day to them: Perdies quadraginta apparens Eis. Act. 1. 3. Act.
2. 7. Salutatio mea manu Pauli 1 Cor. 16. 21.
How St. Paul's meeting at Troas with many in the participation of the
Sacraments, and disputing till Midnight, it being the Eve of his departure, or
his subscribing his Epistle with his own Hands; (for these are the two Texts
produced) is a Proof that the Scripture maintains the constant practice of the
Apostles, of keeping Sunday Holy; I leave it to you Sir, to make out the truth
of it.

Defense, f. 14. It Is sufficient (with Catholics) to submit to an infallible
Guide, and that too if he declares as the Council of Constance did Concerning
the Eucharist, that notwithstanding our Lord did Institute it in both kinds,
and the Apostles so celebrated it, yet now it should not be so. But for us
Protestants, we cannot think that any Reason can be sufficient to lay aside an
Express Text.

Answ. The meaning of these words as they lay here, is to persuade the Readers,
that the Council of Constance did own that Christ did Institute or order, that
the Sacrament should be taken by all in both kinds, and that in the Apostles
time it was ever so taken: yet that by the Church Authority it was ordered it
should hereafter be otherwise: If the Honest Footman means not so, and would
not have all to believe so, there is no sense at all in this his Inference,
That Protestants cannot think that any reason can be sufficient to lay aside an
express Text. But in this sense it is a most outrageous Calumny, and though a
Footman's ignorance may be excused, yet with what face Sir, can you pretend to
judge of Books and License them, if you are in the same gross Error; or if
wilfully and wittingly you License such impudent Slanders, against the whole
Churches Representative, what Libels, and Lampoons, are you not qualified and
disposed to License? These Decreta Council Cons. Dec. 4.
are the words of the Council, Although Christ did Institute this Venerable
Sacrament after Supper, and did administer it to his Disciples under both the
kinds of Bread and Wine; yet notwithstanding, the Authority of the Sacred
Canons, the laudable and approved Custom of the Church has observed, and
observes, that this Sacrament ought not to be Consecrated after Supper, nor
Confici.
received by the Faithful not fasting, but in case of sickness, and such other
necessity, as the Canon Law and the Church admit, or allow of. And so this
Custom, to avoid some dangers and scandals, has been reasonably brought in;
that, although this Sacrament in the Primitive Church was received by the
Faithful under both kinds, since that it should be received by those who
Consecrate (Priests) in both kinds, by the Laity only under the appearance of
Bread. Because we are firmly to believe, and in no way to doubt, that the
entire Body and Blood of Christ is truly contained as well under the species of
Bread, as under that of Wine. Behold the Council declares, that it owns it no
part of the Institution, that the Sacrament be taken under both kinds, no more
than that it be taken at Night after Supper, etc. All these being but
Circumstances belonging to that Discipline, which wholly depends on Church
Authority, and is alterable at any time when there is reason for it. And
indeed, if this be a Crime which Protestants cannot be capable of, how comes it
to pass that your Congregations receive your Sacrament kneeling, fasting, in
the Morning, in the Church, notwithstanding the Institution of Christ. Own Sir,
own Heartily this insinuation to have been a Calumny.

Preservative, f. 45. No Argument from the necessity of a thing, must be
admitted to prove it is. (V. G. It Is proposed to You that) If there be no
infallible Judge, there can be no certainty of Faith: though it be true, and
you think it to be true, you must not allow this Consequence, therefore there
is one; such Arguments do not prove that there be such a Judge, but that there
Ought to be.

Answ. f. 6. This is not only to mis-use human Reason, but to deny Wisdom and
Reason in God. Alphonsus the Royal Mathematician, was ever looked on as guilty
of a horrid Blasphemy, for having said, That he thought he could have ordered
some things better than God did at the first Creation: It Is one of as deep a
die to think, that God ought to have done, what we believe he has not done.

Defense, f. 15. The Doctor says, fol. 44. We should never admit any Arguments
merely from the usefulness, convenience, or supposed necessity of any thing to
prove it is. Now the Answerer leaves out supposed, and so makes that absolute
which was conditional. -- If I thought (says Dr. Sherlock) all this were true,
as I believe not a word of it is, (that if there be not an infallible Judge,
there can be no certainty in Religion) I should only conclude, that it is great
pity that there is not an infallible Judge Instituted by Christ. But if you
would have me conclude from these Premises. Ergo, there is an infallible Judge
of Controversies, I must beg your pardon for that, for such Arguments as these
do not prove that there is such a Judge, but only, that there ought to be one,
and therefore I must Conclude no more from them. Indeed, this is a very
fallacious way of Reasoning, because what we may call useful, convenient,
necessary, may not be so it self: and we have reason to believe it is not so,
if God have not appointed what we think so useful, convenient, and necessary,
etc. And now I would fain know who it is that denies Wisdom and Reason in God.

Answ. It is a pleasant way of Answering in the Defense of a Person accused to
have offended against the first Principles of Reason and Respect, to say that
he has spoken wisely, and dutifully elsewhere: yet so Answers our Footman, if
it be an Answer, merely to add what is not blamed in an Author, to what is
blamed. Dr. Sherlock says well in advising us to believe that not to be
necessary, which we know God has not appointed, therefore I did not touch, or
reflect on that saying: but I say that the advice he gives to one who supposes
there is a necessity of any thing toward the Eternal Salvation of Christians,
That though he believe it true, yet he infers not, Sure then God has bestowed
it, Christ has obtained it for us; but rather, God ought to have done it,
Christ ought to have obtained it; but I do not therefore believe he has. This
Advice, I say, is much more injurious to Gods Mercy and Wisdom, than the Saying
so much blamed by all Christians in Alphonsus; the Salvation of Mankind being
the ultimate Work of God toward his own Glory. Whether this Charge be not
just, and Dr. Sherlock teach not this Doctrine in the words cited by the
Answerer, in the Case of one who supposes that there can be no certain Faith in
a Christian, (and such a Faith Christ exacts in all, by St. Paul and St. James,
etc.) without an infallible Guide, and who believes it to be true; I leave it,
Sir, to your observation.

Principles of Dr. Sherlock, which make void all Faith.
SVppose the Protestant Faith uncertain, how is the Preserv. f. 79, 80.
Cause of the Church of Rome the better? Is Thomas an honest Man because John
is a Knave.

Answer. If Thomas and John be accused severally of a Theft, and the stoll'n
Goods be found with John, I conceive, though this prove not Thomas so assuredly
an honest Man, yet an honest Jury would bring him in Not-guilty. That there is
a true Faith, and consequently a certain Rule of Faith, all Christians
acknowledge, Protestants on one side choose one Rule, (how differently soever
they apply it) Catholics another: I conceive then, that if the Protestant Rule
be proved uncertain, it is plain the Catholic Rule must be the certain one.

Defense f. 17. You must first prove that it is impossible for People to make to
themselves two wrong Rules.

Answer. I do not write against Dr. Sherlock's Errors, but with this
Supposition, that he holds what generally is called (if there be any such fixed
thing) the Doctrine of the Church Established by the Law in England. I suppose
he owns a Faith in Christ; That this Faith ought to be firm, certain, not
wavering: for such is the Faith S. Peter and S. Paul require of us; That this
Faith altogether leans on Revelation; That the Scriptures are the Word of God;
That if we understood the full extent of its true Sense and Meaning, there
would never be Error or Heresy amongst us: Hitherto we agree. Now the thing in
question is, by what Method we ought to come to that Knowledge, as far as it is
necessary to a Christian: and I say that all the Methods are reduced to these
two Heads: That we are guided to the certain knowledge of what God has
revealed, either by a Knowledge communicated to each of us, or by a Knowledge
communicated only to Guides apppointed to direct the rest. If therefore
Protestants are in the wrong, we are certainly in the right, as far as we are
opposite to them. And besides, since that all the positive Proofs that can be
brought for the infallible Authority of Church-Teachers express also in what
Church they are, by evident Marks not to be found but in our Catholic Church,
it follows, if the Protestants be in the wrong as to that Principle, we are
certainly in the right as to each Point of our Religion, taught us by an
unerring Interpreter.

Preserv. f. 80. This (that the Protestant Faith is uncertain) may signify two
things. First, That the Objects of our Faith are uncertain, and cannot be
proved by certain Reasons. Secondly, That our Persuasion is wavering.

Answ. f. 7. Besides the two mentioned, it fignfies a Third thing also, to wit,
That whatever Reasons there may be for a thing, he who believes it, has not
for the Motive of his Belief those certain Reasons. There are, for Example,
certain Reasons, whereon to ground a Faith in Jesus Christ; yet he that
believes in Christ merely because his Mother (or a Minister) has taught him so
to do, has a very uncertain, and no Divine Faith.

Defense f. 18. What can be the Gentleman's meaning, I cannot conceive, unless
it be this, That because Protestants take the Reason of their Faith from
Scripture, and not from the Church of Rome, that therefore they can have no
certain or Divine Faith: which if it be, I pity him; if it be not, I must
desire him to explain himself.

Answer. The honest Footman is grown very tenderhearted. But is not this very
plain, that although there be very good Reasons for the belief of an Article of
Christian Religion, yet one that should believe it on the account of some silly
Motive only, such as I cited, would have no Divine Faith? But how can this be
applied to Protestants, who take the Reasons of their Faith from Scripture?
This I had showed Fol. 6. but the Footman passes it by with this Answer only, I
shall say nothing to that Harangue, so often Answered by our Divines. It seems
he had forgot those Answers, or was conscious of their weakness. Thus I
discoursed there: The Catholics prove, that an uncertain or wavering Faith, is
no Divine Faith, which the Protestants can never have of any one Article of
their Religion, because they never can have a certain one. It Is easily proved,
because they cannot have an act of Faith of any one Article, till their Rule of
Faith proposes it, i. e. till they know certainly (by their private Reading and
Judgment) what the Scriptures teach of it, not by some one Text or two, but by
comparing all the Texts that treat of that Subject: for the Sense of a single
Text (for Examp. My Father is greater than I) cannot be had, but by expounding
it by other Texts on the same Subject. Till a Protestant then has a certain
knowledge, First, that he has all the Books of Holy Writ; Secondly, that all
those he owns for such, were really written by inspired Pens; Thirdly, that he
has a true and sound Translation (in case he understood not the Original
Languages) and (in case he does) a true Copy not altered by the Error or Malice
of our Forefathers; Fourthly, (since the Letter kills) that he understands the
true Meaning and Sense of each Text, which relates to the Object of his Act of
Faith? Fifthly, that he remember them all, so as comparing them, to see which
be the clearer that must expound the obscurer, and what is the true result of
them all, (for any one which he understands not, or has forgotten, may
possibly be that one that must expound the rest) he cannot have one Act of
Faith. Now Catholics say, this is impossible to most, if not to all
Protestants, (who are in each of these Points to Judge for themselves, and not
to submit to any Authority where a Doubt arises) therefore few, or no
Protestants can in their whole Lifetime frame one Act of Divine Faith
concerning any one Mystery, not that Scripture is not a very certain Rule, but
because they have chosen an useless (because impossible) and uncertain way of
applying it.

Preservat. ib. We believe the Apostles Creed, and whatever is contained in the
Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. This is all we believe, and I hope
they will not say these things are uncertain.

Answer. They are very certain, but not to any Protestant, whose Rule of Faith
(considering the Method he applies it by) cannot make him certain of any one
Article. But the pleasant Answer which Justifies Turk, Jew and Gentile: For
this is a Rule of Faith most sufficient, according to Dr. Sherlock, (and a good
Plea) We believe all that God has revealed, and nothing else, is not all that
he has revealed certain? Here lies the Doctor's gross Mistake, that no one is
an Heretic for not believing that what God has revealed is true, it is
impossible to fall into so mad an Heresy: But Heretics are such, for not
believing him to have revealed what in effect he has, though he has given
sufficient Methods to come to the knowledge of it, if they would use them.

Defense. Do Jews, Turks and Gentiles believe all that is contained in the
Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles?

Answer. No, Sir, nor you neither. If they believed all that God has revealed,
(as they pretend) they would believe all that is delivered in the Bible, which
you pretend, but upon as little ground: What they think in their Judgment God
has revealed, they believe; what they think he has not revealed, they
disbelieve: that is their Rule of Faith, and it is yours, your own private
Judgments being on both hands your Guides, and not any Authority Established by
Almighty God.

Preservat. f. 81. If these things (which are believed by those who take their
Faith from the Bible interpreted by their own final Sense) be not built upon
certain Reasons, their Infallible Church can have no certainty of the Christian
Faith.

Answer. Even this is most notoriously false, since she is not Infallible by
any Light of her own, but by the Guidance of the Spirit of Truth. Were not the
Apostles, when they had once acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, certain
of all he revealed to them, before he had given them certain Reasons for it? It
were a blind Impiety to think so.

Defense f. 19. Was there (in that Case of the Apostles) a certain Faith
without a certain Reason. An infallible Man must know things as they are, or
else he is mistaken.

Answer. The Footman is very dull here, and cannot distinguish between a
certain Reason moving me to believe him that speaks, and a certain Reason in
the things that are delivered moving me to believe them. This Second Dr.
Sherlock requires, saying, That if these things which are believed, be not
built upon certain Reasons, the Infallible (Church seeing not any such Reasons)
can have no certainty of the Christian Faith. An infallible Person must know
what he knows as it truly is, but needs not see how or why it can be so.

Preservat. f. 82. It Is their common Argument, That there is a great variety
among Protestants, and that they condemn one another with equal confidence and
assurance.

Answer. It Is one of your usual Artifices, to leave out always the pressing
part of our Arguments: you should have added, Though they use the same Rule of
Faith, and apply it by the same Method. Thus proposed, it is an unanswerable
Argument against your Rule of Faith, and evidently proves it uncertain.

Defense f. 19, 20. Here the honest Footman sends me for an Answer to Dr.
Stillingfleet, and bids me try my Skill upon him. Thus he delivers the Answer
given to J. S. first Letter, and applied to the present Case; it is divided into
five Propositions, which, to avoid repeating, I Will set down with the following
Answer.

Answer. First, Arithmetic (says Dr. Stillingfleet) prescribes a certain way
by Addition and Substraction, to find out any Sum. It Is granted. Secondly,
Therefore it must be such, that they who take it, shall arrive by it at the
exact Sum. That's true also. Thirdly, But two Men, who have made use of the
same, way, differ at least a Hundred in casting up the Sum. This is impossible,
if they both really made use of that way as the words of Dr. Stillingfleet
express: But it is very possible, if the meaning be, one of them does not know
the Rules of Arithmetic, but only thinks he knows them; or both know well the
Rule, but one blundered, and set down one Figure for another. Fourthly,
Therefore they who take only that way, cannot by it arrive at the certain Sum.
This is evidently false, and the contrary true; to wit, Therefore they who take
precisely that way, (and not another for it, erring in the Theory or the
Practice) cannot but arrive by it at the certain Sum. But this following
Conclusion might have been drawn from the Third Proposition taken in its Second
most improper Sense, which Dr. Stillingfleet gives to it, Therefore those who
err in the Knowledge, or miss in the Application of the Rule of Arithmetic,
though they believe never so much in their own Judgment that they know and use
the Rule right, though they have used their best Endeavors, though they firmly
believe they have cast the Sum right, yet certainly they have missed, and are
in the wrong. This is the Conclusion which the Dean of Paul's should have drawn,
and then he might have concluded, Still the Rule is certain to those who use it
right. But is this the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet's full Answer, and that in
Dr. Sherlock's Case? Stupidity it self would not own it: It Is an evident
Demonstration against Dr. Sherlock's Position, and Dr. Stillingfleet's Tenet.
It proves evidently, that although Scripture be as infallible a Truth, and
thereby a Rule of Truth, (for from Truth only Truth can follow) as any Rule of
Arithmetic; Ex vero non nisi verum.
yet as in one Case, if two casting up an Account by the same pretended Rule,
differ in the total Sum, this following Principle would not only be false, but
also after such a trial most absurd and senseless. Every one is bound in reason
to believe the Account he has cast up, to be right, if he has a Book of
Arithmetic by him, has read it, believes he understands it, and has used his
best Endeavors to follow it. So is this like Principle, which Dr. Sherlock and
all his Party stand for: If two Men have the Bible, read it, endeavor to
understand it, and believing they do, draw from the same Scriptures two
different Conclusions, two opposite Articles of Faith, both are bound to stand
to their private Judgment, and to believe themselves in the right, though all the
World should accuse one or both of them in lieu of the true pretended Rule, to
have used a false one. But let us suppose farther, that an eminent Master of
Arithmetic should show to one of these Men where he erred against the true
Rule of that Science, where he misplaced a cipher, otherwise than the Rule
directs; that this Man in lieu of submitting, should appeal to his Book of
Arithmetic, by the which also the other teaches, and the Dispute should be
carried on by the one saying the Book teaches and directs thus, whilst the
other as sturdily pretended it teaches and directs otherwise. In this Case were
it a reasonable Principle, Both must stand to their private Judgment in
Interpreting of the Book, and well they may, for the Rule is certain, which
both follow. Never did Man give a fairer and easier Victory to an Adversary,
than Dr. Stillingfleet does to his, by this Simile. The dullest Schoolboy will
easily discern the Dean of Paul's patent Parallogism, whereby he compares the
written Word of God to the Rule it self of Arithmetic; whereas the natural and
only true Comparison is, of the Book or Letter of Scripture with the Book of
Arthmetick; the true Sense of Scripture with the Rule of Arithmetic.

A Right-Line-Rule and a Square are the Rule of a Carpenter; suppose a
Carpenter had a bent and crooked Rule, and that what he calls his Square opened
at an acute or obtuse Angle; this Man working by these, would certainly make
his Work wrong. I ask you now where the Fault would be? Certainly in his Rule,
in his (supposed) Square and Rule. But is not a Carpenter's Rule exact? Yes, a
Carpenter's, but not this Carpenter's; the Rule he pretends to follow is most
Just, the Rule which he actually follows is most false and erroneous: And if
many Carpenters pretending to work by a Right-Line and Square, applying them
the same way, did all differ in the Irregularity of their Work, it would be
evident they had a false Rule; for that is ones Rule, not that he pretends to
have, but what he actually works by. Now to apply this to our Case: The Word of
God is not the Letter, but the true Sense of the Bible; for the knowledge of
Scripture, as St. Hierom observes, consists not Scripturae non in legendo sed
intelligendo consistant.
in the Reading, but the Understanding of it. The Rule of Faith then, is the
Sense of the Letter of Scripture; The pretended Rule is the true Sense of
Scripture; The real Rule that Christians use, is that Sense of the Letter of
Scripture by which they square their Faith: for that is any ones real Rule, by
which he in reality acts. The true Sense of Scripture is a certain Rule; The
Sense given to the Letter of Scripture is a most uncertain, and frequently a
wrong Rule; The Rule Protestants pretend unto, is a certain infallible Rule,
for Truth never misguides: But their Rule of Faith is the Sense which each
Man's private Judgment gives to the Letter of Scripture; for they square their
Faith by it, and believe according to the same: The Letter of Scripture is
their Material Rule, as a piece of Wood is the Material Square of a Carpenter;
their application of Sense to this Letter is that which makes their real and
Formal Rule, as the streightness or crookedness of a Rule, is the true Rule of
the Carpenter that uses it. It Is against this I write, and against Dr.
Sherlock's Principle, that though several Men using the same Method of making
Rules, find and own that their several Rules make different Lines; yet it
follows not (says he) that the Rules they work by are not true, nor their
Methods of making themselves a Rule, erroneous.

Preservat. f. 83, 84. Were all Protestants of a mind, would their Consent and
Agreement prove the certainty of their Faith?

Answer f, 7. Not at all; but it is a most ridiculous Inference of yours, This
is the same Rule, and their Disagreement proves not their uncertainty. All
Union is not an Argument of the Spirit of God, for People may combine to do
ill; But St. Paul assures us, Disunion and Dissension is a certain Mark of the
absence of the Spirit of God.

Defense f. 21. You should have added in some, not in all the disagreeing
Parties. If the Question be put amongst a company of Men to go rob such a
House, is it a Mark of the absence of the Spirit of God in those which do not
agree to that Wickedness.

Answer. Certainly this honest Footman is hired to write as wide as may be from
Reason, that in Comparison with it Dr. Sherlock's Errors may appear tolerable.
I speak of People led into Disunion by the same Principle, which from thence I
conclude to be no good one: And I pray, those who refuse to go and rob the
House, do they act in this Refusal by the same Principle by which others are
moved to the Robbery? If they be, (for Example, out of Spite) though their
Refusal be just and good, their Motive or Rule they act by (and of that only I
speak) is stark naught.

Dr. Sherlock's Principle, which makes void all Scripture Proof.
IF a Mystery appears against Sense and Reason, Preservative, fol. 72.
we must have a Scripture proof as cannot possibly signify any thing else; or
else it will not answer that Evidence which we have against it, Sense and
Reason proving it naturally impossible.

Answ. f. 7. A Text which cannot possibly have an other sense does not leave it
in any ones liberty who owns Scripture to be an Heretic, therefore the Church
produced no such Texts against the Arians or Nestorians (to whom the Mysteries
of the Trinity, and of Christ's Human and Divine Nature in one Person, appeared
against Sense and Reason) whence it evidently follows, that according to Dr.
Sherlock the Arians and Nestorians, were bound not to believe the Trinity, and
Incarnation of Christ. A happy Ministerial Guide, and well led such as follow
him.

Defense, f. 22. The Trinity and Incarnation, which the Arians and Nestorians
disputed, they are Mysteries indeed, and might seem to be above Sense and
Reason, but they are not contrary to it. But that Transubstantiation
contradicts both, is plain.

Answ. The Footman had better have minded his Masters business, than to pretend
an Answer, to what he does not as much as understand. Certainly the Mysteries
of the Trinity and Incarnation, are not against Sense and Reason, but they did
appear so to the Nestorians, and Arians, and that is the Case, put by Dr.
Sherlock: and therefore it is evident, that according to his Principle, Arians
and Nestorians were bound not to leave their Heresies.

Dr. Sherlock's Principle, making void all use of Councils and Fathers.
AFter he has respectively told us, That Preservative, fol. 73
Learned men may squabble about the Fathers; he gives these Rules without which
they be of no use. 1. We must know that the Father is truly Author of the Book
(or the Council of such a Decree.) 2. That he was not corrupted by the
ignorance or knavery of the Transcribers, while they were in the hands of the
Monks (and to make this impossible he assures us) They not only pared their
Nails, but also their very Habit and Dress, to fit them to the Modes of the
time. 3. That the Father does not in some other place Contradict what there he
says. 4. That he did not alter his Opinion after. Answer f. 8.
That Is to say, some of these requisites, not being possibly to be known, no
use is to be made of them.

Defense, f. 23, 24. These requisites, that man that will build any thing upon
their Authority must know, or else he may be miserably mistaken, yet this is
not to deny any use of Fathers and Councils, for Learned men may dispute about
them.

Answ. A rare Privilege granted to Learned Men, that they may dispute about
Fathers, and Councils, but not till they have resolved some doubts first, which
cannot possibly be resolved. This is to sport pretty pleasantly, but not to
answer.

Dr. Sherlock's Principle, which makes void all use of Civil Charity, and Moral
Justice to our Neighbor.
IT lies in his last Chapter, in which he attempts Answer. fol. 8.
in vain to color the Misrepresentations which his Party has ever been guilty
of.

It is when a man's Exterior Actions are naturally capable of a good and pious
meaning, and he ever and clearly declares that it is His. Yet to fasten upon
him another opposite design and meaning, taken from his opposers contrary
Principle. Than which there cannot be a greater and more unjust disingenuity,
this he calls to join Protestant Principles with Popish Practices. For Example,
to insinuate, That a Catholic thinks the blessed Virgin more Powerful in
Heaven than Christ; He tells us, that he says ten Ave Maria's for one Lords
Prayer. And this though he knows, that the first half of the Ave Mary is in
memory of, and thanksgiving for the Incarnation of Christ, and the other half
asks of the Virgin, only to pray for us to Christ, which is all the Power we
allow her in Heaven.

Defense, p. 24. The matter of Fact is true. -- Suppose he does not think her
more powerful than Christ, yet sure he must think her more merciful, and ready
to hear his Prayers.

Answ. This is in lieu of excusing his Masters Malice and disingenuity, merely
to make the Proverb Good, like Master, like Man. Mary her self, her Merciful
concern for us, her Prayers are an Effect and Gift of the Mercy of Christ. But
to see how people will speak in spite of Sense, when they are resolved to
impugn Truth: how can it prove that I believe a person more merciful than
another, because I repeat oftener my instances and Petition. Naturally we call
that a greater mercy which is sooner moved, and yields to a single address. But
the whole is a most false Calumny, as it insinuates that our Church applies her
Devotions more to our blessed Lady than to Christ. Our Mass, our Church Office,
(except now and then a short Prayer of three or four lines) our Meditations,
our Fasts, are all directed to God and Christ, from him only we expect the
whole Mercy that must blot out our Sins, and the whole Goodness that must make
us Eternally happy.

Preservative, f. 89. The Papist believes it unlawful to commit Idolatry, and
most damnable to Worship any Breaden God, which is spoke like a Protestant, but
yet he pays Divine Adoration to the Sacrament, which is done like a Papist.

Answ. f. 8. This I call the most disingenuous Representation, and the most
false Calumny imaginable, as a supposed and owned Truth; to wit, That Catholics
Worship the visible Species in the Eucharist. A most impudent slander, no
Catholic being guilty of it, no more than the Apostles of Worshipping and
Adoring the Cloths of Christ, when they Adored him upon Earth.

Defense, f. 21. There is no mention made of Species, but the word is Sacrament.

Answ. This is what I called disingenuity. If he takes not Sacrament in the
Catholic sense, therein lies his fraud, in Expounding by his opposite
Principles, our Actions: and in the Catholic sense nothing has a reference to
his Accusation of a Breaden God, but the visible Species of Bread.

I concluded with this address to Protestants, in Dr. Sherlocks words, putting
(as I owned) the word Scripture in the lieu of Fathers, to show that according
to his very way of Reasoning, the mere reading of Scripture, could not serve
for an useful Guide at least to the far greatest part of Protestants. The
Sentence is, as follows.

Preservative, f. 76. Amongst Christians there is not one in a hundred thousand
who understands all Scripture, and it is morally impossible they should, and
therefore there must be certainly an easier and shorter way to understand
Christian Religion, than this, or else the generality of mankind, even of
professed Christians, are out of possibility of Salvation. Think well on it, as
you will answer at Gods Tribunal for the care you took of the one only
necessary, the saving of your Souls, seek out that easier and shorter way, and
walk faithfully in it.

Defense, f. 26, 27. We do not only say, but we find, that Scripture in all
points necessary to Salvation, is plain and easy, so that we may run and read.
It Is true, there are some Texts which we that are unlearned, cannot readily
find the true sense and meaning of, but they are not such as immediately concern
Salvation; and we are not destitute of helps as to these, for we have learned
and Religious Divines.

Answ. Is it not pleasant to say, that Scripture is plain and easy in all
points necessary to Salvation: and yet to see that those who use the same
Method for the understanding of it, differ as much as may be in the belief of
these Points? Is it not against plain Scripture, to say, that such Texts as the
unlearned cannot readily find the sense of, are not such as immediately concern
Salvation, whereas Scripture teaches us, that there be Texts which the
unlearned wrest to their own perdition. Well, I am weary in following this
Footman, running Extravagantly out of all Way, and Reason. Neither, Sir, have I
any mind to add to this long Letter, any farther Advice adress'd to your self:
If the exposing to your Eyes the Characters of the Books you License, does not
move you not to prostitute so easily your Name to those heaps of disingenuous
Cavils, ill-laid Calumnies, and monstrous Misrepresentations, which you daily
License; it shall be to me a sufficient Note and Character of a Book not worth
the reading, much less the Censuring, where ever I see you have opened it the
Press, which will in part ease of an ungrateful and unnecessary toil.

SIR, Your Servant to all Christian Offices, LEWIS SABRAN, Of the Society of
JESUS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THOUGH the Preface to Dr. Sherlock's Defense might very naturally have
challenged to be first Answered; yet because the Defense did attempt (though most
vainly) to undermine the very Foundation of the Christian Faith, that Rock of
the Catholic Church, on which Christ our Blessed Lord raised it; whereas the
Preface was stuffed chiefly with forged Calumnies against me, I thought it my
Duty (and ever shall) to pass by my own private Concerns, till I had vindicated
the Church of God. Now, Sir, I come to my own Defense.

I find my Adversaries Choler heated to the highest Ferment, because I Answered
the Celebrated Preservative, an excellent Tract, says he, proved so acceptable
by the Universal Entertainment it met with, in a single Sheet, which he says
was a ridiculous Answer to so great a Book. I omitted nothing, Sir, that even
pretended to the appearance of an Argument; and if your Celebrated Books swell
so with words, and prove void of Sense and Reason, am I blameable for it? He
should have pointed at some pretended Proofs which I slighted to expose, or
have praised me for not wearying my Readers with a dull Prolixity: But it seems
we must copy these Men's Faults, or abide their Censure.

He tells us next, That the Accusations of Forgery, of Clipping of Texts,
Fathers and Councils, Run high on both sides; That the Reader has this certain
way of knowing where the Guilt lies; That the Church of Rome accuses us, but
does not prove it; but our Men do not only accuse them, but prove it upon them.
This is indeed somewhat material, and he instances upon my Forgeries on the one
side, and those that Dr. Comber, Author of the Advice to Roman-Catholics, is
accused of on the other. I am content to join issue upon this matter; and
having produced the Grounds on which these several Accusations are bottomed, I
will leave the Decision to your and every unbiassed Reader's Judgment, having
first owned Forgery to be the greatest Mark of a bad Cause, and that even owned
such by those who thus defend it. He produces against me three Letters,
written, as he says, by one of their Learned Writers; in which no less than One
and twenty such Forgeries are proved upon me, and Protestant* like, because I
am accused, concludes me guilty, without taking the least notice of my full
Answers given to those most false Calumnies; he and his Learned Author
following both the old Advice, Calumniare fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit; Do but
Calumniate boldly, something will stick of the Dirt you cast. First then, I
will show the confident Impudence of my Accuser.

I Preached on the 25th of August last before his Sacred Majesty at Chester, on
the Conversion of St. Augustine from Heresy and a loose Life; and throughout
that Sermon I laid out in the B. Saint's own words, those mistaken Reasons that
hindered him, and keep off present Sectaries from a due Reconciliation with the
Catholic Church: I offered evident Motives taken from the same Saint's words,
which obliged Him, and do as efficaciously exact from all Protestants, under
pain of Eternal Damnation, (when a most dull Ignorance does not excuse them) to
return to the Communion of that one only Church, which they professed
themselves Members of at their Baptism. Those unanswerable Arguments of so
great a Doctor moved many, to my knowledge, to a happy Imitation of so Learned
a Saint; but they were too plain and solid to meet with even a seeming Answer
from the boldest of their Mercenary Pens.

The only Trick left them, was by some sly Insinuation, some Calumny, to
divert the well-meaning Reader's Attention: and a Minister, better known by his
Forehead than Wit, attempted it boldly in a Postscript. He was however afraid
of burning his Fingers with touching the Sermon it self, but nibled at three
Lines of the Introduction to it, a Form of Prayer to the Blessed Virgin Mother
of our Lord, taken out of the Thirty fifth Sermon of S. Augustine de Sanctis:
Then to support himself with big words, he accuses me of Forgery and
Disingenuity, not for citing any thing otherwise than it lay in that Sermon,
but because, forsooth, this is not really St. Augustin's Sermon, but a Spurious
Piece unjustly Fathered upon him: Then he as insolently triumphs, as a weak
Enemy, who not daring to attack a Camp, should brag of the Victory, because he
had most courageously shot at random at an exposed Sentinel. Now, Sir, take a
view of his Proofs, and of those Forgeries he accuses me of in the two Letters,
which I writ in my own Defense. His Proofs were these.

First the Title, A Sermon on the Feast of the Assumption does not agree at all
to any thing that is near S. Augustin's time. There was then not only no Feast
of the Assumption (therefore no Sermon could then be Preached on that
Solemnity) but not even any belief of such an Assumption.

This is a most weak pretense of a Proof: For, as I showed, that Day of
Assumption, when applied to any deceased Saint, ever signified in the Language
of Fathers, the Day of their Death. I cited several Sermons made by the
Fathers, as S. Cyril, Amphilochius, Methodius, made on our Lady's Purification,
long before any Solemnity of it were observed in the Church of God: That S.
Hierom, or an Author of the same Age, William of Paris, S. Bernard, made
Orations on the Assumption of our Blessed Lady, although they doubted of her
being assumed into Heaven in Body: That the Sermon in S. Meliton's name, owned
for his in the Fifth Century, spoke as fully on the real Assumption of our
Blessed Lady, as any Catholic ever did since. And therefore it is evidently
false, that there was no such Belief in S. Augustin's time. Farther I added,
That, as Nicephorus witnesses, Juvenal Patriarch of Jerusalem, proved the truth
of this Mystery as now piously believed in the Catholic Church, to have been
received of very ancient Tradition, and that in the presence of Marcion the
Emperor, in whose time was the Fourth General Council. Next I showed what a
Cheat this Minister put upon his Readers, by insinuating that the Thirty fifth
Sermon I cited, spoke not of the Blessed Virgins Death, but of her Assumption
in the Sense which that word now vulgarly bears; whereas the contrary is most
evident, and is expressed in such words as are found in all the ancient
Writings of the Fathers on this Subject; to wit, In these the World is honored
by so great a Virgins departure; in what order or manner she passed hence to
Heaven, the Catholic Church does no way recount, neither is her Body found on
Earth, neither is her Assumption in the Flesh (as it is read in the
Apocrypha's) found in the Catholic Church. This is the true Opinion concerning
her Assumption, that not knowing whether in her Body or out of it, (as the
Apostle has it) we believe her assumed above the Angels. It is not evident
from hence, that this Minister most falsely imposed upon his Readers? To this
Accusation of mine he returns not a word of Answer; to my Proofs, only these
insignificant Trifles, That Nicephorus comes too late; That S. Bernard doubted
of our Blessed Lady's Assumption in Body; That the first mention we find of
Meliton's Book was Sixty Years after S. Augustin's time, when it was declared
Apocryphal: Not a word to the Sermon under S. Hierom's name, nor to any of my
other Proofs.

His Second Proof was, That very lately some Benedictin's at Paris, in their
late Edition of S. Augustin's Works, had cast it into their Appendix as
Spurious; and that they told us, that in their MSS. it wanted the Name of any
Author; but that the Louvain Doctors told us, that in several Manuscripts which
they used in their Edition of S. Augustine this Sermon de Sanctis was entitled
to Fulbertus Carnotensis.

1. I Answered, That these were no Proofs, or where they have an appearance of
a Proof, that it is grounded on a Mistake. It Is no Proof at all on any side,
that in many Manuscripts there was no Name to the Sermon; this is self-evident.
2. That it is evident this Sermon was not of Fulbertus Carnotensis; for the
Sermon I cited assures us, that the Church at that time taught nothing of the
Corporal Assumption of the Virgin; whereas Fulbertus in his Sermon of the
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, teaches, That Christian Piety believed, that
Christ raised gloriously his Mother, and placed her above the Heavens. This was
an undeniable Proof, and therefore the Minister answers nothing to it: However,
I added out of Courtesy, that it is no new thing that a Saint's Sermon should
in some Manuscripts appear under other Names than their known Authors, the same
having happened to several Sermons of S. Chrysologus, S. Ambrose, etc. That
Syncletica's Life, the undoubted Work of S. Athanasius, was in some ancient
Manuscripts entitled to Polycarp the Anchoret. The Minister disproves not any
one of these Instances. To his vain Argument, that the Style of this Sermon did
seem to differ from that of S. Augustin's, (which is his private Opinion, and
of few late Writers) I opposed the contrary Opinion of S. Thomas Aquinas, who
owned this Sermon to be S. Augustin's; that eminent Doctor, so well versed in
this Saint's Writings, that he was called Augustinus Contractus: a Doctor, to
the defense of whose Doctrine, the greatest part of Christian Divines are sworn.
Was not this a very full Answer? Yet to show how the Louvain Doctors owned the
Invocation of Saints to have been S. Augustin's Doctrine, I minded him, that
they receive his Eighteenth Sermon de Sanctis, in which he speaks thus, Having
received these our Vows by thy Prayers, obtain Pardon for our Sins. -- What we
offer, let it by thee be pardonable. What we ask with a faithful Mind, let it
become attainable; Receive what we offer, return us what we ask, etc.

The Last Proof the Minister offers, and which he values most, is, That one
Isidore is quoted in that Twenty fifth Sermon de Sanctis thus: Hence Isidore
observes it is uncertain by this Saying, whether the Sword of the Spirit is
meant, or the Sword of Persecution. Now Isidore of Sevil in his Book of the
Life and Death of Saints, Chap. 68. has these words: Which indeed is
uncertain, whether he meant the Sword of Martyrdom, or the Word of God, heavy
and sharp beyond any double-edged Sword. It Is evident, says the Minister, this
same Isidore is cited in the Thirty fifth Sermon, which could not therefore be
of S. Augustin's composing, who lived Two hundred years before this Isidore.

This indeed has the face of a Proof; therefore I offered these following
Reasons, why the Isidore quoted in the Thirty fifth Sermon, was not the Isidore
of Sevil. 1. In the Thirty fifth Sermon, in debate, are these words: In our
time no Author among the Latins can be found, who treating of the Blessed
Virgins Death, has been positive and express. Now S. Gregory of Tours, being
one of the most famous Authors of the Sixth Age, and having as fully and
positively written of this Assumption as any since, the Author assuring, that
no one amongst the Latins had done so, could not be a Learned Bishop that lived
after the Seventh Century; and therefore the Isidore whom he cites, cannot
possibly be Isidore of Sevil. Again, the Sermon cited under the name of S.
Hierom, and at least as ancient as the Fourth General Council, and which was
cited by the famous Hincmar Bishop of Rheims, by S. Odilo, and others
contemporaries with Fulbertus, could not have escaped his knowledge. As for the
words of Isidore of Sevil, they vary as much from those that are cited in the
Thirty fifth Sermon, as the words which express the same sense in Epiphanius,
who writ before S. Augustine. Hence I inferred, that since we know many
Isidores, and famous before S. Augustin's time, it is far more probable, that
one of these was cited in the Thirty fifth Sermon, and therefore without any
danger of Forgery, I might well cite a Sermon as S. Augustin's, (especially in
a mere Introduction to a Sermon) which the greatest Divine of the latter Ages,
and whom most do follow in this, had cited, and that as a Proof in Arguing. All
that is replied to this is, That the Author of the Thirty fifth Sermon looked
upon S. Gregory as mistaken. But can that allow him to say, that no body writ
Positively on that Subject, meaning only that they were mistaken? This is the
Issue of that Controversy which this Prefacemaker styles me Famous for: I
leave it to your Judgment, Sir, whether my Defense does not prove it a Calumny
in the Minister who accused me, in citing this Sermon, of Disingenuous Forgery.
He knew well his weak Surmises, misplaced by him for Arguments, could not make
it out: therefore having espied in my Second Letter, that I resolved to take no
farther notice of such unknown Masks or Persons who concealed their Names, that
their Errors when baffled, their Calumnies when cleared, may not put them to
the Blush, he confidently puts out a Third Letter, without any the least
addition of a new Proof, and again conceals his Name, to secure himself from an
Answer, which he knew I had publicly professed I would not give, if he thus
concealed his Name, and only repeated what I had Answered; then he most
disingenuously brags that I had dropped the Question. Now, Sir, a full account of
the Controversy being thus given, observe the vain silliness of the
Preface-maker's accusing me of Forgery.

I have now proved how false 1. The 35th Sermon of S. Augustine, a Forgery.
this Charge is.

It Is owned at all hands for 2. The 14th Sermon de Sanctis, a Forgery.
S. Augustin's, not disproved or denied by my very Adversary in his last
Answer, who only complains that the Citation in the Margin did not lead him to
it.

My very adversary owns, that 3. The 18th Sermon of S. Augustine de Sanctis, a
Forgery.
the Louvain Divines Printed it amongst those Works of S. Augustine, which they
own for his, but not with an undoubted Certainty.

I expressly cited it as a Sermon S. Hierom' s Sermon a Forgery.
that went under S. Hierom's Name, and therefore added, Or an Author of the
same Age. Not a word has been attempted to prove there was not such a Sermon
in that Age. Pray where lies the Forgery?

My words were, A Sermon under S. Meliton' s Book a Forgery.
S. Meliton's Name. It Is evident there was such an one by the very Censure of
Pelagius in a Council above 1200 Years ago, when it was reckoned amongst the
Apocrypha, that is, of an Authority doubted of, and not asserted to its Author.
Wherein lies this Forgery? But in one of my Letters it was Printed Malion for
Meliton, though corrected in the next. These Men are as wonderful Persecutors of
Errata's, as Dr. Tenison of Errors in Spelling: But such Trifles must be the
Pageantry of these great Writers Achievements; and those, it seems, who at the
end of their Books note the Errata's of the Print, own themselves guilty of
great Forgeries.

And why? Nicephorus, who writ The Story about Juvenal and Marcion, a Forgery.
it, lived almost a thousand years after S. Augustine, and was the first
Historian found to have mentioned it. Does not this prove me guilty of a great
Forgery in citing Nicephorus?

What Proof for it? Every man S. Athanasius de Incarnatione, a Forgery.
indeed has owned it to be his Work; but the last Critic, one du Pin, has
lately questioned it, therefore a Forgery. Is not this a shameless Nonsense?
Luther did not own S. James's Epistle Canonical, therefore it is a Forgery, is
as good an Inference.

I cited to him the Leaf in his own A Prayer to the Virgin, not a syllable
whereof was to be found there, a Forgery.
Century-Writers, where the Place and Leaf in Athanasius's his Works are cited,
to be found where the Centuriators quote them; yet this must be a Forgery.

I proved evidently in my first S. Cyril' s Quotation falsifi'd, a Forgery.
Letter to you, Sir, that the Minister had egregiously falsified it, and that I
had it right according to all the Greek and Latin Copies.

In the same Letter I have convinced Nectarius upon Theodore, a Forgery.
the Minister of his dull Ignorance, and taught him where to find that Sermon
of Nectarius, but no Answer given me, no notice taken of mine, yet it must be a
Forgery.

I cited not one of these, but told That the Prayers out of Methodius, Ephrem
Syrus, Athanasius, S. Leo, are Forgeries.
my Minister, I could cite from those Authors, if need were, evident Instances
of Praying to Saints. He, very wisely, not so much as knowing what and whence I
would cite, declares they must needs be Forgeries; this Preface-maker adds
confidently, that certainly they are so. Is not this a bold kind of Calumny?

No Proof of this but the Minister's S. Gregory Nazianzen' s Prayer to the
Blessed Virgin, a Forgery.
plain Assertion against the general Sense of the Learned World. Is not this a
pleasant way of proving upon us Forgeries.

How is this proved? I do not find The Proof from S. Ambrose is a Forgery.
(says the Minister) the Title of this Sermon in the INDEX, and I will not turn
over five Tomes. To ease him of the labor, I tell him it is the 14th Sermon,
page 144. in the Fifth Tome of the Paris Edition of 1661. What Answer is
returned me? None, but No matter, says this Preface-maker. It was called a
Forgery by the Minister, it must be still a Forgery.

Boldly said: is it proved? Not The Proof from S. Gregory Nazianzen' s
Jamhicks, is a Forgery.
one single word by either of the Ministers; but as a Ministers Oath lately
made any Loyal Man a Traitor, so this Minister's bare saying it is, must make
any of the Fathers Works a Forgery.

In my First Letter to you, Sir, The Council of Chalcedon was clipped and abused,
the Councils of Laodicea, Gangrae and Carthage, misrepresented.
I have cleared evidently these three Calumnies. The Case of the Council of
Carthage is, whether these words in all the Greek Originals, 'O (...), and all
the Latin Translations, Martyr oret pro nobis, ought to be translated: That the
Martyr pray for us, or as the Minister rendered it, The Martyr will intercede to
you for us. This Second, I said, and say still, was a Forgery; and whoever can
but Construe Greek and Latin, will, I am sure, say that I translated right, and
that the Minister was guilty of Forgery. I proved the Sense I gave to a Canon
of the Council of Laodicea to be the true one from Theodoret; That of the
Council of Gangrae from the very Synodical Epistle of that Council; That of
Carthage was so evident, that the Minister having nothing to offer against it,
thought fit only to say, without attempting the least Proof, All this is
nothing to the purpose: yet the Preface-maker will have them all Forgeries.

Had not this Minister great reason to conclude in his Preface, He was amazed
at such a Mass of Forgeries in so little room. These Gentlemen forget the
Axiom, Probationes habere debent Lib. qui accu s^r^ ^. de ^den^.
qui accusare volunt; They must have Proofs at hand that will accuse. I have, I
conceive, fully made out in my Vindication, that Protestant Ministers do accuse
our Writers of Forgery, but prove it not, and therefore stand guilty of the
basest sort of Calumny, which has as much of Silliness as of Dishonesty. Now I
would make out the other Truth I asserted, to wit, that we prove upon them the
most impudent Forgeries we accuse them of, and this by an Instance the most
weighty, in Dr. Comber's Case; because that no one ever pretended more to
Ingenuity, Sincerity and Charity, and I boldly assert it, No one was ever
guilty of so many and so outrageous and malicious Forgeries. But because this
Postscript swells already much beyond its due Bounds, to convince also Dr.
Sherlock, that we do not generally forbid the reading of Heretical Books, but
only to such as want Abilities or Application, to search into, and find out
their gross Forgeries, I will publish a Book written by a Lay-Gentleman, to
whom I had recommended the Reading of the Advice to Roman-Catholics; by which
it will appear how modestly I spoke, when I said that Dr. Comber's Forgeries
and Falsifications could be produced by Dozens; for the Reader will find them
exposed by Scores, and such as will allow of no Color, but the Blushes of the
hardest Forehead.

Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam.


A Third Letter of F. Lewis Sabran of the Society of JESUS, to Mr. Needham,
Licenser of the Second Part of Dr. Sherlock's Preservative against Popery;
Giving an account of the Misrepresentations and Calumnies that make up the
whole Book.
SIR,
WHILST my Second Letter to you is yet under the Press, I meet with a Second
Part to the Preservative Licensed by you to come abroad; and because I
apprehend, by a charitable Judgment, that you approve not all that you License,
but (which of the two may be the lesser Fault) refer your self to the Author's
Ingenuity and Accurateness, I venture once more to give you an account of the
scandalous Untruths, and unconscionable Forgeries, in plain Matters of Fact,
unto which you have unwarily put your Hand.

If Reason was much abused by the First Part of the Preservative, Religion is
slandered at a far higher rate by the Second; in which the Catholic Faith
appears so disfigured, that had I not consulted the Title, I had never
discovered against what Church Dr. Sherlock directs his outrageous Invectives.
I laid open the Errors of the First in a single Sheet; a full Answer to the
thredbare and weak Objections he has made a Collection of in the Second, would
not take up half a Sheet, if yet they could challenge at all to be considered:
but he has packt them up in so many sly and equally false Insinuations (which
claim for him (...), the Title of The Misrepresenter) and backed them with such
a train of most shameless Calumnies, that the bare exposing of them (which is
their plain Confutation) will I fear take up two or three Sheets. I will follow
the order of his four Sections, and first summing up in each his
Misrepresentations and Calumnies, I will give them no other Answer than by a
fair and full account of our Faith; the ugly Mask he has disfigured her by,
will be no prejudice to her, when her Face appears.

Ten Misrepresentations and Calumnies contrived by Dr. Sherlock, in his First
Paragraph Concerning Idolatry.
1. SAcrifice is the only Act of Worship which the Church of Preserv. fol. 3.
Rome appropriates to the Supreme God; she does not pay to him alone that
degree of Worship which the tempting Devil demanded of Christ, whereas our
Savior denying to give him this inferior degree of Worship, thereby teaches
that no degree of Worship must be given to any Being but the Supreme God. 2.
The Papists by their worshipping Saints, Angels, and the Virgin Mary, put them
in the Throne of God. 3. They offer not their Prayers only in the Name of
Christ, Fol. 4.
that in him they may find acceptance. 4. They make not their Applications to
One God by One Mediator. 5. They Fol. 9.
bow to or toward their Images as the Objects of their Worship, and in that
are Idolaters: So were not the Jews on account of the Cherubins which by God's
Ordinance covered the Mercy-seat; for though the People, in pursuance of David's
Advice, did bow down to, and worship God's Footstool, and though this relate to
the Ark, yet how does David's Exhortation to worship the Ark, which is God's
Footstool, prove that all their Worship must be directed to the Cherubins,
which are his Throne? Suppose the Jews were to direct their Worship toward the
Mercy seat, which was covered with the Cherubins, where God had promised to be
present, how are the Cherubins concerned in this Worship, which was paid only
to God as peculiarly present at that Place? which is no more than to lift up
our Hands and Eyes to Heaven where the Throne of God is, when we pray to him,
but the very Image (for Example, of Christ crucified) is the Object of the
Worship of Papists. 6. By the Incarnation God is visibly represented to us in
our Fol. 12.
Nature; but the Papists, not contented with this, contrary to the Design of
God made Man, make and adore other Images Fol. 13.
of God. 7. They have the Worship of Creatures and Images still; and therefore
all the visible Idolatry that ever was practiced in the World before. 8. They
only change the Heathens Country-Gods into Saints and Angels, and give new
Names to their Statues and Images. As to internal Notions, 9. The Pagan
Philosophers made the same Apologies for their Worship of Angels, and Demons,
and Images, which the Learned Papists now make. And 10. It Is doubtful whether
the Unlearned Papists have not as gross Notions about their Worship of Saints
and Images, as the Unlearned Heathens had.

The Faith and Practice of Catholics as to their Worship.
THE Catholic, hating above all Sins the vain and abominable Qui confidunt in
eis. Ps. 133. Sacrificans diis Eradicabitur praeterquam Domino Deo soli. Exodus
22.
Idolatry of the Heathens, says Amen to that heavy Curse of David on all those
who put their trust in those strange and false Gods; for those truly make a
false God, not who carve his Idol, but who create him a Divinity in their Mind
and Heart, by having recourse to him by Prayers and Sacrifices, and what
Sacrifice more valuable than that of the Heart, by a full return of confidence
and dependence? He acknowledges no other Name to be invocated, no other
Protection to be sought, but of our Lord God through Christ in the Holy Ghost;
That there is no other Name under Non est in alio aliquo salus, non enim est
aliud nomen sub coelo datum hominibus in quo oporteat nos salvos fieri. Act. 4.
Ostende nobis Domine misericordiam tuam and salutare tuum da nobis. Ps. 84.
the Heavens, in which we can attain Salvation; It Is God's Mercy, and his only
he calls upon, from him only with the Prophet he seeks his Eternal Bliss: So
that he adheres to God alone, ( Psalm. 84.) and places therein his Virtue and
Comfort; That all his Prayers lift up his Heart toward God, six his Hope on
God, increase his Love of God: From him alone he seeks Relief in Want,
Protection in Adversity, Grace in Temptations, Security in Dangers, Virtue
during Life, Victory in Death, Happiness in Eternity. As he abhors that Saying
of the Poet, Each Man's Security is best placed in himself; so with St.
Augustine, he equally Aug. de Praedest. SS. cap. 1.
fears that Curse of the Prophet, Be he accursed who confides in Man. He owns
with Ezechiel, that the Protection of Noe, Ezech. cap. 14.
Daniel, or Jacob, will not avail their wicked Children; and he places amongst
them all those who put their trust not in their Creator but Creatures, not on
God but their Fellow Servants. He believes that each best Gift, each perfect
Good, Jacobi 1.
is from above, and issues from the Father of Lights; That whoever sweats under
temporal Afflictions, and thirsts after Joan. 7.
ease and comfort; who ever sighs under spiritual Infirmities, and faints for
want of relief; whatever our craving Hearts pant for, Jesus is ready by his
Blessings to refresh us; and that since he shed his precious Blood for us on
the Cross, it is our fault in not addressing our selves to him with confidence,
if Isay's Promise be not fulfilled in us, You shall with joy draw Isai^e 12.
abundant Waters (of all Comforts) from the Fountains of your Savior (his
Wounds:) And therefore in all his Prayers he casts ever his Eyes on Jesus the
Author of his Faith, and the Perfecter of it; it being the Essence of his
Religion, that it fix Quod uni Deo religemus animas nostras. Aug. de vera
relig. cap. 55.
his Thoughts, Hopes, Wishes, Prayers, and whole Soul on God. This all our
Pulpits ever Preach, all our Universities and Divines teach, all our Catechisms
explain, all our Books of Devotion move us to, all our Liturgies, public and
private Prayers express. If we honor God's faithful Servants now glorious in
his Presence, if we ask of them to join their Prayers to ours, it is God's Glory
we aim at, and God's Mercy we sue for.

All Divine Worship we pay to God alone, an inferior Worship Cui honorem, Romans
13.
we not only may, but must pay wherever it is due, as S. Paul commands us. The
reason of it is, that all Worth and Dignity exacts a proportionable Value and
Esteem, and having it interiorly, we ought to express it exteriorly, and such
Expressions we call Worship, and those who may challenge it, Worshipful. If
that Excellency and Worth be created and natural, as Power, Greatness,
Learning, we call it Civil Worship; such is paid to Kings, Magistrates,
Parents. If Divine (...) Hom. 26. de S. Mim. M.
and uncreated, we call it Divine Worship, or Latria, and pay it to God alone.
If created, but supernatural, it is a Religious Worship, but such as is paid to
holy Fellow Creatures, as St. Basil observes: Such is paid to holy Places, as
Churches; to holy Things, as the Sacraments; to holy Persons, as Prophets,
Prelates, Princes, living Saints, and with more reason, to those who in Glory
possess God; therefore, as St. Augustine observes, We give them that Worship of
Charity and Fellowship Eo cultu dilectionis and societatis, etc. Lib. 8. de
Civit. c. 26.
which we pay to Saints on Earth, but with as much greater a Devotion, as we
are more certain of their Holiness, now they are past all Dangers and
Uncertainties, but with that Worship which in Greek is called Latria, which is
a Servitude properly owed to the Divinity; we neither worship, nor teach to
worship any one but God. It Is false that Sacrifice is the Only Act of Worship
which we appropriate to God; we appropriate to him all positive Prayer or
Worship, and give none but Relative, or directed finally to God, to any Saint
or Angel. It was a Calumny invented by Faustus the Manichaean, that we had
exchanged the Pagan Idols for others, to wit, the Shrines of Saints. And St.
Augustine having owned Religious Solemnities in honor of Lib. 20. c. 21. contra
Faustum.
Saints, praises them, because the Christians then, (as Catholics now) by them
only sought to excite themselves to the Imitation of Saints, to be associated
to their Merits, and to be helped by their Prayers, minding that Heretic, that
Sacrifice is indeed the only Exterior Worship inseparable from Latria, and
therefore never to be offered to any but God; and therefore then (as now it is
still practiced) no formal Invocation directed to any Saint, was used at Holy
Mass, but only Commemorations, that they might Pray the more for us, the
Christians (as St. Gregory Nyssen observes) calling on the Martyr as on God's
Tract. 8. in Joa. Sermon. 27. de verb. Dom. l. 22. c. 10. de Civ. In S. Thcod.
Mar.
Minister, who being Invocated by Men, is able to Impetrate for them what
Favors he pleases. That Christ by refusing himself all Worship to God's Enemy
the Devil, teaches Us to pay none at all to God's Saints and Angels, is an
Inference that no one but Dr. Sherlock was ever capable to make. That to bring
or invite Saints to the Feet of God's Throne, to join their Prayers to ours, is
to set them in the Throne of God, is a Position that seems to be supported in
spite of all Sense and Reason. The Catholics by Petitioning the Saints to Pray
to God for them, do most perfectly worship God, and that by as immediate a
Prayer as the Three Children in the Furnace of Dan. 3.
Babylon, as David in his 148. Psalm and others, where he invites all Creatures
to Praise God; and whatever we admire in them being the Graces and Glory of
God, and the Worship which they pay him, as directly leads to God as any other
Prayer, the best sort whereof is Thanksgiving, or a Memorial of the Blessings
we have received our selves from God. Besides, since we are sure that they
faithfully return to God as the Author of all that is praiseworthy in them,
whatever Praises they receive from us, we honor and worship God more by Praying
thus to them, than he that should have held a Book of Prayers to St. Peter or
St. Paul on Earth to read their Seraphical Prayers in.

The Catholic Believes there is but one God, and one Mediator Jac. 4,
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, as he believes Jac. 5.
there is one Lawgiver and one Judge, and one Redeemer: yet he believes that he
who converts his Brother, saves his Soul, though Christ be the only Savior,
because all other Means to Salvation have their efficacy from him. Christ is
the only Mediator by Nature and his essential Office, by his own Merits only,
challenging in Justice to be heard, having given himself a full Redemption: so
that he is, as St. Augustine observes, the Priest, In Psalm 64.
who being now entered into the vail alone there of them who have been partakers
of flesh, does make intercession for us; yet, as the same Saint says, without
doubt the Martyrs intercede for us. It Is true, we are bidden to come with
confidence to the throne In Psalm 8^. and 8^.
of glory, that is, with security that a full Ransom is paid for us, of more
than sufficient value to obtain whatever we ask; but as the beloved Disciple
observes, that full confidence that they shall be heard, is only for those
whose Heart does not check 1 Joan. 3.
them with the consciousness of their Sins, and we reach not the Pharisaical
Pride of those who rank themselves with the Innocents: We own Christ to be the
Gate, the Way, he in whose Name we must ask; and we say with St. Augustine, That
In Psalm 108
Prayer which is not made in the Name of Christ, Mediator between God and Man,
not only does not blot out sin, but is it self a sin. We are certain, that
whoever asks as he should in the Name of Christ, will obtain what he asks; and
therefore finding our Prayers so often not to be heard, and knowing that the
very Prayer of a Sinner is odious to God whilst his Sins cry louder, we put
that adorable Name in the Mouth of Saints, not by choosing them for our
Mediators, since their Prayers are of no other efficacy or value, but through the
Passion of Christ; but for our Fellow-Intercessors, as the Apostles themselves,
when on Earth, asked the Prayers of others, though absent, by their Letters, and
we as much apply the Mediation of Christ to us by the Prayers of our
Fellow Members of his Mystical Body, as we do by Alms-deeds and other pious
Works; which is no more a derogation to Christ, than that St. Peter should work
even greater Miracles than he himself, because he wrought them in his Name; and
we honor God as much as those who laid their sick Friends where St. Peter's
Shadow as he passed might cover them, in lieu of calling immediately upon
Christ, whose Devotion was approved by Miracles.

We pay no other Worship to Images than the Jews by the Holy Ghost's Commands
paid to the Ark or Mercy-seat, or to the Cherubins: for whatever Dr. Sherlock
says to the contrary, the same Worship may be paid to God's Throne as to his
Footstool; the Images are not the Object of our Worship, but a Means to convey
it to its proper Object, which they represent. We adore God every where, and
particularly where his Representative (as a Crucisix is of Christ) by a
livelier Representation renders him more present to our Faith, and we direct no
other way our Worship toward a Crucifix, than we do toward Heaven, when we
adore God there. We adore but one substantial Image of God, Christ Jesus, but
Pictures and Material Representations no more than our own Thoughts, when in
Contemplation we adore God, though we have a singular Veneration for them, (as we
have for the Bible) proportioned to that Civil Respect which we pay to the
Images or Statues of our Kings. If our worship of Creatures be Idolatry, all
the first Christians were great Idolaters, who showed so much Respect and Love
to St. Paul and the other Apostles, and confided so much on their Prayers,
which they asked with Tears: for we own and practice no other sort of
Creature-worship. That Catholics have every where, and even in this last Age,
destroyed all Idols, and converted Nations from Idolatry, is a certain Truth;
and therefore it is as evident a Calumny, that they have only changed the Names
of Idols. The Heathen Philosophers never pretended that their Prayers to Idols
were only to ask the Prayers of Angels and Demons, not the least footstep of
this appears in any one of them: and the Silver-Smith Demetrius, who accused
St. Paul for teaching, Act. 19. 26. Quoniam non sunt dii qui manibus fiunt.
that those were not Gods which were the work of men's hands, sufficiently
teaches us what Notion was generally received of Idols. I have seen some part
of the Catholic World, as France, the Low Countries, some Parts of Italy and
Germany; it has been my great Employ to instruct the weakest Age, and dullest
People; yet I profess I never met with any one that was in the least danger to
take a Picture or Statue for a God, or for a Saint that heard him: And the
Inquisitions, (against whose Severity Protestants so often declaim) though they
have often detected those who turned Jews, (a Persuasion most opposite to
Image Worship) yet never discovered any one, who by the use of Image or Statue,
was fallen into Idolatry. We know God can hear us immediately, (and we commonly
address our Prayers immediately to him) so he can guard us without the help of
Angels, and sanctify us immediately without the use of Sacraments; but he has
often declared, that he will have his Servants honored; and by Ezechiel, that
he had sought Cap. 14.
amongst Men some one that would interpose betwixt his Anger and Sinners, and
disarm his Justice; and we look on the blessed Angels, Apostles, Martyrs, and
other Saints, as those whose Prayers God sets betwixt us and his Justice, that
his Mercy moved by the efficacious Blood of our One Mediator, may protect and
bless us. This account does, I conceive, sufficiently discover the injurious
Misrepresentations and Calumnies which Dr. Sherlock has fastened upon our
Worship, under the odious Notion of Idolatry.

Six Misrepresentations and Calumnies contrived by Dr. Sherlock, in his Second
Section, concerning the Love and Mercy of God, and Pardon of Penitent Sinners.
1. THE Church of Rome teaches, that Christ has Redeemed Fol. 2^.
us from Eternal, though not from Temporal Punishments. 2. That Men suffer in
Purgatory when the Fol. 18, 19.
Guilt of Sin is before taken away, and the Sinner is in a perfect State of
Grace, and needs no Amendment; that is, for no Reason that make it either Good
or Just for them to suffer. 3. That the Blood of Christ could not expiate for
the Temporal Fol. 27.
Punishment of Sin, which the Merits of some Supererogating Saints, or the
Pope's Indulgences, or the Priests Masses, can redeem us from: How then could
that Blood make Expiation for Eternal Punishment? If his Interest in the Court
of Heaven cannot do the less, how can it do the great? 4. Again, the Church of
Rome pretends, that Fol. 28, 29.
Saints in Heaven Pray for us by way of Interest and Merit, not of humble
Supplication. God indeed commanded us to Pray for one another, because it is a
mutual Exercise of Love and Charity, of Forgiveness of our Enemies, and of
other Virtues; but this only becomes those who live and converse together in
this World. 5. That Church takes the Virgin Mary, Fol. 30.
Angels and Saints, for Mediators, to incline God to be good to peculiar
Persons; whereas the Mediation of Christ was not to make God good and kind,
(who before was infinitely good) but to reconcile God's Goodness with his
Wisdom and Justice, and to make it Wise and Just in God to do good to Sinners.
6. They believe Christ is not Merciful or Pitiful Fol. 31.
enough; That his Virgin Mother has tenderer and softer Passions, and such
Interest with, or Power over him in the Right of a Mother, that she can have
any thing of him; And likewise they suppose other Saints to be much more
Pitiful than he.

Dr. Sherlock's Arguments against Purgatory, and our recourse to Saints for
their Prayers.
YOU may call the Doctrine of Purgatory Justice, you Fol. 16.
may call it Vengeance, but Love it is not. I should rather choose to fall into
nothing when I die, than to endure a thousand years Torments to be happy for
ever. It Is an extravagant Notion, That God may forgive Sins, and yet punish us
for them. What is it Men desire, when they desire Pardon? Is it not Fol. 17.
that they may not be punished? It Is something that God exchange the Eternal
Punishment due to Sin in Hell, for the Temporal of Purgatory; but would it not
be a perfecter Expression of Love and Goodness, to have remitted the Temporal
Punishment also? The Texts that say that Christ died Fol. 20, 21, 22.
for our sins, has made atonement for sin, is a propitiation through faith in
his blood, if they do not signify that a penitent Sinner shall be delivered
from (all) the Punishment due to his Sins, how shall he be sure, though his Sins
are Pardoned, and he Justified, that he shall not be Damned for ever?
Redemption from the Curse of the Law cannot signify that we shall not be
Eternally punished, unless it signify that we shall not be punished (at all,)
and therefore not in Purgatory neither. There is no Fol. 24.
Threatening against Sin in all the Gospel, but Eternal Death; all other
Punishments are inflicted by virtue of this Law, consequently he who is
delivered from this Curse of the Law, Eternal Punishment, is delivered from the
whole Punishment due to Sin. 2 Cor. 4. 18. The things which are seen (that is
of this World) are temporal, but the things which are not seen (that is of the
next World) are eternal: This is a Demonstration that Fol. 25.
there is no Purgatory. Who believes in Christ, shall never die. 11. Joa. 25.
therefore good Men must not go to Purgatory, Fol. 26.
which is as much perishing and dying as Hell, but not so long; otherwise
Purgatory may be Everlasting Life for all I know, and so the Pains of it
Eternal. Could I believe our Savior could leave his Members in Purgatory Fire,
which burns as hot as Hell, I should have mean thoughts of his Kindness, and
not much rely on him for any thing; when a merciful Man cannot see a Beast in
torment without relieving it.

To imagine that we want any Mediator to God; but only our Fol. 27.
High Priest, who Mediates in virtue of his Sacrifice, is a reproach to the
Divine Goodness. God will never be persuaded Fol. 28.
by any Intercession to show Mercy to unfit Objects, that is, to Fol. 29.
Impenitent Sinners. He that spared not his Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall be not with him also freely give us all things? It was not for
want of Goodness, or that he needed Entreaties, that he gave his Son to be our
Mediator.

Behold (not one omitted) all the Arguments which bear up the most outrageous
Declamations of this Man against the Church of God.

The Catholic Doctrine about Purgatory and Saints Intercession, and its evident
Grounds opposed to Dr. Sherlock's Sophistical Cavils.
WE call the Doctrine of Purgatory, God's Justice tempered with infinite Mercy:
And tho it is in our power, by the Mercy of God, to attain Salvation without
suffering in Purgatory; yet we judge the Possession of God so infinite a Good,
that we believe that Man unworthy ever to see the Face of God, who declares
with Dr. Sherlock, that did God offer him the Eternal possession of himself on
this Condition, that he should first suffer a thousand years, he would
absolutely refuse it. We own two sorts of Guilt in Sin; First, an Aversion from
God, and slighting of that infinite Good; Next, an Irregular Affection to some
transient Good or Pleasure, which the Prophet expresses by the forsaking the
Fountain of living Waters, and seeking the leaking Cisterns. To the First is
due, an Eternal loss of God's Grace and Glory; to the Second, the Punishment of
a sensible Pain. We believe, that through Christ we obtain full remission of both
Evils at once, whenever we are duly disposed to receive it; to wit, when a
perfect Contrition creates in us a full Conversion to God, and an equal
detestation of all sensible Pleasure, that may in the least draw us from God.
But when this Disposition is but in a remiss degree in us, God is yet so
merciful, as through Christ to remit that first Guilt; and the Blood of Christ
being particularly applied by the Sacrament of Penance, by the infusion of his
sanctifying Grace, to make us his Friends, although, because we endeavor but
weakly to be entirely such, a sensible Pain remains due to us, to punish the
past sinful Pleasure not sufficiently mortified, either to be suffered by
Penitential Works in this Life, or hereafter in Purgatory. A Man dying in the
State of Grace indeed, but without a perfect Contrition, without supplying and
increasing it by the due Fruits of Penance, may be called still, (and is so
termed by St. Hierom) a Sinner, Hier in cap. 1. Nahum.
because he carries with him to God's Tribunal, an Obligation of suffering for
his Sins, which he has refused, or has not had time to comply with by a
Penitential Life. In this Method of God's Judgments there appears but an
unbiassed Justice, yet accompanied with a singular Mercy, by which God restores
his Favor to us, before our Hearts be as perfectly converted as his Justice
might well require. So God was merciful to the Exodus 32. Hier. Ep. 12. ad Gaud.
Israelites, when at Moses's Prayer he forgave them their past Sin of Idolatry,
though as St. Hierom observes, he protested in his Justice, that he would punish
that Sin in the day of revenge. Thus he was merciful to David, when Nathan
acquainted him that Our Lord had put away his Sin, yet Just in 2 Reg. 12.
punishing it by the death of his Child. Thus from the beginning he had been
merciful to Adam, whom he brought forth of Sap. 10.
his Sin, yet how severely he punished him in his Justice, we know and feel in
our selves yet the smart of it. 'Twas in contemplation of this Truth St.
Augustine thus addressed himself Aug. in Ps. 50. Bas. reg. brev. interr. 12.
to God, Thou have loved Truth, that is, thou have not left unpunished the Sins
of those thou have pardoned, so extending Mercy, as not to swerve from Truth
and Equity. For as St. Basil teaches us, although God has in his only begotten
Son granted to all, as much as in him lies, Remission of Sin, yet because Mercy
and Judgment are joined together, it is necessary that those things which are
spoken of Penance by the Prophets and Apostles, be performed in us, that the
Judgments of the Divine Justice may be seen. We own that the Blood of Christ
cleanses us from all Sins, but applied according to the Methods of a Just and
Merciful Providence. Thus it cleanses from all Guilt of, and releases all
Punishment due to Sin, by the Waters of Baptism; and following Sins by the
Tears of Penance, or if those flow more sparingly than God requires, by the
Fire of Purgatory. Again, there are several Sins which unpardoned in this
World, are pardoned, but after due Punishment, in the other. They make God
severe indeed, and wonderfully blast his Mercy, who interpret that Sentence of
God by Ezechiel, The Soul which sins shall Ezech. cap. 18.
die, and that by St. Paul, The wages of sin is death, of any the Ad Romans 6.
least Offenses, admitting of none venial in their nature, and say, That
without Faith and Repentance even the least and lightest Fulk in 1 Ep. Joan.
Sins are damnable and deadly. We own that several lighter Sins bereave not a
Soul of Grace and Justice, since that ( Prove. 24.) Seven times the just man
falls and rises again; and as St. John witnesses of the most perfect, If we
shall say we have no sin, we Joan. 1.
seduce our selves, and the truth is not in us. In many things we Jacob. 3.
offend all, says another Apostle, who teaches us, that besides Concupiscence
which is no sin, there is a conception of it which brings forth sin; yet that
sin only which is consummated, engenders death. They are then most injurious to
God's Mercy, who own not that there is a degree of Knowledge and Consent so
imperfect, that though God is offended by it, yet the Band of Charity is not
broken by it, but the servor only of that Virtue is diminished. These Sins are
purged by the Fire of Purgatory, this Guilt is punished there. We hold then
Purgatory Fire to be a purging Flame, which punishes Guilt: Of this the Prophet
Isay tells us, that Our Lord shall purge the dregs of the Isay 4.
daughter of Sion, and shall wash the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst
thereof, in the spirit of judgment and in the spirit of combustion. And
Malachy, Our Lord is like a purging fire: He shall Malach. 3.
even refine the sons of Levi, and purify them as gold and silver. Which words
(says St. Augustine) cannot signify a separation only I^^. 20. c. 25. de Civit.
of the polluted from the pure in the last penal Judgment, but must signify a
purgation of the good, who have need thereof: whence in this firm belief he
used the following Prayer: Purge me in this In Psalm 65.
Life, and make me such an one as shall not need the amending fire. Is it not a
Position most suitable to the Mercy of God, by which we hold, that the
Sacrifice of our Blessed Lord's Body and Blood daily offered on our Altars,
eases those suffering Souls, and that God accepts of the Prayers of his
faithful Servants Ut Christi gratia jam redempti sanctae Ecclesiae
intercessione solvantur, and quod sententia negat, Ecclesia mereatur, praester
gratia. S. Pet. Chrysol. Sermon. 125.
offered for them; so that as St. Peter Chrysologus expresses it, Souls
redeemed (from the Guilt and Eternal Punishment of Mortal Sins) by the Grace of
Christ, have remission (of lesser Sins and Temporal Punishment) obtained by the
Intercession of the Church; and what the just Sentence of God would otherwise
not have granted, the meritorious Prayers of the Church (offering the Blood of
Christ) obtain it from God's Mercy, as a gratuit Gift. Out of these Pains
Christ after his holy Passion rescued many, ( Act. 2.) whom God raised up,
loosing the sorrows of Hell. Or which words S. Augustine grounds the belief of
the Church, That the Soul of Christ did descend into the place where Sinners
are punished, to release them of their Torments, whom he in his Justice thought
worthy to be released; otherwise (adds the Holy Doctor) I see not how to
expound that Text. -- For neither Abraham nor Lib. 12. de Genesis ad litt. cap. 33.
the poor Man in his Bosom, that is, in the secret of his quiet rest, was
restrained in Sorrows. Sins then are truly punished in Purgatory, and through
the Grace of Christ are there remitted. Hence Christ could say of the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, That it shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world Matt. 12.
to come; which could not be truly said, as St. Augustine observes, Except there
were some, who although not in this World, yet Ibid. l. 21. c. 24.
in the next might be forgiven. A Proof so often urged by the holy Doctor St.
Bernard, against the Heretics of his time. Lib. de anima c. 35. and 58. Lib. 4.
Eq. 2.
Purgatory then is that Prison, as Tertullian and St. Cyprian observe, into
which many are cast, when they are no more in the Way, and have been presented
to the Judge, till they pay the last Farthing, of which Christ speaks. St. Paul
teaches the Corinthians this Article of Faith, when beside, that general Fire
which goes before the Face of the Lord in that Day which shall be revealed by
Fire, and the Fiery Trial of Judgment it self, where the work of every one, of
what kind it is the Fire 1 Cor. 3.
shall try, he asserts a third purging Fire, of which he says, If any ones work
burn, he shall suffer detriment, but himself shall be saved, yet as through
Fire. A Doctrine most suitable to God's Justice and Mercy: for says the often
cited St. Augustine, In Psalm 37.
Why are some said to be saved by Fire? Because they build upon the Foundation
(of Faith and Charity) Hay, Wood, Stubble; but if they would build Gold,
Silver, and Precious Stones, they might be secure from both Fires; not only
from that Everlasting, which shall punish the Impious Eternally, but from that
which shall AMEND them who shall be saved by Fire. -- Who although they be saved
by Fire, yet that Fire will be more painful and grievous than any thing that
can be suffered in this Life; not for want of Mercy in God, but because he
punishes Sin wherever he sees it, as he essentially hates it. Yet Christ truly
obtained remission from all Temporal as well as Eternal Pain; whence, whoever
is regenerated by Baptism, as the same Doctor observes, he not De Civit. Dei l.
21. c. 26.
only is not adjudged to Eternal Torments, but neither does he suffer after
Death any Purgatory Pains, if he die in that State of recovered Innocence. Now
I would know, whether God be less Merciful, because Ezechiel puts this Sentence
in his Mouth, Lay her naked upon the Coals until her Brass be heated, Ezech.
cap. ^^
and all her Tin be fried out; because that (says the same Doctor) 50 Homil.
Hom. 16.
there idle Words, and wicked or impure Cogitations; there the multitude of
lesser Sins, which have infested the Purity of her nobler Nature, shall sees
forth; there the Tin or Lead, which have obscured the Divine Image, shall be
consumed; all which might here with Alms-deeds and Tears, after a more short
and easy way, have been purged from the Soul. Is it not just as St. Gregory
Oratione ad Dom.
Nyssen observes, That all vicious Affections be purged either in this World by
a sober course of Life, or after our departure hence by the Furnace of
Purgatory Fire? Is God not Merciful, because (Revel. 21.) Nothing defiled can
enter that Kingdom? Was St. Paul injurious to the Mercy of Christ, when he
chastised his Body, to make up what was wanting in himself (not in Christ) of
the Passions of Christ; that is, such Dispositions as Gods Justice requires in
us, that his Mercy through Christ may take effect? Those Sectaries, I am sure,
of Dr. Sherlock's Persuasion, who will not own any one Action of the Just to
their very last gasp to be freed from Sin, are very injurious to Gods Justice,
if those Sins are no where to be punished, with which they grant each Christian
to go out of this Life.

But those Punishments may last so long! That depends of us: let us but possess
as perfect a Charity as God offers us, and by his holy Grace enables us to
purchase, and we shall all avoid Purgatory. Thus a Martyr's perfect Charity
sets him out of the reach of those Flames. As St. Cyprian observes, One Lib. 4.
Ep. 2.
thing it is a long time punished for Trespasses to be amended and purged by
Fire, and another to abolish all Faults by suffering for Christ. No one suffers
in Purgatory because God is not infinitely Merciful, but because he refuses to
love that infinite Mercy as much as he ought, and God requires. It Is still
(through Gods Mercy) in our power during Life, to shorten those Sufferings:
For, as Origin warns us, if any one bring a Hom. 6. in Exodus
little Iniquity, that little Lead ought to be consumed by Fire; and if more
heavy and leaden Metal, he is more burnt, that more may be wasted. God were not
Just if, as Daniel saw him, a fiery and violent Flood did not run before his
Face, to consume and punish Sin. It Is by reason of our Sins, as St. Augustine
observes, Dan. 7. 10.
that some shall pass through a fiery Lake, and horrible Shallows full of
burning Flames, as much as shall remain of the Dross of Sin, so long shall the
delay of the Passage be. This Justice of God it is which made all holy Men ever
to fear and tremble at the approaches of Death and Judgment, whilst the very
lewdest Livers amongst Sectaries, grounded on the security of a prodigious
Presumption, if the Minister but tells them they have made their Peace with
God, though in their whole Life they have never done that Penance for their Sins,
without which the Word of God assures them, they shall altogether perish; though
perhaps they never shed a Tear for their Sins, though destitute of the help of
the Sacraments, yet affront Gods Justice by a bold unconcerned Confidence,
whilst they presume on a Mercy never promised to so undisposed Souls. Different
was the Sense of the great Doctor St. Hilary: Since no one Cum nemo veniens in
conspectum ejus mundus sit, quomodo desiderabile ejus potest esse judicium --
in quo subeunda sunt gravia illa expiandae a peccatis animae supplicia.
(says he) appears spotless before God, how can we meet his Judgment with that
hope and confidence, in which that unwearied Fire, and those grievous
Punishments are to be undergone, which Expiate a Soul from Sin.

That there remains then after the Guilt of Sin is forgiven, such an Obligation
to undergo Punishment, to pass by all the Greek and Latin Fathers, all those
Texts of Scripture make it plain, which deliver unto us the necessity of
Penance and its due Fruits. Now whoever goes out of this World, not having
satisfied this Obligation, has such a moral unworthiness, as bars him, till it
be complied with, from the sight of God. And those who say, that it were a
greater Mercy in God to remit all the Punishment due to Sin, blame Christ for
Preaching Penance, and account him on that score less merciful. To say with Dr.
Sherlock, That Men desire nothing when they ask Pardon, but merely not to be
Punished, is to declare, they value not Gods Love and Grace like Children, but
merely fear the Lash like Slaves; and all Catholics look on such a Disposition,
excluding positively all regard to Gods Grace and Love, as incapable of
receiving forgiveness of Sins. Christ has made Atonement for our Sins, but his
Blood is to be applied by Baptism, and in case of Relapse, by perfect
Contrition or Penitential Works during Life, or Punishment after Death, before
all Pain due to Sin be remitted; thus applied, it frees us from the whole Curse
of the Law. No Suffering or Punishment is the Death of the Soul, as Dr.
Sherlock supposes, but only the privation of Gods Grace, which is her Life, and
which is enjoyed through Christ as much in Purgatory as by penitent Saints on
Earth in their penitential Sufferings; and the mercy of our Lord appears as
much in purging his Members from all Stains of the least sin by the Fire of
Purgatory, as here by the toilsom Labors of a penitential Life, such as his
dearest Servants were ever purified by. St. Paul never taught, that all things
that are not seen, or of another World, are Eternal, or else God would be
Eternally Judging, and so never Rewarding his Servants, or Punishing his
Enemies; so that Dr. Sherlock's Demonstration has not so much as the least
appearance of a seeming Reason.

Having thus represented our Faith, I conclude with S. Augustine Enchirid. c. 10.
against Dr. Sherlock; It cannot be denied, but that the Souls of the Dead, are
relieved by the Piety and Devotion of their living Friends, as often as the
Sacrifice of our Mediator is offered, or Alms-deeds are done in the Church for
them; but these things do bring profit only to those, who in their Lifetime
did merit to receive profit by the like after Death: For there is a certain
State of Life neither so good, that it needs not these Helps after Death, nor
so evil, but that it may be helped by the same.

I have already Answered in the first Section, all those Calumnies which are
repeated here concerning the Blessed Saints Intercessions for us. Our Doctrine,
directly opposite to the slanderous Misrepresentations here offered, is, 1. We
look on the Prayers of Saints as merely humble Supplications; for we hold that
Christ only stands our Mediator, challenging he alone in Justice, and by his
own Merits, to be heard in favor of us. 2. We conceive Charity to be at least
as proper to, and inseparable from the Seraphical Souls of Saints, as from any
of Gods Servants on Earth, and as much inclining them to Pray for their
Fellow Members of Christ's Mystical Body, engaged here below in Miseries and
Dangers. 3. We never required the Prayers of Saints, to render God good and
merciful; but only when joined with our Prayers, to render these a fitter
Object of Gods Mercy, and to reconcile the Effects thereof to his Wisdom and
Justice. 4. Whatever pity the Saints may have on us, we look on it, as on a
small St^^l^e situ^^e.
Drop, compared to the Ocean of Gods infinite Mercy; of which, that very Pity,
and the Intercession of Saints, is a free Gift to us, given with all other
Blessings, together with, and as an Effect of his greatest Gift, to wit, his
Eternal Son, with whom, in whom, and by whom, he has given us all things. This
Faith of ours does, I conceive, most evidently expose the shameless Calumnies,
which Dr. Sherlock has disfigured her by.

Thirty Misrepresentations and Calumnies offered by Dr. Sherlock, in his Third
and Fourth Sections, and some of his Phanatical Principles.
NEver did Man speak more without Book, without Truth, and without any respect
to Shame or Conscience; this Preservative deserving more the Fate of defamatory
Libels, than those two which he prises and recommends Fol. 78. No Provincial
Letters, Jesuit Morals, burnt by the Hangman.
Narrative of the Minister Oats contains more Lies and Calumnies against the
Persons of Catholics, than the Minister Sherlock's Preservative against their
Religion; the latter is infinitely more Impudent, because he accuses with an
equally shameless Scurrility, not single Persons, but most Princes, Bishops,
Universities, Kingdoms of the Christian World, and all the General Councils to
boot. I do own, and will maintain it, That no man ever Lied in Print with more
Confidence, ever was so deafned by Passion to all the Reproaches of Conscience
and Honor: And had not a long Custom of saying any thing in the Pulpit, though
never so monstrously false, that could render Catholic Religion odious, or
ridicule it by disfiguring it, dictated to his peevish Distemper this Second
Part of his Preservative, it would not, I conceive, have been possible, that
all the Gall that can drop from a Christians Pen, should in one Pamphlet have
heaped so many and so defamatory Calumnies. Take the following Instances.

1. The Catholics by unwritten Traditions, that make up a part Fol. 73, 74, 75.
of their Rule of Faith, mean such things as may be concealed from the
knowledge of the World for 1500 Years, never heard of before in the Church of
God, kept very privately and secretly for several Ages, and totally unwritten.
By Tradition we mean a Revelation received from God, by the Apostles,
conveyed by the continual teaching and preaching of Lawful Pastors,
strengthened by the visible practice of Christian Churches; found in the Books
of succeeding Fathers and Historians, though not in Canonical Scripture, which
St. Paul recommended 1 Timothy 6. 2 These. 2. de Sp. S. c. 27. Ipsam fidei
praedicationem ad nudum nomen Contrahemus.
to Timothy faithfully to be kept as a depositum. And commanded the
Thessalonians to observe, which if it be laid by, says St. Basil, We shall
retain of the Preaching of the Faith, but an empty Name: and which is delivered
to us as Preached by the Apostles by the same means, and with the same security
at least, as the Letter of the Gospel is conveyed to us, as written by them.

2. They teach several External Observances, to be much more Fol. 79.
pleasing to God, and therefore much better in themselves, than true Gospel
Obedience, Moral or Evangelical virtues: that they supply the want of true
virtue, Compensate for sin, and make men great Saints. We teach that Gods
inherent Grace only Sanctifies us, and that whatever External observance void
of Evangelical virtue, is a sinful Hypocrisy, and only can make one a greater
sinner.

3. They teach that when a Priest Absolves men, that forsake Fol. 81, 82.
not their sins, God must confirm the Sentence of his Minister, and therefore
they are Absolved and need not fear; whence they believe that God can be
reconciled to sinners, whilst they remain in their sins. And therefore they
must believe that God has given power to his Priests to Absolve those whom he
could not Absolve himself. We teach that to receive Absolution without a real
forsaking of our sins, in lieu of forgiveness of them, adds a heinous Sacrilege.

4. In the Church of Rome men may Expiate their sins by Penances, Fol. 90.
but are under no necessity of forsaking them. No pain due to sin can be
remitted whilst the guilt remains, nor this removed till they be forsaken: no
Exterior Penance can in the least Expiate the guilt of sin. This is our Doctrine
by which the Calumnies of the following Misrepresentations appear.

5. They account Satisfactory works, Fastings, acts of Penance, Fol. 45, 46.
Prayers, Alms, though done without the least sorrow for sin, without any true
Devotion to God, without mortifying any one Lust: mere External Rites and
Observances, being judged Satisfactions and Expiations for Sin.

6. They use External Mortifications to satisfy for sins, not to Fol. 91.
kill them by subduing the Flesh to the Spirit; to punish themselves for sins,
that they may commit them more securely again.

7. The Roman Church teaches, that men need take no care of Fol. 79.
Venial sins, and that they may keep clear from mortal sin without any great
attainment in virtue. It teaches a voluntary Venial sin ought not to be
committed, to save a whole Worlds Lives: that it disposes to Mortal sins as
Diseases do to Death: that if our Passions be not curbed by the practice of
solid Christian Virtues, mortal sins will not be avoided, nor Heaven attained,
which they only purchase who use Violence.

8. In the Roman Church Money is paid for Indulgences, Fol. 45. 48.
and with them Satisfactions and Merits are bought. To pretend to buy or sell
any such Spiritual things, we account a most grievous sin. And every Alms-giver
might with as much Justice be accused, to have bought of God, his Grace and
Pardon for a sum of Money.

9. They Consecrate senseless things to pardon Venial, or sometimes Fol. 44.
Mortal sin, by touching or kissing them.

10. They attribute Divine Virtues and Powers to senseless Fol. 43.
things; as is evident from the honor paid to Relicts: and from the
Consecration of Agnus Dei' s, Wax Candles, Oils, Bells, Crosses, Ashes, Holy
Water.

11. With them senseless things are capable of the Sanctification Fol. 44.
of Gods holy Spirit by his Graces, and can convey such Sanctification by
Divine and invisible effluviums of Grace. All these are misrepresentations of
our Faith which teaches us nothing of all this. What we believe is, that
nothing can free us from the guilt of any sin, which is external, and does not
effect and change the heart. That all Creatures of God are good, 1 Timothy 4.
and that they are Sanctified by the word of God and Prayer; neither does Faith
teach us that any Material thing has any other than Moral Connection with
Grace, either obtained for us by the Prayers of the Church, offered for us at
the blessing of those things, or of those blessed Saints whom we honor, and
call upon by that Veneration, or by the Sacraments according to the Institution
or Covenant of Christ; but we do not believe that Gods Grace is inherent, but
in the Souls of the Faithful, or that any sin is remitted without a due
disposition in a repentent sinner. Or any virtue to be nowadays Communicated
otherwise by insensible things, than it was to the Woman that touched the Hem
of Christ's Garments, or by the Handkerchiefs of St. Paul, or Shadow of St.
Peter. Neither do we use any Blessings which we do not find in the Records of
the Primitive Church, to have been ordered by the Apostles: as I am ready to
make out when ever required.

12. The Popish Ceremonies are more severe and Intolerable Fol. 39.
than the Jewish Yoke it self, which St. Peter tells the Jews, neither they,
nor their Fathers were able to bear. Unless he means it intolerable to
Christians to Fast in Lent, in imitation of our Blessed Lord, and Friday and
Saturday in memory of his bitter Agony on the Cross, and laying in the Grave
for us, or their obligation of praying to God daily, and particularly the Lords
day, and of relieving the necessities of the Poor: thus calling Fasting,
Watching, Praying, and Alms-deeds so recommended by Christ our Lord, Mere
Ceremonies: I know no Obligations imposed on the generality of Christians by
any positive Law of the Church, which can be called a Yoke. As for the
Ceremonies used in the Liturgy, if they be a burden, sure the Clergy or
Religious, must feel the weight of them, yet I am sure not one ever owned it,
but this predominant passion of Calumniating will venture blindly at the most
shameless untruths.

13. Their Canonical Fast is not to abstain from Food, but only Fol. 40, 41.
from such Meats as are forbidden. This is most false, but one Meal being
allowed of on Fasting-days.

14. There is no imaginable reason why it should be an act of Fol. 41.
Religion merely not to abstain from Flesh, if Flesh have no legal uncleanness.
Here he would insinuate that we Judaize. But when God by Hyeremy praised the
Rhechabites for abstaining from Wine, was it because Wine was held by them to
have a legal uncleanness? Is the taming of the Flesh, the curbing of
Sensuality, no reason at all for Abstinence?

15. They may Fast and say over their Beads and perform their Fol. 43.
Penances and Satisfactions by another as well as if they did it by themselves.
This is an Impudent Sham. Each man is bound to satisfy by himself, fulfilling
the Penances imposed upon him.

16. They hold that they have no title to Reward by doing their Fol. 47.
Duty, and therefore they add Works of Supererogation. A shameless untruth!
Nay, the more pressing the Duty is, the greater the Reward; Alms given to a man
starving for hunger, we hold more meritorious, than if not so great a necessity
bore off the obligation of relieving him. Each necessary observance of the
Commandments has a Crown laid up, to be rendered by the just Judge.

17. Whilst they Pray in an unknown Tongue, a Parrot may as Fol. 58.
much be taught to Pray in Spirit as they. He would insinuate that Catholics
when they assist to Prayers which they do not understand, are not Commanded to
pray in Spirit by devout thoughts and pious affections, which is a mere Calumny.

18. They take no care to instruct men in all necessary Doctrins; Fol. 61.
they learn their Creed as Schoolboys their Grammar, without understanding it:
they receive the Impression that is made on them as Wax does, and understand no
more of the Matter. And with them this is the utmost perfection of Knowledge
that any Christian must aim at. A heavy Charge, but so perfect a Slander, that
besides the Obligation laid on all those that have the charge and Cure of
Souls; hundreds of thousands of Religious men, make it their daily Employ to
instruct the Ignorant, and each Parish has Schools of Christian Doctrine to
that end: so that usually Children of ten years old can give a better account
of their Faith in Catholic Countries, than Sectaries of forty years old can
generally do, who have seldom heard of any thing in the Concerns of Religion,
but Slanders and Misrepresentations of Catholic Doctrine. It has been my Lot to
deal for some time with a Body of near two hundred Protestants on the score of
Religion, and I in truth Protest, that I found not one in six that could give
me any reasonable account of Christ being God and Man, and dying for our
Redemption. We exact of each Christian that to the best of his abilities he
improve his knowledge in the duties of Faith.

19. They teach a man need not know any thing but the Apostles Fol. 76.
Creed: therefore Heretics know and believe all things necessary to Salvation,
as long as they believe the Apostles Creed. Did Christ teach any thing but what
he would have known? We teach that each Christian is bound to know all that he
is bound to do, and to understand all those necessary means left by Christ for
his Reconciliation and Perfection, though not expressed in the Creed: we teach
that each Man is not bound to know all that Christ has taught, but yet all
that Christ has taught as necessary to him in his Station. But this Calumniator
confounds what is to be known necessitate Medii; so that he who through no
fault of his has not learned it, is however incapable of Salvation: (which is
all contained in the Creed) with what must be known, Necessitate Praecepti;
because God has commanded all those who are in the occasion, and in a capacity
of being instructed in it, to learn it.

20. The Church of Rome teaches, that the sins of those sinners Fol. 82, 83.
who do not repent of them, nor amend their lives, and consequently are not
Expiated by the Death of Christ upon the Cross, are Expiated by the Sacrifice
of the Mass.

21. That by the bare opus operatum, by the offering this Sacrifice Fol. 83.
of the Mass it self, without any good motion in the Person for whom it is
offered, his sins are Expiated.

22. That when Christ was Sacrificed upon the Cross, he Expiated Fol. 85.
only for the Eternal Punishment due to sin; and when Sacrificed in the Mass,
only for the Temporal. Behold three loud Calumnies! We teach that Christ on the
Cross gave himself a full Redemption for all the Guilt and Debt of Sinners, who
apply to themselves that precious Blood, by the means appointed by Christ. That
by the Sacrifice of the Mass, as also by any good Christians Prayers for
obdurat sinners, such Graces may be obtained, as shall work in them their
Salvation: but that no sin is remitted to an impenitent sinner. And all we mean
by opus operatum, has no reference to him who receives the Sacraments, to the
whole effect whereof a stubborn and unconverted sinner puts ever a full stop:
but in reference to those who Administer the Sacraments, from whose Piety they
take not their force; Baptism given by a Priest in the state of sin, having as
much its whole effect as given by a Saint, because it takes its value and force
from Christ the chiefest Minister in the conferring of it: so the Church did
teach by St. Augustine heretofore, against Parmenian the Heretic, so She teaches
to this day.

23. Catholics think that the Intercession of the Virgin Mary, Fol. 87.
or the most Powerful Saints can prevail with our Savior to do that which
according to the Laws of his own Mediation, they know he cannot, and will not
do; How can any man be so stupid as to think this? Yet so it is. A bare-face
Calumny. For we teach that the blessed Saints, only join their Prayers to ours,
to obtain of Christ for us, what he in his mercy will have them to ask: it
being a most proper effect of Christ's Mediation, to challenge Blessings for
several Members of his Mystical Body on the account of the whole, or moved by
the love he bears to the holier Members thereof; since he has declared that
many joining together to Petition in his Name, will obtain Blessings, which had
not been granted to the single Prayers of some one.

24, 25, 26. By the Doctrine of Purgatory, they mightily abate Fol. 87, 88.
the terror of Hell, considering how many easy ways there are for rich Men to
get out of Purgatory, who have Money enough to buy Indulgences while they live:
or Masses for their Souls. Here are three Calumnies that lie thick together.
The first, that Catholics exempt sinners from Hell, who in the Protestant
Doctrine would be Condemned to it. No unrepented Mortal sin is lodged in
Purgatory, or escapes Hell. Secondly, That Indulgences may be bought for Money,
or avail a Soul undisposed to receive the benefit of them, through want of
Contrition, the guilt of sin not being before remitted. The Third, that Masses
said for any Soul in Purgatory, avail such as during life have not deserved and
merited that mercy; which untruth I have before defeated, with the words of St.
Augustine, delivering our Faith in the 110. Chapter of his Enchiridion to
Laurence.

27, 28, 29. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, besides the Fol. 91.
supernatural conveyance of Grace, is a great Moral instrument to Holiness,
representing to us the love of our Crucified Lord, the merit and desert of sin,
requiring the Exercises of a great many virtues, etc. But in the Church of Rome
this Sacrament is turned into a dumb Show, which no body can be edified with,
or into a Sacrifice which Expiates sins, and serves us instead of a holy life.
Behold three crying Calumnies! The First, that amongst us there is no other use
of the Sacrament of our Lords Supper but for a Show, or a Sacrifice, whereas
that holy Sacrament is received by all pious Catholics at least once a Month;
and by an Infinity once or oftener each week, by our Priest daily. The Second,
that we require no practice of any Virtue: whereas we interpret the words of
St. Paul, Let a man try himself, of the Sacrament of Penance, in which we exact
a true sorrow for past sins, a firm purpose to dye rather than to fall into any
other again: a full satisfaction to all the persons we have injured in their
Reputations or Fortunes, or any other way, a perfect entire reconciliation with
our Enemies, a removal of all the occasions that lead us into our former sins,
or may likely prove a stumbling Block for the future: a breaking and subduing
of our Passions by penitential works, Devotion toward the admirable Mystery of
our Redemption, humility in accusing our selves of our most secret sins, a firm
hope of Remission, etc. But these things are with Dr. Sherlock no Christian
Virtues. A Third, that our exposing of the blessed Sacrament is a dumb show,
and that so we assist at Holy Mass; we hold no necessity of a Pious life:
whereas we feel that nothing speaks more the Mercies of God; nothing moves us
more to Christian Virtues, than this great Sacrament considered with the Eyes
of Faith: and believe that this Sacrifice helps much to a holy life, but not at
all without it.

30. Amongst them one can Merit for twenty, so there is no need above one in
twenty should be Good. Merit with us is Personal, and not Communicative; no one
is better in the sight of God for the Piety of another: and in what ever sense
one may satisfy Gods Justice for the Penitential works he exacts from an other
whose sin is remitted, no one has a title to the least degree of Glory, and
consequently has any Merit by an others Sanctity, or Merit.

Many more of this Man's Calumnies I pass by; these Thirty and the other Ten I
have laid down, being a clear Evidence, that he is the most confident
Calumniator that ever Preached or Writ; who dares say any thing without the
least respect to Truth, without any regard to Charity, Honor or Conscience.
Now, Sir, give me leave to offer you some few of the many Fanatical Principles
he advances, as destructive to what you call your Church, as to Christianity in
general; that in your second thoughts you may blush (if you are capable of it)
for having set your Name to them, and Licensed them to the Press.

The First. God being a Spirit, must not be sought for in Houses Fol. 48, 50,
51.
of Wood and Stone; because he must be worshipped in Spirit, he must not be
worshipped by any material or sensible Representations. Those words, Except
your Righteousness exceeds the Righteousness of the Fol. 38.
Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
cuts off every thing that is External in Religion. Do not these Principles
remit all Christians to the Silent Meetings of Quakers? Exclude the use of
Churches rather than Barns; Singing of Psalms, and such other material
Representations of the God whom we Praise?

The Second. God and Christ are not present in the Assemblies Fol. 37.
of Christians by any Figurative or Symbolical Presence: There is no Symbolical
Presence of God under the Gospel. It Is a great Fol. 34, 55.
Absurdity to talk of more Symbolical Presences of God than one: for a
Symbolical Presenc confines the unlimited Presence of God to a certain Place in
order to certain Ends; as for Example, to receive the Worship which is paid
him. Now to have more than one such Presence as these, is like having more Gods
than one. To say nothing of the absurdity of this Discourse, which makes that
Christian an adorer of two Gods, who by Faith adoring God in Heaven and in his
own Soul, worships him in both places; does not this destroy the very Essence
of your Sacrament, the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, which you own to be
a Symbolical Presence of Christ?

The Third. If God be better worshipped before an Image than Fol. 53, 54.
without one, then the Worship of God is more confined to that Place where the
Image is. I cannot see how to avoid this; whereas there is no appropriate Place
of Worship under the Gospel: And it is the same, though the Image be not
appropriated to any Place, but carried about with us; for still the Image makes
the Place of Worship. This is an Argument for all Dissenters from you, and all
Fanatics against a Set Liturgy, a Set Form of Prayer: for if God be better
worshipped by a Set Form of Prayer than without it, then the Worship of God is
more confined to that Place where that Set Form of Prayer, that Set Liturgy is
used; and it is the same, though no set Place be appointed for that Set Form of
Prayer, etc. The Parallel is exact.

The Fourth. Having laid this Principle, All that is merely Fol. 34, 36.
External in Religion, is taken away, all Rites believed to be in themselves
Acts of Religion, and to render the Worshipper acceptable to God; and this
because God must be worshipped as a mere Spirit. To defend the use of Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, he brings this only Reason: Mankind by Sin has
forfeited all natural Right to Gods Favor, they can challenge nothing but by
Promise and Covenant, such Covenants require a mutual Stipulation on both
Sides; Therefore they must be transacted by some visible and sensible Rites,
whereby God obliges himself to us, and we to him. Is not this last Inference
destroyed by the former Principle, taking away all Rites that are Acts of
Religion, all that is merely External? And on this Principle ought he not to
teach, that the mutual Stipulation betwixt God and us, must be made by his
interior Graces, and our interior Worship, because God must be worshipped as a
mere Spirit? Upon whatever account that interior Covenant requires a visible
sensible Mark, and our actual Communion with Christ another, all the
Communications of Gods Graces to us, all our return of Worship and Adoration
will equally admit of sensible Signs and Rites. To avoid farther Prolixity, I
will end with the following Principle of his, most injurious to Christ, and an
open and never to be colored Blasphemy.

Fifth Principle. There never was, never can be an Infallible Fol. 68, 69, 70.
Judge; Christ himself was not an Infallible Judge, although he were an
Infallible Teacher. I must my self judge of his Doctrine, before I know that he
is Infallible; therefore Men were to judge of Christ's Doctrine, before they
believed him; and they are thus to this day to Examine his Doctrine by the Law
and Prophets, and he never required that they should submit to his Infallible
Authority without Examination. He could not be an Infallible Judge, obliging
Men to receive all his Dictates as Divine Oracles, without Examination: 'Twas
impossible to know him to be Infallible, but by judging of his Doctrine, by the
agreement thereof with the Principles of Reason, and of former Revelations.
Does a Christian teach this, and a Christian approve and license it! What,
JESUS our God blessed for evermore, even when owned the Son of God, even from
us Christians, cannot exact a Submission to his Infallible Authority, without
Examination of the truth of what he says, by comparing it with the Principles
of Human Reason! He cannot oblige us to receive all his Dictates as Divine
Oracles! Was Christian Faith, was the Author of it JESUS, ever thus affronted!
Did the Apostles err, did they act against Sense and Reason, when they believed
what he had taught, of his Flesh being meat indeed, Joh. 6. v. 69.
only because he had the words of Eternal Life, because his Dictates were
Divine Oracles? Were all men of this mind, Christ would not indeed find any
Faith on Earth. What though we certainly know Christ to have taught and declared
a Truth, must we not upon his word submit to it and embrace it, till we have
consulted our Reason, and found it can object nothing against it? Were the
weapons of S. Paul's 2 Cor. 10. 5.
warfare such as could humble what raised it self against the science of God,
and bring into captivity all understanding in obedience to Christ, and had the
Word and Preaching of Christ less power? Christ teaches it is not yet a
sufficient Motive for me to believe? Should an Angel from Heaven teach me this,
I would with St. Paul return him no other Answer than Anathema; and do you,
Sir, approve this? Do you License men to teach to Christians, they are not to
submit to Christ's Word as to Divine Oracles; that they must make themselves
his Judges, and Examine by their Reason, whether he spoke truth or no? Well,
Sir, were it but not to give occasion to the spreading so horrid Blasphemies
against our Lord and God, I take my leave of you, and of such Books Licensed by
you; and end with this Profession of my Catholic Faith: Christ is an Infallible
Judge, I must not Judge of his Doctrine, but believe it, and submit to him; I
submit to his Infallible Authority without Examination; I receive all his
Dictates as Divine Oracles. If, though Summoned by me, you still refuse to
Subscribe to this Doctrine, I will obey St. John's Counsel, I will have nothing
to do with you nor return to you so much as Ave, or any Greeting; but content
my self with Subscribing to this Profession of my Faith,

LEWIS SABRAN Of the Society of JESUS.


