October 23. 1679.
I Do Appoint Robert Pawlet to Print this my Speech: And that no other Person
presume to Re-Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.

THE Lord Chief Justice SCROGGS HIS SPEECH IN THE KING'S BENCH The first day of
this present Michaelmas Term 1679.

Occasioned by the many Libellous Pamphlets which are published against Law, to
the Scandal of the Government, and Public Justice.

TOGETHER With what was Declared at the same Time on the same Occasion, in open
Court, by Mr. Justice JONES, and Mr. Justice DOLBIN.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane. 1679.

THE Lord Chief Justice SCROGGS HIS SPEECH In the KING'S BENCH, The First day of
this Present Michaelmas -- Term, 1679. Occasioned, by the many Libellous
Pamphlets That are Published against Law, To the Scandal of the Government and
Public Justice. WITH What Mr. Justice Jones, and Mr. Justice Dolbin, then
declared about the same.
I Have bound over this Man Richard Radley to his good Behavior, and to appear
here this day, for saying false and Scandalous words of me, which are Sworn to
by two several Affidavits, viz.

William Lewis makes Oath, That on the seventh day of August 1679, there being
a Difference between Robert Raylett and Richard Radley, he heard the said
Richard Radley say to him the said Raylett, If you think to have the Money you
have overthrown me in, go to Weale-hall to my Lord Scroggs, for he has received
Money enough of Dr. Wakeman, for his Acquittal.

William Lewis.
Jurat. 4o die Septembris, 1679. coram me

Will. Scroggs.



Robert Raylett makes Oath, That there was a Trial at the last Essex- Assizes
between him and one Richard Radley, where he recovered Thirty eight pounds; and
he happening to be at work on the seventh day of August 1679, over against the
house of the said Richard Radley, the said Richard Radley told him, If you
expect the Money you have overthrown me in, you may go to Weale-hall, for there
is Money enough come in now.

Robert Raylett.
Jurat. 4o die Septembris, Anno 1679, coram me

Will. Scroggs.



First, I would have all Men know, that I am not so revengeful in my Nature,
nor so netled with this Aspersion, but that I could have passed by this and
more, but that the many scandalous Libels that are abroad, and which reflect
upon public Justice, as well as upon my private self, make it the Duty of my
place to defend one, and the Duty I owe to my Reputation to vindicate the other.

And having this opportunity, I think this the properest place for both. If
once our Courts of Justice come to be awed or swayed by vulgar noise; and if
Judges and Juries should manage themselves so, as would best comply with the
humor of times; it is falsely said, That Men are Tried for their Lives or
Fortunes, they live by chance, and enjoy what they have as the wind blows, and
with the same certainty: The giddy Multitude have constancy, who Condemn or
Acquit always before the Trial, and without proof.

Such a base fearful Compliance, made Felix willing to please the people, leave
Paul bound, who was apt to tremble, but not to follow his Conscience. The
people ought to be pleased with public Justice, and not Justice seek to please
the people; Justice should flow like a mighty stream, and if the Rabble, like
an unruly wind blow against it, it may make it rough, but the stream will keep
its Course.

Neither for my part, do I think we live in so corrupted an Age, that no man
can with safety be just and follow his Conscience: if it be otherwise, we must
hazard our Safety, to preserve our Integrity.

And to speak more particularly as to Sir George Wakeman's Trial, which I am
neither afraid, nor ashamed to mention, I know that all honest and
understanding Men in the Kingdom (speaking generally) are thoroughly satisfied
with the impartial Proceedings of that Trial, taking it as it is Printed; which
was done without the perusal of one Line by me, or any Friend of mine. Though
by the way, I wonder by what Authority that Arbitrary Power was assumed, to
forbid any Friend of mine the seeing of it, before it was put out.

However, as it is, I will appeal to all Sober and Understanding Men, and to
the Long Robe more especially, who are the best and properest Judges in such
Cases, as to the Fairness and Equality of that Trial.

For those hireling Scriblers that traduce it, who write to Eat, and Lie for
Bread, I intend to meet with them another way, for they are only safe whilst
they can be secret; but so are Vermin, so long only as they can hide
themselves.

And let their Broakers, those Printers and Booksellers by whom they vend their
false and braded Ware, look to it; some will be found, and they shall know,
that the Law wants not power to punish a Libellous and Licentious Press, nor I
a Resolution to execute it.

And this is all the Answer is fit to be given (besides a Whip) to those
Hackney Writers, and dull Observators, that go as they are hired or spurred,
and perform as they are fed, who never were taught.

If there be any sober and good Men that are misled by false Reports, or by
subtilty deceived into any misapprehensions concerning that Trial, or my self;
I should account it the highest pride, and the most scornful thing in the
World, if I should not endeavor to undeceive them.

To such Men therefore I do solemnly declare here in the Seat of Justice, where
I would no more Lie or Equivocate, than I would to God at the Holy Altar,

I followed my Conscience, according to the best of my Understanding, in all
that Trial; without Fear, Favor, or Reward, without the Gift of one Shilling,
or the value of it directly or indirectly, and without any promise or
expectation whatsoever.

This I say to honest men (that know me not) if any that do know me needed
this, they should not have had it, for they use me Ill; he that knows me and
doubts, so long thinks it an even wager, whether I am the greatest Villain in
the World or not, one that would sell the Life of the King, my Religion, and
Country, to Papists for Money: And he that says great Places have great
Temptations, has a little, if not a false Heart himself, for no Temptation is
big enough for a sin of this Magnitude.

I would not have the Papists now make any false Conclusions from what I say,
that because I reprove the insolence of some men's Tongues and Pens, concerning
this Trial, they should thence infer they have not had or (at least) cannot
expect fair play, because some foolish men cry out of their acquittal, and
think there is no Justice, where there is no Execution.

They have had fair Trials, and some that have suffered have had the ingenuity
to confess it, and they shall still be tried according to the Evidence, and the
probability and credibility it carries with it.

But this I must say, he that thinks there is no Plot, is blind with prejudice
or wilfully shuts his Eyes.

The Priests and Jesuits had a design to root out the Protestant Religion, and
bring in Popery, and that is directly to overthrow the Government; and to
effect this, that they would kill the King (were there no more) their Doctrine
and Practices go very far to prove it, and he that says the contrary is as
much out, as where in a printed Pamphlet he too confidently asserts, that in
all their Papers that were searched, there was not one ill Letter found, or any
thing that was suspicious: Colemans Letters and the Letter found amongst
Harcourts Papers will never be answered; not by saying that a meeting so
exactly appointed, with all cautions imaginable, as not to appear too much
about the Town for fear of discovering the design, which in its own Nature
requires secrecy, that this was only a meeting to choose an Officer.

And yet to affirm that this is not so much as suspicious at least, is a
confidence, that the Ingenuity of a Jesuit only will undertake to own.

However in the mean time the extravagant boldness of men's Pens and Tongues is
not to be endured, but shall be severely punished. For if once Causes come to
be tried with Complacency to popular opinions, and shall be insolently censured
if they go otherwise, all public Causes shall receive their Doom as the
multitude happen to be possessed, and at length every Cause shall become public,
if they will but espouse it, at every Sessions the Judges shall be arraigned,
the Jury condemned, and Verdicts overawed to comply with popular noise and
undecent shouts.

There are a sort of men, I doubt, that too much approve and countenance such
Vulgar ways, and count it Art and Stratagem* that embrace all sorts of
Informations true or false, likely or impossible, nay though never so silly and
ridiculous they refuse one, so shall all Addresses be made to them, and they be
looked on as the only Patrons of Religion and Government* though they should
have but little of the one, and would maintain the other only so far as their
own share in it comes to.

These Sir Politics (if such there are) deceive themselves as much as they do
others, and are not what they imagine themselves to be with understanding and
honest men, no not with those they think they gull neither, for they use them
to serve their purposes, as they think they serve others: and if ever time
shall serve, 'twill prove so.

Let us pursue the discovery of the Plot a Gods Name, and not baulk any thing
where there is danger or Suspicion upon reasonable grounds, but not so overdo
it as to show our Zeal, we will pretend to find what is not, nor stretch one
thing beyond what it will bear to reach another, nor count him a Turn-coat, and
not to be trusted that will not betray his Conscience and understanding, that
will not countenance unreasonable boldness, nor believe incredible things.
Least we fall into what we justly condemn in the Papists, cruelty and vain
credulity, such courses cannot be the result) of honest Intentions, but
shrewdly to be Suspected rather a Disguise in pursuing one Villainy to commit
another.

For my own part without any other meaning or reservation whatsoever, I freely
and heartily declare, I will never be a Papist nor a Rebel, but will to my
power suppress Popery as an open Enemy, and Faction as a secret one.

No Act of Oblivion ought to make us to forget by what ways our late troubles
began, when the Apprentices and Porters mutined for Justice in their own sense.
And though I am morally certain, that no such effect will follow as did then,
yet the like insolence ought not to be suffered for the example past, and to
come.

The City of London, I mean; the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and generally all men
of value and worth there, I think in my Conscience are at this Day as Loyally
and Religiously disposed to defend the King, and the Government, and maintain
the true Protestant Religion to their utmost, as any former Age whatsoever can
show, and I know the King thinks so too, and is therefore really and heartily
as kind to them.

And therefore though our Jealousies may be many, our fears need not be so: For
whosoever they are that design disturbances and public Dissentions for private
Ends, will find they are rather troublesome than dangerous, and the greatest
mischief they will be able to effect will be upon themselves.

In short it is the proper business of this Court, and our Duties that sit
Judges here, to take care to prevent and punish the mischiefs of the Press.

For if men can with any safety Write and Print whatever they please, the
Papists will be sure to put in for their share too, so that what between them,
and the Factious, and the Mercenaries that Write for him that hires, and for
what they are hired, we shall be infected with the French Disease in
Government, and be overrun with Lies and Libels, which agrees neither with
English men's honesty nor Courage, who were wont, to scorn to say what they
durst not own.

Mr. Justice Jones. We have a particular Case here before us in a matter of
Scandal against a great Judge, the greatest Judge in the Kingdom in Criminal
Causes, and it is a great and an high Charge upon him. And certainly there was
never any Age I think more Licentious than this in aspersing Governors,
scattering of Libels and Scandalous Speeches against those that are in
Authority. And without all doubt it does become this Court to show their Zeal
in suppressing it.

I am old enough to remember (and perhaps feel the smart of it yet) the
beginning of the late Rebellion, for a Rebellion it was and deserves no other
name). I know it had the forerunner of such Libels and Scandals against the
Government as this is, and it followed almost to the subversion of the
happiness of the Kingdom. As for the Trial hinted at in this Affidavit I was
not present at it my self, I was detained by my usual infirmity, so that I
could not attend that Service, nor indeed have I read the Relation of it in
Print, so considerately as to give a Judgment upon it. But I am very Confident
(upon my knowledge of the Integrity of my Lord, and the rest of my Lords the
Judges that were there) for there were all the Chief Judges and almost all my
Brothers) that that Trial was managed with exact Justice and perfect Integrity
by them.

And therefore I do think it very fit that this Person be proceeded against by
an Information, that he may be made a public Example to all such as shall
presume to Scandalize the Government and the Governors with any false
aspersions or accusations,


Mr. Justice Dolbin. I am of that mind truly, and am very glad we have Lit
upon one of the Divulgers of these Scandals. I was present at that Trial, and
for my part, I think the Scandal to my Lord Chief Justice was a Scandal to us
all that were there, for if he had misbehaved himself in such a manner as some
have reported, we had been strange People to sit still and say nothing or not
interpose to rectify wherein be did amiss. And therefore I desire this man may
be proceeded against for an Example to others.


THere is now in the Press, the Trial, Conviction and Condemnation of William
Atkins and Andrew Bromige, two Romish Priests, before the Right Honorable the
Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, at Stafford Assizes last.

Together with the trial of Charles Kern a Bomish Priest at Hereford Assizes
last.

Printed also for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane,


