THE Seaman's Opinion OF A Standing Army IN ENGLAND, In Opposition to a Fleet
at Sea, the Best Security of This Kingdom.

In a LETTER to a Merchant, Written by a SAILOR.

Printed according to Order.

(...) Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1699.

Price Two Pence.

The Sea-man's Opinion of a Standing Army, etc.
SIR,
I Have read with no small consideration, the Argument^ for and against a
Standing Army, so warmly argued on both sides; one making false Weights and
Measures, allowing nothing to be true Weight that is not weighed at the
Court-Beam; while the others lay their Reasons and Arguments in the Peoples
Scale, and weigh the common Interest and our Constitution against the Court
Projects. I must confess, the latter are much in the right for Laws were made
for the general Good of all the Subjects, and are by no means to be altered to
the prejudice of the People: The English Constitution has no respect to those
future Contingencies and Emergences which may happen to crowned Heads. Our Fore
fathers thought those Laws which were of Force and Virtue enough to keep them
in the possession of their Estates, equally powerful t^ secure the Regalities
of the Crown to the King, and would be alike advantageous to their Posterity;
and I know no Reason why we should be of another Opinion. -- The main Reason
the Court-party offers for a Standing. Army, is the entire Confidence we may
repose in the King on the account of the heroic Virtues inherent in him and
his firm and sincere Intentions to the preservation of the Nation, and the
Rights of the Subject; so that if the People of England do not trust the King
with their Lives, Liberties and Estates, they would insinuate as if they did
mistrus^ him. I may know my Neighbor to be a very honest Man and yet have no
occasion to trust him with the Deeds o^ my Estate, my Money or Goods: nor need
the People exchange Magna Charta for the King's Letters Patents for their
Liberties durante beneplacito; for so it must be when he is armed with force at
any time to take it away. I have a much, nay, a greater esteem of the Royal and
Princel^ Virtues of his Majesty, than any Courtier of them all; and though I
could trust the King with a great deal, yet I should not care to trust them
with a little. A Government settled by the People of England ought to be
maintained by them; and without doubt the People will maintain a King in those
Rights and Prerogatives they have granted and confirmed to him, otherwise it
will be a Reflection which hitherto has not happened upon them: but to maintain
a Government upon any other Principles, than such on which it is founded, is
ridiculous. The Superstructure ought to be conform to the Foundation, the
Building otherwise is irregular and inarrificial; and for the People to
undermine the Foundation of their Liberties, and raze it to the ground, only to
build a Pyramid of Honor, or a Triumphal Arch for a Prince, is downright
Nonsense. A Government ought to be supported; but it must be considered withal
how it deviated from its Institution: when we know what a Government is, we can
quickly find fit props to support it, and fit Force to defend it. It Is pity
there should be a distinction betwixt the King, and the Government, which it
must be allowed when the Courties call themselves the Government: As a certain
Person was committed to the Custody of a Messenger by the Secretary's Warrant,
for publishing and dispersing a seditious and scandalous Libel against His
Majesty and Government; whenas it only contained Matter of Fact against some
Commissioners. Well then, these Commissioners are the Government; and I am of
opinion, if it be thus, that it is not worth our while to keep up twenty
thousand Men to support it. Setting themselves thus up, they lessen the King
and his Pre^ogative; as if the King had the Legislative, and they the governing
Power. Evil Ministers and Officers have in all Times proved prejudical to the
Prince that employed them; or they acting after an illegal and arbitrary manner
in their ^everal Stations, cause suspicion that the Prince by whom they are
commissionated, will, when enabled with Force, to the like, or worse: and tho
ill Ministers and Officers may act-illegally, and after an arbitrary manner,
without the Knowledge, nay contrary to the Consent and Approbation of the
Prince; yet all their Actions tend to the weakening of his Government, and to
create Jealousies in his People. Men judge of the Fountain by the Purity o^
Impurity of the Streams; and Justice being denied or delayed by Officers and
Ministers, they presently look back to the orginal Contract and Coronation
Oath, with a great deal of Doubt and Hesitation. It was a noble and glorious
Saying of our great and renowned Prince Edw. 3 when he hanged his Chief Justice
Thorp, of the King's Bench, for taking a Bribe of 100 l. That he being
intruste^ as the King's Deputy, to administer Justice in that Court, ha^ as
much as in him lay broken that Solemn Oath that his Majest made to his People
at his Coronation. Instead of a Land Fore^ to defend Evil Ministers, this wise
Prince procured a Halte^ to hang them. If Men in great Offices have been guilty
of enomous Crimes, have lavishly spent and squander away Parliamentary Funds
raised for the security of the Nation, must the People of England make a rent
in their Constitution, and raise and pay Twenty thousand Men t^ maintain them
in their vicious Practices, and secure then from the Violence and Insults of
the common People They are grown already to such a height, that their is n^ way
of calling them to an Account. If an inferior Boar^ commit a Crime, rob,
(embezel; plunder the Nation, and of rich themselves with the Puplick Spoils of
the Kingdom^ and a complaint be made to the Lords of the T -- ry, the refer it
(after the Complainer has a long time attended) t^ the Board complained
against: after a long attendance (fiv^ on six Months I have known it) a Report
is made; the T -- ry acquiesces with the Report, and the Complainer frustrated
of his honest Intentions. It is a Law amongst'e^ never to hear the Complaint of
an Inferior Officer again a Superior; as one of the Commissioners of the Ex
-- told a certain Person, that there was a Resolution taken u^ by all the
Commissioners in the Kingdom, that if an Inferior Officer complained of
Mismanagement, they would represent him either as a Fool or a Knave, or else
mak^ him so uneasy that he should be forced to quit his Employment: and this
appears to be true, for most, if not all the ^fficers that have complained of
Mismanagements, have ^een discharged for so doing. How then shall these Men
(...) punished? Why the last Resort you know is a Parliament; and if you read
over the List, you will soon find ^ow many Courtiers were there, Judges of
their own Cause, and Auditors of their own Accounts. So that, Sir, I think
(...) ashore are in a fine pickle, if ever these Men get a ^tanding Army to
support their Mismanagements by point ^f Sword, and the powerful Arguments of
Pike and Gun: ^or our Controversy is not about trusting the King with a
^tanding Army, we pay Him all the Deference imaginable; ^ut we are loath to be
at the charge of guarding of those ^^at have not regarded the Public Good, nor
those worthy Gentlemen that ventured their Lives to bring the King to ^^e
Throne, and to promote them to Offices of Trust and ^^e greatest Profit. Their
restless Endeavors to gain the ^oint of a Standing Army, have other meanings
in them ^hen the specious pretense of Public Safety. When the ^ox preaches,
beware of the Geese; there is some Fetch or ^ther, some Snake or other in the
Grass, that will not ^^riggle it self into view, but under the Umbrage of a
^and Force. You must bear, Sir, with my homely Com^arisons, as well as with my
indifferent Language; we Tars don't pretend to polite Learning, and finery of
Speech. But to illustrate my Discourse, I must tell you, that the ^ast Voyage I
made was to New England, the Commander of the Ship I sailed in was a Man of
Virtue and Probity, very ^kilful in Navigation, and one that had a due regard
to the Profit and Advantage of his Owners. But the Mare, Boat^wain, Gunner, and
other Officers, were men of vicious Principles, and worked so far upon the good
Nature of the Captain, that they got entire possession of him, to the no small
loss of the Merchants, and the trouble of all the honest Sailors aboard. When
we came to New England, and had taken in our Loading, being homeward bound,
they persuaded him to take more Men, more Forces aboard, under ^retence of
Advice they had received from England of some Turkish Men of War that lay in
the Chaps of the English Channel. The poor Captain believed a necessity upon
such (...) or augmenting his Forces, being unwil^ (...) to have his Ship
pirated from him: The Forces were ^ailing apace, when it was discovered that
these Fellow^ had a design to run away with the Ship; so that had their Design
taken effect, the good natured Captain had been thrown overboard, and I had now
been among the Madagascar Pirates. Ill Men contrive all ways, first to raise
themselves by Villainy, and then to support themselves in it. The same Effect
your Land-Force may have upon you; Your Captain I know is a good Commander, of
Principle and Address, and I verily believe designs you no harm: but his under
Officers, if they designed you any good, would have done it before this time.
Besides, if you have a mind to keep your King, keep him from a Standing Army:
King James had been here still, had it not been for his Standing Army, an Army
modeled by the Vipers which lay in his Bosom for that purpose. I like the
Effects of that Design so well, that I desire no more of that nature: We have a
Government founded upon good Principles; a Revolution of which every step has
attended by Divine Providence; a King, who governs according to the Rules of
Justice at home, and is the Head and Leader of our Armies abroad, to his own
immortal Honor, and the good and welfare of his People; and every good
Englishman and Christian ought to bless God for it. An English King, and an
English People, suit well together; and since we are blessed with both, we have
no reason to promote new Whimseys in the head of one, to create Jealousies in
the other. The notion of an Invasion from the Man abroad is not so much a
Proposition of Horror, as the notion of our Liberties being invaded at home;
and we are in more danger of those Horseleaches of Government that fill,
themselves from the Veins of the State, than from Foreign Troops. Money is the
Sinews of War; but the Sinews once weakened, the Body is in a tottering
condition. A Standing Army must be sed, and when once without Pay, must live
upon Free Quarter; for there is no reason that Men raised for the service of
their Country, should starve in it. I would fain know what these Men would do
with a Standing Army, unless (as before) to guard them from the Violence of the
Mob. Where should they encamp, to be in a readiness to oppose an Invasion? Had
they as many Armies as there are Landing places in England, we might have some
Security. Few of these Men that talk of Standing Armies, have had the Courage
to go abroad to the Wars; but now perhaps for their Diversion, at the expense
of the Kingdom, they are willing to see Namur taken at Windsor, or a Butterfly
Camp at Hounslow-Heath, where the Forces must attend the Motions of the Man
abroad:

Where the Knights Errant lie Legs across.
Expecting what must never come to pass.
They Sky falling to the utter destruction of the whole Species of Larks;
French Invaders in Fleets of flying Wheel-barrows, and abundance of such odd
Chimera's, if not worse. How will they model this Army? as they have done the
Civil Offices? Will they fill Commissions with rancour'd Tories, confirmed
Jacobites, and Non-Jurors? Shall Men of Worth, Merit and Affection to the
Government, be as scarce in this Army as they are in the Customs and Navy? God
forbid! How many years Purchase must a Commission be sold for; and where will
be the place of Sale, and who the Broker, now Sir Fleet is dead? Few of the
King's, and their Country's Friends, have got Money to buy; must they be sold
to those that got Pardon-money in the late Reigns of those that are starving
since this Revolution? Well, there may be a formidable Invasion, and the Nation
in a great deal of Danger thereupon. The whole strength of the Nation is not
able to withstand it, and yet the Party pretend that Twenty thousand men out of
that strengah shall do it; that is as much as to say, seven Millions of Men are
not able to withstand an Invasion, but Twenty thousand of the seven Millions
are; the Minor is of greater force, power and virtue than the Major: if the
Folk in power say so, it is true enough; better a Nation be ruined, enslaved, or
any thing else, than they be thought to err in Judgment, or miss their Ends.
But suppose the worst, that a French Army should land; why then it we have not a
Standing Army, the great Places at White Hall will be in a tottering condition:
but suppose they don't land and we have a Standing Army in expectation of it;
wh^ then the great Folk at White Hall are all the time fingerin^ Money raised
to pay them, not to their disadvantage to b^ sure. It Is no matter whether we
are invaded or no, as lon^ as their Trade goes forward. Now tho your Earthquak^
don't disturb the Element I sojourn on, yet I may give m^ Opinion concerning
you Affairs as well as some of you have as to the Management of the Fleet that
know no other diffe^ence betwixt Salt Water and Fresh than by the Taste. I
remember I was at an Anchor in Studland Bay, when there wa^ just such another
Invasion in the Isle of Purbeck, as you^ Folk expect. If there was then any
Standing Army, the^ were guarding the Royal Ducks in St. James Park, ot
otherwise employed; but I am sure they were not there. No^^ without any Royal
Mandate, Commission, or any Orde^ from above, the bold Brittons assembled in a
hostile mane^ with all the Weapons of Defense the Country could affor^ and
without any Ceremony marched to the Place of landing The Rumor of the French
Numbers was Ten thousand, an^ in 48 hours there were a Hundred thousand in Arms
in Dose^shire, and the adjoining Counties, who came down tin^ enough to the Sea
side to engage the Invaders. I believe (...) these Hodmandods, Raw-heads and
Bloody-bones, wit^ which the Children of England are now scared, should appear,
we shall be in a good posture of defense, without Twenty thousand Red Coats,
which are morr terrifyin^ thun an Idvasion.

Now these Bugbears and Scare-crows, this Visionary Invasion that haunts the
Ruins of White Hall, being remov'^ out of sight, let us recover our Senses, and
scan the poin^ whether the Militia regulated and disciplined may not be a^
powerful to withstand an Invasion, as Twenty thousand (...) that Militia (for
every one capable of bearing Arms belong to it) listed and entered into Pay.
But they say the Militi^ is not disciplined; whose Fault is that? Was it not in
their power that contend for a Standing Army, to have disciplin'^ the Militia
since the Controversy in the House of Commons last Sessions about it? If the
Officers of the Militi^ cannot be trusted, it is the fault of those that made 'em
Officers. A neligence in this Point, and trumping up a Standing Army at the
same time, looks as if their Army were to do some business the Militia will not
do; for it is evident the Militia can do more than twenty times the Forces they
desire, when necessity shall require it. Besides, Twenty thousand Men dispersed
are no Army; their being in a body makes them one, but a body can be only in
one place at a time. We have abundance of Landing-places, and our Army can be
but at one of them, and I know already the Invaders will not land there. Now on
the other hand, they cannot land no where in England, but the Militia will be at
the place, enough of them to make a stand till the rest come up; so that if we
had a Standing Army, the greatest use of them at that Juncture would be to come
in for the Plunder of the field. But the Authors for an Army, like Mr. Bays in
the Rehearsal, are resolved to present the World with something very
ridiculous, and have not yet determined the point whether the two Kings of
Brentford shall head their Standing Army with both Boots on, or one off.

As I don't know the designs, so I am ignorant of the Consequences of what
these Men make such a bustle about; but it tends to create a Mistrust in the
King of his best Subjects, and tells him plainly he cannot be secure in his
Throne, and enjoy his Prerogative, without making an Alteration in our
Constitution; and that the People's Liberty, and the Regalities of the Crown
cannot be safe at the same time. Now, if I should aver, that our Constitution
must of necessity tumble down, if a Branch of the King's Prerogative were not
lopt off to make a prop to support it, I suppose the Secretary of State would
esteem it a State Crime, and I should be visited with the plague of a
Messenger; when at the same time these Authors raise Bulwarks, and plant their
Cannons upon them to batter down our Constitution, break down the Frences of
our Liberty, and destroy those privileges which have immemorially been the
Rights of our Ancestors; and all this connived at, if not encouraged. Have the
Liberties of the People no Guardians? Are there none to prosecute such
Offenders in the name of the Good People of England? Where is the Justice,
Glory, and Honor of our Ancestors? Are all their glorious Marks obliterated in
their Posterity? Are the ends of the World come upon us, that we are willing to
see an end of our Liberty? Are our Rights less valuable, our Laws of no les^
force than formerly? Are we ignominiously willing to give away what our
Forefathers left us at the expense of their Blood? God forbid that the
Children unborn should curse us as cruel Sep-Fathers that have disinherited
them of their Birthright. Will not succeeding Generations think, tha^ either
our Rights were not worth keeping, or that we ingloriously betrayed our
Children in parting with them Will not the Roman Honor and Gallantry, which
inspired Heathens newly acquainted with Laws and Principle^ of Government, rise
up in judgment against us, when w^ prove treacherous Deserters of our
Liberties, and raise and pay Twenty thousand Men to take possession of our
Freehold? Are not those who surrendered Charters, gave awa^ their Birthright,
and betrayed the Liberties of their Country in the late Reigns, justly branded
with the marks of Infamy, and their Memories handed down to Posterity as
ignominious and scandalous? And shall we, who have spent (...) many Millions to
undo what they did, and retrieve our sinking State from utter Ruin, tread in
their steps, act the same Trag^dy, and play over the same Game? Was a Standing
Army but a few years ago, accounted a Grievance, an^ now become a thing
desirable? Is it not attended with the same danger, or are we grown less
sensible of it? Are we i^ the same condition with those that are troubled with
the French Disease, of whom it is said, when once cured the^ are more desirous
to commit the Sin again? Are we clapped i^ our Understandings, that we are
willing to return into the same languishing Condition, of which we are so
lately recovered, and have paid so dear for the Cure? Let the Pleaders for a
Standing Army consider, how much a Standin^ Army was accounted a Grievance in
the late Reigns, and ho^ much it tended to the destruction of the King that
raised i^ and they may esteem their designs impracticable; for it ca^ be no
other than a Reflection upon the Wisdom of the English Nation, voluntarily to
give one King what they forced from another, to secure themselves in the
peaceable possession of their Estates: and no wise Man can imagine, that in a
Government founded on good and wholesome Laws, a thing that turned one King out
of the Throne, should keep another in it. If you have the same People to manage
this Standing Army, that managed the late K. James's you have the same People
to oppose this Standing Army as opposed the other; and in all likelihood you will
be brought into the same Disorder and Confusion: wherefore I think, all things
considered, you had better be without it.

Thus far, Sir, I have ventured out of my Element, to give you my Sentiments of
Affairs ashore; now suffer me to step aboard my Ship, and give an account of
another Security to our Kingdom little heeded or talked of, I mean our
Shipping. It is supposed these horrible Invaders will not^^y over the Seas in
the Air, nor will they shove themselves over in leaden Boats under Water; they
are compounded of Flesh, Blood and Bones, contrary to the nature of Spirits;
^hey are visible and tangible Substances: therefore let us consider how we
Sailors may handle them; for it is a demon^^rable Argument, if we can drown or
burn them at Sea, you will ^ave no occasion of a Land Army to knock 'em oth' head
^shoar. By your insisting so much upon a Land Force as ^ecessary to withstand
an Invasion, you seem to yield up ^he Empire and Dominion of the Sea, which I
am very un^illing to grant, knowing the English have no Rivals in ^^at Affair,
nor no Nation capable of taking possession of that Dominion. If we could beat
an Enemy at la Hogue, and ^urn fourteen of their three Deck Ships at one time,
and ^ight have quite ruined them at Sea then, had it not been or the wonderful
good Nature of you know who; I say, if we could do what they have not yet been
able to recruit, nor ^erhaps never will unless we fell 'em Timber to build more
^hips; if they have lost their Ships, and we have augmented ^urs by a far
greater number than they have lost, I hope we (...) not now less able to fight
an Invader. I suppose the Dis^mbarkment of the Prince of Orange was carried on
with as ^uch secresy as an Invasion will be, yet we know how long it was talked
of, and how long expected before it came. Consider in the next place, how many
Ships an Invader must have to bring over Men enough to conquer this Kingdom. Now
if six or seven hundred Ships were requisite to bring over at most but Fourteen
thousand five hundred Men, how many well be necessary to make an Invasion upon
England in order to conquer it? Their numbers must be much greater, they come
without leave and undesired; and Invaders let 'em be of what Country soever, or
of what Religion soever, are hated by Englishmen. The Prince of Orange's
Descent upon England was no Invasion but an Invitation, and his Accession to
the Throne no Conquest (whatever two or three insignifiant Priests have wrote)
but the free Gift and Benevolence of the good People of England. Yet
notwithstanding all Parties were agreed in his Revolution, how many Accidents
happened? How often was the Fleet detained by contrary Winds? and when at Sea,
fore'd to steer a Channel Course, and in a Line too, which made 'em seen by
both shores. But this Invading Fleet that must have at least ten times the
number of Men, and consequently of Shipping, are to come over undiscovered.
From what place will they come? Why this is the main point; the honest Men in
Offices tell of an Invasion, and it is to be done by somebody, that they will
not dare name for fear of being Gazetted, and ordered to be prosecuted, as Dick
Baldwin was for reflecting upon some great Person at the French Court: They had
better run the hazard of Prosecution, and tell the truth; the Prosecution may
be bought off, Mr. Baldwin gave but eight Guinea's to Harry B -- and three to
his Brother N -- and the Prosecution was at an end. But this Invasion cannot be
bribed off the Invaders will not stay for Gratuities, all is their own when
they have conquered, and into this Condition we may be brought, because our
Standing Army-men are mealy mouthed and will not speak out. An Invasion may well
be a Proposition of Horror to them, when the very Invaders and the Country they
come from, cramp^ their Tongues, and frightens them speechless, so that Twenty
thousand Men and nothing else, can bring them again to their Senses. If they
would tell us the Country they will come from, I could give you my opinion in the
matter; if I knew their Country, I should know their Ports, and what
Conveniences they have for shipping their Men; But I Am sure they have no
Convenience of landing them in England unless we please: All we can learn from
them is, that it is the Man abrord, and abundance of Men there are abroad, and
which of 'em it is we cannot tell; this Man may be somebody or nobody, or anybody
or everybody, since he has no name. He may be the Man in the Moon for ought we
know, and then we are in a fine condition; his is a Country we know nothing of,
nor what kind of People he will bring with him, nor what sort of Weapons they
use in Battle: He is certainly an Enemy, because he is no Friend and a powerful
Enemy too; his Dominions are very large, and for ought we know very populous;
and if he should descend upon Salisbury Plain with two or three hundred
thousand Mortals, why then the Cathedral Church there will be invaded by Men of
a Religion, that have not been educated to mumble the Prayers in usum S^rum;
and the best stake in the Hedge of one of our Bishops is quite lost, The more I
think of it, the more am I terrified at the Apprehension of such an Invasion;
what a hor^ied terrifying Spectacle will it be to see Men (nay for ought we
know Monsters) descend like Hail upon our Country; where our Ships cannot come,
and nothing but Twenty thousand regular Troops can oppose? How will our Women
and Children be frighted, and our old Men astonished at such an Apparition,
worse than that at Pu^beck! Now I should think it most proper, to prevent an
Invasion from this Country, to send an Ambassador thither: We have not given
the Man nor any of his Subjects, any affront that I know of; and a Truce or
Peace is far better than War, as the Turks and Germans on both sides affirm;
and we have Men of Parts and Sense enough in our Nation to send on such an
Embassy: We know the Country is very high, yet we are provided with very high
Flyers in our Government that have mounted from Footboys, Journeymen and
Valets, to Commissioners, and other great Officers; one or two of these on this
Embassy may put an end to our Fears, and render Twenty thousand armed Men
useless: I could pick a Man or two out of our Officers fit for this Embassy,
that have risen with a wonderful Impudence at home, and will no doubt carry a
good Stock abroad with them. These high Flyers have one Convenieecy in mounting
above the rest of Mankind* they have no weight of Brains to retard their Flight
upwards; and if there is any M^ney in the World in the Moon, they I load enough
in their Pockets to hasten their descent downwards. If they say my Invasion is
ridiculous, I say so of theirs, as also Twenty thousand Men to withstand it,
and keep out a Force which all. England cannot beside do. -- Well, it seems we
must still be in the dark about this Invasion; the Army Authors won^t tell us
whence it will come, and yet tell us a dismal Story of its coming; so that we
are left to bare supposition, which puts nothing at all into being, but in the
Foster-father of Non entities: We have suppos^d it from above the Clouds
already, let us descend and view the Terrestrial Globe, view the Coasts of our
Neighbors, and see from which of them all a Fleet of Ships ca^lanch forth into
the deep, and pass the Ocean with an Army without O^struction from the Royal
Navy: It Is Nonsense to suppose this Invasi^^ to come from Holland, which
solately assisted us with Forces in order (...) recover our lost Liberties;
those that help^d knock our Fetters off, w^^^ not be for putting them on so
soon already. But suppose Holland had design upon England, let us consider how
impracticable such a design wou^^ be, whilst England has so good a Fleet of
Sheeps of War: Those Auxillar (...) Forces they lent the good People of England
upon the Revelution, m^^ with abundance of Obstacles and Difficulties in
shipping the Horses a^^ Men, which kept the Enterprise so far back, that the
very Regiments, the Names of the Colonels commanding those Regiments, and an
exact A^count of the Number of the Men House and Foot, was printed in the
English Gazette long before they saw the Coast of England; so that th^^ the
English Nation had then as much time to prepare to oppose them, ha^ they been
as willing, as they had to prepare to receive them; Volen^^ non fit injuria.
The Revolution pleased the Nation, if the major part (...) the People may be
called so. The Fleet under the Command of the Earl of Dartmouth, and in a
proper Station too, could easily have obstructed that Expedition: But the
Seamen were in a Confederay with the Landmen in the Interest of their Country,
and I hope in God ever will be; and it is not often the Engilish Fleet has let
an Atmed Navy pa^^ through their Channel without one Broadside.

We must imagine it not come from France immediately after the Ratification of
a solemn Peace, so honorable to the English Nation: Bu^ suppose France at any
time should have the Vanity to invade England, will not our Naby ^e suffi^ient
to put a stop to such an Invasion? The French Councils perhaps are as secret as
any in the World, and tho vulgar Eye^ cannot pry into the Cabinets of thot
Prince, yet his first and second Rat^ Men of War are easily discerned; I hope
they will rig their Ship before the^ put them to Sea, they will careen, and gun, and
man them, and all thi^ cannot be done in a Chimney-Corner: Their Caulkers,
Hammers, and Carpenters adzes, will make some noise; we shall hear something of
i^^ sure. Consider their Ports, and where their Ships are laid up, and you may
easily conclude they cannot soon join upon such a design. Besides, the^ must
rendezvous somewhere, and that Wind which brings one half o^ the Fleet to the
place of rendezvous, keeps the other half back; so tha^ if the Peace did not
put us out of this danger, our Fleet would be a sufficient Guard ogainst it. --
Spain is in a firm Alliance with us, and had good Belly-full of Invaons^in 83,
which is not yet digested, and the Nor^then Crowns never made any Pretensions
of this nature; so that I dare boldly affirm we are in no danger of an Invasion
from any known part of the World, and the Terra Incognita is a long way off.

In the short view I have taken of the Condition of our Neighbors and their
strength in Shipping, compared with the Naval Force and Maritime Strength of
England, I believe if all of them should intend an Invasion upon England, they
could not accomplish it. For, as I have said before, it cannot be done but we
must have notice of it; and while they ^re fitting out their Fleet we may do
the same: our Fleet being out, and ^iuided into Squardons, appointed in proper
Stations, would easily in^ercept them.

Now the Usefulness of a Fleet, as the best Guard to England, is evident, not
only from Reason, but from undoubted History, and plain Matter of Fact; many
Instances whereof our Tars often at Sea talk and boast of, many of which I
^ould instance in, were I not too far gone already beyond the Limits of a
Letter. But however I must tack about again upon your Land-Army Folk; and to
avoid all Animosities, Quarters and Heats, I shall not tell how much nor how
little was done during this War by the Land-Army in Flanders; ^ut shall only
hint what might rationally have been done by ^he Fleet under a good Management
and Conduct. Of so ^any Millions of Money that have been spent during this War
in Land ^orces, suppose some of that Money and those Forces had been used on
^oard the Navy, would not fifteen or twenty Thousand of them thus em^oyd, have
done more Mischief to the Enemy than fifty or threescore ^housand in Flanders?
They might have landed in their Country, their ^usible part, which we have so
gently touched; such a Force would have ^een sufficient to have ravaged 10 or
20 Miles round in their Country, and when the Enemy had got sufficient Force
together to repel them, they ^ight even have marched aboard again with their
Plunder: and coasting ^ong their Country, in two or three days time have landed
again a hun^^d d Miles from the place they landed in before, and retired aboard
as ^^fore, and practiced this Trade along their Coast from East to West; ^is
would have been a tiresome Diversion indeed: They would thus have ^^d no time
to sow or reap, or dre^s their Vineyards; this would have ^vorted their Armies
abroad, perpetually harassed their Arrear-ban at ^^me, kept their Peasants from
their Employment, and filled 'em with ^^ars and Alarms. Being kept continually
waking, it might have altered ^^e temper of an imperious aspiring Enemy; waking
they say will tame a ^^d Horse, why not a mad Tyrant? But whether our
Mismanagements ^^ve been occasioned through Ignorance of the Managers, or through an
evil De^^^n against our Country, is yet left to determine; but both are equally
^^xious to a Nation, and by continued Successions of Grievances without ^dress,
the most flourishing Kingdom, the most glorious Monarch, and ^^ost warlike.
People may at once be empoverish'd at home, and grow ^^ndalous abroad; for
nothing conduces more to the Honor and Glory (...) a Nation than the good
opininion foreign States and Governments ^^ve of their Management; they will give
respect according to the Polity of ^^eir Government; if wise they will court its
Favor, if foolish they will de^sel^: The a Man be strong and rich, his Adversary
values it not, know^^ his blind side, and how to cully him out of his
Birthright. The ma^^^ment of our Maritime Affairs has been the common Subject
of all Tongues, as it has been the common Grievance of the Nation; and wh^
makes it the more resented by those that have paid Money to the ^^nagers, and
been at the Charge of our Naval Force, is the mighty A^vantage England has had
over the Enemy in this point. Let us conf^^^ the natural Advantage of our
Dominions, the happy Situation of our T^^ritories in order to annoy our Enemy:
Let us (and that not without sham^ look into the Aquitain Sea, and behold there
the Islands of Jerzey, Guersey, etc in our possession, just upon the Enemy's
Coast, provided w^^ Harbors, convenient Peers, safe Roads for Ships to ride in
secure of Tempests, overlooking the Enemy's Ships as they pass from St. Malo,
Gr^vile, etc. and at the same to consider that they have been of no other
^^vantage during the War than an accidental Shelter to such of our Ships (...)
have touch^d there, is matter of amazement as well as miscarriage. (...) the
time of the Civil Wars Sir Geo. Carteret was then Governor of the Is^a^^ of
Jerzey in trust for the Royal Family, and with about twelve or so very small
Frigot, so annoyed England, that the Government then in b^ing was forced to
send a Fleet with considerable Forces to reduce th^^ Island. Had we been
wanting of Shipping during the War, the case wou^^ have been altered; but had a
small number of our Ships cruiz'd in t^^ Station, the very Prizes they would
have taken had been sufficient to h^^^ paid the charge of the Ships, provided
the said Prizes had not been ^verted to private uses, and sunk in Grants. I
have often wondered t^^ French during the War did not repossess themselves of
those Islands, no^withstanding the sincere Affection of the Inhabitants to the
present G^vernment, their good Discipline and Native Courage: they would
^^^tainly have made some Insults upon those Islands, had they not repeat^^ a
greater Advantage by them than the possession of them would have, (...) mounted
(...), for from thence they were supplied with Lead, Pitch, (...) and other
Necessaries of War, besides a settled Intelligence of the Affa^^ or England,
and all that (...) by (...) Kings Officers, (...) Mismana^^ments every body
knows, and we have complainers enough, but the diff^^^cies we labor under is to
find out Punisherr: We have had sufficient ^^perience that the punishing of
Criminals with good Offices and Empl^^ments, has had an Effect answerable to
the Folly of the Project, to pun^^^ a Captain for giving away a 5th Rate to the
Enemy, with preferring (...) to a fourth Rate, will never do our business. If
you officer your Sh^^ of War with Rigby's, and man them with Landmen, christened
by the na^^ of Marceners, you^l make but an indifferent spot of work of it.
(...) now I mention Mareeners, I would beg the favor of you, Sir, to (...)
them at home, and se^ ^m Sentinels over the Farmers Cocks and H^^^ for they do
us no other service here than to eat up our Provisions, (...) us lowsy, and
stand in our ways These amphibious Soldiers, that live ^^ther on Land or Water,
are a Scandal to both, and serviceable on nei^^^ We don't want Sailors now, and
are willing to be freed from the F^^gu^^ Land-Lubbers; yet you see the Army,
folk are desirous of 'em, any thing ^^ther than lose their point; an Army thy
would have, tho if were of Ta^demations, while the Credit, Reputation, and
Usefulness of the Eng^^^ Navy is sunk, and overset by a sort of Men that have a
Necessity fo^^ Land Force, to the ruin of our Country, and the loss of our
Birth rig^^

FINIS.

