Johannes Scott S. T. P.



THE Christian Life, PART III. Wherein the GREAT DUTIES OF JUSTICE, MERCY, and
MORTIFICATION are fully Explained and Enforced. VOL. IV.

BY JOHN SCOTT D. D. late Rector of St. Giles's in the Fields.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1696.

To the Right Honorable Sir GEORGE TREBY LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE Common
PLEAS.
MY LORD,
THose excellent Treatises of Christian Life, which were published some years
since by the learned Author, have, I doubt not, in a great measure answered his
Design, in writing them, which was to do as much good as he could to the World;
and had he lived to finish the other Parts of it, we might have had such a
complete Body of Christian Institutions in our own Language, as would have
highly contributed toward a Revival of true Piety among us. For, besides those
Pieces which have already seen the Light, 'twas the Author's design to proceed
to a particular Explication of the several respective Duties which Men are
obliged to render to God, their Neighbors, and Themselves; and for a
Conclusion of all, he proposed a distinct Treatise of Ecclesiastical Duties.

The two Discourses of Justice and Mercy, which I now present to your Lordship,
were intended as a Part of that Duty which we owe to one another, and which,
with other Enlargements, had the Author lived, would have made a Volume of
themselves. And the Discourse of Mortification is likewise a Part of what He
designed for the Explication of that Duty which Man owes himself, which was
also intended for another distinct Volume. Besides these he proposed a
particular Examination of those great Duties, which God requires; which
together with the other Volumes would have completed the whole Design. In
Justice therefore to the Memory of this incomparable Person, I thought my self
obliged to communicate to your Lordship this short Account of him. The Design
which he proposed was Great and Noble, and I Am sure those Pieces which he has
already published, do loudly speak the Excellent Qualifications with which God
had endowed him to complete it, had not a laborious Station, and, what was
worse, a very sickly Constitution at last interrupted him from the Prosecution
of it.

As for these Remains, they are faithfully transcribed from the Author's
Manuscript; and your Lordship may easily discern that they are his true and
genuine Offspring by your Perusal of them. I know your Lordship has a very
high Value and just Esteem for the Memory of that great and good Man, and that
is a prevailing Inducement to take into your Protection those Works which he
has left behind him. To You they address themselves, and I doubt not but under
that Character which your Lordship bears, they will be sufficiently recommended
to the World; and that they may effectually promote the Good of it, is the
hearty Prayer of

Your Lordship's most Obedient, Humble Servant, J. G.

THE CONTENTS.
OF JUSTICE.
CHAP. I. OF Justice as it respects the Rights of Men, whether natural, or
acquired. The natural Rights of Men shown in four particulars; First, As
dwelling in mortal Bodies. Secondly, As rational Creatures. Thirdly, As joined
to one another by natural Relations. Fourthly, As naturally united in Society,
Page 3. As Men dwell in mortal Bodies, they have a Right to their Bodies, p. 4,
5, 6. And to their bodily Subsistence, p. 7, 8, 9, 10. CHAP. II. OF Justice in
preserving the Rights of Men, considered as rational Creatures, p. 11. Which
Rights are reduced to four particulars, p. 12. First, That every Man has a
Right to an equitable Treatment from every Man, p. 13, 14, 15. Secondly, That
every Man has a Right to judge for himself so far as he is capable, p. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. Thirdly, That every Man has a Right not to be forced to act
contrary to the Judgment of right Reason, p. 23, 24, 25. Fourthly, That every
Man has a Right to be respected by every Man, p. 26, 27, 28, 29. CHAP. III. OF
Justice in preserving the Rights of Men, as united together by Natural
Relations, p. 30, 31. And as joined together in Society, p. 32. Wherein is
shown first, That they have a Right to Love, p. 33. Secondly, To Peace, p 34,
35. Thirdly, To Truth, p. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Fourthly, To Credit, p. 41, 42,
43. Fifthly, To Protection, p. 44, 45, 46. Sixthly, To Communication in the
Profits of Commerce and Intercourse, p. 47, 48. CHAP. IV. OF Justice, as it
preserves the Acquired Rights of Men: and particularly those which arise from
Sacred and Civil Relations. As first, Of Sovereign and Subject, p. 54, 55, 56,
57, 58, 59. Secondly, Of Subordinate Magistrates to the Sovereign and People,
p. 60, 61. Thirdly, Of Pastors and People, p. 62, 63. Fourthly, Of Husband and
Wife, p. 64, 65, 66, 67, 68. Fifthly, Of Friend and Friend, p, 69, 70. Sixthly,
Of Masters and Servants, p. 71, 72, 73. Seventhly, Of Truster and Trustee, p.
74, 75. Eighthly, Of the Benefactor and Receiver, p. 76, 77. Ninthly, Of
Creditor and Debtor, p. 78, 79, 80, 81. 82. CHAP. V. OF Justice, as it
preserves the Rights of Men acquired by Legal Possession, p. 83, 84, 85, 86,
87, 88, 89. CHAP. VI. OF Justice, in reference to the Rights of Men acquired by
personal Endowments, p. 90, 91, 92, 93. And of outward Rank and Quality, p. 94.
95. CHAP. VII. OF Justice, in reference to the Rights of Men acquired by
Compact, p. 96, 97. Wherein are prescribed some general Rules of Righteousness
to Conduct our Bargains and Contracts. First, That we should use Plainness and
Simplicity in our Dealings. Secondly, That we should impose upon no Man's
Ignorance or Unskilfulness. Thirdly, That we should take no Advantage of
another's Necessities. Fourthly, That we should not substract from the
Commodity or Price, for which we have contracted. Fifthly, That we should not
go to the utmost Verge of what we conceive to be lawful. Sixthly, That in
doubtful Cases we should choose the safest side, p. 98, 99, 100, 101, 102. CHAP.
VIII. OF the Eternal Reasons whereon Justice is founded, and which render it
morally good; which are these four, p. 103. First, The eternal Proportion and
Congruity of Justice to the Nature of Things, p. 104, 105, 106, 107. Secondly,
The eternal Conformity of it to the Nature of God, p. 108, 109, 110, 111.
Thirdly, The Agreement and Correspondency of it with the Divine Providence and
Disposals, p. 112, 113, 114, 115. Fourthly, The everlasting Necessity of it to
the Happiness of Men, p. 117, 118, 119, 120, etc. CHAP. IX. SOme Motives and
Considerations against the Sinfulness and Unreasonableness of Injustice, viz.
First, The great Repugnancy of it to the Terms and Conditions of the Christian
Religion, p. 125, 126, 127. Secondly, The great Vanity, or Desperateness of it,
p. 128, 129, 130, 131, 132. Thirdly, The manifest Inexcusableness of it in it
self, p. 133, 134, 135, 136, 137. Fourthly, The Fruitlesness and
Mischievousness of it to our selves, p. 140, 141, 142, 143. Fifthly, The high
Provocation it gives to God, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148.
Of MERCY.
CHAP. I. OF Mercy, as it relieves the Miseries of the Souls of Men, p. 149.
Which Miseries are: First, Sorrow and Dejection of Mind, p. 150, 151, 152.
Secondly, Errors and Mistakes in matters of less Importance, p. 153, 154, 155.
in which Case the proper Acts of Mercy are; First, Forbearance and Toleration,
p. 156, 157. And Secondly, To endeavor by all prudent and peaceable ways to
rectify one another Mistakes, p. 158. Thirdly, Another of the Miseries of the
Soul which Mercy relieves, is Blindness and Ignorance in things of the greatest
Moment, p. 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164. Fourthly, Malice and Obstinacy of Will
in mischievous and destructive Courses, p. 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170.
Fifthly, Impotency, or want of Power to recover themselves out of their vicious
Courses, p. 171, 172, 173, 174. For the enforcement of which Duty are subjoined
the following Considerations. First, The inestimable Worth of those Souls upon
which our Mercy is to be employed, p. 175, 176. Secondly, The great Interest we
have in the Fate of the Souls of others, p. 177, 178. Thirdly, The mighty
Influence our Mercy may have upon their Welfare, p. 179, 180, 181. CHAP. II. OF
Mercy as it relieves the Miseries of the Bodies of Men which are reduced to
five Heads: First, Natural Blemishes and Defects, p. 182, 183, 184. Secondly,
Sickness and Diseases, p. 185, 186, 187. Thirdly, Outward Force and Violence
from those in whose Power they are; such as Bondage and Captivity, p. 188, 189.
Imprisonment, p. 190. bodily Torments and Persecutions, p. 191, 192, 193.
Fourthly, Civil or Arbitrary Punishments inflicted on them for Injuries
received, p. 194. In which the Law of Mercy requires us in punishing Offenders;
First, That we do it with a good Intention, p. 195. Secondly, Not to exact
Punishment for small and trifling Offenses, p. 196. Thirdly, Not to punish an
Offender, when we can do no Good by it, either to our selves, or to him, or to
others, p. 197. Fourthly, Not to punish an Offender, so long as the End of
punishing him is fairly attainable by gentler Means, p. 198. Fifthly, To
inflict no more Punishment than what is absolutely necessary to the obtaining
those good Ends we design by it, 199. Sixthly, Always to punish short of the
Offense, p. 200, 201. Fifthly and Lastly, Another of the Miseries which affect
Men's Bodies is want of the outward Necessaries of this present Life, wherein is
shown the proper Remedies which are to be applied to them, p. 202, 203, 204,
205. CHAP. III. OF Almsgiving, as to the manner of performing it; First, That
it ought to be performed with a good and merciful Intention, p. 207, 208.
Secondly, With Justice and Righteousness, p. 209. Thirdly, Readily and
cheerfully, p. 210, 211. Fourthly, liberally and bountifully, p. 212, 213.
Fifthly, Timely and seasonably, p. 214, 215. Sixthly, Discreetly and prudently,
p. 216, 217. which ought more particularly to guide and direct our Alms; First,
In the Method of Provision of them, p. 218. Secondly, In the Choice of the
Objects of them, p. 219, 220. Thirdly, In the Nature and Quality of them, p.
221. Fourthly, In stating the Proportions of them, p. 222, 223, 224, 225.
Fifthly, In the manner of bestowing and conveying them, p. 226, 227. The
Practice of this Duty is pressed and enforced with some Motives and Arguments,
viz. First, That it is imposed upon us as a necessary Part of our Religion, p.
228, 229, 230. Secondly, That it is highly recommended to us by the Examples of
God, and our Savior, p. 231, 232, 233. Thirdly, That it is a most substantial
Expression of our Love and Gratitude to God and our Savior, p. 234, 235, 236,
237. Fourthly, That it charges an high Obligation to us, upon the Accounts of
God and our Savior, p. 238, 239, 240, 241. CHAP. IV. OF the eternal Reasons
and Grounds of Mercy, upon which it is founded and rendered morally Good. This
shown in five particulars: First, The Suitableness of it to the Nature of God,
p. 242, 243, 244, 245. Secondly, The Convenience of it with the Frame and
Constitution of human Nature, p. 246, 247. An Objection against Cruelty
answered, p. 248, 249, 250. Thirdly, The near and intimate Relation of those
Persons to us, upon whom our Mercy is to be exercised, p. 251, 252, 253.
Fourthly, The Equitableness of it to our own State and Circumstances, p. 254,
255, 256, 257. Fifthly, The Necessity of it to the tolerable Wellbeing of
humane Societies, p. 258, 259, 260, 261, 262.
Of MORTIFICATION.
CHAP. I. OF Mortification, p. 263, 264, 265. Wherein it does consist, shown in
three particulars. First, In Abstinence from the outward Acts of Sin, p. 266.
Secondly, In not consenting to any Sin, p. 267, 268. Thirdly, In a constant
Endeavor to subdue our involuntary Inclinations to Sin, p. 269, 270, 271, 272.
CHAP. II. OF the Means and Instruments of Mortification, which are reduced to
these Six: First, Faith, p. 274, 275, 276. Secondly, Consideration, p. 277,
278, 279, 280, 281, 282. Thirdly, Resolution, p. 283, 284, 285, 286, 287.
Fourthly, Discipline, which consists in three Things; First, In a frequent
Repetition of it, p. 288, 289. Secondly, In frequent Reflection upon, and
Examination of our selves, p. 290, 291. Thirdly, In keeping our selves at as
great a distance from Sin, as prudently and conveniently we can, p. 292, 293,
294. Fifthly, Frequent Receiving of the Sacrament, p. 295, 296, 297, 298, 299,
300, 301. Sixthly, Constant Prayer, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306. CHAP. III. OF
Motives to Mortification drawn from the present Mischiefs and Inconveniences
which our Sins bring us into: which are first, either outward and bodily, or
secondly, inward and spiritual, p. 307. The outward and bodily Inconveniences
are Four: First, That Sin destroys our Health, and shortens our Lives, p. 308,
309, 310, 311. Secondly, That it stains our Reputation, p. 312, 313. Thirdly,
It consumes our Estates, p. 314, 315, 316. Fourthly, It disturbs our sensual
Pleasures, p. 317, 318, 319, 320. The second sort of Motives to Mortification
are drawn from the present Mischiefs and Inconveniences that Sin brings upon
our Souls; which are chiefly Three: First, It spoils our Understandings, p.
322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328. Secondly, It subverts the natural
subordination of our Faculties, p. 329, 330, 331, 332. Thirdly, it disturbs the
Tranquillity of our Minds, p. 333, 334, 335, 336, 337. CHAP. IV. OF Helps to
Mortification, given us by the Spirit of God, viz. First, The external Argument
and Motives of the Gospel, p. 338, 339. Secondly, The external Providence of
the Divine Spirit by which he excites us to our Duty, p. 340, 341, 342.
Thirdly, The Aids and Assistances which the Holy Angels give us, who are the
Agents and Ministers of the Holy Ghost, p. 343, 344, 345. Fourthly, The
internal Motions and Operations of the Holy Ghost upon our Souls, p. 346, 347,
348. From the Consideration of these Benefits of the Spirit of God the
following Inferences are deduced: First, The Necessity of the Spirit to enable
us to mortify our Sins, p. 349, 350, 351. Secondly, The Necessity of our
Concurrence with the Spirit, p. 352, 353, 354, 355. Thirdly, The Certainty of
Success, p. 356, 357. Fourthly, The great Reason there is for our continual
Prayers to God, p. 358, 359. Fifthly, The indispensable Necessity of our
faithful and sincere Endeavors in order to the mortifying our Lusts, p. 360,
361. Sixthly, The Possibility of keeping the Commands of God, in that God by
his Spirit* does so powerfully Aid and Assist us, p. 362, 363. Seventhly, The
Inexcusableness of Sinners, if they go on in their Wickedness, p. 364, 365,
366. CHAP. V. OF the Eternal Reward of Mortification. That there is a State of
everlasting Life, and Happiness prepared for good Men, proved by plain and
easy Arguments. First, Because the Law of our Natures has not a sufficient
Sanction without it, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372. Secondly, From those Desires
and Expectations of it, which do so generally and naturally arise in pure and
virtuous Minds, p. 373, 374, 375, 376. Thirdly, From the Justice and Equity of
the Divine Providence, p. 377, 378, 379. Fourthly, From the Revelation of his
Will, which God has made to us by Jesus Christ, p. 380, 381, 382, 383. From
the Consideration of which the following Inferences, are raised; First, What an
unreasonable thing it is for us Christians, immoderately to dote upon the
World, p. 384, 385, 386. Secondly, How vigorous and industrious we ought to be
in discharging the Duties of our Religion, p. 387, 388, 389. Thirdly, How
upright and sincere we ought to be in all our Professions and Actions, p. 390,
391. Fourthly, What great reason we have to be cheerful under the Afflictions
and Miseries of this World, p. 392, 393, 394, 395. CHAP. VI. OF the Necessity
of Mortification to the obtaining Eternal Life; proved, First, From God's
Ordination and Appointment, p. 396, 397, 398. Secondly, From the Nature of the
thing, which implies a Disagreement in wicked Souls to the future Happiness, p.
399. To evidence this Disagreement, three things are proposed, First, Wherein
the Felicities of the future State do consist, p. 401, 402, 403. Secondly, What
the Temper and Disposition of wicked Souls will be in the future Sat, p. 404,
405, 406, 407. Thirdly, How contrary such a Temper and Disposition must be unto
such Felicities, p. 408, 409. For, First, There is in it an Antipathy and
Contrariety to the Vision of God, p. 410, 411. Secondly, To the Love of God, p.
412, 413. Thirdly, To the Resemblance of God, p. 414, 415, 416. Fourthly, To
the Society of the Spirits of just men made perfect, p. 417, 418. From all
which these following Inferences are deduced, First, How unreasonable it is for
any Man to presume upon going to Heaven, upon any account whatsoever without
mortifying his Lusts, p. 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425. 426. Secondly, The
indispensable Necessity of Mortification, since it is plain we cannot be happy
without it, p. 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431. Thirdly, What is the only true and
solid Foundation of our Assurance of Heaven, p. 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436,
437. Fourthly, What is the great design of the Christian Religion, p. 438, 439,
440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 445.
OF THE Christian Life.
PART III.
CHAP. I. Of Justice, as it preserves the Natural Rights of Men: and
particularly in reference to their Bodies.
HAVING in a former Discourse asserted and explained the Nature of Moral Good
and Evil in Humane Actions; I shall now distinctly consider the Sum of all that
Moral Duty which we owe to God, and to our Neighbor; as the Prophet has
comprised it in these words, He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and walk humbly
with thy God? Mic. vi. 8. I begin with that Duty which God requires of us
toward our Neighbor: and it is all implied in the two distinct Virtues of
Justice and Mercy.

IN discoursing of Justice, I shall endeavor these two things: 1. To show what
that Justice is which is required of us toward our Neighbor: 2. To prove,
that it is grounded upon such immutable Reasons, as do render it a Moral Good.

I. I shall endeavor to show, what that Justice is which is owing to our
Neighbor. In general therefore, Justice consists in giving to every one his
due; in which latitude it comprehends all matter of duty: for every Duty is a
due to God, or our Neighbor, or our selves, and accordingly every performance
of every duty is a payment of some due; and, as such is an act of
Righteousness. And therefore in Scripture Good Men are frequently styled
Righteous, and the Whole of Virtue and Goodness is called Righteousness,
because it is a payment of some due either to God, our selves, or our
Neighbors. But Justice being here considered as a distinct, and particular
Virtue, must be understood in a more limited sense; viz. for Honesty in all our
dealings with men, or giving to every man his due with whom we have any
Intercourse. And wherein this consists, will best appear by considering what
those things are which are due from one Man to another, or what those Dues and
Rights are which men may claim by the eternal Laws of Righteousness. And these
are twofold, 1. Natural, and 2. Acquired.

I begin with the First, viz. the Natural Rights of Men, which are such as
appertain to Men, as they are Reasonable Creatures, and dwelling in Mortal
Bodies, and joined to one another by their natural Relations, and by Society.
For in all these capacities there accrue to men certain Natural Rights which we
are obliged in Justice not to violate, but so far as we can to secure and make
good to one another.

First, Therefore we will consider men as dwelling in mortal Bodies; Secondly,
As Rational Creatures; Thirdly, As joined to one another by natural Relations;
Fourthly, As naturally united in Society; and I will show what Rights there are
redounding to them from all these Respects, and Considerations.
I. WE will consider Men as dwelling in mortal Bodies, in which there is a
twofold Right accruing to them: 1. a Right to their Bodies: 2. a Right to their
bodily Subsistence.

I. As dwelling in mortal Bodies, they have a natural Right to their Bodies,
and to all the Parts of them, for their Bodies being the Tenements which the
great Landlord of the world has allotted to their Souls during their abode in
this terrestrial State, are upon that account their undoubted Right; which
unless they forfeit, they cannot be deprived of without manifest Injury and
Injustice. For if God gave this Body to my Soul, it is certain that immediately
under him my Soul has a Right to it, and holding in Capite as it does from the
Supreme Proprietor, is Tenant at will to none but him, for this its earthly
Habitation: so that antecedently to all Humane Laws and Constitutions, every
Soul is vested with a natural Right to its own Body; as being placed in and put
in possession of it by the God of Nature; and till by its own free Act it has
alienated, or forfeited its Right, there is none but God, (who has reserved to
himself the Sovereign and absolute disposal of it) can justly either dispossess
a Soul of its Body, or of any Part or Member of it; or offer any violence to
the Body,* or put it any farther out of its Souls Disposal, than God himself
has done by placing it under the outward Restraints of Government. So that for
any one either to kill or dismember a Body, whose Soul has not forfeited its
Right to it; to ravish, inslave or imprison a Body, whose Soul has neither
alienated, nor forfeited its Right to dispose of it, is a piece of high and
crying Injustice. In short, God has placed the immortal Soul of man in the
Tenement of a mortal Body, in which it has thereupon the Right of a Tenant at
will, that holds at the pleasure of his Landlord; by whom it is empowered to
enjoy it for its own Habitation, to defend it against outward Violence, and
dispose of it for its own needs and conveniences. So that unless he be empowered
by God, there is no Man can rightfully destroy or dismember, or without his
Consent, inslave or imprison another Man's Body; unless it be in defense of his
own Life, or Livelihood, or Liberty, which every man has a natural Right to
defend. But then since for the common Good and Defense of all, God has placed
his reserved Authority over our Bodies in the hands of humane Government, it is
no violation of the Right of our Souls, for the Government under which we are
placed, to destroy or dismember, inslave or imprison our Bodies; whenever by
offending others, we render it necessary for the Defense and Good of All. And
since the Government has, so far as the Commonweal requires, God's own
Authority over our Bodies in its hands; it is no more injurious to our Souls,
for That to dispose of our Lives and Members, Livelyhoods and Liberties, for
the common Security and Good; than if God himself should do it immediately;
since the Government does it by his Right and Authority, which is Paramount to
all the natural Rights of our Souls. But for any others either to take away the
Life, or Members of another Body, except it be necessary for their own
defense; or to endeavor the carnal Enjoyment of another Body, except it be by
the party's consent; or to inslave, or imprison another Body, except it be
upon free Consent, or just Forfeiture, is an outrageous Invasion of the natural
Rights of humane Souls.

II. As Men dwell in mortal Bodies, they have also a Right to their bodily
Subsistence. For, for God to give them a Tenant's right in their mortal Bodies
would be very insignificant, unless we suppose he has therewith given them
some Right to those outward Goods, that are necessary to their Maintenance and
Subsistence: For God being the Supreme Proprietor of this lower Word, as well
as of those Tenements of Flesh we live in; it must needs be supposed, that, as
by placing our Soul in this Body, he has given her a Right to it; so by
placing our Body in this World, he has given it a Right to such a portion of
this World's Goods, as are necessary to its Repair and Maintenance. And though
in the unequal Division of the World, that now is, he has given to some a
larger share of it than to others; yet it is not to be supposed he has so
appropriated All to some, as to leave nothing for all the Rest. For as all Men
are equal in their natural Faculties and Indowments, so according to original
Constitution they were also equal in their outward Properties and Possessions;
and all things being promiscuously exposed to the Use and Enjoyment of All,
every one from the common Stock assumed as his own Right what he ne^ded. And as
for the Inequality and private Interests that are now among us, they were
By-blows of our Fall; for it was Sin that introduced our Degrees and Distances,
that devised the Names of Rich and Poor, begot Ingrossings and Enclosures of
Things, and forged those two pestilent words Meum and Tuum, which have since
engendered so much Strife and Mischief in the World. And though God has made
these Enclosures Rights by his long and continued permission of them, yet he
has not thereby parted with his own Right to them; He by an immuteable Right
is still Paramount of all his Creation, and every thing in it unalienably
belongs to him. And as for those enclosed Properties, with which he has
vested us in such unequal Proportions, he has committed them to us as
Stewards, and not transferred them upon us as Masters; and so without any
Injury to us, may appropriate what Part of them he pleases to what Use he
pleases: which when he has done, we cannot without manifest Injustice
otherwise dispose of that appropriate Part, than to the use and service for
which he has appointed it. Now out of every man's Estate and Property he has
actually reserved some Appropriate portion to be disposed of to the Poor and
Needy, who have nothing else to subsist by; and in this part of our Estates the
Poor have the same Right from God, that we have in all the other Parts of it.
So that this World being now cantoned out so very unequally among men, yet
according to God's Allotment every Man has Right to such a Share of it, as is
at least sufficient to keep him from being starved, or pinched with Extremity
of Need; and in this Method God has assigned to every man a Child's Portion,
which in some fair way or other ought to be obtained, viz. either by legal
Right, or by humble Request; which latter, in Conscience, ought to take effect,
as well as the former. For now according to this later Constitution he has
appointed the Rich to be his Stewards and Treasurers for the Poor; with a
strict charge that they dispense to every one his meat in due season. The
Honor of distributing is conferred on the former, as a trial of their Fidelity
and Bounty; the Right of receiving is conferred on the latter, as a trial of
their Patience and Gratitude: and thus God has wifely projected, that all his
Children should be both effectually* and quietly provided for; that one man's
Abundance should supply another's Wants, that so there might be an Equality, as
St. Paul expresses it, 2 Cor. viii. 14. For since no Man can enjoy more than
he needs, and every Man ought to have so much as he needs, there could be
no great Inequality among men, if things were administered according to the
Institution of God. But if out of our Abundance we refuse to relieve the poor
Man's Necessities, we are unjust both to God and him; to God, because we
misapply his Goods, and cross his Orders; to him, because we wrongfully usurp,
and detain from him the portion which God has allowed him; and so under a
Vizard of Right, and Possession, we are no better than Robbers in the Account
of God; when by refusing to relieve our Brothers necessities we spoil him of
his Goods; his Goods I say, by the very same Title that any thing is ours, even
by the free Donation of God. It Is the hungry Man's Bread which we hoard up in
our Barns, his Meat that we glut, and his Drink that we guzzle: it is the naked
Man's Apparel that we shut up in our Presses, and do so exorbitantly ruffle and
flaunt in; and what we deny out of our Abundance to an Object of real Pity, and
Charity, is in the account of God an unjust Usurpation of his Right. For by the
Institution of God, I owe every man this Right; not to see him pine, and perish
for want, whilst I surfeit, and swim in Plenty. And thus you see what Rights
appertain to a Man in his first Capacity, viz. as inhabiting a Mortal Body.

CHAP. II. Of Justice in preserving the Rights of Men, considered as Rational
Creatures.
II. I Proceed in the second place to observe, That there are other Rights
accruing to Men, as they are Rational Creatures: for it is this indeed that
gives a Right to common Justice, to be governed by Laws, and by Rewards and
Punishments, that we are free and Rational Agents who can choose or refuse, and
determine our selves which way soever we think fit or reasonable. For without
Reason, and Free Will, we could no more be capable of Laws, nor subject to
Rewards and Punishments than Stones or Trees are: For no Law can oblige a Being
that has no Power over his own Actions; nor can he deserve to be rewarded when
he does well, nor punished when he does evil, if it be not in his Power to do
otherwise: and therefore Beasts cannot be said to do either justly, or unjustly
toward one another; because whatsoever good, or evil they do one another, they
do it necessarily, and it was not in their power to do otherwise. But because
Men are free Agents, and have power to determine themselves either to do good
or evil to one another; therefore of right they claim of each other the mutual
Performance of such Goods, and Forbearance of such Evils as agree or disagree
with the State, and Condition of their Natures. And hence every Rational
Creature has a Right to be used and treated by those of his own Kind,
agreeably to the state of his Rational Nature; and for one Man to treat another
otherwise, is not only hurtful, but also injurious. Now the Rights which one
Rational Creature may by the condition of his Nature claim of another, may be
reduced to these four particulars;

First, Every Man has a Right to an equitable Treatment from every man.
Secondly, Every Man has a Right to judge for himself so far as he is capable.
Thirdly, Every Man has a Right not to be forced, or impelled to act contrary
to the Judgment of right Reason. Fourthly, Every Man has a Right to be
respected by every man according to the dignity of his Nature.
I. EVERY Man has a Right to an equitable Treatment from every man, that is,
to be treated according to the measures of that Golden Rule of Equity
prescribed by our Savior, Matthew. vii. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and
the Prophets, i. e. in all your Intercourses with men, suppose you had
exchanged conditions with them, and that you were in theirs, and they in yours;
and be sure you do them all that good, which upon a due consideration of the
case, you could reasonably expect, or desire of them, if you were in their
persons and circumstances. And this Right of being treated by others, as they
would expect to be treated by us, supposing they were in our Circumstances,
arises from that equality of Nature that is between us, which gives every one
a right to be equally treated by every one, and to claim all those good Offices
from others which they might reasonably claim of him, if they were in his state
and circumstances. For we being all propagated from the same Loins, and
partakers of the same Nature, every Man in the world is by cognation of blood,
and agreement of nature every man's Brother, and Kinsman. We are all but so
many several Streams issuing from one common Source, but so many several Twigs
sprouting from the same Stock; we are all of us but one Blood derived through
several Channels; but one Substance multiplied, and dilated into several Times
and Places, by the miraculous Efficacy of the divine Benediction. We are all
fashioned according to the same Original Idea, resembling God our common
Father: we are all endowed with the same Faculties, Inclinations, and
Affections; and do all conspire in the same essential Ingredients of our
Nature: and there is nothing does distinguish, or diversifie us, but what is
accidental to our Being; such as Age and Place, Figure, and Stature, Color and
Garb; so that every man is not only our most lively Image, but in a manner our
very Substance, or another Our Self, under a small Variation of present
Circumstances; which Circumstances are to be considered in every application of
the abovenamed Rule of Equality to our Actions. If I am superior to another,
either in my place, or Relation, or in the Goods of my Mind, or Fortune; I am
only obliged by this Rule, to do that by him which I might reasonably desire he
should do by me, were he as much my Superior, as I am his. But when all Men
naturally as such are equal, and do stand upon even terms and level ground,
there ought to be no other Inequality in their mutual Treatment of one another,
but what is owing to the Inequality of their Circumstances: and he who does
that to another man, which upon good Reason he would not have another do to him
in the same Circumstances, does unjustly usurp a Superiority over him, which
neither Nature, nor Providence allows of. For there is no Proposition in the
Mathematics more self-evident than this, Paria paribus convenient, equal
Things agree to equal Persons; and therefore since we are all equal by Nature,
whatsoever things are due to me, must by the same reason be due to another in
the same Circumstances; and therefore he that denies to another Man that which
he conceives he might justly claim of him in the same condition, unjustly
withholds from him a Right that is due to him as he is his Equal in Nature.

II. EVERY Man has a Right to judge for himself so far as he is capable: for
we must either suppose that every Being has a Right to use its own Faculties,
or else that it has its Faculties in vain: for to what purpose serve its
Faculties, if it has no Right to make use of them? And to what purpose serves
our Faculty of Reason, but only to judge for our selves in all such matters as
fall within the Sphere of our Cognizance? Which if our Reason be debarred of,
it stands for a lonely Cipher in our Natures and is altogether useless and
insignificant? And if in any thing our Reason has a Right to judge for us,
then much more in matters of Religion, in which our highest and most important
Interest is concerned. So that to deny it the Right of judging for us here, is
to render it useless in our greatest Importance, and to disable our best
Faculty from being serviceable to our best Interest. It Is true, there are
sundry Controversies about religious Matters, which every Man's Reason cannot
judge of; the Arguments pro and con depending either upon Criticisms of
Language, or Metaphysical Niceties, or ancient Histories; which are all beyond
the Comprehension of persons of mean and vulgar Understandings: who are
therefore obliged in all such matters as these to submit to the Determination
of their lawful Guides and Governors. But as for the great and necessary
matters of Religion, they are plain and obvious to the meanest Understanding;
and consequently herein every man ought to exercise his natural Right of
judging for himself, and not swallow his Religion blindfold, without trying it
by the Test of his Reason. And certainly they who remove the Cognizance of
Religion out of the Court of Reason, take away that which does most properly
and naturally fall under its Determination. For Religion is the Chief End of
Man's Creation, as he is a reasonable Being, and thereby capable of Religion:
and to be sure where the End is natural, the Means must be so too. And
therefore as Horses that were made for Burden, have a natural Ability to bear;
and as Birds that were made to fly, have a faculty and Wings for that purpose;
so rational Souls that were made for Religion, must needs be supposed to have
some Power naturally placed in them, for the Exercise, and Judgment, and Choice
of it. And what else can that be but their Reason? So that to deny Men the
Liberty to judge for themselves in that which is their natural End and highest
Interest, is as great a piece of Violence and Injustice as can be offered to
humane Nature. And of this very matter the Church of Rome is highly guilty; for
it commands Assent without Evidence, and imperiously requires Men to believe
her Doctrines without examination; to rely implicitly upon her Authority and
swallow down her Faith by the lump, without ever inquiring whether it be
Physic, or Poison. For the leading Principle of the Romish Religion is this,
that the Churches Authority is the Reason of our Faith, and that Men are bound
to believe what she believes without any further proof or evidence; by which
tyrannical Proceedure She uses her wretched Children, as the Philistines did
Sampson, first puts out their Eyes, and recreateth herself with their
Blindness and Ignorance. For unless they wink hard, and believe at a venture
whatsoever she proposes, they are sure to feel the Edges both of her spiritual
and temporal Swords; and though they are never so modest, peaceable and humble
in their dissents, to incur her Anathemas, which have always the sting of Fire
and Faggot in the tail of them. Now what is this but to force the Opinions of
Men, and drive their Reason from its Throne of Judicature? For he that
punishes a man barely for his Opinion, does in so doing endeavor to rob him
of his natural Right of judging for himself: which is the greatest Tyranny in
the World, it being an exercise of Dominion over the minds of men, which are
subject only to the Empire of God. It Is true, if in judging for themselves Men
take up Opinions that are vicious, or destructive to Government, their wicked
Practice is justly punishable according to the proportion of its Malignity; for
otherwise Men's right of judging for themselves will soon be made a Sanctuary
for all the Villainies in the World. And though no Man ought to be punished
barely for his Opinion, yet he may be justly punished for practicing his
Opinion, though his practice be indifferent in its own Nature. For indifferent
Things which God has neither commanded, nor forbidden; are the proper matter
of all humane Laws; and therefore if upon a false Opinion that what the Law
enjoins is not indifferent, but sinful. I practice contrary to the Law, I am
justly punishable; because my Mistake alters not the nature of the thing. If
it be indifferent, it is a proper object of humane Laws, whether I think it so
or no; and as such may justly be imposed; and the Imposition being just in it
self, our not complying with it is justly punishable. Once more; though no Man
ought to be punished for his Opinion, yet he may be justly punishable for
making a public Profession of it; for there is no doubt but Men may be
restrained by Laws from propagating their little Opinions into Factions, and
dividing themselves upon every different persuasion into opposite Parties.
Otherwise it will be impossible, considering the Passions of Men, to maintain
any Unity, or Concord in civil, or sacred Societies. And therefore where such
Restriction is, Men ought to be satisfied with this, that they freely enjoy
their liberty of Opining, and are not deprived of their natural Right to judge
for themselves; and so they ought either to keep their little Opinions to
themselves, or at least not to vex and disturb the Public by a fierce
Endeavor to propagate them to others. And this due Deference to Men's natural
Right of judging for themselves, has been always punctually observed in the
Church of England; for it neither damneth, nor censureth, persecuteth, nor
destroys Men upon the score of difference in Opinion; provided their Opinion
does not lead them to wicked, or seditious practices; but hops well of all
that live well, and receives all into its Communion, that desire it; provided
they believe but the Apostles Creed and the Doctrine of the four first General
Councils. It Is true, it forbideth Men so to profess their Dissents to the
Articles of its Doctrine and Discipline, as to seduce her Children from her
Communion and list them into Factions against her; and this every Church must
necessarily do, that valueth its own Peace and Preservation: but it pretends
not to invade the Liberty of their Thoughts, or to lay rigid Restraints on
their Opinions; and so long as they dissent from us modestly and peaceably,
they may enjoy their own Opinions, and our Communion too. And as for those
Foreign Communities of Christians that differ from us, we pass no severe
Sentences against them; but do believe, and hope, and earnestly pray that the
God of all mercies will pity their Errors, and connive at their Defects, and
finally unite them to us for ever in the blissful Communion of the Church
Triumphant. Nor does our Religion obtrude it self upon the minds of Men, by the
bare Warrant of an imperious Authority; but fairly appealeth to our
Understandings, and casts it self upon the trial of our Reason; exacting of
us no further Assent, than what the evidence claims upon which it is founded;
and is so far from exacting of us a blindfold Assent to it without
Examination, that it readily exposes it self to the severest Enquiry, and
asks no other favor but to stand, or fall by the impartial Sentence of our
Reason. It tells us both what we are to believe, and why; and not only
allows, but requires us to examine the grounds and reasons of it; in all
which there is not the least Shadow of imposing on Men's minds, or usurping on
their Rights of judging for themselves. But alas! It Is not only the Church of
Rome that is guilty of this unnatural Tyranny: for how many are there of all
Parties among our selves, that cannot endure the least Contradiction, but
expect all Judgments should bow to theirs, and receive their imperious Dictates
for Oracles; and are ready to censure all that dissent from them as Men of
Reprobate Minds, and to hate and persecute them, because they cannot believe as
fast as they? As if no Man had a Right to carry his Eyes in his own Head, but
They; and their Understandings were to be a Rule, and Standard to the whole
World. If another Man differs from me, do not I differ as much from him? And
has not He as much Right to judge for himself as I? But He is mistaken, you
will say, and I am not; and possibly He is as confident that I am mistaken and
not he; and if I think I cannot be mistaken, I am more mistaken than He: but
certainly it is neither Presumption for him to know more than I, nor Sin to
know less. What then is to be done, but to leave one another in the quiet
Possession of each others Right; and not to hector and swagger upon every
difference in Opinion; because he that differs from me, has as much Right to
judge for himself as I, though he refuses to prostrate his Understanding to
mine; which for any Man to expect, is a most unjust Invasion of the common
Rights of Humane Nature.

III. EVERY Man has a Right not to be forced, or impelled to act contrary to
the Judgment of right Reason. For right Reason is the natural Guide of all
reasonable Creatures; it is the Light of their feet and the Lanthorn of their
paths, and the Star by which they ought to direct their courses. And what can
be more unjust, than to force any Man to act against that which is the Law of
his Nature? For if He who gave me my Nature, gave me right Reason for the Law
and Guide of it, I must necessarily have an undoubted Right to a full and free
permission to follow it; otherwise he has given me a Law in vain. And if I
have Right to a full permission to follow the Law of right Reason, then for any
man to impel me to act counter to it either by hope, or fear, or any other
motive, is a high Injustice to my Nature. For he who induces me to do any
wicked, or unreasonable Action, which I should not have done, had not he
induced me to it, does in so doing so far as in him lies, not permit me to
follow the eternal Laws of right Reason. As for instance, the Law of right
Reason requires me, when I pretend to give Evidence to any matter of Fact, to
testify nothing but the Truth to the best of my Knowledge; he therefore who
endeavors either by promises, or threats to suborn me to testify falsely,
does thereby hinder me, so far as in him lies, from harkening to the call of
right Reason. Again, right Reason requires me to make good my Promises,
whether they be to my Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals; and much more when I
confirm them with an Oath; he therefore who by any means endeavors to
persuade me to falsify my Word, or Oath, does in so doing, so far as in him
lies, not permit me to follow what right Reason prescribes. Once more, right
Reason commands me to bridle my Appetite with Temperance and Sobriety; he
therefore that by force, or persuasion endeavors to make me drunk, does to
the utmost of his power withold and restrain me from following that which is
the Law of my Nature. In a word, he who by command or threat, promise or
persuasion puts me upon any sinful Action, is not only guilty in the fight
of God of the Sin which I commit by his inducement; but also of doing a high
Injustice to my Nature, of putting it out of its true biass, and not permitting
it to move and act according to the Laws of Reason; which is a piece of the
most outrageous Violence that can be offered to a rational Creature. Besides
that by inducing another Man to sin, I do, as far as in me lies, betray him to
eternal Punishment; which is as barbarous an Injustice to his Soul, as the
Devil himself can be guilty of. For should I not call that Man a treacherous
Villain, who while he pretends to embrace his Friend, should secretly stab
him to the heart? And is it not a much more bloody Villainy, under a specious
pretense of kindness and good fellowship, to stab my Brother to the Soul, and
wound him to eternal Death? But whilst like a heedless Wrastler, I thus eagerly
endeavor to give my Brother a fall, it is a thousand to one but I fall with
him, and bear him company to eternal Torment.

IV. Fourthly and Lastly, EVERY Man has a Right, as he is a reasonable
Creature, to be respected by every Man, according to the dignity of his Nature.
For as in particular Kingdoms the King is the fountain of honor, and every Man
under him ought to be respected according to that Rank and Degree of dignity,
which the royal Stamp has imprinted on him; so in the universal Kingdom of the
World, God is the fountain of honor, and every Being under him ought to be
treated and respected, according to the dignity of its Rank, and suitably to
that Character of Perfection which God has imprinted on its Nature. Since
therefore Man is so highly advanced by God in the Scale of Beings, as being not
only a sensitive but a rational and immortal Creature, he has a Right to be
treated as such by all that are of his Class and Order. And for a Man to treat
a Man otherwise, is wrongfully to depose and degrade him from that noble Rank
of Being wherein the God of Nature has placed him. For whatsoever his outward
Condition may be, I ought to consider him as a Man, as One that is placed in
the same rank of Being with my self; though he be my Slave, or Vassal, I ought
to respect him as an Individual of my own Kind, and not use him rudely, harshly
or contemptuously like a Dog; though he be poor and mean in his outward
Circumstances, yet I ought to regard him as a Branch that is sprung out of my
own Stock, and not to contemn and despise him as if he were a Creature of an
inferior Species: though he should be a Fool, or a Mad Man, yet I ought to
respect him as my Brother Man, i. e. endowed with the same Faculties with my
self, though through the unhappy defect of his bodily Organs he cannot exert
and exercise them; and not to scorn and deride him, as if he were an Ape, or a
Baboon that seemed to be made on purpose to be laughed at: yea though (which is
worst of all) he should be a lewd, or wicked Man, yet I ought to consider him
as a Stem of my own Root; and not abuse, disdain or vilify him, as if he were
only a two-legged Brute, or an upright Animal. So that there is a respect that
is eternally due to Humane Nature, wherever it is, or whatever disadvantages
it is attended with, it is stamped with the Image of God, and that ought to be
reverenced by the whole Creation. And therefore whoever uses a Man inhumanly,
affronteth both God and his own Kind, and violateth the most sacred Rights of
Humane Nature. If therefore we would render to Men their Natural Right and Due,
we must take care not to behave our selves rudely and insolently,
superciliously or contemptuously toward them; and we must endeavor, as much
as in us lies, to accommodate our selves to their particular Tempers, and not
be froward and untractable, or tenacious of our own Humor, especially when it
lies in another Man's way; but be apt to recede and give place, that there may
be room for other Men's humors, as well as ours. For what reason is there,
that our particular humor should take up all the World? We have no more Right
to be morose, or inflexible, than other Men; and should they be as unyielding
as we, we must either stand at a perpetual Bay, or resolve to justle with every
one we meet, till we have forced all to give way, or they have forced us. For
whilst we want this Complaisance toward others, we are in Society like
irregular Stones in a Building, which are full of roughness and corners, that
take up more room than they fill; and till they are polished, and made even,
will not permit others to lie near them. This respect therefore we owe to the
humane Nature, which is common to all men, to file off that unmanly sharpness
and ruggedness of humor, which renders us perverse and untractable in our
Conversation; that so we may be able to compose our selves into such
respectful, courteous and obliging Deportment toward all Men, as is due to the
essential Dignity of humane Nature. And thus you see what Rights are accruing
to Men as they are Rational Creatures, and consequently what Acts of Justice,
as such, they owe to one another.

CHAP. III. Of Justice in preserving the Rights of Men, as United together by
Natural Relations: and as joined together in Society.
III. WE will consider Men as Rational Creatures united together by Natural
Relations; such as Parents and Children, Brothers and Sisters, and
consanguineous Kindred; in which several Relations they have their peculiar
Rights appertaining to them. Thus Parents by giving Nurture and Education to
their Children, have a natural Right to be beloved and reverenced and obeyed by
them; and for Children to withold these Dues from them is not only a foul
Ingratitude, but a great Injustice: they owe their Parents for their Lives and
Limbs, for the health of their Bodies and the use of their Faculties; and what
a small Composition is there in their Love and Obedience for so great a Debt?
They borrowed their Being from their Parents, and therefore are their natural
Subjects, Properties and Pensioners; and to be sure every Lord has a Right to
the Obedience of his Subject, every Owner to the Disposal of his Property,
every Benefactor to the Love of his Pensioner; and consequently every Parent,
who is all these together, to all the Respects and Duties from their Children.
And so on the other hand, Children have a Right to be treated as Children to
their Parents, that is, as their natural Images and Copies, as parts of their
own Substance, as Flesh of their Flesh, and Bone of their Bone, or as
themselves derived and multiplied; which gives them a natural Right to be
dearly beloved and kindly treated, to be fed and clothed, instructed and
provided for by their Parents, according to their power and ability: and for
any Parent not to render these Dues and Rights to his Children, is not only an
unnatural Cruelty, but a barbarous Injustice. And then for Brethren and Sisters
and consanguineous Relations, their partaking of the same Blood and Substance,
as being coined in the same Mint, and more immediately derived from the same
Root and Fountain, gives them a natural Right to be mutually beloved, and
esteemed, and relieved, and assisted by one another; and they cannot be unkind,
ill-natured, or hard-hearted toward one another, without breaking all the ties
of Nature, and being unjust Violators of its sacred Rights. These in short are
the Rights which accrue to Men, as united together by Natural Relations.

IV. Fourthly and Lastly, WE will consider Men as Rational Creatures joined
together in Society: and because Society is natural to Men, and that not only
as they are Rational Creatures, but as they were always born and bred in
society; therefore whatsoever Rights accrue to them from hence, may be justly
ranked among those Rights which are Natural. And Men being by Nature united in
Society with one another there does from thence accrue to us a Right to all
that is necessary to the obtaining the common Benefits of Society; otherwise
our being united in Society would be perfectly insignificant to us. Now the
common Benefit of Society is mutual Assistance, Comfort, and Support; to the
obtaining of which these things are absolutely necessary. First, Love.
Secondly, Peace. Thirdly, Truth. Fourthly, Repute. Fifthly, Protection.
Sixthly, Communication in the profits of Intercourse. To all which every Man
must have a Right, by virtue of his being in Society; otherwise he is in
Society to no purpose. These things I shall but very briefly insist on, because
I have handled most of them at large upon another occasion. Christian Life.
Vol. I.


I. BY virtue of our being united in Society, we have a Right to be beloved of
one another for being all incorporate Members of one Body, we naturally owe
each other a mutual Sympathy and Fellowfeeling of each other's Pains and
Pleasures; without which we can never be concerned as we ought to succor and
relieve one another. If I partake in another's Joys and Sorrows, it is my
Interest to contribute all I am able to his Happiness; but unless I am Partner
in his fortunes, it will be indifferent to me whether he be happy, or
miserable. And as it is Sympathy that engages us to a mutual Assistance, so it
is Love that engages us to a mutual Sympathy; it is Love that confederateth
our Souls, and causes us to espouse one another's Interests; and therefore so
far as we fall short of this, we must necessarily fall short of the end of our
Society, which is to aid and assist one another: which we shall never do,
unless we are constantly inclined to it by a mutual Benevolence. But while we
hate, and malign one another, our being united together in Society will only
furnish us with surer means and fairer opportunities to wreak our spite upon
each other. So that not to love one another while we are thus associated, is
not only uncharitable, but unjust; since we thereby rob one another of one of
the most necessary means to obtain the End of our Society. For when Men's hearts
are divided, it is impossible their hands should be long united in a mutual
Defense and Assistance: so that by withdrawing our love from each other, we do,
so far as in us lies, excommunicate one another from the common Benefits of
Society; which since we have all a Natural Right to, is highly dishonest and
injurious.

II. BY virtue of our being united in Society, we have a Right to Peace; that
is, to live peaceably and quietly our selves, so long as we do not causelessly
vex and disturb others. For Society being nothing but an united Multitude, it
is indispensably necessary to the preservation of its Union, that every
individual Member should quietly comport himself toward every one, in that
degree and order wherein he is placed; because as the Health of natural Bodies
depends upon the Harmony of their Parts, so does the Common Good of
Societies, or Political Bodies. It is Peace and mutual Accord which is the Soul
that does both animate and unite Society, and keep its parts from dispersing,
and flying abroad into Atoms; which nothing but Force and Violence can hinder
them from, when once they are broken, and divided. For he that cannot enjoy his
Peace in Society, is in a worse condition than if he were out of it, and lived
in some solitary Desert alone by himself: for there is no Solitude so dismal,
as a vexatious and quarrelsom Society. Whilst therefore men are of an
unpeaceable Temper, and do affect to live like Salamanders in the Fire of
Strife and Contention; they are the common Pests, and Nuisances of Society: for
wherever they dwell, they lay an Imbargo on all sociable Communion, stop all
the Inter-changes of good Offices between Men, turn all Conversations into
Tragedies, and convert all Societies into Maps, and Images of Hell, that black
and dismal Region of dark Hatred, fiery Wrath and horrible Tumult. And whereas
by the Fundamental Laws of Society, every Man has an undoubted Right, not to
be disturbed in the Enjoyment of his innocent Pleasures, not to be hindered in
the advancing his lawful Profits, not to be interrupted in the prosecution of
his reasonable Designs, not to be detained in his Afflictions, or vexed and
grieved with causeless Aggravations of them; it is the proper business of
Litigious Spirits to invade and overthrow these Rights, and so far as they are
able to turn every Man out of the Possession and enjoyment of them. So that
they are a public offense and injury to Mankind; and ought to be looked upon
as so many Common Barretors in the World. In short, every Man by virtue of his
being in Society has a Right to Peace, so long as he demeaneth himself justly
and peaceably toward others; he therefore that disturbeth another Man's Peace,
unless it be in the defense of his own, or other Men's Right or Peace, is an
Infringer of the natural Rights of humane Society.

III. BY Virtue of our being united in Society, we have a Right to Truth; that
is, we have a Right to know the true sense of each others Minds and Intentions,
whenever we pretend to report and discover it by our Speech; for it is only
our Speech that capacitateth us for a rational Society. Our Words are the
Credentiaries and Intelligencers of the society and Intercourse of our minds;
and it is only by these that Souls do correspond and communicate their Thoughts
to one another: it is by these that they mutually divert their sorrows, and
mingle their Mirth; impart their Secrets, communicate their counsels, and make
mutual compacts and agreements to supply and assist each other. And indeed
Words are the Rudders that steer all Humane Affairs, the Springs that set the
Wheels of Action a going; and the Hands work, the Feet walk, and all the
Members and all the Senses act by their direction and impulse; and there is
scarce any Communication, or Intercourse among men, but what is transacted by
their Speech. So that if Men were under no Obligation to express their Thoughts
truly to one another, there could be no such thing as humane Society in the
World; for it is impossible their Minds should converse, while their words do
falsely Echo and report their Thoughts. In a word, Society and Conversation
being the great Bank and Exchange of Souls, Truth and Integrity herein is the
one public Faith of Mankind; which every Man vertually engages himself to
keep, by being and continuing a Member of humane Society. For humane Society
being a Society of Minds, implies in the very Nature of it an universal
Contract and Agreement to signify our Minds truly to one another; and
therefore since Words are the natural Instruments by which this signification
is made, every Man by virtue of that Contract has a Right to have the true
meaning of every Man's Mind in his Words, to have every Man turn himself inside
outward to him whenever he speaks, and to measure his words by his meaning,
and his meaning, so far as he is able, by the Truth and Reality of things. And
therefore whosoever lies, or equivocateth to another, by laying Ambushes in
his words, or lurking behind them in reserved meanings, does thereby
injuriously deprive him of the natural Right of Society. And therefore, by the
way, whatsoever the Romish Casuists may pretend, Equivocation is as great an
Injustice as Lying; as being both directed to the same end and purpose, viz. to
rob those whom we speak to of their Right to our meaning and intentions; which
he who equivocateth does as effectually, as he that lies So that in reality an
Equivocating Jesuit is as great an Outlaw to Society, as a common Liar; nor
can his ambiguous words be any more depended on than false ones, for the
signification of his meaning; but if what he falsely or equivocally affirms to
be his Mind and Meaning, he attesteth with his Oath; he does not only thereby
wrong Man, but horribly affront God. For an Oath is a solemn Invocation of God,
to bear Witness to what we assert, or promise; and therefore if what we assert
be false, we call God to witness to a Lie; which is to suppose either that
there is no God at all, or which is a thousand times worse, that God is as
great a Liar as our selves. For he that calls God to witness what he says,
must be presumed to believe that God will witness for him, and consequently
that God will witness falsely; if what he says be false; which is such a
Blasphemy against the God of Truth, as no Vengance can sufficiently expiate.
And as in the matter of Assertion every Man has a Right to Truth, so he has
also in the matter of Promise; provided he be promised nothing but what is
lawful and possible: and therefore for any Man to promise what he intends not
to perform, or go back from his promise when he lawfully may, or can perform
it, is an Act of unjust Rapine: and I may every whit as honestly rob another of
what is his without my Promise, as of what I have made his by it; he having an
equal Right to both, by the fundamental Laws of Society. But if he promises
with an Oath, as in matters of public Trust and Administration we usually do;
he does not only owe a just and punctual Performance unto Man, but to God
himself, whom he calls to witness that what he swears he intends to
perform, according to the true and natural Meaning of his Words: and he
solemnly invocateth God to avenge his Nonperformance. So that if he fail of
what he has promised by his Oath, or does not execute it according to its true
meaning; he is guilty not only of a high Injustice to Man, but of a horrid
Profanation of the name of God; whom he has solemnly called to witness to a
lie, whose Wrath he has imprecated on his own head, and whose Justice he has
obliged by a dreadful Contract severely to avenge his Perjury. He therefore who
lies, equivocateth, or forsweareth himself, whether it be in asserting or
promising, violateth that universal Contract truly to signify our meaning to
another, which humane Society implies, and upon which it is founded; and
whilst he does so, there is no Intercourse can be had with him, but he is a
Creature by himself, an Enemy to the World, that lives in a state of war with
all Mankind, and out of all Laws and Obligations of humane Society: and so
whilst he continues in it, and pretends to observe its natural Rights, he
does by his Equivocations, and Lies wrong and injure all he converseth with.

IV. BY Virtue of our being united in Society we have a Right to Credit, and to
a fair Estimation among one another. For the great end of humane Society is,
that by their mutual Intercourses Men might aid and assist one another; and it
is for this purpose that Men combine themselves into Societies, that thereby
they may enjoy a delightful Conversation void of Fear, Suspicion, and Danger;
and by exchanging their Labors, Counsels, and Commodities may be mutually
helpful and beneficial to one another. And this End no man can ever attain,
without having a fair Credit and Estimation among those with whom he deals
and converseth: for who will trust to a Man of a lost Reputation? Or who would
willingly have any Intercourse with one whom he cannot trust and confide in?
Credit is the main Sinew that holds Society together, and there is scarce any
Conversation or Dealing between Man and Man, but what requires a mutual Trust,
and Confidence in one another. Since therefore all Trust and Credit is founded
upon good Repute, every Member of our Society, who has not forfeited his good
Name, has a natural Right to be well-reputed and spoken of; and whosoever
either by false Witness, public Slanders, or private Whisperings endeavors
to attaint an innocent Man's Reputation, does thereby injuriously attempt to
exclude him from the Conversation of Men, and shut the door of humane Society
against him. And this, how lightly soever it may be thought of, is one of the
highest Acts of Injustice that one Man can offer to another; for a good name,
says Solomon, is rather to be chosen than great Riches, and loving favor
rather than Silver and Gold. Prove. xxii. 1. And indeed in its consequences it
is much more so to every Man; because upon his good name his ability to do good
to himself, or friends, or Neighbors, the Success of his Affairs, his best
Comforts, chiefest Interests, and dearest Conveniences of Life, yea and
sometimes his Life it self depends: so that in defaming of others we commonly
rob, sometimes murder, and always injure them; and there are no damages so
irreparable, no wounds so incurable, no Scars so indelible as those of a
slanderous Tongue. For wheresoever its venomous Arrows fall, no eminency of
Rank, dignity of Place, sacredness of Office, no innocence of Life,
circumspection of Behavior, benignity of Nature and Deportment can protect Men
against them; no Force can resist, no Act can decline them, no Vindication
assoil their mischievous impressions, but still, aliquid adhaerebit, let the
Innocence they wound be never so well cured, some mark of dishonor will
remain. Whosoever therefore either forgeth, or spreads, or rashly
entertaineth a Slander against any Man, does in so doing injuriously offend
against the natural Rights of Society, and is at once a Thief, a Ravisher and a
Murderer; a Robber of the good name, a Deflowrer of the Reputation, and a
Murderer of the Honor of his Neighbor. And yet, Good God, how strangely does
this unjust and villainous Practice prevail in all Societies and Conversations
of Men! Among whom it is grown so common to asperse causelessly, that no Man
wondereth at it, few deslike it, and scarce any detest it: but whilst the
black-mouthed Calumniator is blustering against all that stand in his way, and
exhaling his poisonous Breath from his venomous Heart; he is heard not only
with Patience but with Pleasure, and looked upon as a Man of a notable Talent,
and judged very serviceable to the Party he is engaged in. So that now this
odious Vice is grown a fashionable Humor, a pleasing Entertainment, a knack of
carrying on some curious feat of Policy: and so Epidemical is the mischief
grown, that it is dangerous for a Man who has any sense of Honesty, or
Justice, to come into any Conversation, without being tempted to wish himself
sequestered from Society, and to cry out with the Prophet, Jer. ix. 2, 3. Oh
that I had in the Wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring Men, that I might
leave my people and go from them; for they are an Assembly of treacherous men,
and they bend their tongues like a bow for lies.

V. BY virtue of our being united in Society, we have a Right to Protection
from one another: for it was for this Reason that God brought us forth in a
state of Society, and linked us to one another by the Inclinations of our
Nature; that so we, who are singly a sort of the most defenseless Creatures,
whom nature has not furnished either with the defensive, or offensive Armor
which is natural to other Creatures, might by a Union of Forces be able to
secure our selves against Foreign Outrage and Violence; and being associated for
this end by the Law of our Nature, we are thereby obliged, so far as we are
able to defend one another. All Mankind are One Body, incorporated by the
Charter of Nature, whereby every Member is obliged to stand by and assist his
Fellow, so long as he acts as a Member, and keeps within the Rules of
Humane Society. Whilst therefore I do not by offending others, offend against
the Charter of Nature, I have a Right to be defended by every Man, so far as he
has Power and Opportunity; and whosoever offends me, ought to be looked on
and proceeded with as a public Offender against the Corporation of Mankind.
For the Whole is concerned in every Part, and as he that bruiseth the Toe
offends the Body, and engages every Member against him; so he who wrongfully
hurts any Member of the Humane Society, is thereby injurious to the Whole,
and ought to be repelled and opposed by every Member of it: and he who refuses
to aid his Fellow-member when injuriously struck at, and it is in his power to
defend him, is a Traitor to the Common Cause, a false-hearted Turn-coat and
base Deserter of the Society of Mankind. He that can patiently sit still, and
hear his Brother's Name torn in pieces by a slanderous Tongue, when it is in
his power to purge and Vindicate him, robs him of the common Rights of a
Man: he that can see his Brother's Life injuriously exposed, either by open
Violence or secret Practice, when it is in his power to rescue him, treats
him like an utter Alien and Foreiner to Mankind: he that can suffer his Brother
to be robbed of his Estate, or defrauded in his Property, when it is in his
power to defend and right him, unjustly withholds from him what he owes him
by the Charter of humane Society; and in so doing does not only offend against
his Brother in particular, but also against the whole Society of which he is a
Part and Member. So that in short, as we are all united by the God of Nature
into the same Corporation, we are obliged in Justice manfully to defend each
others Lives, Estates and Reputations; and if we wilfully permit any
Fellowmember to be murdered, slandered robbed or cozened, when it is in our
power to prevent it, we do not only wrongfully withold from him his natural
Right to be defended by us, but foully betray the Common Interest of Mankind;
for both which we shall one day give a dear Account to the supreme Head and
Sovereign of all Societies.

VI. Sixthly and Lastly, BY virtue of our being united in Society, we have also
a Right to share with one another in the profits of our Commerce and
Intercourse. For as of all other Creatures we are the best fitted for Society,
by reason of that peculiar Faculty we have of communicating our Thoughts and
Minds to one another; so of all other Creatures we stand in the greatest need
of it, by reason of our Insufficiency to supply and relieve our selves. For as
for other Creatures, after they come into the world, they are much sooner able
to help themselves than we; and after we are most able to help our selves,
there are a world of Necessaries and Conveniences without which we cannot be
happy, and with which we cannot be supplied without each others Aid and
Assistance. And therefore God created us in Society, and imprinted sociable
Inclinations on our Natures; that being by them combined and united together,
we might be mutually helpful to one another, and ready to assist and supply
each other, according to our several Talents and Abilities, with such
necessaries and conveniences of Life as the condition of our nature requires.
This therefore being one main End of our Society, viz. to be dutiful Ministers
of God's Providence toward one another, in supplying those wants and
necessities which he has made, and which he has made to be supplied by our
mutual good Offices and Ministries; every Man has thereupon a Right to be
aided and assisted by every one with whom he has any dealing or intercourse;
and to have some share of the benefit of all that Exchange, Traffic, or
Commerce, which passes between him and others. For every Man has a Right to
his own Labor, and Industry; and therefore if another be benefited by mine, it
is but just and equal that I should be benefited by his; that he should so
exchange Labor, or Commodities with me, as that my Necessities should be
served as well as his own; and that while he reapeth what I sow, and enjoys
the harvest of my Labor, he should repay me such a share of his, as my
Convenience and Necessity calls for. But if he ingross all the profit of our
Exchange and Commerce to himself, he is rather a Wen of the Body Politic, that
draws all the nourishment to himself, and starveth the neighboring Parts;
than a regular Member, that contenteth it self with such a share as is
proportionate to its own bulk and magnitude, and gladly permits his
Fellow Members to live and thrive as well as he. So that for any Man in his
Dealings with others, to take advantage from their Necessity, or Ignorance, to
oppress or overreach them; to use them cruelly, so as wilfully to damnifie
them, or hardly, so as either to take all the advantage to himself, or not to
allow them such a competent share of it as is necessary to support and maintain
them, according to their rank and station; is an injurious Invasion of that
natural Right, which the very end and design of humane Society gives them.

AND thus you see what are the natural Rights of men, considered as Rational
Creatures inhabiting mortal Bodies, and united to one another by natural
Relations and Society; all which Rights are inherent in them antecedently to
all Humane Laws and Constitutions; and though there had never been any other
Law but that of Nature, yet they might have justly claimed them of one another,
as Eternal Dues which no Laws can cancel, no Custom dissolve, no Circumstances
make void or abrogate. So that to do justly with respect to Men's natural
Rights, is to render them what we owe them by the Obligations of Nature, as
they are Rational Creatures; to treat them equitably, to do them all the good,
we can justly desire they should do to us, if we were in their Circumstances;
quietly to permit them to judge for themselves, without endeavoring to
tyrannize over their Minds by persecuting, censuring, and reviling them,
because they are not of our Opinion; to suffer them freely to comply with the
Dictates of right Reason, and not to put them either by force, command, or
presumption upon any wicked and unreasonable Act; in a word, to pay them all
those fair respects that are due to the dignity of Humane Nature, to treat them
Courteously, and Humanly, and not to bespeak or use them as if they were so
many Dogs, or brute Animals; these are Eternal Dues, which every rational
Creature owes to his own Kind, and which we cannot withhold from one another
without high Injustice to humane Nature. But then as we are Rational Creatures
inhabiting these mortal Bodies, we are obliged in Justice not to maim or
destroy or captivate one another's bodies; unless it be in the necessary
defense of our own Lives, Estates, or Liberties; not to deprive one another of
our necessary Livelihood, and Subsistence; but out of our Abundance to supply
the pinching Necessities of the Poor and Needy. These things we owe one another
as we are all the Tenants of God, sent down into this lower World and quartered
in these Houses of Clay: and if we rob one another of what we are thus entitled
to by the present State and Condition of our Being, we are extremely unjust to
God and to each other. Again, as we are rational Creatures united to each other
by natural Relations, we are obliged to render to each other all those Respects
and Duties, which the Nature of our Relation calls for; as we are Parents, to
love and instruct and make suitable provisions for our Children; as we are
Children, to love and reverence, succor and obey our Parents; as we are
Brethren or natural Kindred, to love and honor, succor and relieve one
another: and if we withold from each other any of these Rights or dues, which
the nature of our Relation calls for, we make an injurious Inroad upon the
most sacred Rights and Enclosures of Nature. Lastly, as we are Rational
Creatures united to one another by natural Society, we owe Love and Peace,
Truth and Credit, Protection and Participation of Profit to one another. Whilst
therefore we hate and malign, and vex and disturb each other; whilst we lie and
equivocate, and violate our Promises and Oaths; whilst we refuse to defend each
other's Lives, Estates or Reputation; and usurp all the profits of our Exchange
and Intercourse, not allowing those whom we deal with a sufficient share to
subsist and live by; we trample upon all the Natural Rights of humane Society,
and demean our selves as open Enemies, and Outlaws to Mankind.

WHEREFORE in the name of God, if in this degenerate Age, whereinto we are
fallen, Christianity has quite lost its just Power and Dominion over us; let
us be honest Heathens at least, though we resolve to be no longer Christians:
if we will needs be deaf to the voice of our revealed Religion, yet for shame
let us attend to the voice of our Nature, and not leap down at once from the
Perfection of Christians into the wretched Condition of Beasts and Devils. O
for the Love of God and the Honor of those noble Natures he has given us,
stop at Men at least, though you are fallen from Christian; and do not by your
Cruelty and Inhumanity, Frauds and Calumnies, Oppressions, Lies, and shameless
Perjuries at the least approach toward that, at which Humanity starteth with
horror and amazement; do not defame and scandalize your Natures, and render
your selves a shame and reproach to the name of Men, by these your outrageous
Invasions of the common Rights of Humane Nature.

CHAP. IV. Of Justice, as it preserves the Acquired Rights of Men: and
particularly those which arise from Sacred and Civil Relations.
I PROCEED now to the second sort of Humane Rights, which Justice between Man
and Man relates to, viz. such as are not Natural to them either as Rational
Creatures, or as dwelling in Mortal Bodies, or as joined to one another by
natural Relations, or as naturally united in Society; but are acquired
subsequently to the Rights of Nature, by that mutual Intercourse which passes
between Men in their Society with one another. Which Rights though they are not
Natural, but Accidental, are yet founded on the Rights of Nature, and therefore
ought to be preserved as sacredly and as inviolably as these: for whatsoever
Rights Men do acquire in the performance of the common Rights of Nature, are
equivalent with them, as being founded on the same Reasons. Now all those
Rights which are not Natural, are acquired one of these ways; either, First, by
Sacred and Civil Relations; or Secondly, by Legal Possession; or Thirdly, by
Personal Accomplishments; or Fourthly, by outward Rank and Quality; or Fifthly,
by Bargaining and Compact.

I. THERE are some Rights acquired by Sacred and Civil Relations, and of these
there are several sorts.

First, There is the Relation of Sovereign and Subject. Secondly, Of
subordinate Magistrates to the Sovereign and People. Thirdly, Of Pastors and
People. Fourthly, Of Husband and Wife. Fifthly, Of Friend and Friend. Sixthly,
Of Masters and Servants. Seventhly, Of Truster and Trustee. Eighthly, Of
Benefactor and Receiver. Ninthly, There is the Relation of Debtor and Creditor:
of the proper Rights of each of which Relations I shall give as brief an
Account as I can.
I. THERE is the Relation of Sovereign and Subject; which is the highest and
most Sacred of all those Relations that are not natural. For God being the
Supreme Lord and Sovereign of the World, all lawful Power and Authority must be
derived from him; for as in particular Kingdoms, the King is the Fountain of
Authority, from whence executive Power descends upon subordinate Magistrates;
so in the universal Monarchy of the World, God is the Fountain of all Power and
Dominion; from whom all Authority and Right of Government descends upon
Princes and Governors; and whosoever exercises Dominion in the World without
Divine Authority, is an Usurper in the Kingdom of God. But then the Derivation
of this Authority from Him is either immediate, or mediate; those who are
supreme under Him derive their Authority immediately from Him, and are the
Channels by whose Mediation he deriveth Authority to their subordinate
Magistrates; so that the subordinate Magistrates of particular Kingdoms derive
their Authority from God by the hands of their Kings, but the Kings themselves
derive theirs from God's own hands immediately: and whatever the particular
form of any Government be, whether it be Monarchy, or Polyarchy, that which is
supreme in it under God must be immediately from him. So far from true is that
modern Maxim of some Jesuited Politicians, viz. That Civil Government is the
Peoples Creature; which by necessary Consequence excludes God from being the
supreme Governor of the World: for if He be absolutely Supreme, there is none
can be Supreme immediately under Him, but by an Authority derived immediately
from him. So that the Relation of Sovereign has this Right unalienably
appendant to it, to be accountable to none but God; from whom alone it holds
its Authority, and to whom alone it is subjected. And therefore for Subjects to
call their Sovereign to account, is both to arraign God's Authority, and to
invade his Peculiar; to set our selves down in his Throne, and summon his
Authority before us, and require it to submit its awful Head to our Doom and
Sentence: which is as high and impious an Injustice, as can be offered either
to God, or Man; and (till Popery, that fardle of religious Impostures, set
Treason and Rebellion abroach) as abhorrent to all Christian Principles, and
Practices, as Hell is to Heaven, or Darkness to Light. But then since
Sovereigns are God's Vicegerents, and do Reign by his Authority, they have also
an inseparable Right to be obeyed in all things, wherein they do not interfere
with the Commands of God; for in obeying them we obey God, who commands by
their Mouths, and wills by their Laws, and Edicts: and as he who refuses to
obey the Viceroy's command, does in so doing disobey the King himself, unless
he commands the contrary; so he who disobeyeth his Sovereign who is God's
Viceroy, does in so doing disobey God, unless it be where God has
countermanded him. So that while he commands only lawful things, he has an
undoubted Right to be obeyed; because his Commands are stamped with Divine
Authority, and are thereby rendered sacred, and inviolable. Again, since
Sovereigns are the supreme Representatives of God's Power and Majesty upon
Earth, as being his immediate Substitutes; they have also an unalienable Right
to be honored, and reverenced by their Subjects, because they bear God's
Character, and do shine with the Rays of his Majesty; before which every
Creature in Heaven and Earth ought to bow and lie prostrate; and therefore for
Subjects to contemn and vilify their Sovereigns, to expose their faults and
uncover their nakedness, and Lampoon and Libel their Persons and Actions, is an
Affront to God's own Majesty, and an unjust and impious Profanation of that
Divine Character they bear about them. Once more; since Sovereigns are
substituted by God for the Common Good, to protect the Innocent, and avenge the
Injured, and guard the Rights of their People against Foreign and Intestine
Fraud and Violence; they must hereupon have an undoubted Right to be aided and
assisted by their Subjects; because without their Aid, it will be impossible
for them to accomplish the Ends of their Sovereignty. And therefore for
Subjects to refuse to Aid their Sovereign with their Purses, or Persons, when
legally required; or by any indirect means to withdraw themselves from his
Assistance, whenever his Necessities call for it, is to detain from him a just
Right that is owing to his Character and Relation. And as these Rights are all
employed in the Relation of a Sovereign, so are there others employed in the
Relation of a Subject: for Sovereign Power being ordained by God for a public
Good, to guard and defend the Innocent, to shelter and relieve the Oppressed,
to fence and propagate true Religion, and adjust and balance private Rights
and Interests; Every Subject has a Right to be protected by it, so far as it
is able, in his Person and Legal Rights, in his just Liberties and Privileges,
and sincere Profession of true Religion; and that Sovereign who does not employ
his power to these purposes, but through wilful and affected Error, or
Ignorance imposes a false Religion on his People; or betrayeth, oppresses, or
inslaveth them himself, or permits others to do it either out of Malice, or
Carelessness, is an injurious Invader of their Rights and Properties; and though
he be not accountable to any Earthly Tribunal, shall one day answer for it at
the Tribunal of God.

II. THERE is the Relation of Subordinate Magistrates to the Sovereign and
People, such are the Judges and Justices, the Governors of Towns, Cities and
Provinces, and the like; who by virtue of that Authority which is stamped upon
them, and which they derive, as I told you, from God, who is the Head and
Spring of all Power and Dominion, have by virtue of that a Right to be honored
and reverenced and obeyed by the People according to the Degree and extent of
their Authority. For wherever it is placed, Authority is a Sacred thing; as
being a Ray, and Impress of the Divine Majesty, and as such may justly claim
honor and reverence from all Men; and whoever contemns the lowest Degree of
it; offers an Affront to the highest. He who contemns Subordinate
Magistrates who are vested with the King's Authority, does therein contemn the
King; and he who contemns the King, who is vested with God's Authority, does
therein contemn God. Whatsoever therefore the personal faults and defects of
Magistrates may be, Men ought to consider that their Authority is a Sacred
thing, and, as such, challenges their Reverence and Obedience by an
unalienable Right; and that therefore to behave themselves frowardly,
stubbornly, or irreverently toward a lawful Magistrate, is to detain from him
his Rights, and offer an unjust Affront to his Character; which, how good
soever they may be in other Instances, does in this bespeak them highly
dishonest and injurious. And as the Relation of Subordinate Magistrates
intitleth them to the Peoples Reverence and Obedience; so the Relation which
the Prince and People bear to them, intitleth them both to their Fidelity,
Vigilance and Justice. For Subordinate Magistrates are the King's Trustees for
himself and his People; and in their hands he depositeth the Honor, Security
and Rights of his own Crown and Dominion, together with the Safeguard and
Protection of the Just and Legal Rights of his People. So that upon their
acceptance of this Trust, by which they engage themselves faithfully to
discharge it, the King acquireth a Right to their faithful and vigilant Care,
to see that his Authority be Reverenced, his Laws Obeyed, his Person,
Government, and Properties Secured; the People acquire a Right to be Protected
by them in their Persons, Reputations, Liberties and Estates; and so far as
they are wilfully failing either toward the King, or the People, in any of
these Matters, they do unjustly detain the King's or the Peoples Rights, or
both; they betray the Trust committed to them, falsify their own Engagements,
and under the Mask of Authority are public Robbers of Mankind.

III. THERE is the Relation of Pastors and People: for since out of his tender
care to the Souls of Men, God has instituted an Order of Men to Administer to
them those holy Ordinances, by which he conveyeth his Grace and Spirit, to
instruct them in their Duties, admonish them of their Errors, and warn them of
their Dangers, and guide them to eternal Happiness; there does from hence arise
a near and sacred Relation between the People, and their respective Guides and
Pastors. They are joined together by the Ties and Obligations of Religion,
which gives them a mutual Right in one another; and which gives the Pastor a
Right to be diligently attended to by the People in his religious
Ministrations, to be Construed in the best Sense, and fairly treated and
complied with in all his pious Reproofs and Admonitions, to be honored and
reverenced for his Work's sake, to partake with the People in their Temporals,
as they do with him in his Spirituals, and to be supported by them, according
to their Ability, with a fair and honorable Maintenance; and they who are
wanting to their Pastor in any of these particulars, deprive him of that which
is as much his Right in Conscience, as any thing can be theirs in Law. And then
as for the People, They have also a Right to have holy Things duly and
regularly Administered to them by their Pastor, to be taught and instructed by
him with wholesome Doctrine and Example, to be prudently admonished of their
Faults and Dangers, and counseled and advised by him in all their spiritual
Straits and Exigencies; and he who is wilfully failing in the faithful
discharge and payment of these Dues is a Thief and a Robber of his Peoples
Souls; that so far as in him lies, rifleth them of that which ought to be
dearer to them than their Estates, or Lives, even the Bread of Life, without
which they cannot live, but must starve and perish for ever; and if they do, it
is by his unjust Neglect to render them their Dues, and their Blood will be
required at his hands.

IV. THERE is the Relation of Husband and Wife, who having mutually bestowed
themselves upon each other, and sealed the Deed by Matrimonial Vow, are thereby
interwoven into one another and morally compounded into one Person. For
Marriage is an Union of Persons, an Incorporation of two into one by moral Ties
and Ligaments; so that between Husband and Wife there is the nearest and
dearest Union that can be between two natural Persons; they are each others
Property and Enclosure, having by mutual Vows made over and exchanged
themselves for one another; by virtue of which they have a mutual Right in each
others Person, and cannot bestow themselves away from one another, without
being guilty of the most outrageous Injustice. For the Husband is one half of
the Wife, and the Wife of the Husband; and therefore whenever they alienate
themselves from each other, they rob one another of one half of themselves. And
it is this that does so much inhance the sin of Adultery, beyond that of simple
Fornication; because when the Husband disposes his Body to another Woman, or
contrariwise, he is not only guilty of an unbounded, rambling Lust, which is
the proper malignity of simple Fornication but also of a foul and monstrous
Injustice. For he having made himself his Wife's by Promise and Vow, cannot
give away himself from her without being impiously injurious, without robbing
God of his Vow, and robbing her of himself, for whom she exchanged her self.
And consequently they who endeavor to seduce the Wife from the Husband, or the
Husband from the Wife, are guilty of a horrid Injustice, in attempting to rob
God and Man of that which is most dear and precious to them, and to break
through Vows and Sacred Fences to Trespass on their Neighbor's Enclosure;
which how common soever it may be in this degenerate Age, is certainly one of
the blackest Villainies in Nature. And as Husband and Wife have a mutual Right
to each other's Persons, so they have also to each other's dearest Love and
Affection: for there is no Relation does so nearly entitle and interest Persons
in one another, as that of Marriage; nor consequently, that gives them so
great a Right and Title to each other's Hearts and Affections. Mat. xix. 5. For
this cause shall a Man leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife,
and they two shall be one flesh; and then no man ever yet hated his own flesh,
but nourishes and cherishes it, says the Apostle exhorting to Matrimonial
Love, Ephesians. v. 29. Husband and Wife are one by a moral Union of Persons, and
therefore for them to hate and abuse one another would be as unnatural, as for
a Man to hate and tear his own flesh. Again, as they have a mutual Right to
each others Persons and Affections, so they have also to each others Help and
Assistance: hence the Apostle calls them Yoak-fellows, implying, that they
ought to draw together, and mutually assist one another in their common
Concerns and Interests. For in the union of their Persons their Interest is
combined and united; so that that which is the one's is the other's: their
Meums and Tuums are confounded together, and their Fortunes make a common Stock
wherein they are Partners with one another, and are entitled to the promiscuous
use and enjoyment of it. And being Sharers in the same Interest, they ought to
be mutually helpful and bear a part of each others Cares and Burdens: for when
they are both entitled to the same Fortunes and Interests, it is by no means
just, that the one like a slothful Drone should dwell at ease in the Hive and
devour the Honey, whilst the other like a laborious Be goes forth and toileth
to gather it. These are the common Rights and Dues, which Husband and Wife owe
to one another: but then the Husband having the Superiority, has a Right to be
reverenced and obeyed by his Wife in all things that are fair and honest, to be
entertained with a gentle Behavior, addressed to with soft Entreaties, and
treated with a sweet Compliance; and therefore for a Woman to behave her self
perversely toward her Husband, to control his will in indifferent matters, and
if he will not yield, to teaze and weary him with her sour Looks, or clamorous
Words, or provoking Deportment, is not only a great Dishonor to her own Head,
but a high and shameful Injustice, for which she must one day account to God,
as well as for other Iniquities. And then on the other hand, the Wife being no
otherwise inferior to the Husband, than the Body is to the Soul, or the Bosom
to the Head, ought not to be treated by him as his Slave and Servant, but as a
part of Himself, i. e. with all lenity and forbearance, tenderness and
complaisance: and as Plutarch says, the Husband's Empire over the Wife ought
to be soft and cheerful, to be allayed and sweetened with the greatest
Condescension and Officiousness: and that Soul is not more unrighteous to its
Body, that starveth, or macerateth, or evil entreats it; than the Husband is
to his Wife, who behaveth himself churlishly, sourly or imperiously toward
her. Col. iii. 19. Husbands love your Wives, says the Apostle, and be not
bitter against them, i. e. be not morose and rough, stern and severe in your
Carriage toward them; but be sure you use them with all that honorable
Regard, prudent Compliance and indearing Familiarity, that is due to them as
they are parts of Your Selves.

V. THERE is the Relation of Friend and Friend, which I put next to that of
Husband and Wife, because it is next to it in respect of Nearness and Affinity.
For Friendship is the Marriage of Souls and Interests and Counsels, the Union
or Exchange of Hearts, the Clasp of mutual Affections, or true Love-knot that
tyeth Men's Hearts and Minds together* for as for the Matter of Friendship, it
is Love and Charity; but as for the Form of it, it is Charity appropriated to
such particular Persons; so that Charity is Friendship in common, and
Friendship is Charity enclosed. In a word, Charity is Friendship expanded, like
the force of the Sun when he rises above the Horizon and shines upon all the
World; but Charity is Friendship contracted, like the Rays of that glorious
Light drawn into the Center of a Burning-glass, and made more warm and active
by their Union. When therefore Men have contracted particular Friendships, and
espoused their Souls and Minds to one another, there does from thence arise a
new Relation between them beyond what common Charity creates; from which new
Relation there accrue new Rights to the related Parties. For mutual Friendship
is not a Metaphysical Nothing, created merely for Contemplation, for such as
are contracted in its holy Bands to stare upon each other's Faces and make
Dialogues of News and Prettinesses, or to look Babies in one another's Eyes;
but a substantial and important Virtue that is fitted for the noblest purposes,
to be an Alloy to our sorrows, an Ease to our Passions, a Discharge of our
Oppressions, a Sanctuary to our Calamities, a Counselor of our Doubts, a
Repository of our Secrets, and an Improvement of our Meditations; a Champion to
our Innocence, and an Advocate for our Interest both with God and Men; to these
brave Purposes serves every real Friendship, and without these it is only the
empty Name and Shadow of Friendship. When therefore Men combine and unite
together in this close and near Relation, they give each other a Right to
themselves to all the abovenamed Uses and Purposes, to be Guides and Comforts
to each other in their Doubts and Sorrows, Monitors and Remembrancers in their
Errors and Oblivions, Shelters and Refuges in their Oppressions and Calamities,
and faithful Trustees and Secretaries to each other's Confidencies and
Thoughts. These are the great Rights of Friendship, which whosoever detaineth
or withholds from his Friend is a false, and unjust Correspondent in that
brave and noble Relation: For when we mutually contract particular Friendships
with one another, it is to these great purposes, or it is not Friendship: and
when to these purposes we have once joined hands, and struck particular Amities
with one another, we are bound by the ties of common Honesty and Justice, so
far as we are able, to make good our Contract to all those Intents and Purposes
it extends to.

VI. THERE is the Relation of Masters and Servants: for between Master and
Servant there are mutual Engagements, which are either expressed in their
Contract, or employed in their Relation; and whether there be any formal
Contract between them, or no, their very Relation is an implicit Bargain, and
supposes a mutual Engagement to one another. By being a Servant to another, I
put my self into his hands and disposal, and devote my Time and Pains and
Labor to him; by virtue of which he acquireth a just Right to my time and
service, my fidelity and cheerful Obedience: and therefore if either by Gaming,
Loitering or Company-keeping, I alienate my Time from him; or if by my Sloth
and Idleness I rob him of my Pains and Labor, or by my hypocritical
Eye-service, or betraying his Trusts, or wasting or embezzeling his Goods, I
deprive him of my Truth and Fidelity; or if lastly by my Stubborness and
Obstinacy I purloin from him my Duty and Obedience, I am a dishonest and unjust
Servant; and however I may escape now, must one day expect to give an Account
to my Just and All-seeing Master in Heaven. And accordingly in Scripture
Servants are enjoined to obey their Masters in all things, Col. iii. 22. And to
do service to them with good will. Ephesians. vi. 7. To serve them with singleness of
heart, not to purloin their Goods, or answer them again in a froward and surly
manner, Tit. ii. 9, 10. Since then they stand obliged to these Duties both by
Precept of Scripture, and the natural Engagement of their Relation; it is plain
they cannot act contrary thereunto, without openly transgressing the Laws of
God, and trepassing on the Rights of Men. And so on the other hand, by being a
Master to another, I stand engaged to maintain and protect him in my service,
to pay him the Wages, or teach him the Trade for which he serves me; not to
out-task his Ability, nor impose any thing on him but what is tolerable and
merciful; to Correct him with gentleness, prudence and mercy, and not to
restrain him too rigidly from fitting and healthful Recreation: and above all,
to admonish him of his Faults, instruct him in his Duty, and give him all
cheerful Encouragements to Well-doing. For I ought to consider, that I am
Master of a Man of the same kind with my self, that has Right upon that
account to be treated humanely; which if I do not instead of being a just
Master, I am a savage Tyrant: and also I should consider that I am Master of an
immortal Man, who upon that account has a Right to be treated religiously,
that has a Soul to be saved, and an eternal Interest to be secured; which if I
take no care of, I treat him rather as my Dog, than my Servant, as a Beast that
perishes, than as a Man that is to live for ever. So that if any of these ways
I am wanting to my Servant, I am a Transgressor of that Rule of Righteousness
that is founded in my Relation to him; and though the crying Necessities of his
Soul and Body cannot penetrate my Ears, nor move my Adamantine Bowels to a more
just and pious Treatment; yet the Cry of those Wrongs and Injuries I do him by
my unjust, inhumane and irreligious Usage, will certainly penetrate the Ears of
God, and provoke his Vengeance to a dire Retribution of it.

VII. THERE is the Relation of Trustees to those that trust them: for he who
trusts another does thereby create a very near and intimate Relation to him;
so far forth as he trusts him, he puts his case into his hands, and
depositeth his Interest in his Disposal, and thereby creates him his Proxy, or
his second self. So that when I accept of the Trust that another offers me,
whether it be to be an Arbitrator in his Cause, or an Executor of his Will, or
a Guardian to his Children, or a Keeper of any Pledge or Depositum he
commits to me, I do thereby enter into a close Alliance and Relation with
him; I put on his Person, engage to supply his place, to act as his
Representative, or alter ego, and so far as he trusts and confideth in me, to
do for him as if the case were my own, to determine his Cause, to execute his
Will, and dispose of his Children, and secure his Pledges to him as if I were
himself, and those were all my own. And by entering into this near Relation to
him, I give him a Right so far forth as he intrusteth me, to my Skill and Care,
Fidelity and Industry; all which by putting on his Person I have listed and
engaged in his Service. So that if by my own Carelessness or Neglect I suffer
any of his Trusts to miscarry, I am highly dishonest and injurious to him;
because I undertook to do for him all that I can suppose he would have done for
himself, had he been Master of my Skill and Ability. But if for a Bribe, or to
serve my Interest, I betray the Trust he committed to me, or convert it to my
own Advantage; I rob him more basely and infamously, than if I bad him stand,
and demanded his Purse upon the Highway. For then I had robbed him in the
person of an Enemy, but now I rob him in his own, and make use of that Trust to
betray his Interest, by which I was as much obliged to secure and defend it, as
if I had exchanged Persons with him, and his Interest were my own: and to
betray his Interest for my own Advantage, when he had made me his second Self,
and I had engaged my self to be so, is a piece of the most inhumane and
disingenuous Persidiousness and Injustice; because by thus doing I abuse his
good Opinion of me, for which I stand obliged to him, into an occasion of
betraying him. So that in effect I have borrowed his Person, which he freely
lent me, only to rob and despoil him; and from his confidence in my Truth and
Fidelity, by which he was justly entitled to it, have basely taken occasion to
defraud him of that Trust, which he freely deposited in my hands and disposal.

VIII. THERE is the Relation of the Benefactor to the Receiver: for he who does
good to another, does thereby contract a Relation to him; because in doing good
to him he espouseth his Interest, and in espousing his Interest he espouseth
himself: he performs the part of his Brother, of his Father, and his God,
whose highest Character and Elogium is to be good and to do good; and
consequently in all these Capacities he stands related to him. And by virtue
of this Relation he acquireth a Right in the Person obliged, to be esteemed and
beloved by him; to be prayed for and requited by him whenever he has
opportunity, and ability. For there is always a Right acquired by Benefits,
where there was none antecedently: he who does a good turn, deserves and
meriteth of him that receives it; and what he deserves, he has a Right to.
So that every Receiver is Debtor to his Benefactor; he owes him all the good
he receives from him; and is always obliged to a thankful acknowledgment, and
whenever he has opportunity to an equivalent Requital. For though my
Benefactor gives me his benefit freely, as having no need of it himself, or at
least not so much as I, and therefore cannot legally demand a Repayment of it;
yet whatsoever he gives me, he deserves of me, and whenever our Circumstances
change and he has my Need, and I his Ability, I am in Conscience as much
obliged to repay it, as if he had lent it me upon Bond. In this case my Ability
is Security for the Benefit I owe him, and his Need is a just Demand of it; and
therefore since what he has merited of me is his Due, I am extremely unjust,
if when his Needs do demand it, I do not repay him so far as I am able. But if
either I am not able to repay him an equivalent Benefit, or he has no need or
occasion for it; I am bound in justice to express my Gratitude to him in
thankful Remembrances and Acknowledments, to take all fair Occasions to own and
celebrate his goodness, and by all the little services I can render him to
express a forward willingness to make him a full requital. For as in matter of
Debt, he who cannot pay all must Compound and pay so far as he is able; so in
the matter of Benefits, he who cannot make a complete Requital, is obliged in
justice to make some small Composition, and pay so much in the pound as his
Ability extends to; and if he can do no more, to express a grateful Sense of
them, and give thankful Words for beneficial Deeds; which all generous
Benefactors esteem the noblest Requital. But he who receives Benefits without
some thankful Acknowledgment, acts the part of a Swine, that greedily
devoureth the Acrons, and never looks up toward the Tree from whence they
drop: and he who requiteth Benefits with Injuries, acts the part of a Devil,
that would fain have thrown that blessed Being out of Heaven, who created and
placed him in it.

IX. Ninthly and Lastly, THERE is the Relation of Creditor and Debtor: for he
who lends to another Man, and gives him Credit either for Money or
Commodities, or accepts of his Security for what he lends to another, does
thereby contract a Relation to him; by which he acquireth a Right to be justly
repaid according to Contract and Agreement. For lending and crediting does not
alienate the Property; the Debtor has only a Right to use what he borrows
for his present Convenience or Necessity, but the Property remains in the
hands of the Creditor, who has the same Right to it as when it was in his own
Possession. And it being so, the Rule of Common Justice obliges us that we do
not borrow more than we have a fair Prospect of Repaying; unless he that
crediteth us knows our Inability, and is willing to run the hazard. For he
who engages himself in Debt beyond what he can reasonably hope to repay,
takes that from his Creditor upon promise of Payment, which he knows he is
never likely to restore him; which is at least as high an Injustice, as if he
had taken it by Force and Violence. And the same is to be said of borrowing
upon false or insufficient Securities, such as bad Mortgages, counterfeit
Pawns, or insolvent Bonds-men: for he who takes up his Neighbor's Goods or
Money upon such Securities, as he knows are incapable of repaying him, does as
manifestly wrong him, as if he had taken them by Stealth, or Robbery. And since
our Debts are our Creditor's Rights, if we would be just Debtors, we must
neither reckon what we owe to be our own; nor so dispose of it, as to put it
out of our Power to restore it to the true Proprietor: he that has so much of
his own, and so much of other men's, ought not to spend, or give, as if it were
all his own. For if he that has borrowed one Thousand Pounds, and is worth
another, lives to the utmost height and proportion of two Thousand, he must
necessarily spend upon what he has borrowed, and put it out of his power to
restore it; and in so doing rob and despoil his Creditor, to maintain himself
in his Prodigality. And as Debtors ought to be careful so to dispose of what
they owe, as that they may be able to repay it; so they ought to be no less
careful to repay it upon due Demand, or according to Contract and Agreement.
For as it is unjust to deprive a Creditor of his Money, so it is unjust to
deprive him of the Use and Possession of it, any longer than he consents and
agrees to it: because as he has Right to his Money, so he has Right to
possess and use it. And therefore for Debtors to defer and protract their
payments without their Creditors Consent, when it is in their power to
discharge them, to put them upon fruitless Attendances, and make advantages of
their money against their consent, and beyond their Contracts and Agreements, is
a degree of Injustice next to that of Robbing and despoiling them of it;
because by thus doing they do not only force their Creditors to waste their
time in tedious Attendances and take them off from their other businesses, but
also rob them of the Use and Possession of their Money; which they have as much
Right to, as to the Money it self. And if to defer Payment be so unrighteous in
a Debtor, then to refuse and deny it, or take indirect courses either to abate,
or avoid it, is much more unrighteous: because this is not only to deprive a
Creditor of the present Use and Possession of his Property, but of his Property
too; and how can that Man call any thing he possesses his own Right and
Property, whilst he thus denies another his? So that by an indispensable Rule
of Justice, every Debtor is obliged rather to strip himself of all, and cast
himself naked on the Providence of God; than by denying his Debts, or
indirectly shifting the payment of them, to Feather his Nest with the Spoils of
his Neighbor. When therefore by refusing to pay what we owe, we force our
Creditors upon costly, or troublesome Suits to recover their own; or by
pleading Protections, or sheltring our selves in a Prison, we avoid being
forced to it by Law; or by fraudulent Breakings, we necessitate them to
Compound our Debts, and accept a Part for the Whole; which soever of these ways
we take, I say, to deprive our Creditors of their Rights, we are inexcusably
dishonest, and unrighteous. And though by these, or such like knavish Evasions,
we may force them to acquit and discharge us, yet we cannot force God, in whose
Book of Accounts our Debts are recorded, as well as in theirs; and it
concerns us sadly to consider, that there is nothing can cross, or cancel
them there, but only a full Restitution; and that if they are not cancelled
there, all the Tricks and Evasions in the World will never be able to secure us
from a dismal Reckoning, and a more dismal Execution.

AND thus you see what those acquired Rights are which are due from Man to Man
upon account of their Civil and Sacred Relations.

CHAP. V. Of Justice, as it preserves the Rights of Men acquired by Legal
Possession.
II. THERE are other Rights acquired by Legal Possession. For when there was
but one Man, he was Lord and Proprietor of all this lower World; but when he
had propagated a Family from his Loins, and that Family was by degrees branched
into several Tribes; he sent forth these Tribes under the Conduct of their
Heads, Fathers, and Princes to go and take Possession of such, and such
Portions of his Earth, as their Numbers, Necessities and Conveniences
required; which when they had done, the Prince and Father of each Tribe divided
his Land among the Members of it, and shared it into particular Properties,
proportionably to the Merit, or Number of the particular Families contained in
it; and when any of these Tribes became too numerous and burdensome to the
Land that was thus divided among them, they sent forth Colonies from among
themselves, to take Possession of the next unpeopled Country bordering upon
them; which when they had done, the Leader of the Colony divided it among his
Followers: and so as they increased and multiplied, they spread themselves from
Country to Country, till they had shared the World into Nations, and divided
the Nations into distinct and particular Properties, and Families. And this
Division was the Original Law, by which each Family claimed as its Property the
share that was allotted to it: and since the Father of Mankind was entitled by
God, who is the supreme Proprietor to all this Terrestrial Globe, he had an
undoubted Right to divide it among the several Tribes that descended from him;
and therefore since he empowered the Heads and Princes of his Tribes, to take
Possession of such and such Portions, and divide it among their Families; not
only each particular Tribe had an undoubted Right to the Portion allotted to it
by him that was Head of them all, but each particular Family had an undoubted
Right to the share that was allotted to it, by him that was the Head of the
Tribe it belonged to. And thus you see the first Division of the World among
Men was the great Law of Property; and that whatsoever Men were possessed of by
it, they had an undoubted Right and Title to: and upon this Law all the Meums
and Tuums, the particular Rights and Properties that are now in the World are
founded. For though in process of time not only the Tribes and Colonies
incroached upon one another, 'till the stronger by swallowing up the weaker
grew into Kingdoms and Empires; but even the particular Families also of these
Tribes and Colonies incroach'd upon each other, and either by Fraud or
Oppression robbed their Neighbors of their Original share; so that those
Rights and Properties which were made by the Primitive Divisions, seem for the
most part if not altogether extinguished; yet it is to be considered, that the
Laws now extant do suppose all Alienations of Property from the first Owners to
have been made according to that Original Law of division; which Law did not so
unalienably entail on those Tribes and Families their appropriate Shares, but
that they might either sell or give them away, or forfeit them: and if either
of these ways those Shares have passed through all successive Generations till
now from Tribe to Tribe, or Family to Family, the present Possessors are justly
entitled to them by that Original Law of Division. And that they have thus
passed, all Laws now extant do suppose: the Law of Nations supposes those
Countries that are held by Right of Conquest, to have been justly forfeited to
the Conqueror; and that unless they are so, his Conquest is Robbery, and not
Right: the Municipal Laws of Countries do suppose the Estates of particular
Families to be held by the Right of Donation, or Purchase from the true
Proprietor, and that unless they are so, their first Possession was a Theft and
not a Right: and therefore neither the Law of Nations, nor the Law of Countries
do allow either Conquerors, or Families to be rightful Possessors of their
Conquests, and Estates, so long as there appears any just Claim against them.
But though the first Possession should be obtained either by unjust Conquest,
or by Fraud and Oppression; yet if it continue in the Lineage or Family of the
unjust Possessor, till all just Claim against it be extinguished, the Law must
suppose it to be obtained justly, because there appears no Evidence to the
contrary. And indeed when a Dominion, or an Estate, which was at first unjustly
obtained, has been so long successively possessed, as that no Man can produce
a just Claim and Title to it, it must be either the present Possessor's, or
nobodies: but then when God, who is the supreme Proprietor of all, does by his
providential Permission continue any ill-got Possession, till all lawful Claim
to it is worn out, he does thereby entitle the present Possessor to it, and
creates it his Right and Property. For though God's Providence can be no Rule
against his Revealed Will, nor consequently can authorize any Man to possess
what another has a just Claim to, because his Revealed Will forbids it: yet
it is to be considered, that when no Man can justly Claim what I Possess, I
wrong no Man in possessing it, and consequently am in no wise forbidden it by
God's Revealed Will; and therefore in this Case by his Providential Continuance
of the Inheritance of it to me, he gives me free Leave to possess it; and that
Leave is an implicit Conveyance of a just Right and Title to it. So that Legal
Possession, when there is no Just or Legal Claim against it, is an undoubted
Right, a Right founded on the free Donation of God, who is the Supreme
Proprietor of all things: and therefore Justice obliges us not to rob, or
deprive Men of what they are entitled to by Law; nor to despoil any Man by
Stealth, or strip him by Violence, or defraud him by Craft and cunning
Insinuation of any Right, or Property to which the Law intitleth him; because
by thus doing we do not only wrong Man of that Right which by Legal Conveyance
he deriveth from God, but we do also wrong God himself by presuming to alienate
his Bequests, and to reverse and cancel his Donations. For he who by Stealth,
or Robbery, or Fraud depriveth another of his Property, does impiously invade
God's Right of bestowing his own where he pleases; and refuses to stand to
that Division, and Allotment which his Providence has made in his own World:
he does in effect declare in his Actions, that God has nothing to do to share
his World among his Creatures, that he will not endure him to reign Lord and
Master in his own Family of Beings, nor allow his Providence to Carve and
distribute his own Bread and Meat among his Children; but that he will snatch
from every one's Trencher, and Carve what he pleases for himself out of every
Man's Commons, and Allowance. So that to deprive another, you see, of what he
is Legally possessed of is a high, and crying Injustice against God and Men:
for he that will needs have more of God's Goods than God has given him, is an
impious Robber of God; and he that will needs have those Goods of God which he
has given to another, must be an unjust Robber of Man. If therefore we have
injuriously deprived another of his Legal Rights, we are bound by all the ties
of Religion toward God, and of Honesty toward Men, to make what Restitution
we are able: for it is certain that my wrongful Seizure of what is another
Man's does not alienate his Right to it, so that he has the same Right to it
while I keep it from him, as he had at first when I took it from him, and
consequently till I restore it back to him, I persist to wrong him of it; and
my detaining it is a continued Repetition of that Fraud, or Theft, or
Oppression, by which I wrongfully seized it. And whilst I thus persist in the
Sin, the Guilt of it abides upon me; and I am justly responsible to the
Tribunal of Heaven, for being a Robber of God and Men. Whilst therefore I
unjustly detain what is another's Right, I keep the Earnest-peny which the
Devil gave me to entitle him to my Soul for ever; and so long as I possess the
Spoils of my injured Brother, I maintain so many Evidences to give Testimony
against me, and to raise a Cry on me as high as the Tribunal of God.

CHAP. VI. Of Justice in reference to the Rights acquired by Personal
Endowments, or outward Rank.
III. THERE are other Rights acquired by Personal Accomplishments, such as
Wisdom and Learning, Integrity and Courage, Generosity and Goodness, which do
naturally render Men exceeding useful and beneficial to the World; and
therefore by these Men do acquire a just Right to be highly esteemed and
honored by all that know them. For Praise and Honor are the natural Dues, the
Birthright and Patrimony of Excellency; which by its own inherent Merit
challenges Esteem and Veneration: he who excels another, has a Right to be
preferred before him in the Esteem and Value of the World; to have his Light
reflected with a more glorious Splendour, and his Excellencies resounded with
higher Elogiums. Now the Excellency of a Man consists in the Graces and
Ornaments of his Mind; and as we do not esteem a Ship excellent, because it is
curiously carved and inlaid, but because it is exactly fitted to all the
purposes of Navigation; as we do not account a Sword to be excellent, because
it has a rich Hilt, or Embroidered Scabbord, but because it has a keen Edge,
a sharp Point, or a good Guard and Temper: so none but Fools will esteem a Man
to be excellent, because he has a great Estate, or a comely Body, or wears
fine Clothes, and rich Trappings; but because he has a brave and a goodly
Mind, a Soul well adorned with Intellectual, or Moral Accomplishments. These
are the Glories of the Man, whereas all the rest are only the Imbellishments of
his Case and Outside. So that the true stamp of Nobility is upon the Minds of
Men; and consists in those Graces of Understanding and Will, whereby we
represent and resemble God, who is the Pattern of Excellency, and the Fountain
of Honor. So that true Honor is nothing else but a due Acknowledgment of the
Excellencies of Men's Minds and Wills, or their own Intellectual or Moral
Accomplishments ecchoed and reverberated upon them in just Acknowledgments and
Commendations; which to withold from one that truly deserves them is great
Injustice and Dishonesty. For he who detaineth from a worthy Person those
honorable Acknowledgments that are due to his Virtues, robs Virtue it self
of one of the fairest Jewels in her Diadem, and that is her Honor and Glory:
he strippeth and dispoileth her of her Garments of Praise, steals from her
her Native Rays and Luster, and buries her alive in Darkness and Obscurity; and
therefore since to rob a virtuous Person of his Honor and Reputation is so
great an outrage to Virtue it self, it must needs be highly unjust and
dishonest. And herein consists the great Iniquity of Detraction, and of
lessening, or debasing Men's deserved Praises and Commendations; which is a
higher Injustice than to pick their Purses; for he that clips or imbaseth a
Man's Honor, robs him of his best and dearest Property; and whilst he
sucketh the Veins of another Reputation to put color into the Cheeks of his
own, he lives upon the Spoils of his Neighbor; and is every whit as injurious
to him, as if he should pull down his House about his Ears to build himself
another in its Ruins. And yet how common is this unrighteous Practice among
Men? How does this grovelling Serpent lurk almost in every Hedge, to snap at the
Heel of every nobler Creature that passes by? Insomuch that a Man can hardly
mention in any Company another Man's Excellencies, but presently some little
Viper, or other will be perking up to sting and spit Poison at him: and if he
can say nothing against him, yet something he will seem to know, and with a
crafty Nod or Shrug, a malicious Smile, or Snear, suppress and conceal it: and
if he chance to speak of another, what care does he take to stifle what may
commend, and blazon what may shame and disgrace him; like the envious Panther,
that shadoweth in dusky Colors all the graceful Parts and Features but
carefully exposes the Spots and Blemishes to open view. These, and a thousand
other tricks of Detraction are frequently practiced in all Conversations; but
certainly did Men but consider what a villainous Injustice this is, and how much
it provokes God, who will one day make a strict Inquisition for Men's good
Names, as well as for their Blood, they would never dare to allow themselves in
such a crying Injustice toward one another.

IV. THERE are other Rights acquired by outward Rank and Quality, whether it be
in respect of titular Dignity, or of Wealth, and large Possessions; by both
which Men do acquire a Right to Civil Respect and outward Obeisance. For as for
the several degrees of Nobility, Titles and places of Dignity, by which Men are
advanced above the vulgar Class into the upper form of Mankind, they are so
many Marks and Badges of Honor; by which the King, who is the Fountain of
Honor, and who by smiling on a Clod of Earth can, with the April Sun, prefer
it into a gay Flower, does raise and enoble Men, advance them into a higher
Orb, a more illustrious Rank and Station in the World. Now though by virtue of
this titular Dignity, we are no farther obliged to reverence or esteem Men,
than their Wisdom or Virtue deserves; yet are we bound to give them their due
Titles, and demean our selves toward them with that outward Preference,
Observance, and Ceremony, which their Degree and Quality requires; otherwise
we rob them of those Rights, which the King, who is Master of outward Respects
and Precedencies, has bestowed upon them. For the Royal Stamp upon any kind of
Metal gives it an extrinsick Value, and determines the Rate at which it is to
pass among Coins; though it cannot raise its intrinsic Worth, nor make that
which is but Brass to be Gold. And as titular Dignities entitle Men to an
outward Respect and Observance, so also does Wealth and large Possessions: for
these are Badges of Honor as well as the other, only the other we receive from
the King, but these from the King of Kings. For when God bestows upon one Man
a larger Fortune and Possessions than on another, he does thereby prefer and
advance him into an higher Sphere and Condition; and when God has set him
above us, it is just and fit that we should rise and give place to him. And
though a wise, or virtuous Poor Man has more Right to our Esteem, than a
fortunate Knave or Fool, who in all his Glory is but a Beast of burden in rich
Trapping and Caparisons; yet forasmuch as in outward Rank and Condition God
has preferred the latter, he has the Right of Precedence, and of outward
Respects and Observances, and ought to be treated with greater Obeisance and
Regard,

CHAP. VII. Of Justice, in reference to the Rights acquired by Compact.
V. FIfthly and Lastly, THERE are other Rights acquired by Bargaining and
Compact: for Compacts being a mutual transferring of Rights, wherein the Person
with whom I bargain makes over such a Commodity to me for so much money or
other valuable thing, the Right whereof I make over to him; we mutually owe
this Right to one another, to deal truly and honestly in making, and sincerely
and faithfully in discharging our Compacts, and mutual Engagements with each
other. For since the end of Commerce, and Buying and Selling is mutually to
assist and furnish one another with the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life;
both Buyer and Seller must thence have a Right accruing to them so to buy and
sell, as that they may be mutually assisted by one another; as that the Buyer
may have the worth of his Price, and the Seller the worth of his Commodity: for
otherwise instead of mutually assisting, the one must necessarily depress and
damnifie the other. What the exact Measure is, which in matter of buying and
selling ought to be observed between Man and Man, is, I confess, a difficult
question, and hardly capable of being nicely determined; especially by us who
are so little acquainted with the Affairs of the World, the necessities of
things, and the particular and hidden Reasons of some sorts of Traffic and
dealing: and therefore that I may not venture beyond my depth in the
Determination of this matter, I shall only prescribe such general Rules of
Righteousness to Conduct our Bargains and Contracts, as being impartially
applied to particular Cases, may secure Men from dealing wrongfully and
injuriously with one another. And they are these, first, Use, Plainness and
Simplicity in all your Dealings. Secondly, Impose upon no Man's Ignorance, or
Unskilfulness. Thirdly, Take no advantage of another's Necessities. Fourthly,
Subtract not from the Commodity or Price, for which you have Contracted.
Fifthly, Go not to the utmost Verge of what thou conceivest to be lawful.
Sixthly, In doubtful Cases choose the safest Part.

I. USE Plainness and Simplicity in all your Dealings: Do not by disparaging
another Man's Commodity, or over-valuing your own, endeavor to draw on an
advantageous Bargain; neither ask far beyond, nor bid much below the worth of
Commodities. Say not, you cannot take less, or give more, when you know you may
with fair Advantage and Profit. Pretend not what is false, cover not what is
true; but so far as in you lies, fit your Affirmations and Denials to the
understanding of the Person you deal with; and do not lie in Ambush behind your
words to trap and ensnare him. For in Bargains not only that which is false is
unjust, but also that which deceives.

II. IMPOSE upon no Man's Ignorance or Unskilfulness. Whilst you keep within
the latitude of lawful Gain, you may use your Skill against another Man in
driving a Bargain; for in an ordinary Plenty of Commodities there is an
ordinary Price, which those that deal in them know and understand; and when the
Contractors equally understand the Price, there can be no Deception or
Injustice on either side. But if he whom I Contract with be ignorant or
unskilful, I must not rate his want of understanding, or set a Tax upon his
Ignorance, but use him not only justly, but ingenuously, as one that reposeth a
trust in me and casts himself upon my Equity; considering that to take
advantage from his Simplicity to abuse and defraud him, would be not only
Injustice but Inhumanity.

III. TAKE no advantage of another's Necessities. Do not wring and squeeze a
poor Man when he is driven to your Doors by his Wants, and forced to Sell his
Wares to supply his Necessities; but give him the same Price you would have
done, supposing he wanted your Money no more than you need his Commodity. And if
the poor Man be forced to Buy of you upon Trust, increase your Price no higher,
than what is necessary to make you recompense for the Loss, which according to
the Rules of Trade you must sustain by your Forbearance; reckoning in also the
hazards you run, which ought to be charitably as well as prudently estimated.
For he who makes advantage of another's Necessities, robs the Spittle, and adds
Oppression to Misery; which is not only Injustice but Barbarity*

IV. SUBTRACT not from the Commodity, or Price, for which you have Contracted.
For he who buys a Commodity by Weight and Measure, has a Right to as much of
it as the Common Standard allows him; to have a full Standard, Pound, or Pint
or Bushel according as he Bargains or Contracts. And to subtract any think from
what he has bargained for, whether it be by false Weights or Measures, ot by
falsely weighing or measuring, is no better than Theft and Robbery. And so on
the other hand, he who sells a Commodity has a Right to the Money for which he
sold it; and therefore for the Buyer either knowingly to pay him uncurrent
Coin, or forcibly to detain from him any part of the Price agreed on, is a
manifest Violation of the Eternal Rules of Righteousness.

V. GO not to the utmost Verge of what you conceive to be lawful; for he who
goes to the utmost of what is lawful, ventures to the brink of a Precipice,
where he stands in imminent danger of falling headlong into it. For it is a
short and easy Passage from the utmost limits of what is lawful, to the
nearmost of what is sinful; so that he, that will go as far as he may, will
never be able to avoid going sometimes farther than he should; especially when
he is led on by Interest, and has a tempting prospect of Advantage before him;
which is wont to blind the Eyes of Men, to warp their Judgment, to tincture
their Minds with false colors and undue apprehensions of things. Wherefore in
that Latitude of lawful Gain which is allowed you, use Favor toward the poor
and necessitous, Ingenuity toward the ignorant and unskilful, and Moderation
toward all.

VI. Sixthly and Lastly, IN doubtful Cases choose the safest Part: for not only
a good, but a quiet Conscience is to be valued above the greatest Gain; and
that Man has but little regard of his Conscience, that will venture to expose
it to a wound to get a Shilling more in a bargain. Wherefore if we would be
safe, we must make this a constant Rule of Action, in matters of Duty to do the
most, in matters of Privilege and divisions of Right, or proportions of Gain,
in all doubtful Cases, to choose the least, which to be sure is always the
safest. For if in buying and selling I make any Advantage which I doubt is
unlawful, I stake my Conscience at a Lottery, and throw Cross and Pile whether
I shall be guilty, or innocent: and thus to play and dally with my Innocence is
but one degree of Presumption from being wilfully Guilty.

THESE are the General Rules by which we ought to conduct our selves in our
Compacts and Bargains, if we mean to avoid that crying Sin of defrauding and
overreaching one another; which how Crafty and Politic soever it may seem to
Men that do not regard the Issue and Event of things, it will in the end be
found to be one of the greatest and most unprofitable Follies. For alas, while
I am overreaching my Brother in his Estate, there stands an invisible Cheat at
my Elbow that is chousing me out of my Heaven and my Soul! So that in fine the
whole Scene of Knavery resolves into this; the Devil is Angling with a less
Fish to catch a greater, baiting his Hook with my Brother's Property, that so
when I have taken and devoured that he may take and devour me. And so I have
done with the first thing proposed in handling this great and comprehensive
Duty of Justice, or Honesty between Man and Man, which was to show what it is
and how far it is extended.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Eternal Reasons of Justice.
I PROCEED in the next place to show what those Eternal and Immutable Reasons
are, which render Justice morally good. I have elsewhere showed at large, that
that which makes a thing to be morally Good is this, that it is Obligation is
founded in some Eternal and Immutable Reasons; so that we are obliged to
practice it by such Reasons as can never cease or change, or alter with Times
or Circumstances: and that this is the difference between Positive and Moral
Duties, that the one are founded upon temporary and changeable Reasons, and so
may and will one time or other cease to oblige us; as the Sacrifices of the
Jews have done, and the Sacraments of Christians will do; whereas the other
being backed with everlasting Reasons can never cease to oblige us* Wherefore
to demonstrate Justice to be a Moral Duty, or one of those Moral Goods which
God has made known to us, it will be necessary to produce some eternal and
unchangeable Reasons whereby it binds and obliges us: and of such I shall
produce these Four;

First, The eternal Proportion and Congruity of Justice to the Nature of
Things. Secondly, The eternal Conformity of it to the Nature of God: Thirdly,
The eternal Correspondency of it with the Divine Providence and Disposals:
Fourthly, The eternal Necessity of it to the Happiness of Men.
I. ONE eternal Reason by which we stand obliged to do justly, is the eternal
Proportion and Congruity of Justice to the nature of things. For there are in
Nature eternal Respects of Things to Things, which are as fixed and unalterable
as the Nature of the Things themselves: as for instance, some things are
naturally more perfect than others, such as the superior Kinds and Orders of
Beings; others are naturally equal in perfection, such as are Individuals of
the same kind of Beings; others are naturally less perfect, such as the
inferior Ranks and Species of Beings; and since Nature has thus ranked and
placed things either above, or below, or equal to one another; every Being in
the world must naturally respect every one, either as it is superior or
inferior, or equal: and these Respects are as inseparable to their Natures, as
those Degrees of Perfection are which constitute their Kinds and Orders. So
that were all the Beings in the world Rational, and understood but their mutual
Respects and Relations to one another, they would thereby be obliged to demean
themselves toward each other suitably to that Rank and Form of Being wherein
Nature has placed them; and by their Actions to acknowledge themselves
superior or inferior or equal to one another, according as they excel, or
equal, or come short of one another in degrees of Natural Perfection. And
herein consists the strict and proper Notion of doing justly, viz. in
treating my Superiors, Inferiors, and Equals as such, in respecting my Equals
equally, and my Superiors and Inferiors according to the degree of Superiority
and Inferiority wherein they are placed. So that Justice consists in acting
congruously to those eternal Respects, which things bear to one another; or in
a practical acknowledgment that the Beings above me, below me, and equal to me,
do bear such a Respect to me as they really do; that they are just so much my
Superiors, so much my Inferiors, or so much my Equals, as God and Nature has
made them. For among Beings that are capable of understanding those Respects
and Relations they bear to one another, it is a natural Due that they should
own one another to be what they are, and mutually signify by their Actions and
Behavior what Respects and Relations they bear to one another; that by
Reverence and Submission they should own those above them to be their
Superiors; that by Grace and Condescension they should own those beneath them
to be their Inferiors; and that by Equity or Equality of Usage and Behavior,
they should own those who are level with them to be their Peers and Equals.
These are the Natural Expressions of our Acknowledgments of those mutual
Respects and Relations we bear to one another, which not to acknowledge is in
effect to deny one another to be what we are, to thrust one another out of our
Palaces, and invade each others Rights and Peculiars. So that in short Justice
is nothing else but the great Balance of the Rational World, which weighs out
to every part of it what is due from every one in those respective Ranks and
Relations wherein God and Nature has placed them: and so long as there
remains any Proportion of Nearness or Distance, of Superiority, or
Inferiority, or Equality, among Rational Beings, that will be a firm and
unanswerable Reason why they should deal justly and righteously toward one
another; because dealing justly is nothing else but a practical Owning and
Acknowledgment of these Respects and Relations; which so long as they continue,
every Being must be obliged to acknowledge, that has any capacity to know and
understand them. For since God has given me Reason to understand that all
those Beings which are of my own Kind and Order, are my Equals by Nature, I
cannot but conclude that they ought to be equally dealt with; since equal
Things must necessarily belong to equal Beings in the same Circumstances. And
from this Principle whereon that Golden Rule is founded, to do as we would be
done by, all the particular instances of Justice between Man and Man are
naturally derived. So that the Obligations of Justice, you see, do immediately
grow out of the Nature of Things, and those Respects and Relations they bear to
one another: and therefore till the Nature of Things be utterly unravelled, and
their Respects to one another for ever cancelled and reversed, every Rational
Being must be obliged to be just; that is, to acknowledge, so far as he
understands it, the Respect and Relation he bears to all other Beings; by
demeaning himself submissively toward his Superiors, equally toward his
Equals, and condescendingly toward his Inferiors. And whatsoever we are
obliged to by the Nature of Things, we are obliged to by the Author of Nature;
whose Works are as real Signs and Expressions of his Will, as his revealed
Declarations: and therefore since he framed and constituted us with such
Respects and Relations to one another, that is as plain a signification that it
is his Will we should demean our selves accordingly, as if he had proclaimed it
by a Voice of Thunder from the Battlements of Heaven. Since therefore God has
thus engraven the Obligations of Justice upon the Nature of Things, they must
abide for ever, and be as eternal as those Respects and Relations are which
things bear to one another.

II. ANOTHER eternal Reason by which we are obliged to do justly, is the
conformity of it to the Nature of God. For Justice is one of the brightest
Jewels of God's Diadem, one of those most glorious Attributes which do
eternally crown and adorn his Nature and determine his Will and direct his
Actions. Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints; Rev. v. 3. Righteous
art thou O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments. Psalm. cxix. 137. Are not my
ways equal, and are not your ways unequal? says God himself, appealing to the
Consciences of his Subjects, in Ezekiel. xviii. 29. Consonantly to all which is
the assertion of Plato, (...). God cannot be said to be unjust in any respect
whatsoever, but is in all Kinds just to the utmost Possibility. And indeed the
eternal Self-sufficiency of his own Nature sets him above all manner of
temptation to deal injuriously by his Creatures: he wants none of their Rights
to enrich himself, needs none of their Happiness to augment his own; which is
so boundless and secure, that it can neither admit of any Increase, or be
liable to any Diminution. What then should move him either to deprive his
Creatures of any Good that is their due, or to inflict on them any Evil that
they have not deserved; when he can serve no End of his own, nor reap any
Advantage to himself by it? For all Injustice springs out of Want, and
Indigence; which being utterly excluded from the Nature of God, it is
impossible there should be any unjust Inclination, or Tendency in him. And as
by the infinite Self-sufficiency of his Nature he is secured from all
temptation to Injustice, so by the infinite Goodness of it he stands unvariably
bent and inclined to deal justly and righteously by his Creatures. For Goodness
is nothing but an Inclination of Nature to bestow more Good than is due, and
inflict less Evil than is deserved; which Inclination being inseparable to the
nature of God, it is impossible for him either to withold from us any Right,
or to punish us wrongfully, without doing Violence to himself and committing an
Outrage on his own Nature. So that the Nature of God is a Law of Righteousness
to himself, by which his Will and Actions are constantly determined to what is
just and equal; to require nothing of us but what is possible, to proportion
our Burdens to our Strength, or our Strength to our Burdens, to satisfy all
his Engagements to us, and not withold from us any of those Goods which we
can claim by the Title of his gracious Promises; in a word, to proportion the
Evils of our Sufferings to the Evils of our Sin, and not to plague us for
nothing, or for what we cannot help, or beyond the Guilt and Demerit of our
Fault: and whatsoever else is just from a God to a Creature, he is unchangeably
determined to choose and act by the Law of Righteousness in his own Nature.
Since therefore the Nature of God is the great Exemplar and Pattern of all
Reasonable Natures, as being it self the most perfectly reasonable; whatsoever
is imitable in it we are eternally obliged to copy and transcribe into our own;
and consequently since he is eternally just, that is an eternal Reason why we
should be so. By dealing justly with one another we act like God, whose Nature
is the Standard of ours; and it is certainly fit that all Reasonable Beings
should deal by one another, as God who is the most reasonable, deals by them;
that they should choose and act in conformity to him who is the Pattern of
Goodness, and the Rule of Perfection. And herein consists our Conformity to
him, that we live by the Law of his Nature; and therefore so long as that Law
determines him to deal justly by us, it ought to determine us to deal justly
by one another. So that the Obligations of Justice are as eternal as the Nature
of God; for so long as he is righteous, we are bound to be righteous in
conformity to him; and therefore since he cannot cease to be righteous without
ceasing to be happy and good, or which is all one, to be God, We can never
cease being obliged to be righteous so long as God is.

III. ANOTHER eternal Reason by which we are obliged to do justly, is the
Agreement and Correspondency of it with the Divine Providence and Disposals.
For God being the supreme Lord and Proprietor of Beings, all those Rights and
Properties which we claim of one another must be originally derived from him;
even as the claims of the under-Tenants are from the Head-Landlord. All those
Natural Rights we are invested with, we derive from him who is the Author of
our Nature; who by creating us what we are, and uniting us by Natural Ligaments
to one another, has endowed us with all those Rights, which we claim as
Rational Creatures dwelling in Mortal Bodies, and joined together by Natural
Relations and Society. So that to deal justly by one another, or with respect
to our Natural Rights, is only to allow one another what God has entailed upon
our Natures, and mutually to render those Dues to each other, which he has
entitled us to by the very Frame and Condition of our Beings: and for us to
withold from one another those Rights, which God has consigned to us by the
State and Formation of our Natures, is to quarrel with his Workmanship, and
declare our selves disatisfied with the State of his Creation. For whatsoever I
have a Right to as I am a Man, I have a Right to by the state and condition of
my Nature; and therefore he who allows me not that, allows me not to be
what God has made me; permits me not to enjoy that State and Condition of
Nature wherein God has created and placed me* For whatsoever I have Right to
as I am a Man, I have a Right to from God who made me a Man; and therefore he
who denies me the Right of my Nature, thrusts me down from the Form wherein
God has placed me, and uses me as if I were not what God has made me;
whereby he does in effect fly in the Face of my Creator, and quarrel with God
for making me what I am. In a word, it is eternally reasonable that I who am
the Creature of God, should pay so much Reverence to his all-creating Wisdom
and Power, as to treat every Creature suitably to the State and Condition of
its Creation; and consequently to treat Men as Men, that is, as Beings endowed
by God with the common Rights of Humane Nature; which if I do not, I alienate
from my own Kind what God has endowed it with, and so in effect do disallow of
his Endowments, and impiously call in question the Rights of his Creation. For
either I must own that God ought not to have constituted Humane Nature with
such Rights, which would be to impeach his Creation; or that I ought to render
it those Rights which result from its Frame and Constitution: and therefore
when by my Actions I disown that I ought to render them, I do in effect quarrel
with God's Creation for entailing such Rights upon Humane Nature, and declare
that I am resolved not to be concluded by it; but that I will for ever defy
the Laws of the Creation, and will not abide by that Rule and Order which it
has established in the Nature of Things. If therefore it be reasonable,
eternally reasonable for Creatures to act agreeably to the Order of their
Creation; this is an eternal Reason why we should render to one another those
Rights which God has bequeathed to us by the Constitution of our Natures.

AND as our natural Rights are derived to us from God by his Creation, so are
our acquired also derived from him by his Providence; who having reserved to
himself the Sovereign Disposal of all our Affairs, is our Founder and
Benefactor, upon whom we all depend for every Right and Property we acquire by
our Conversation and Intercourse with one another: and that this is mine, and
that yours, is owing to the Providence of God, which carves out to every one
his Portion of Right, and divides as he sees fit his World among his Creatures.
So that Justice as it refers to acquired Rights, consists in allowing every Man
to enjoy what God has given him by his all-disposing Providence: and if God
has an eternal Right to share his own Goods among his own Creatures as he
pleases, then that is an eternal Reason why we should allow one another to
enjoy those Portions which he has shared and divided to us. For by depriving
another Man of what God's Providence has given him, I do not only rob him of
his Right to enjoy it, but I also rob God of his Right to dispose it. Fore
while I withold or take away what God has given to another, I take his Goods
against his leave, and impiously invade his Province of bestowing his own where
he pleases: and whilst I thus carve for my self out of those Allowances which
he has carved to others, I live in open Rebellion against his Providence, and
am an Outlaw to his Government. For this in effect is the Sense and Meaning of
my wrongful Encroachments upon other Men's Rights, that I will not be concluded
by that Division and Allotment of Things which God has made; but that I will
divide and carve for my self, and live at my own Allowance; that I will not
suffer him to share his own World, nor endure him to reign Lord and Master in
his own Family of Beings, but even live as I list, and take what I can catch
without asking God's leave, who is the supreme Proprietor and Disposer. So that
to deal unjustly by Men, whether it be in respect of their natural, or acquired
Rights, is a direct opposition to the divine Ordination and Disposal: and
therefore if it be eternally reasonable for us who are God's Creatures and
Subjects, to comply with the Order of his Creation and the disposals of his
Providence, that is an eternal Reason why we should deal justly with one another

IV. Fourthly and Lastly, ANOTHER eternal Reason why we are obliged to do
justly, is the everlasting Necessity of it to the Happiness of Men: For Justice
is the Pillar and Support of all Society, without which it is impossible for
Rational Beings ever to live happily with one another. For while I deal
unjustly by others, I draw all Men into a Combination against me; who having
all the same tender sense of their own Interest and Happiness as I have of
mine, must be sufficiently jealous of all Designs and Encroachments on their
Rights and Properties; and consequently be ready to conclude from my Injustice
toward one, that I am prepared to do mischief to any for the advancement of my
own End: so that when once I am remarked for a Person that bears no regard to
Right and Wrong, it becomes the joint and equal Interest of all to declare
open War against me, and treat me as an open Enemy without Mercy and
Compassion. So that one unjust Man in a Society is a common Disturbance to all
the rest, for by every single Injury he does he alarms the Jealousy of every
Man, every Man having reason to conclude that he shall be served by him in the
same kind, if he should happen to fall into the same Circumstances: and as he
distubs others, so he cannot securely enjoy himself; for how can that Man be
secure that acts as an Enemy to Mankind, and for that reason has just cause to
suspect that every Man is his Enemy who is conscious to his injurious
Behavior? The Fear of which must necessarily deprive him of all Satisfaction
for the present, and of all Security for the future. So that unjust Persons are
a Plague to themselves, and others; and like frighted Porcupins they are
disturbed within, whilst they dart their Quils at all without them. What a dark
rude Chaos then would this reasonable World be, should Justice and
Righteousness forsake it; should Rapine and Violence, Falsehood and Oppression
reign, and the strongest Arm be sole Arbitrator of Right and Wrong; should all
Promises and Professions be converted into Traps and Snares; and every Man lay
Ambushes in his words, and lurk behind them in reserved meanings, only to wait
an opportunity to surprise and ruin every one he converses with? What would the
Consequence of this be, but the disbanding of all Society, and the converting
of this humane World into a Den of Wolves and Cannibals? For by reason of Men's
continued Experience of each others Falsehood and Insincerity, all mutual Trust
and Confidence would be banished from among them; and every one would be forced
to stand upon his guard, in a constant Expectation of Mischief from every one;
and so all their Intercourse would consist in a Trade of Diabolical Knaveries,
in doing and retaliating Injuries, and in circumventing and playing the Devils
with one another. Which would be such a dreadful State of things, that I verily
believe were it left to my own option, I should rather choose to languish out
an Eternity in some dismal Dungeon alone, and there converse only with my own
silent griefs; than to dwell for ever in the Garden of the World, accompanied
with such false and villainous Creatures. But now, do but turn the other end of
the Perspective, and imagine that you saw Judgment running down like Water, and
Righteousness as a mighty Stream, that you beheld a world of upright People
ballancing all their Actions and Intercourses in the impartial Scale of
Justice, and mutually weighing to one another their natural and acquired Rights
without any Respect or Partiality, the Superiors graciously condescending, the
Inferiors cheerfully submitting and the Equals dealing equally with one
another; O good God! what a blessed and happy People would this be? With what
Content and Satisfaction, Peace and mutual Security would they deal and
converse with one another? Here would be no Quarrels or Contentions, no
Jealousies or Suspicions, no dark Designs or false Pretenses; but every one
would converse with every one with the greatest Openness and Freedom, and all
would be inviolably safe in each others Sincerity and Justice: Here would be no
justling or rencountering, no clashing or interfering of Interests; but every
one would sit happy and contented under his own Vine, without any unjust Desire
of trespassing on his Neighbor's Enclosure, or disquieting Fear of being
ejected from his own. O! were I but an Inhabitant of such a World as this,
though of the lowest Rank and Form; how should I despise and pity the most
prosperous Circumstances of this unrighteous World we live in? And how loath
should I be to change my World for any other, but that of Angels and of
glorified Spirits? O Justice, Justice, would Men but call thee down from Heaven
again, and permit thee to rule and govern their Actions, into what a blessed
World would thou convert this Stage of Rapine, Cruelty and Blood! How would
thou separate this dark Chaos, and distinguish its Confusions into Order and
Beauty! How soon would thou reform it into an Emblem of Heaven, or lively
Figure of that Celestial Ether, where all is Harmony, and Light, and Peace,
and Love, and Happiness! If therefore it be eternally reasonable that Men
should study their own Happiness, that is an everlasting Reason why they should
deal justly by one another; since without so doing it is for ever impossible
for them to be happy. These are the eternal and immutable Reasons, which
constitute Justice a Moral Good, and do eternally oblige us to deal justly by
one another.

AND now what remains, but that we betake our selves to the Conscientious
Practice of this great and comprehensive Virtue, to give to every Man what is
due to him either by Constitution, or by just Acquisition; to deal with every
Man with whom we have any Intercourse, as with a Rational Creature; to treat
him equitably, and do him all that good which we might reasonably expect from
him, if we were placed in his Circumstances; to allow him the liberty to judge
for himself, so far as he is capable, and not endeavor to impose our Opinions
upon him by violent and forcible means; to leave him at liberty to follow the
Dictates of right Reason, and not seek to debauch him by Persuasion or
Threatenings, into immoral and vicious Courses; to treat him humanely and
suitably to the Dignity of his Nature, and not use him like a Dog, or as if he
were an Animal of an inferior Species? For all those things are due to him as
he is a Rational Creature, and cannot be denied to him without high Injustice.
Again, to deal with him as he is a Rational Creature placed by God in a mortal
Body; and neither to ravish his Body to satisfy our Lust, nor to maim or
destroy it, uless it be in our own Defense; nor to captivate and enslave it,
unless it be upon free Consent, or upon just Forfeiture; nor to suffer it to
perish for want of bodily sustenance, so long as it is in our power to support
and relieve it. These things he has a claim to, as he is the Tenant of God,
and cannot be denied without foul Injustice. Once more; to use him as a
Rational Creature united to me by natural Relations; if he be my Father, to
honor and reverence and obey him; if he be my Child, to love and instruct him,
maintain and provide for him; if my Brother or Sister or consanguineous
Relation, to cherish and advise, support and assist him according to my
ability. These are the Dues of Natural Relation, and cannot be withheld
without great Unrighteousness. Lastly, to treat him as one whom God and Nature
has united to me in the bands of humane Society; to love him and live
peaceably with him, to speak Truth to him, and when I am lawfully called, to
swear nothing but Truth concerning him, and perform my Promises and Oaths to
him, so far as it is lawful and possible; not to blast his Reputation, but to
defend his Person, Good Name and Estate, so far as I am able, and to allow him
a competent share of all those Profits which accrue to me from my Dealing and
Intercourse with him. These are the natural Dues which Justice requires me to
render him, and which I cannot withold from him without being injurious to
the Humane Nature within him. And as I am obliged in Justice to render to every
one his natural Dues, so I am no less obliged by it to render him his acquired
ones; to render him whatsoever is due to him upon the account of any Sacred, or
Civil Relation to me; not to entrench upon his legal Possessions either by
Fraud or Violence; to render him those Honors and Respects which are owing to
his Personal Accomplishments; or to his outward Rank and Quality; and not to
defraud, oppress, or overreach him in his Contracts and Bargains with me.
These are the particulars as I have showed you at large, to which this
comprehensive Virtue extends it self; and Oh that now having seen upon what
everlasting Reasons it is built, we would be persuaded to betake our selves to
the serious Practice of it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Sinfulness, and Unreasonableness of Injustice.
AFTER the explication of the immutable Reasons, and Grounds of Justice, it may
be proper to add some Motives, and Considerations against Injustice.

And First, CONSIDER the great Repugnancy of Injustice to the Terms, and
Conditions of the Christian Religion. I know there are some People that look
upon Honesty and Justice as one of the beggarly Elements of Religion, a sort of
Heathen Virtue belonging to carnal and mere moral Men, that are utterly
unacquainted with the Spirit and Power of Godliness: and accordingly in the
room of this, and such like Moral Virtues, they have foisted in a sort of
spiritual Religion as they call it; which consists in a certain Model of
Conversion and Regeneration, that is made up of nothing but a mere fanciful
train of Dejections and Triumphs, that are most commonly either the effects of
a distempered Blood, or the unaccountable freaks of an overheated Fancy: and if
they find they have been Converted secundum artem, i. e. that they have
undergone those frightful, sorrowful, or joyous Passions, which this stated
Method of Regeneration includes, all their After-Religion is nothing else but
a leaning and rolling on Jesus Christ. And whilst they should be governing
their Wills, their Tongues, and their Actions by the eternal Rules of Justice
and Goodness, they are employed, as they think, in a higher Dispensation; in
forming odd Schemes of spiritual Experiences, and attending to the inward
Whispers and Incomes, and With-drawings of the Spirit of God; all which are
commonly nothing but only the effects of a melancholy Fancy tinctured with
Religious Fears, and flushed with a natural Enthusiasm. But whatever it be, it
is doubtless a dangerous Mistake for Men to take up with any Religion, which
does not principally insist upon the eternal Laws of Morality: and though
Justice or Honesty in our dealings with Men will never singly recommend us to
God, unless it be conjoined with Mercy, Sobriety and Godliness; yea though all
these together will never recommend us to God, unless their Imperfections be
purged and expiated by the all-sufficient Merit of our blessed Savior; yet
without Justice, and Honesty, all our Religion is a damnable Cheat; and all the
Merit of our Savior will be as insignificant to us, as it is to the Devils, or
damned Ghosts. For his Merit is no Refuge for Religious Knaves, his Wounds no
Sanctuary for Spiritual Cheats, or Liars, or Oppressors: and for such persons
as these, to shelter themselves in our Savior's Propitiation, is to profane
and desecrate it; and thereby to cause those vocal Wounds to accuse them which
were made to plead for them; and to provoke that eloquent Blood to cry aloud
for vengance against them, which in its native Language speaks far better
things the blood of Abel. Heb. xii. 24. For Justice is a Duty of that
indispensable necessity, that God will not, yea, to speak with Reverence,
cannot dispense with it: and so far was our Savior from ever designing to
obtain a Dispensation from it, that the great end of his dying to obtain our
Pardon for our past unrighteousness, was to encourage and oblige us to live
more justly and righteously for the future. For so the Apostle tells us, Tit.
ii. 14. That he gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works: and
notwithstanding all that he has done for us, he has plainly assured us by his
Apostles, that no unrighteous person shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor.
vi. 9. and that the unjust shall be reserved unto the day of Judgment to be
punished: 2 Pet. ii. 9. that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all unrighteousness of men, Romans i. 18* and that they all shall be damned that
take pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 12. And if these things be so,
then as ever you hope to enter into the Kingdom of God, to escape his
unquenchable Wrath, to hold up your Heads at his Tribunal, and not to be
condemned to everlasting Horror and Confusion; be persuaded to fly from all
Unrighteousness, and use all honest Care to deal justly and righteously with
all Men.

II. CONSIDER the great Vanity, or Desperateness of Injustice: for if the Wrong
and Injustice you do to another Man be such as is repairable, you must resolve
to repair it, or to perish for ever. For he who does not repair an Injury when
he is able, does every moment continue and repeat it; and though the first
injurious Act were transient, and did expire and die in the Commission, yet
because it leaves a permanent Evil behind it upon the good Name, or Estate of
my Neighbor, I am as much obliged, if I am able, to remove the Evil from him,
as I was at first not to bring it upon him; and all the while I neglect to
remove it, I wilfully continue the evil upon him, and in so doing continue
wilfully injurious to him. As for instance, when I wilfully asperse another
Man's Reputation, my Sin dies not with my slanderous Breath, but survives in
the evil effects of it; and till I have endeavored to purge his stained
Reputation, and to restore him his good Name again by a fair and ingenuous
Vindication, I am a Slanderer still, and accountable for all those hard
thoughts, and injurious words which I have occasioned others to think or speak
against him. Again, when I rob, or defraud another Man of his Estate, or any
part of it, the Sin does not cease with the transient Act of Stealth, or
Couzenage, or Violence, which ends and expireth in the Commission; but
continues so long as the Damage and evil Effect of it remains: Whilst therefore
he suffers in his Estate by my injurious Act, and it is in my power to repair
it, I continue injuring him; and till I have made him all the Restitution I am
able, I am a Cheat, or a Thief, or a Robber. Since therefore Injustice is a
damnable Sin, as I showed you before, it necessarily follows that whenever a
Man deals unjustly by another, he must at the same time either resolve to undo
his own Act, or to run the hazard of being undone for ever; the former of which
is a ridiculous Vanity, and the latter a desperate Madness. For what a Vanity
is it, for a Man to do what he resolves to undo, to slander with a purpose to
vindicate, and cheat with a resolution to refund, that is, to do an evil thing
with a purpose to be never the better for it? If you resolve to restore what
you wrongfully take from another, why do you take it? Is it so cheap a matter
to be wicked, that you should covet to be wicked for nothing? That you should
contract a Guilt which will bind you over to eternal Punishment, with an
intention to part with all that temporary Gain which tempted and invited you to
it? What is this but to weave a Penelope's Web, to do and undo, and build
Castles of Cards, to blow them down again? and which is more vain and
Nonsensical, to swallow deadly Poison for our Health and Ease, which we know
will rack and convulse us, with a purpose to vomit it up again without gaining
either Health, or Ease by it? For he who wrongs another with a purpose to make
him Restitution, does an evil Action with an intent to get nothing but Guilt by
it. You say, you intend to restore to him what you wrong him of, and if so, for
what end do you wrong him? Unless it be to render your self more Criminal and
Guilty: For when you have restored to him what you have wrongfully deprived him
of, what can remain to you but only the Guilt of a wrongful and injurious
Action? So that for Men to deal unjustly by others with an Intent to make them
Restitution, is the greatest Vanity and Nonsense in the World; but then to do
it without such an Intent, is the most desperate Madness. For since every
wilful Act of Injustice binds Men over to Eternal Punishment, and since nothing
but Restitution, so far as they are able, can release and absolve them from
that dire Obligation; it necessarily follows, that he who deals unjustly by
others without any Intent of making them Restitution, does by his own Act
wilfully oblige himself to endure an Eternal Punishment. For he knows that what
he gains unjustly from another must be restored, or his Soul must be lost;
and therefore if he resolve upon that Gain without any Intent to restore it, he
does in effect stake his Soul to it, and freely oblige himself to endure
Hellfire for ever, in consideration of the present Gain he acquires by his
unjust dealing. For he who knows that such a Potion, however sweetened and made
palatable, is compounded with the Juice of Deadly Nightshade, and yet wilfully
swallows it without any intent to disgorge it again, does thereby voluntarily
murder and destroy himself: and so He who knows that such an unjust Gain, how
tempting so ever it may look for the present, has an everlasting Horror and
Anguish intermingled with it, and yet wilfully seises it without any intent to
refund it; does freely consent to undergo the Evil to enjoy the Good of it, and
shake hands upon this desperate Bargain, that upon condition he may reap such
an unlawful Profit, he will freely surrender up his immortal Soul to the Pangs
and Agonies of Eternal Death. For in every Temptation to deal unjustly the
Devil cheapens our immortal Soul, and the unlawful Gain with which he tempts us
is the Price he bids for it: and though sometimes he bids exceeding low, yet if
we take his Price, though it be but a Penny, we thereby strike the fatal
Bargain, and by our own Act and Deed consign and deliver our Souls to him to be
his Slaves here, and his Martyrs hereafter. And what greater madness can a Man
be guilty of, than to sell his Soul and all his Hopes of Happiness for ever,
for the trifling and momentary Gains of an unjust Action?

III. CONSIDER the manifest Inexcusableness of Injustice in it self: For, as I
have showed you at large, all Justice between Man and Man is reducible to that
general Rule Do as you would be done by; i. e. Do all that good to others,
which you could reasonably expect they should do to you, if you were in their
Circumstances, and they in yours: and this is so plain a Rule, that no Man can
plead Ignorance of it, who does not wilfully shut his own Eyes. It Is true,
whilst Laws, though never so plain and useful in themselves, are yet obscure
and perplexed in their Promulgation, or over-numerous, they may prove a Snare,
rather than a Guide, and make more Controversies than they can decide, and lose
much of their force by being spun out into nice and subtle Disputes: they may
fall short of their aim, by not being able to reach the greater part of those
Persons whom they designed to direct; who either have not Leisure sufficient to
attend to, or Capacities to understand them, or Sagacity to apply them in all
opportunities of Action. But as for this General Rule of Justice, it is always
at hand, and we carry it about us in our own Breasts: for this is the peculiar
advantage of this Rule, that by it we may very easily discern all the
Specialities of our Duty, without looking abroad, or having recourse to
external Instructions. So that by it we may be perfect Lawgivers, skilful
Judges, and faithful Casuists to our own Souls: For it is Legible to those that
have no Letters, and lies open and obvious to the most Rude and Ignorant. We
need not search ancient Records, or dark Repositories, revolve and ruminate
upon old Sentences, or new Glosses, or rove about the World to examine the
various Customs and Constitutions of Countries: we need not soar to Heaven, or
dive to Hell in quest of our Duty; for if we will but return into our Selves,
and look into our own Hearts, there we may find it copied and engraven in
legible Characters. For when any Opportunity of dealing justly by another
presents it self to us, it is but asking our selves how we would be dealt by in
the same Circumstances; and our Answer to that is our Duty to those we deal
with: I know very well how I should expect to be used if my Neighbor and I had
changed Persons and Circumstances: my own Heart tells me, that I should think
it reasonable to expect such measures from him, and that therefore he has just
Reason to expect the same from me. So that in most cases of Justice between Man
and Man, every Man, if he pleases, may be his own Casuist: for it is but
exchanging Persons, and Circumstances with his Neighbor, which is quickly
done, and then applying this General Rule to his particular Dealings with him;
and his own Heart will soon tell him what he is to do, and very rarely but
never grossly misinform him. For by thus changing the Scales, and making another
Man's case my own, I take the fairest and readiest way to understand what is
right and due to him: for now to be sure my Passion, and Self-interest will not
incline me one way more than another; and even that Selfishness, which inclines
me to wrong another Man for my own Advantage, will likewise render me
unwilling, when the Scales are changed, that another Man should wrong me; and
that Self-conceit, which makes me apt to scorn and despise another, will make
me unwilling to be scorned and despised my self; and so when I consult my self
how I would be dealt by, those very Passions which incline me to wrong others
will instruct me to right them. So that there is no Rule in the World can be
pressed with fewer Encumbrances, or darkened with less Intricacy; none that can
lie open to larger Use, or be readier to present Application, or more obvious
to all sizes of Apprehension than This, which is the Measure and Standard of
our Dealings and Intercourses with one another. So that there is no pleading
Ignorance to excuse, or palliate any great Violations of the Laws of
Righteousness; since in all matters of moment every Man may easily understand
how he ought to deal by every Man, if he would but take care to consult the
Oracle in his own Breast, and ask himself how he would expect to be dealt by,
were he placed in the Circumstances of those he deals with. And when Men will not
understand their Duty, when it lies so plainly before them; or will not do their
Duty, when they do understand it; what Color of Excuse can be made for them?
Were the Rule of our Duty so obscure as that we could not easily apprehend it,
the Weakness of our Understanding might partly excuse the Error of our Wills,
and render it pitiable and pardonable, though not altogether innocent; but when
it lies so full in our View as that we cannot but discern it, if we will but
open our Eyes, and fairly consult our own Minds and Thoughts, our Understanding
is acquitted, and our Will only is chargeable with our Folly, and Wickedness:
so that now we sin at our own Peril, and leap headlong into mischief with our
Eyes open. But as for Injustice, the Guilt of it is so open and visible, that
however our other Sins may be excused by our Ignorance, and mitigated or
connived at upon the score of the natural Defects of our Understanding, this
can admit of no Cloak, or Extenuation; because whenever a Man deals unjustly
by another, his Conscience will be sure to tell him (if he puts the question to
it) that he would not be so dealt with, were the Case and Circumstances his
own. So that when we come to give up our Accounts at the Tribunal of God, and
to answer for our unrighteous dealings with one another, they will so stare us
in the Face that we shall be able to make no Excuse or Apology for them; but
our own Consciences will be forced to cry Guilty, Guilty, to anticipate our
doom, and when it is past, to approve and second it with a Just and righteous
art thou, O Lord, in all thy ways. For when the Rule of Justice lies so very
plain, and open to our very Faculties, what can be said if we do unjustly, but
that we are obstinate and wilful and incorrigible Robbers, that can claim no
Indulgence, deserve no Pity, and pretend to no mitigation of our Stripes, since
we knew our Master's Will and did it not?

IV. CONSIDER the Fruitlesness and Mischievousness of unjust Dealing to our
selves. For the usual bait of Injustice is Gain and Profit, we deplume our
Neighbor's Wings with an intent to Feather our own Nests, and invade other
Men's Properties to enrich our selves with their Spoils: This is the common Game
that Fraud and Oppression pursues and flies at, though usually they fly short
or beyond it, and instead of enriching Men do finally damage and impoverish
them. For how successful soever unjust Dealing may sometimes prove to the
raising a Man's Fortune and Estate, it is in its natural Tendency an effectual
way to impair and ruin it; because by dealing unjustly he makes it every Man's
Interest to forsake and abandon him, and in effect sets a Cross upon his own
Door to warn all Customers from entering. For who would willingly have to do
with a Knave, that always lies upon the Catch, waiting Opportunities to Rook
and Cozen him; with whom he can neither speak, nor act securely, but must be
forced to stand upon his own guard with him, and treat him with the same
Circumspection and Cautiousness as Conjurers do their Devils, for fear of being
snapt and torn in pieces by him? And how is it possible for a Man to thrive,
when no body cares to deal with him; when his House is haunted, and his Frauds
and Cozenages appear like Specters at his Door, to frighten all Men from his
Shop and Conversation? And accordingly you see that Justice and Honesty in
Dealing is so absolutely necessary to Men's thriving in the World, that even
they who are not honest are fain to seem so: but for a Man to seem to be Honest
there is no way so certain and secure, as to be really so; for if he be not, it
is a thousand to one but the events of things will one time or other unmask and
discover him. No Man can be secure of Privacy in an unjust Action, but let him
carry it never so secretly and demurely, one Accident or other will draw the
Curtain, and bring to light the Fraud and Villainy behind it: and when it does,
what will Men say? He has cheated me once, and that was his fault, but if he
cheat me again it will be mine as well as his; and I shall richly deserve the
second wrong, if I will take no warning by the first. So that how much soever a
Man may gain by a present Cheat, he is sure, if he be discovered, to lose his
Correspondent, by whom in a few years he might have honestly gotten ten times
more: besides that, either his Resentment of the Injury he has received, or
else his Charity to others will oblige him to divulge the knavery, and to warn
others by it not to have any thing to do with the detected Knave that wronged
and abused him. And when once a Man's Credit is blasted by the report of a foul
and dishonest Action, it is a thousand to one but he will lose back in his
Trade all that he gained by his Cheat, and twenty times more; and then if once
he begin to sink, there is no recovering of him; for Estate and Credit are the
two Wings that bear Men up in the World, and therefore if when he has clipped
the Wings of his Credit, his Estate should fail him too, he must decline and
sink without Remedy. For Credit is like a Looking-glass, which when only
sullied by an unwholesome breath may be wiped clean again; but if once it is
cracked, it is never to be repaired. So that considering all, Fraud and
Injustice is as great an Error in Politics, as in Morals, and does bespeak a
Man to have as little Wit, as Honesty; and in plain English, to be as much a
Fool, as a Knave. But suppose the best, and that which sometimes happens, that
a Man should thrive by his Fraud and Injustice, and grow great and prosperous
in the World; alas! what Comfort can he take in his ill-gotten Wealth; when
every part of it throws Guilt in his Face, and awakens some dire Reflection in
his Conscience? For, as I showed you before, of all Sins that of Injustice
admits the least Excuse and Mitigation; the sense of it clings so close to a
Man's Conscience, that he can never pluck it off without pulling away his
Conscience with it, and rooting out of his mind all the sense of Religion, and
of Good and Evil. So that unless the Man turn an assured Atheist or a stupid
Sot, it will be impossible for him to enjoy his unjust Possessions, without
great Recoilings and Convulsions of Conscience; because his unjust Possessions
will, like the Adulterer's Bastard, be a standing Reproach to him, and a
perpetual Remembrancer of his Guilt and Shame. And when that which a Man enjoys
and lives upon, when the Meat which he gluts, and the Drink which he guzles,
the Clothes which he rustles and flaunts in, shall thus reproach and upbraid
him; O wretched Man! We are the Price of thy Innocence, thy Soul, and thy
Eternal Happiness; for us thou have damned thy self, and freely consigned thy
immortal Spirit to everlasting Horror and Confusion; When his Bags and Coffers
cry Guilty, Guilty, and he sees a Mean Tekel on the Walls of every Room in his
House, and every thing he enjoys whispers some Accusation against him; what
Comfort can he take in the purchase of his Frauds and Oppressions? Were it not
a thousand times better for him to have lived contentedly on a brown Morsel,
than thus to fare deliciously every day with a vexed and a tormented Mind? And
yet this is commonly the Fate of unjust Possessors, who under the disguise of a
cheerful Countenance too commonly wear woeful Hearts, and like Tragedies bound
in gilded Covers, are only gay and splendid without, but full of Stabs and
Wounds within. But suppose that in a continued Tumult of Excesses and Riots,
they should make a shift, whilst they live, to drown the Cries of their guilty
Consciences; yet in all probability whenever Death threatens, or approaches
them in a Disease, and sets them within ken of Eternity, their Conscience in
despite of them will rouse and awake and raise a hideous outcry against them:
for now their Last Will and Testament will set before them a woeful Catalogue of
uncancelled Guilts, and every ill-gotten Penny they have there bequeathed will
put them in mind of their approaching Damnation; and dictate Dread, and Horror
to their Consciences, which in a desperate rage will fly in their Faces and
tell them to their Teeth that they are Cheats and Knaves and Reprobates; that
their Legacies are the Fruits of their Sins, the purchase of their Frauds and
Oppressions; and that for that which they are now bequeathing to other's, they
have long ago bequeathed their Soul to the Devil, who now stands ready to seize
on it and carry it, away to those dark Prisons of Horror where he keeps his
miserable Slaves under a dreadful expectation of their Eternal Judgment. So
that should any Man chance to thrive, and grow rich by Injustice, yet it is a
thousand to one but either living or dying, or both, his Riches will prove a
far worse Plague to him than Poverty it self; and if so, who but a mad Man
would ever abandon himself to a Folly so fruitless and mischievous?

Fifthly and Lastly, CONSIDER the high Provocation that Injustice gives to God.
For God, as I have showed you before, is the Author of all those Rights which
Men are invested with, whether they be natural, or acquired: and being the
Author of them, he is more especially obliged to assert and vindicate them, to
maintain his own Bequests and Donations, and not suffer those to go unpunished,
who presume to purloin or alienate them from their rightful Owners. For he who
wrongfully deprives a Man of any Right; deprives him of what God has given
him, snatches God's Goods out of those hands in which he has trusted and
deposited them; and in so doing robs God himself, and seises his Goods without
his leave. So that every unjust Invasion of another's Rights is an Injury to
God, who is the supreme Proprietor, from whom all Right and Property
descends. For since every Man's Right is derived from, and founded on the
Right of God, whosoever trespasses on the one, must necessarily invade the
other: all that is ours we hold by Tenant-Right from the great Landlord of the
World, whose supreme and independent Propriety is the Ground, and Foundation on
which all our just Claims and Properties depend. He therefore who by Fraud or
Violence dispossesses any Tenant of God, or seises any part of the Property
which he has farmed out to him; does in so doing eject the Landlord, as well
as the Tenant, and so far as in him lies turn God out of his own World, and
usurp his eternal Right and Dominion. And so long as he holds what God has set
to another, he holds not as a Tenant of God, but as a Robber and an Invader of
him: when he seized his unjust Possession, he snatched God's Goods out of his
hands; and while he detains them, he does in effect declare that he will keep
God's Goods in despite of him; that as he has already thrust him out of this
part of his Creation, so he is resolved to keep him out as long as he is able,
and never to permit him to re-enter upon it, so long as he can maintain and
defend it against him. Since therefore we claim by God's own Tenure, and all
our Rights do finally issue and resolve into his; he is peculiarly concerned to
assert, and vindicate them, because they are all his own. Hence is that passage
quoted by St. Paul from God's own mouth, Vengance is mine and I will repay it,
Romans xii. 19. for what is Vengeance, but only a Retribution of Punishments for
Wrongs, and Injuries received? And therefore since all Rights are God's, and
consequently all Wrongs do redound upon him, Vengeance, or Retribution of
Wrongs must necessarily be his Right and Prerogative; and it being his, he will
be sure to repay it one time or other: and though he may defer it a while out
of wise and gracious Ends, yet in the long run it will appear that his
Forbearance is no Payment and the longer he is repaying the Principal, the
greater sum the Interest of his Vengeance will at last amount to. For what
higher Outrage can you do to God who is an Immortal Being, infinitely removed
from all Passion and Suffering, than to break in upon him as you do by every
act of Injustice, and despoil him of his Goods, and rifle his House before his
Face; to turn him out of Doors as it were, and shut up his own Creation against
him; and in effect to tell him, that from henceforth you are resolved to be
your own God, to live at his Allowance no longer, but to carve and divide for
your selves; and that so far as you are concerned, he shall have no more to do
in his own World, but that you will supply his place in his Family, and order
his affairs, and dispose of his Goods, as you think convenient. Which is such
an intolerable Indignity, as cannot but kindle a Resentment in the most
indulgent Nature, and arm even an infinite Patience with Thunderbolts: and
accordingly if you consult either Sacred, or Profane History, you will find
that there is no one Sin which God has so remarkably punished in this World,
as this of Injustice between Man and Man. For this he has been observed, to
plague not only the unjust Persons themselves with such Judgments, as have
ecchoed and resounded their Crimes, but has many times entailed a Curse upon
their Posterity; which like a flying Scourge has pursued them Generation after
Generation, and marked their Descendants with dire Events, like a Coat of Arms
charged with Crosses and Croslets: For this he has pursued whole Nations to
utter Ruin, and Desolation; and 'twas for this that he cut off his own People
the Jews, and converted his beloved Sharon into an eternal Desert. And if his
Vengeance thus smoke against Injustice in this Life, which is the School of
Discipline; how will it burn against it in the other, which is the Stage of
Execution! If the Posterity of the Unjust be thus racked for it upon Earth, how
will the Unjust themselves roar for it in Hell! In a word, if these temporary
Flashes and Eruptions of God's Vengeance against Unrighteousness be so
dreadful, how terribly must it flame against it within the bottomless Vulcano's
of everlasting Burnings! Wherefore as you would not provoke an infinite
Vengeance which you can neither withstand, nor endure; it concerns you
diligently to avoid all Unrighteousness in your Dealings, and Intercourse with
Men; which if you take care to do, and to add to your Justice Mercy, to your
Mercy Sobriety, and to your Sobriety walking humbly with God, you shall be sure
not only to escape his Vengeance both here and hereafter, but also from these
Seeds of Holiness to reap Everlasting Life.

CHAP. I. Of Mercy, as it relieveth the Miseries of the Soul.
AFTER the Consideration of Justice, that of Mercy is to follow: And the proper
Object of Mercy being Misery, it will be requisite in order to the explaining
of this Virtue, to consider what those human Miseries are which it relates to,
and what are the particular Acts of Mercy which belong to them. Now the
Miseries which Men are liable to in this Life are reducible to these Heads:
First, Either they are such as do affect their Souls; or, Secondly, Such as do
affect their Bodies.

I. THE Miseries which do affect the Souls of Men; which may all be
comprehended under these five Heads: 1. Sorrow and Dejection of Mind. 2. Errors
and Mistakes in matters of lesser Importance. 3. Blindness and Ignorance in
things of the greatest Moment. 4. Malice and Obstinacy of Will in destructive
and mischievous Courses. 5. Impotency or want of Power to free and recover
themselves of them.

I. ONE of the Miseries which affect Men's Souls is Sorrow and Dejection of
Mind, which like a Consumption in the Body, preys upon the Soul, dispirits its
faculties and renders them faint and languid in all their Operations. By Sorrow
of the heart, says Solomon, the Spirit is broken. Prove. xv. 13. And indeed
Sorrow is that Sense of the Soul by which it feels and perceives its own
Miseries, and without which it could no more be affected with calamitous
things, than Iron is with the blows of the Hammer. This is the Sting by which
all sad Accidents do wound and inflame our Spirits, and with which the least
trifle in the World can make us miserable in the most prosperous State, and
turn all our Enjoyments into Wormwood. Sorrow therefore and Dejection of mind
being the Point and Edge of all our Miseries, is upon that account a most
proper Object of Mercy; whose peculiar Province it is to ease and relieve the
miserable. Whenever therefore we do converse with the Sorrowful and Dejected,
the Law of Mercy requires us to do what we can to support and relieve them; and
that first by sympathizing with them, by sharing their Griefs, condoling their
Sorrows, and pitying their Calamities, or as the Apostle expresses it, Romans
xii. 15. By weeping with those that weep; which upon the first breaking out of
a great Sorrow is the properest Remedy we can administer. For when a Passion is
in its Rage and Fury, it is no more to be pacified with Reason and Discourse,
than the Northern Wind is with a Lecture of Consolation; and till it has tired
it self a while with the Transports of its own Rage, to endeavor to check it
with Arguments would be as vain an Attempt, as to damn up the Cataracts of Nile
with a Hurdle; which instead of suppressing their Violence would but cause them
to roar the louder, and to swell and break forth into more impetuous Torrents.
The best Course therefore that can be taken at present, is to humor and
gratify the Passion by condoling with it the Calamity which caused it. For as
the fiercest Creatures are most easily tamed by gentle management, by soothing
and stroaking and being kindly treated; so the best Expedient to mitigate
violent Sorrows is to sooth and indulge them till their Violence is abated; to
conform our selves to them, and mingle our Tears and Lamentations with them.
And accordingly we find that to be pitied and condoled is a real Ease and
Comfort to the miserable; and that so far as we partake with other Men's Griefs,
we do translate 'em out of their Breasts into our own: So that by sympathizing
with them we take part of their Sorrows from them, which like Dimensions may be
so divided by us, as to become at least insensible, if not indivisible.
Wherefore since it is not the Tears of their own Eyes only, but of their Friends
Eyes too, that do exhaust the Current of their Griefs; which falling into many
Streams will run more peaceably, and by degrees contract themselves into
narrower Channels; it is an Act of Mercy that we owe to the sorrowful to
condole and sympathize with 'em in their Afflictions. And not to do so, or
instead of that, to be either insensible of their Sorrows, or to take no other
notice of them, but to mock at, and deride them, is a certain Argument of a
cruel and barbarous Temper. And as we ought to sympathize with them in their
Sorrows, so, when they are capable of it, we are obliged by the Laws of Mercy
to use our best endeavor to support and comfort them under their heaviness, as
the Apostle exhorts, 2 Cor. i. 4. sometimes by lessening and extenuating their
Affliction, sometimes by applying to them the Consolations of Religion,
sometimes by representing to them the evil of immoderate Sorrow, and sometimes
by diverting them with innocent Pleasantry, and Cheerfulness. For Sorrow
diverts the mind from all comfortable thoughts, and like a black
Perspective-Glass represents all Objects mournfully and tragically: So that
unless others will have Mercy on it and thrust Comforts into its Mouth, it will
have no Mercy on it self, but sit pining and languishing under incessant Grief
and Discontentedness. Wherefore to cheer and comfort dejected and sorrowful
minds, is both a great and a necessary Act of Mercy; as on the contrary for any
Man causelessly to afflict and grieve another, to add Weight to his Sorrows and
Wormwood to his Gall, and take Pleasure in his Griefs and Vexations, is not
only inhuman but diabolical: For to rejoice in the Afflictions, and recreate
with the Sorrows of the miserable, is the blackest Character that can be given
to a Devil.

II. ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Souls is the Errors and Mistakes
they are liable to in matters of less Importance. The Understandings of Men are
naturally weak and short-sighted, apt to be imposed upon by shows of Truth, and
swallow Lies for Realities, when they are gilded with a fair Probability: And
though we make loud boasts of Certainty and Demonstration, yet, God knows, many
times our Certainties are the Dictates of our wild Imaginations, and our
Demonstrations prove nothing but our own Confidence. For Prejudice, Error and
Inadvertency are as incident to our Minds, as Diseases are to our Bodies; and
there are certain Springs and Principles in all Men's understandings, which do
render them liable to be turned about by strange and unaccountable Impulses.
And generally our Affections are apt to creep into and mingle with our
arguings, so that in most of our Disputes the Argument on both sides is
commonly lost, and the Controversy determins in a Conflict of Affections. And
in a word, the Generality of Men are unalterably determined in their Opinions
by their Fear or their Hope, or their Prejudices, or the Prepossessions of
their Education; which, like so many Whirl-pools, having once sucked a Man in,
do most commonly keep his head under Water, and never permit him to emerge and
recover himself: And if the Prejudices of our Education happen to be false, in
all our Reasonings from them we do only spin out one Error from another, and so
our Thoughts wander in a Labyrinth, wherein the farther we go, the more we lose
our selves. And as our Understandings are very dimsighted, so the Paths wherein
we seek after Truth, are commonly very obscure and intricate: For whilst we
rack our Brains with nice and curious Speculations, we generally but delude our
Reason with the little Images and airy Phantasms of things; while we weary our
Eyes with laborious Reading, our Books prove oftener the Tombs, than the Shrines
of Truth; and while we pursue it through the stormy Seas of Controversy, there
we are tossed with endless Doubts and Difficulties, which like the rolling
Waves crowd one upon the neck of another. And thus we grope to and fro in the
dark, and it is a very great Acquist if in our Search after Knowledge we do but
discover our own Ignorance. It Is true, as for those necessary Truths which are
the Fundamentals of our everlasting Well-being, God has taken care to propose
them to us in so clear a Light, that no Man can be ignorant of them who
sincerely inquires after them: But commonly the remoter any Truth is from a
necessary Article, the less plain and obvious it is to our Understanding; and
therefore if in these we do err and mistake, it is not to be wondered at,
considering how weak our Understanding is, and what disadvantageous Prospect it
has. And though these our mistakes are many times caused by a corrupt Biass in
our Wills, by a factious Prejudice, or an overweening Self-conceit, by a carnal
Interest, or a supine Neglect of the means of a better Information; which
according as they are more or less wilful, do render our Errors Sins of
Infirmity, or damnable Heresy: Yet very often they are merely the Effects of a
weak-sighted Mind, that is either unavoidably seduced with fair Shows, or
innocently tinctured with false Prejudices: And in this case they are not our
Crimes, but our Miseries. For we can no more be obliged not to err in our
Opinions, than not to be sick or hungry; all that we are bound to is to
understand as well as we can, and if when we do so, we should happen to be
deceived, we have a just claim to Mercy and Commiseration. And the proper Acts
of Mercy which this miserable Case requires are first Forbearance and
Toleration; with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one
another in love; as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. iv. 2. that is, abstaining
from all harsh Judgments and severe Censures, from all peevish Separations from
our Communion and Charity, and mutually treating each other with all the Candor
and Forbearance, Lenity and Indulgence that a pitiable Case requires and
deserves. For if I am in the right, and my Brother in the wrong, to be sure it
is my Happiness, and perhaps it is only his Misery; and what an unmerciful part
is it for me to damn, or censure, or rigorously treat him, merely because it is
his lot to be miserable and mine to be happy? What if he has had the ill Luck
to have his Brains cast into a different figure from mine, by reading different
Books or keeping different Company, or being prejudiced by a different
Education; is it reasonable that I should hate or severely judge him, because
he has been unfortunate, and perhaps could no more prevent those little Errors
wherein he differs from me, than he could the Moles on his Skin, or the
different color of his Hair and Complexion? What is this but to load the
oppressed, and heap Misery upon Misery, which is the most unmanly Cruelty? In
this case therefore the Laws of Mercy require us as private Christians, to bear
with one another's mistakes, to make the most candid Judgment and Construction
of them, and interpret them in the most favorable sense; and not to separate
from one another for Trifles, or fly out into Bitterness and Animosity upon
every little Opinion which we judge false and erroneous.

II. ANOTHER Act of Mercy which this Case requires, is to endeavor by all
prudent and peaceable ways to rectify one another's Mistakes. If I behold my
Brother's Understanding laboring under the misery of Error, Mercy will incline
me, so far as I am able, to endeavor his Relief and Recovery; an Error in the
Understanding being as great a misfortune, as a wound or a disease in the Body:
and what merciful Mind can behold that noblest Part of a Man diseased and
affected, without being strongly inclined to administer what it can toward its
Health and Recovery? And as Mercy will incline us to it, so it will direct us
to the properest Means of effecting it: for if it be Mercy and Compassion that
moves me to rectify my Brother's Mistake, it will move me to endeavor it with
the Spirit of Meekness, which as the Apostle assures us, Galat. vi. 1. is the
most likely expedient to restore him; that is, calmly and compassionately to
represent to him his Error, so as that he may see it is not my Design to expose
or upbraid him, to insult over his Folly, or to triumph in his Confutation; but
merely to set his Understanding to rights, and to rescue it from the Mistakes
in which it is unfortunately entangled. And this, if any thing, will dispose
him to listen to my Reasons, and make way for my Arguments to enter into his
mind: whereas by deriding his Error, or persecuting it with sharp and bitter
Invectives, I shall engage his passion to defend it, as well as his Reason; for
witty Jests and severe Sarcasms may provoke an Adversary, but will never
convince him. And as Mercy will direct me to treat my erring Brother with
Meekness and Compassion, so it will also instruct me not to teaze and importune
him with perpetual Disputacity; for this will look rather like an affectation
of wrangling with him, than a desire of convincing him: but to wait the fairest
Opportunities of remonstrating his Error to him, when he is most at leisure,
and most disposed to attend to Reason and Argument. For Errors, like Paper
Kites, are many times raised and kept up in Men's minds, by the incessant
Bluster of overfierce Opposition.

III. ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Souls is Blindness and
Ignorance in things of the greatest moment, which is doubtless one of the
greatest Miseries that can happen to a Soul in this Life. For the Interests of
Souls are everlasting, they being born to live happily or miserably for ever;
and their Happiness depending upon the right use of their Liberty, and this
upon their Knowledge how to use and determine it; it will be impossible for
them to attain to eternal Happiness, or escape eternal Misery, without
Knowledge to steer and direct them: so that whilst they are ignorant of those
Truths, by which their Liberty is to be governed, and their Choices and Actions
to be determined to eternal Happiness, they are under a very remote Incapacity
of being happy. And what a miserable Case is this, to have an eternal Interest
at stake, and not to know how to manage it? To be traveling on this narrow
Line, or Frontier which divides those boundless Continents of everlasting
Happiness and Misery, and not to see one step of our way before us, nor to
perceive whither we are going till we are gone beyond recovery? Should you
behold a blind Man walking upon the brink of a fatal Precipice, without any
Guide to direct his steps, and secure him from the neighboring Danger, would
not your Hearts ache and your Bowels yearn for him? Would you not call out to
him and warn him of his Danger, and make all the have you could to take him by
the Hand and conduct him to a place of Safety? And is it not a much more
deplorable sight, to see a poor ignorant Wretch walking blindfold on the Brinks
of Hell, and for want of sight to direct him Heaven-wards ready to blunder at
every step into the Pit of Destruction? Can you behold such a miserable Object
with a regardless eye, and yet pretend to Pity or Compassion? Can you sit still
and see him cast himself into the mouth of such horrid and amazing Danger,
without warning him of it, and endeavoring by the best Instructions you can
give him to lead him off, and direct him to eternal Happiness? Surely did we
but duly understand the Worth and the Danger of Souls, such a woeful Spectacle
could not but affect our Bowels, and excite us to employ all our Power to
convince him of the Danger he is running into, and instruct him how to avoid
it. For this is the proper Act of Mercy which this miserable Case calls for,
viz. to endeavor to dispel that fatal Ignorance which surrounds Men minds, and
to enlighten them with all those Principles of Religion which are necessary to
conduct them to eternal Happiness. For it is not so great a piece of Mercy to
give a starving Man Bread, as it is to inform an ignorant Sinner and feed his
famished Mind with the Bread of Life; because without the former it is only his
Body will die, whereas without the latter his Body and Soul will die for ever.
When therefore we know any Persons to be grossly ignorant of God and Religion,
the Laws of Mercy require us to use all prudent means to instruct and inform
them: and if they are in our power, as our Children and Servants are, to take
care to train them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord, to catechize and
instruct them in the Doctrines of Faith, and season their Minds with the
Principles of pure Religion; that so understanding their Duty, and the vast and
indispensable Obligations of it, they may not leap blindfold into eternal
Perdition. For whilst we train them up in Blindness and Ignorance, we do in
effect Predestinate them to eternal Ruin, and like those barbarous Parents that
offered up their Children to Molock, devote them as so many Sacrifices to the
Devil. Wherefore we stand obliged, not only in Fidelity to God, who has
committed their Souls to our charge, and will one day require an account of
them at our Hands; but also in Mercy to them, that they may not perish
eternally for lack of knowledge; to take all possible care to instruct their
minds in the Duties and Obligations of Religion. And as Mercy obliges us to
instruct our Children and Servants who are in our power and disposal, so it
also obliges us to instruct others whom we know to be ignorant of God and their
Duty; to take all fair opportunities to insinuate the Knowledge of Divine
Things to them, and to cultivate their rude and barbarous Minds with the
Principles of Virtue and Religion; or at least where we cannot be admitted to
do them this good Office our selves, or our endeavoring it may be looked upon
as a piece of Sauciness or Pedantry, to recommend their miserable Case to
others who have more Authority with them, or from whose hands it may be better
taken. For sure if we have any Mercy or Compassion in us, we cannot sit still,
and see a miserable Wretch wandering in the dark upon the Confines of eternal
Ruin, without endeavoring by some way or other to reduce and light him back to
Heaven. Hence 2 Timothy ii. 25, 26. It Is made a necessary act of Mercy, Meekly to
instruct those that oppose themselves, that is, out of ignorance of the Gospel,
if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
Truth, that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil who are
taken captive by him at his will.

IV. ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Souls, is Malice and Obstinacy
of Will in mischievous and destructive courses; which is doubtless one of the
greatest Infelicities that can happen to a Man on this side Hell. For to be
obstinate in mischievous courses is but one remove from the forlorn Condition
of a damned Soul, which being fixed and determined to Evil by the invincible
Obstinacy of its own will, lies under a fatal Necessity of being its own
eternal Hell and Devil: so that every degree of Obstinacy in Wickedness is a
nearer Approach to eternal Damnation, and will at last inevitably center in it,
if it be not stopped in its Course and Progress, and cured by a timely
Application. Now what a deplorable sight is this, to see a wretched Soul
obstinately pursuing his own destruction, and even forcing his way to Hell
through all the resistances of his Religion, and Reason, and Conscience
together? Should you see a mad Man break loose from his Chain, and run his Head
against a Wall, or catch up a Knife or Dagger and thrust it into his own
Breast, and repeat Stab after Stab, in despite of all your Counsels and
Dissuasives, would you not pity and lament his Case, and heartily wish him
deprived of all that Liberty which he employs only to his own Destruction? And
is it not a much more lamentable spectacle, to see a wild and desperate Soul
break loose from those ties of Religion and Conscience which bind it to its
Duty and Happiness; and in a deaf and obstinate Rage seize on the Weapons of
Perdition, and plunge them into its own Bowels, and by repeated Acts of
Wickedness imbrue its hands in its own blood; whilst the blessed Spirit, with
its own natural sense of God, are struggling with it in vain, and fruitlesly
endeavoring to disarm its desperate Fury, that it may not wound it self to
eternal Death? What merciful Heart can forbear wishing, O would to God this
miserable Soul had no Will, that it had not the Liberty to choose or act! Would
to God it were a Stone, or a Tree that have no power to dispose of, or
determine their own Motions, rather than be thus left at liberty as it is, only
to murder and destroy it self? But since to wish thus would be in vain, who
that has any Pity can sit still and see a miserable Wretch thus outrage
himself, without endeavoring to hold his Hands, and bind him down with Reason
and good Counsel? And this is the proper Act of Mercy which the miserable Case
in hand requires, viz. When we see an obstinate Sinner resolutely pursuing his
own Destruction, to endeavor, by prudent and seasonable Reproofs, by pious and
compassionate Counsels, and Admonitions, to reclaim him from the Error of his
way. For thus our Holy Religion directs us to exhort one another daily while
it is called to day, least any of us should be hardened, i. e. irrecoverably
hardened, through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. iii. 13. And how acceptable a
work this is to God, St. James informs us, Chap. v. 19, 20. Brethren if any
of you err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know that he who
converteth a Sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and
shall hide a multitude of sins. Whereas by permitting Men to run on in their
sins without any check or disturbance, under a pretense of Complaisance and
Civility, is as much as to say; Sir, you are going headlong to destruction, and
go you are like for me; for my part whether you are damned, or saved, is much
at one to me; if you are minded to make an experiment of damnation, much good
may it do you; I know should I attempt to hinder or disturb you, you will think
me rude and troublesome, and therefore rather than I will run the hazard, even
let the Devil take you. And would it not be a high Complement, if you saw a Man
plunging a Sword into his Bowels, to cry, Sir, I would hold your Arm, but that
I am afraid you will be angry with me? It Is true, this merciful Work of Reproof
and Admonition ought to be managed with a great deal of Caution: if the Person
we reprove be out of our power, we ought to observe the mollia tempora fandi,
to forbear him till his Passion is down, or his intemperate Draught digested,
till his Mind is sedate and calm, and best disposed to attend to and receive a
pious Admonition: for he who reproves a Man when his Mind is disordered by
Passion or Intemperance, does but Preach Patience to a Northern Wind, which the
more he endeavors to resist, the louder it will storm and bluster. But then
when he is fit to receive a Reprehension, we ought to give it with the greatest
Privacy: If he offend in public Conversation, where there are other Witnesses
of it besides our selves, unless the matter be highly scandalous, it is
sufficient for the present that we express our Dislike of it by the Severity of
our Looks, and the Seriousness of our Behavior; and afterward between him and
our selves, to remonstrate to him the Folly and Danger of his Sin. For to
reprove Men publicly looks more like Malice, then Mercy; especially till we
have first made Trial of private Reprehensions, and found them ineffectual. But
then with our Reproofs we ought to take care that we do not intermingle
Lightness, or Drollery on the one hand, nor Passion, or sharp Invectives on the
other; but that we perform this merciful Office with the greatest Modesty,
Seriousness, and Compassion; first endeavoring to anticipate the Offender's
Displeasure, with kind and gentle Insinuations of our unfeigned Respect and
Benevolence toward him; then representing his Crime to him with such a
compassionate sense of the Evil and Danger of it, as may convince him that that
which renders us so severe to his Sin, is nothing but mere Mercy and Charity to
his Soul: for to reprove a Man lightly, or passionately, looks more like a
design to deride, or reproach him for his Sin, than to reclaim him from it.
Lastly, we ought to take great care that the Matter we reprove him for be
really culpable, that we do not reprehend him for any innocent Freedom, no nor
for every trifling Indecency; but only for plain and unquestionable Trespasses
upon Religion: lest he should look upon our Reproofs as the language of a
supercilious and morose Spirit, that affects to domineer and find fault, and as
such should despise and reject them. To avoid which it is highly advisable,
that while we reprove what is evil in him, we should commend what is good; that
so our bitter Pill being sweetened with a due Commendation, may be rendered
more palatable, and so go down with less Difficulty. But if the Offender whom
we reprove be under our Power and Government, to our Reproofs and Admonitions
we are obliged in Mercy to add Correction, if Necessity requires: for when it
is come to that pass, that our Child or Servant must smart or be damned, it is a
cruel Softness and Indulgence, not to chastize him. Were your House on fire,
you would think it a Mercy to be rescued from the Flames, though you were
dragged out by the Hair of the Head: And when the Flames of Hell are kindling
about your Child or your Servant, would it not be much more merciful to snatch
him away, though with Smart and Violence, than to stand still and let him
perish for fear of hurting him? It Is true, Correction ought not to be used till
gentler Means have been tried and found ineffectual: For Blows are Arguments
for Beasts, and for beastly Natures, fit only to be applied to stubborn and
obstinate Tempers that are insensible of Reason and Persuasion: But when they
are applied, it ought to be done with the greatest Tenderness and Compassion,
when our Minds are calm, and our Passion allayed; that so the Offender may be
sensible we do it not to wreak our Spleen, or vent and ease our Fury, but
merely to reclaim and amend him: The Sense of which will cause the Correction
to operate more kindly in him, to affect his Ingenuity as well as his Fear, and
to melt him with the Mercy, whilst it breaks him with the Severity of it: This
therefore is the Mercy which we are obliged to exercise toward obstinate and
stubborn Offenders.

Fifthly and Lastly, ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Souls is
Impotency, or Want of Power to recover themselves out of their vicious Courses;
for a vicious State does so miserably weaken and disable Men's Faculties, so
impair the health and vigor of their Minds, that it is not in their Power to
help and recover themselves out of it. For to their Recovery it is necessary,
first that their Thoughts should be determined to a fixed and exact
Consideration of the Evil and Danger of their Sins, and of the blessed Hopes
which God has set before them to tempt them to renounce and forsake them: And
then that these Considerations should so prevail upon and influence their
Wills, as to captivate them into a thorough Resolution of Amendment; both which
Effects are out of the reach of the Sinners Power, considered singly, and
without the concurrence of the Divine Grace. For his Mind is so depressed and
bowed down toward these earthly and sensible Objects, which have been hitherto
the sole Companions of his Thoughts, that it is not able to raise up it self to
the Consideration of Divine Things: And though now and then, a good Meditation
may break in upon him, and seize upon his Thoughts, yet it cannot hold them a
quarter of an hour together; they are so roving and slippery, so backward and
averse to any thing that is serious and divine: So that unless the Divine
Spirit lays hold upon them, and by his powerful and importunate Inspirations
confines and fixes them, the Man will never be able to reduce them to any fast
and steady Consideration. And when with the Holy Spirit's Assistance he has
effected this, he has a perverse and obstinate Will to deal with; which no
Considerations will be able to determine to a fixed Resolution of Amendment, but
what are set home upon his Mind, and continually actuated and enlivened with
the vigorous Influence of the Spirit of God. So that of himself every habitual
Sinner is a most weak and impotent Creature, that with all the Powers of his
Mind and Will, the utmost Efforts and Struglings of his own Faculties is not
able without a supernatural Aid to rescue himself from Sin and Misery. For how
many sorrowful Instances do we every day converse with of Men, who in their
sober Thoughts will sadly lament their own Follies; and blush in the morning
when they remember how their Brains were set a float by their last Night's
Intemperance; who yet when the next Temptation beckoneth them to their Lust
again, return as greedily to it as ever; and though when they have repeated
their Sin, they curse it and resolve against it, yet when they are tempted, sin
again, and then weep and call themselves miserable: But still alas! the same
Enchantment confineth them to the same Circle? Now in this Philosophy is at a
stand, nor can there any other rational account be given of it, but only the
miserable Frailty and Impotence which Men contract by vicious Courses. What
then is to be done for these miserable Persons in this their forlorn and
helpless Condition? Why, besides all the abovenamed Instances of Mercy which
we are obliged even for Pity's sake to apply to them; we are also bound in
Mercy earnestly to recommend their woeful Condition to the God of all Grace and
Compassion, to beseech him to commiserate their Impotence, and with the
outstretched Arm of his Grace to touch their dead Souls, and raise them up
into Newness of Life. For though in all Cases of Misery Prayer is a proper Act
of Mercy, yet there is none that does so much need and call for our Prayers as
this: For in all other Cases, either it is in the Power of the Miserable to
help themselves, or it is in the Power of the Merciful to rescue and relieve
them, or the Miseries are such as will quickly end and expire into Eternal
Ease; but as for the Misery of the obstinate Sinner, it is such as God alone
can remedy, and such as i^ it be not remedied the sooner, will quickly
determine in endless and remediless Misery. Wherefore if we have any Bowels of
Mercy or Compassion in us, How can we sit still and see an impotent Sinner
bound as it were to the stake of Perdition, and not able to escape, though he
sees the Flames of Hell rising round about him; without lifting up our Eyes to
God, in whom alone his Help and Salvation lies, and earnestly imploring him to
commiserate the perishing Wretch, and to snatch him from his approaching ruin?
Wherefore as the Law of Mercy obliges us in general to pray for all that are in
Misery, so more especially for these wretched Creatures, who are already within
the Suburbs of endless Misery; and unless God stretches forth his Arm and saves
them, will be within a few moments beyond the reach of Prayer and Mercy. And
thus you see what those Instances of Mercy are, which we are obliged to
exercise toward the Souls of Men: And for the enforcement of our Duty herein,
I shall subjoyn some Considerations to excite our Christian Compassion.

I. CONSIDER the inestimable Worth of those Souls, upon which your Mercy is to
be employed. I confess, were the Souls of Men of the same alloy with their
Bodies, whose highest Pleasures do consist in the gratification of a few
brutish Senses, and are nothing else but the agreeable Touches of certain
little Skins and Arteries, which are as inconsiderable as a Lutestring; and
which, after they have repeated these Pleasures some twenty or thirty years, do
commonly expire into Insensibility and Rottenness; were, I say, their Souls of
the same Make and Frame, it were not so much to be admired that we are so
indifferently affected toward them. But these precious Beings are of a much
nobler Constitution, their Faculties are made to relish Godlike and Angelical
Delights, to drink for-ever of that Divine Nectar of Contemplation, and
Holiness, and Love, and to feast upon those Joys with which God entertains
himself, and all his Choir of Angels: And as they are born to much higher
Pleasures and Enjoyments, than those wretched Bodies which enclose them, so
they are also made for an infinitely longer Life and Duration: For they must
live for ever in inconceivable Happiness or Misery; and when their Bodies are
mouldered into insensible Dust, be partaking either of the Raptures of Angels,
or of the Horrors and Agonies of Devils. And can I think my self obliged in
Mercy to feed and cloth the Body of my Child or Servant, the Body which within
a few days in despite of all my Care and Pains will resolve into a Clod of
stupid Earth! and yet be altogether unconcerned what becomes of that precious
Soul, which must be the subject of an everlasting Happiness or Misery? Is it
possible I should be so careful and sollicitous as I am, to heap up great
Fortunes for my Children, that so they may swim in Plenty a few Moments, wear
fine Clothes, and fare deliciously every day, and at last go down to the Worms
with Pomp; and in the mean time neglect that immortal Being within them, which,
when all the Wealth I provided for them is shrunk into six foot of Earth and a
Winding Sheet, must be a glorified Spirit, or a damned Ghost! Sure did we but
seriously consider, with what vast Capacities of Happiness or Misery the Souls
of Men are framed and constituted, and what proportionable Fates do attend
them; we should be much more solicitous than we are, not only to secure our own
Souls, but also to make a timely provision for the Souls of our Children and
Relations.

II. CONSIDER how much you are interested and concerned in the Fate of the
Souls of others, but especially of your Children and Servants, for in this
state of Danger wherein we are placed, God has committed us to one another's
Care, with a strict Injunction that we should exhort one another daily, while
it is called To day, least any of us be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. Heb. iii. 13. And if when it is in our power to prevent it, we suffer our
Brother to be irrecoverably hardened in his Sin, we are accountable for it at
the Tribunal of God, who will one day severely charge us for this our cruel
Unfaithfulness to our Brother, in suffering him to miscarry for ever, without
admonishing him of his Danger, and endeavoring to rescue him from it by our
charitable Counsels and Persuasions: So that if we suffer him to fall by
neglecting to exhort and admonish him, in all probability he will not fall
alone, but pull us down along with him into Eternal Perdition. Wherefore it
concerns us for our own sakes, so far as we have opportunity to discharge all
Offices of Mercy toward the Souls of others; lest whilst they perish through
our Neglect, we should be involved in their Ruin. But then as for our Children
and Servants, their Souls are more immediately committed to our Care and
Conduct, as being placed under our Power and Disposal by God's overruling
Providence; which by bestowing them upon us, and placing them with us, does in
effect thus bespeak us: These precious Souls I entrust in your hands, to be
educated and trained up to Eternal Happiness: See you give me a good Account of
them, for if they perish through your Neglect, whenever I make Inquisition for
Blood, I will certainly require it at your hands. How then shall we be able to
lift up our Heads, when God shall demand of us, What are become of those
precious Jewels which he committed to our trust? If through our barbarous
Neglect they should happen to be lost and forfeited to Eternal Misery; if
through a wretched Regardlesness of their Eternal Interest, we have not
instructed and admonished them; if through a cruel Fondness and Indulgence we
have not reproved and corrected them; or if by our wicked Connivance or Example
we have encouraged and soothed them up in any destructive course of Action; and
so they should finally miscarry. Lord, what a dreadful Account shall we have to
give, when we come to appear at thy Tribunal! Where the Blood of our Children
and our Servants Souls shall join with our own Personal Guilts, to cry aloud
for Vengeance against us. Wherefore if we have no Pity or Compassion for them,
yet let us at least be so merciful to our selves, as not to omit those Offices
of Mercy, which we are obliged to render to them.

III. CONSIDER what a mighty Influence your Mercy may have upon their Welfare.
It is not to be imagined how many Souls might be saved from perishing, were we
but so kind and merciful as to distribute the Bread of Life to one another,
according as we have Ability and Opportunity: How many a dark Mind might be
enlightened by our sound and pious Instructions? How many a headstrong Will
might we curb and restrain by our prudent and seasonable Reproofs and
Admonitions? And how can we tell, but these our merciful Endeavors may,
through the Concurrence of Divine Grace, prove blessed means of their final
Recovery and Happiness? And if so, What better Office can we do in the World;
or what higer Dignity can we aspire to, than to be the Saviors and Redeemers
of Souls? And if by our Instructions and Admonitions, we might do so much good
in our common Conversation among Men; How much more might we do in our own
Families? For our Children and Servants being under our Power and Government,
will upon that account receive our Admonitions with greater Awe and Reverence;
and consequently comply with them with greater Ease and Readiness. And then we
having the Conduct of their young and tender Years, in which their Minds and
Manners may be easily shaped in any Form, it is in our Power to stamp upon them
what Impressions we please: So that would we but now take Care to instruct
their Minds, and regulate their Wills, with wise and good Principles and
Admonitions, we might easily impregnate their Natures with strong dispositions
to Virtue and Religion; and so by degrees cultivate those Dispositions into a
State of Grace, and habitual Goodness. And when this blessed Effect is so much
in our Power, what a cruel Neglect is it not to contribute toward it so far as
we are able? Should you see a Mother deny a morsel of Bread to her famished
Child, when she has enough and to spare; or strip it stark naked in a deep
Winter's Frost, and expose it to the Mountains to be starved with Cold; Would
you not brand her for a Monster of her Sex, and exclaim against her with the
greatest Detestation and Abhorrence? And yet alas! that unnatural Cruelty which
we should so much abhor in another, we our selves are too often guilty of in a
much higher Degree. For by neglecting to instruct and educate our Families in
Religion, we deny them the most necessary thing in the World, even that which
is the Food and Raiment of their Souls; without which they cannot live, but
must necessarily starve and famish for ever: And therefore by how much more
precious their Souls are than their Bodies, and by how much more deplorable
eternal Death is than temporal, by so much more barbarous and inhumane are
those Parents, who do not institute their Children in Religion, than those who
suffer them to perish with Hunger* or Cold. For are you such Infidels as to
imagine, that they are born only for this Life, and that there is nothing
beyond the Grave in which they are concerned? If not, What account can you give
of this your unnatural Neglect of them? If you think they must live for ever
when they are gone out of this World, Why then do not you take care that they
may live in the other World as well as in this? O Improvident that we are! Can
we be so much concerned that they may be happy for a Moment, and yet so
indifferent whether they are happy or miserable for ever* Are their Souls such
Trifles, or their everlasting Fate such an Indifferent Matter, as that when it
is so much in your Power, you think it not worth your while to concern your
selves so much about them? Wherefore in the Name of God, consider with your
selves, what an infinite deal of Good you are capable of doing them by your
Pious Instructions and Admonitions; and what an unnatural Barbarity it would be
to omit and neglect it.

CHAP. II. Of Mercy, as it relieveth the Miseries of the Body.
I SHALL now proceed to the second sort of Miseries, viz. such as do affect
Men's Bodies; under which I shall show you what Acts of Mercy this kind of
Miseries requires of us. Now these as the former, may be reduced to Five Heads:

First, NATURAL Blemishes and Defects. Secondly, SICKNESSES and Diseases.
Thirdly, OUTWARD Force and Violence injuriously offered to them by those in
whose Power they are. Fourthly, CIVIL or arbitrary Punishments inflicted on
them for Injuries received. Fifthly, WANT of outward Necessaries.
I. ONE of the Miseries which affects Men's Bodies is their natural Blemishes
and Defects; such as Lameness or Crookedness, the Want of our Senses, or the
disproportion of our Parts, or Features; all which are real Infelicities, for
as much as they render our Bodies either less useful to our selves, or less
graceful and amiable to others. And indeed our Body being an Object of Sense is
usually much more remarked and taken notice of, than our Soul which is an
invisible Being; and consequently the Defects and Blemishes of our Bodies lying
more in view, are much more liable to be reflected on both by our selves and
those we converse with, than the Stains and Deformities of our Minds and Wills;
which being placed out of sight are less exposed to Observation: Which is the
reason that our Corporeal Defects are so grievous to us, because being so
apparent as they are both to our own and others Senses, they do not only
upbraid us to our selves, who being led by Sense are apt to value our selves by
sensible Graces and Perfections; but are also prone to create a mean and
contemptible Opinion of us in the Minds of others; the very suspicion of which,
if we are not raised above such mean Considerations, will be exceeding apt to
grieve and afflict us. In this case therefore the Law of Mercy requires us not
to contemn or undervalue Men, not to upbraid or reproach them upon the account
of any bodily Blemish or Defect; but to overlook these as inconsiderable Flaws
of their Case and Outside, and render them all those Honors and Respects which
the Graces and Virtues of their Minds deserve: Considering that the Body is not
the Man, but the immortal Mind that inhabits it; and that many times the
richest Diamonds wear the roughest Coats and Outsides; that those natural
Blemishes are Infelicities which Men could not prevent, and which they cannot
rectify; that it was not in their Power to order Nature in their own Composure,
but that what they had there, was such as they could neither give themselves,
nor yet refuse, when it was bequeathed to them; and that therefore to deride
and expose them for any Mishape or Blemish in their Composition, is to fling
Salt into their Wounds, to fret and inflame their Misery. And yet alas! How
common a Practice is this to sport with the Deformities of Men, as if God and
Nature had designed them for so many Finger-buts of Scorn and Derision; to make
them the Themes of our Jests and Laughter; which is a lamentable instance of
the foul Degeneracy of Humane Nature, that can thus play upon Misery, and turn
that which is an Object of Pity and Compassion, into a Triumph of Mirth and
Drollery: for certainly how light and trifling soever it may appear through the
common Practice of it, it is a sign of barbarous Illnature for Men to deride
those Defects and Blemishes in another, which he is too prone to grieve at, but
yet cannot help, as being his Infelicities and not his Faults.

II ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Bodies is Sicknesses and
Diseases; by which the strength of our Natures is gradually exhausted, the
Vigor of our Spirits wasted, the Activity of our Parts cramped and abated, and
our Bodies are rendered through incessant Pains and Weakness not only useless,
but burthensom to our Souls. In this case therefore the Law of Mercy requires
of us to render to our sick Friends, Neighbors and Acquaintants all such good
Offices as do any way conduce to their Support, Refreshment, or Recovery. As
first, if their Sickness be such as will safely admit of Discourse and
Conversation, we are obliged in Mercy to visit them, provided that our Company
will be acceptable; and to endeavor by our Discourse to cheer their drooping
Spirits, to intermix their sorrowful Hours with the Pleasures of good
Conversation, and to administer to their wearied Thoughts the Supports and
Comforts of Religion. For cheerful and good Discourse is many times better than
the richest Cordial, it makes the Patient to forget his pain, or at least
allays and mitigates his Sense of it; it diverts his thoughts from their
sorrowful Themes, and entertains them with brisk and sprightful Idea's; it
raises the languishing Heart, and like David's Music, charms the rage of those
evil Spirits which infest it with their unnatural Heats. So that by visiting
our sick Friends; when they are willing to admit of our Conversation, and able
to bear it, we many times prove their best Physicians, and administer to them
the greatest Relief and Ease; and therefore if when we might do them so much
good by our Company, we needlessly withdraw or absent our selves from them, we
are very much wanting in our Charity and Mercy toward them. But then as we are
obliged in Mercy to visit them, when their case will safely and conveniently
admits of it; so we are also obliged by the same Mercy to render them all those
necessary Assistances, which either their Souls or Bodies do require and need;
to endeavor to awaken their Minds into serious Thoughts and Purposes, to
advise them of their Duty, and to resolve their Doubts, to comfort and support
them with the blessed Hopes of Religion, and to take all fair Opportunities to
prepare their Souls for a happy Death and a glorious Eternity; that so whether
they recover or no, this temporary Sickness of their Bodies may contribute to
the eternal Health of their Souls. And then in order to their Recovery, we
stand bound by the Laws of Mercy to contribute what we are able to their bodily
Ease and Refreshment; to be ready to serve them in all their Necessities, and
to help them when they cannot help themselves; to compassionate their Griefs,
and bear with their Pevishnesses, and to the best of our knowledge to direct
them to the ablest Physicians, or the most suitable Means; and if they are poor
and indigent, to supply them with all such Remedies as are necessary to their
Health and Recovery: and lastly, to be their earnest Advocates at the Throne of
Grace, that the God of all Power and Goodness in whose hands are the issues of
Life and Death, would commiserate their Sorrows and refresh their Weariness,
and either remove their Sickness, or Sanctify it to their Eternal Health.

III. ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Bodies is outward Force, and
violence from those in whose power they are; such as Captivity and
Imprisonment, Persecutions or cruel Torments; all which do importunately
solicit the timely Succors of our Mercy and Compassion. For so for the first
of them, viz. Bondage and and Captivity, it is a sore and comprehensive Misery
that commonly draws a long and heavy Chain of Calamities after it: for it is not
only a Deprivation of our Liberty, which is one of the dearest of all our
temporal Blessings, but also a Confiscation of it into the Hands and disposal
of our Enemies: and when our Persons are exposed to the will and tyranny of our
Enemies, what can be expected from them in this degenerate state of Humane
Nature, but a cruel and barbarous usage; to be worn out with Stripes and Hunger
and intolerable Labor, and be forced to pine away our wretched Lives in
unpitied Anguish and Vexation of Soul; especially if those whom we are enslaved
to happen to be* Enemies to our Religion, as well as Country; which is the case
of those miserable Captives with whom our Mercy is most concerned; who being
under the power of those that are sworn Enemies to the name of Christ, must
upon that account expect to be treated with much more Rigor and Severity;
there being no Enmity so fierce and cruel, as that which is backed and set on
by Conscience, and enraged with zeal for Religion. And when Men are ill treated
not only as they are Slaves, but as they are Christians, what a hazardous
Temptation are they under to renounce their Christianity, and to exchange their
hopes of Heaven for their Liberty, and to enslave their Souls to Ransom their
Bodies? And when both their Souls and Bodies are thus exposed to Wretchedness
and Misery, what woeful Circumstances can render them more proper Objects of our
Mercy? Wherefore in this case we are obliged in Mercy, when any fair
Opportunity is proposed to us, to contribute to their Ransom proportionably to
our Ability; and so far as it is consistent with the public Benefit, to
solicit their Cause both with God and Men; to beseech him to support and
preserve them, and to persuade all those with whom we have any Power or
Interest, to a liberal Concurrence toward their Relief, and Redemption.

AND then as for Imprifonment, which is a sort of Captivity too, what a
calamitous Condition is it for a Man to be shut up in a close and unwholsom
Durance, to dwell with Hunger and Cold, and be confined to a hard Lodging, a
dark Solitude, or a wretched Company; to be sequestered from the Conversation of
his Friends, from the Comforts of Diversion, and from his Business and
Employment, and all opportunities of making Provision for his poor Family? All
which unhappy Circumstances do commonly meet in the State and Condition of
Prisoners, and render it exceedingly wretched and miserable. In which case the
Mercy which is required of us is, first to visit them in this their
uncomfortable Solitude and Confinement, supposing that they are our Friends and
Acquaintants; and to endeavor by our Conversation to divert their Sorrows, to
raise and strengthen their Hopes, and to cheer them with fresh Assurances of
our Friendship; and then to use all just endeavors to mollify their
Adversaries, to vindicate their Innocence, or to Compound their Debts, if they
are not able to discharge them. But whether they are our Friends or
Acquaintants, or no, the Law of Mercy obliges us, as we have Opportunity and
Ability, to relieve their Necessities, to redress their Injuries, and if it be
just and feasible, to contribute to their Enlargement, that so they may enjoy
themselves with Comfort, and by their honest Industry make Provision for those
who depend on them.

AND then lastly, for bodily Torments and Persecutions, you need not be told
what a Misery that is; for your own Sense will inform you, how dolorous it is
to Flesh and Blood, to be cruelly scourged, beaten and abused; to be pinched
with Hunger, harrassed with Labor, and dispirited for Want of necessary Ease
and Refreshment; and therefore as Mercy binds you by the strictest Obligations,
not to inflict these Evils upon your Children, or Servants, or any others that
are in your Power and Disposal; so it also engages you to endeavor the Relief
of all such unhappy Persons, whom you know to be thus cruelly treated; to
intercede in their behalf with those their hard-hearted Parents, Masters, or
Conquerors, by whom they are thus unmercifully dealt with, to remonstrate to
them their Cruelty and Inhumanity, and to endeavor, by such Arguments as are
most likely to affect them, to reduce them to a more merciful Temper and
Treatment: and if in despite of your Arguments they still persist in their
Cruelty, to use all just and lawful ways to curb and restrain them, to complain
of them to those who have power to Correct them, and to rescue the miserable
Wretches out of their Power and Disposal.

AND then as for those who are unjustly perfecuted for their Conscience and
Religion, who to secure their Souls, and their Loyalty to God and their
Savior, are forced to fly from their Habitations and Countries, or to submit
themselves to Spoil and Depredation, to Imprisonment and Famine; Torture and
Death; these doubtless are of all others the greatest Objects of our Mercy,
because they suffer for our common Master and in our common Cause, which ought
to be dearer to us than our own Lives; because our Religion suffers with them,
and what they suffer we must suffer (unless we will renounce our Religion) if
ever we are reduced to their Circumstances. And can we with unconcerned Hearts
behold our persecuted Brethren, flying into our Arms for Succor before the
mighty Nimrods of the Earth, with their Souls; their Consciences, and their
Religion in their Hands; and with pitiful Looks beseeching us to deliver them
from the dreadful Dilemma they are put to, of delivering up their Souls, or
Bodies for a Prey; without Agonies of Pity and Compassion? And if we have any
Mercy or Compassion for them, by what more suitable Acts can we express it,
than by a kind and welcome Reception of those who fly to us for Succor, and a
free and liberal Contribution toward their Relief and Subsistence; and by
assisting those with the Charity of our Prayers; whom we cannot reach with the
Charity of our Alms; or as the Apostle expresses it, by remembering those that
are in bonds, that is, so as to pity them and pray for them, and if it were in
our Power, so as to visit and comfort and relieve them, as being bound with
them, and also with the same effect to remember those that suffer Adversity as
being our selves also in the body. Heb. xiii. 3.

IV. ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Bodies is Civil, or Arbitrary
Punishments inflicted on them for Injuries received. For all considerable
Injuries do give us a Right to punish the Of-Offender, either by due course of
Law, or else immediately by our own Power and Authority. If by Nature or
Compact the Offender be put under our Power and Disposal, his offense gives us
a Right to correct him by our own Authority; if not, his offense gives us
Right to appeal to the Public Tribunals, and there to exact of him such
Penalties as the Law denounces in the case. Now because Men's Souls are out of
the reach of all Humane Punishments, and liable only to the lash of the Father
of Spirits; therefore we can exact no other Penalties of Offenders, but only
such as do affect their Bodies with Shame, or Pain, with loss of bodily Goods,
or wearisome Labor, or confinement of Liberty; all which being Miseries to the
Body, are proper Objects of our Compassion and Mercy. And what Mercy these
Miseries require, may be easily collected from the natural End of Punishment,
which is not so much to offend the Guilty, as to defend the Innocent, not so
much to hurt or damnifie the Offender, as to restrain him from hurting himself,
or others; and to warn others, by the Example of his Punishment, not to imitate
the Example of his Offense. So that according to its true and natural Design,
Punishment is rather an act of Mercy, than an act of Revenge; the End of it
being to do good, and not to retaliate evil; to defend my self, or others
against the Offenders, or else to defend the Offenders against themselves, or
to defend others against the prevailing Infection of their lewd and pernicious
Examples: and whosoever punishes to vent and ease his Spleen, or gratify his
Malice with the Hurt and Mischief of the Offender; transgresses the End of
punishment, and under pretense of Justice Sacrifices to his own Cruelty. No Man
has Right to do another Hurt, unless it be necessary to some good End; for to
hurt without any Reason is a brutish Savageness, and to hurt without a good
Reason devilish Rancour: he therefore who hurts another merely to hurt him,
acts with the intention of a Devil, who does mischief for mischiefs sake and
plagues his wretched Vassals merely to recreate himself with their Miseries,
and pacify his own black Rage and Malice. Since therefore the End of
punishment is doing good, it ought to be executed with a good Will, and a kind
and benevolent Intention; not to discharge our Rage, or tickle and recreate our
Malice, but either to vindicate our own Right, or to reclaim the Offender, or
to terrify others from his sin by his Sufferings. This therefore is the first
thing which the Law of Mercy requires of us, in respect to our punishing
Offenders, that we should always do it with a good and benevolent Intention.
But then,

II. IT also requires us not to exact Punishment for small and trifling
Offenses: for since the End of Punishment is doing good, it is Cruelty to exact
it for slight and inconsiderable Evils; because in this case the Punishment is
a greater Hurt than the Offense. And what Reason can I have to hurt another for
such small Offenses, as do little or no hurt either to my self or others, but
only to gratify my own Revenge and Malice? As for instance, suppose that in a
heat of Passion a Man should give me the Lie, or call me by an ill Name, or
treat me with reproachful Language; and thereupon I should strike, or wound
him, or prosecute him with with a vexatious Suit at Law: in this case it is
plain my Punishment would hurt him more than his Offense could hurt me, and
consequently my Design in punishing him would be to do Hurt and not Good; and
to design to do Hurt is Malice and Cruelty. Wherefore in case of lighter
Injuries, the Law of Mercy requires us wholly to remit and forgive them; and not
rigidly to exact the Hurt of the Offender for such trifling Offenses, as do no
great Hurt either to our selves, or others.

III. THE Law of Mercy also obliges us not to punish an Offender, when we can
do no Good by it either to our selves, or to him, or to others; for in this
Case to punish can serve no other End, but to fulfill the Lust of our Revenge
and Malice. As for instance, suppose I have a poor insolvent Debtor, that owes
me a great deal and can pay me nothing; and it were in my power not only to
cast him into Prison, but to force him to languish away his wretched Life; to
what end should I inflict this Punishment upon him? I cannot hope to recover my
own by it, for a Prison, we say, will pay no Debts; and where nothing is,
nothing can be expected: I cannot design to reform him by it, since Prisons are
commonly the most fruitful Nurseries of Wickedness: I cannot aim to warn others
by it, for what Warning can oblige Men to do that which is impossible? What End
can I propose then, but only the humouring of a wrathful Mind, and to glut it
with Revenge and Mischief? and if this be the Point I drive at, I run from all
the Rules of Mercy.

IV. THE Law of Mercy also obliges me not to punish an Offender, so long as the
End of punishing him is fairly attainable by gentler Means. For if when I can
obtain my End of an Offender by Persuasion and Forbearance, I rather choose to
extort it from him by Punishment; it is plain that I have a cruel Intention
toward him, and do affect to hurt and mischief him: for when I may obtain my
End of him by Forbearance or gentle Persuasions, why should I choose to force it
from him by Rigor and Severity; but that I am either insensible of his hurt,
or else do take pleasure to afflict and grieve him? Wherefore in all such
Punishments as are within our Power, the Law of Mercy obliges us, first to try
softer and gentler ways, and make a long and through Experiment of the methods
of Kindness, Persuasion and Forbearance; and if by these we can obtain our End,
and conquer the Offender and vindicate our own Right, to remit our Right of
punishing him, and forbear all Rigor and Severity. For Punishment is our last
Remedy, and ought never to be applied to Offenders, till gentler means have
been tried, and defeated.

V. THE Law of Mercy also obliges us to inflict no more Punishment on
Offenders, than what is absolutely necessary to the obtaining those good Ends
we design by it. For he who punishes an Offender more than is needful to the
natural End of punishment, can design no other End by it but what is cruel and
barbarous: and whatsoever is more than needful either to the vindicating our
own Right, or the reforming the Offender, or the giving fair warning to others,
serves to no other purpose but to gratify our own Revenge and Fury. So far as
Punishment is needful to these good Ends, it is not only lawful, but good: but
all beyond what is needful to these, is perfect Savageness and Cruelty. When
therefore for the obtaining these Ends, we are necessitated to punish an
Offender, the Law of Mercy obliges us first to try lighter and gentler
Punishments; and if by these we cannot obtain our End, to proceed in our
Severities by degrees, and not to fly to extreme Rigor, till we have found all
gentler Corrections ineffectual. For if a lighter Punishment will do the work,
it is Cruelty to lay on a heavier: and whether it will or no, is no otherwise
to be known than by Trial.

Sixthly and Lastly, THE Law of Mercy also requires us, always to punish short
of the Offense, i. e. where the Punishment is in your power, and you are not
determined by a legal Necessity to use the utmost Extremity. For where you are
legally obliged either to judge, or prosecute an Offender, there you are to
proceed by the measures of the Law which obliges you, and which usually
determines you to the kind and degrees of the Punishment to be inflicted: but
where the matter is wholly in your power, either to remit of, or augment the
punishment, there the Law of Mercy obliges you not to exact the utmost. For if
you punish more than the Offense deserves, you are unjust and tyrannical;
because as your Right to punish accrues from the Offense that is done to you,
so your Right to punish to such a degree accrues from the degree of the
Offense; which you cannot exceed without exceeding your Right, and exacting
more Punishment of the Offender than he owes you. So that every degree of
punishment which exceeds the demerit of the fault, is lawless and licentious
Violence, to which we can pretend no Right, and by which we do an injurious
Outrage to the Offender. And as when our Punishment exceeds the Offense, we
punish without Justice; so when it equals the Offense, we punish without Mercy.
For the utmost degree of just Severity admits no Intermixture of Mercy; the
Office of which is to relieve the miserable, and consequently to relieve them,
when they have injured and offended us, of some part of the Evils and Miseries
they deserve. Wherefore as he is an unmerciful Creditor, who rather than abate
the least part of his Due, will strip his poor Debtor to the Skin, and reduce
him to the utmost Pinch and Extremity of Need; so he is an unmerciful Punisher,
that exacts to the full demerit of the Fault, and stretches his Right of
punishing to the utmost extent, to make the Offender miserable. In this case
therefore the Law of Mercy requires us to follow the great Example of God, who
in the midst of Justice does always remember Mercy; who makes large Abatements
of his Right to punish us, and never exacts of us the utmost Plagues and
Sufferings which our Iniquities deserve. Conformably to which excellent
Pattern, we are obliged in punishing others to intermingle Mercy with our
Severities; and proportionably to the Offender's Penitence, or the pitiable
Circumstances of his Fault, or the Misery and Necessities of his present
Condition, to make an equitable Abatement, and Defalcation of his Punishment.
And thus you see what that Mercy is which is required of us with respect to our
punishing of others.

Fifthly and Lastly, ANOTHER of the Miseries which affect Men's Bodies is want
of the outward Necessaries of this present Life, such as Meat and Drink,
Lodging and Apparel; the want of which cannot but render our Life exceeding
wretched and miserable. For what an insupportable Grievance is it to our
Nature, to be pinched with an impatient Hunger, or suffocated with a burning
Drought; to be forced to prey upon it self for want of other Fuel, or to
appease its furious Appetites with loathsome, heartless or unwholesome
Sustenance; to see a hungry Family crying about us for want of Bread, and have
little or none to give them; to behold our Children shivering with Cold, and
drooping with Famine, and not be able to succor and relieve them; whilst our
pined and miserable Carcasses are either covered with loathsome Rags, or nakedly
exposed to the Injuries of the Weather, and more destitute and unprovided than
the Foxes and Birds, for want of a Hole, or Nest where to lay their Heads?
These are Circumstances miserable enough to move a Heart of Stone to Pity and
Compassion: In this case therefore we are obliged by the Law of Mercy, first,
to a tender Sympathy and Commiseration; to affect our Souls with a soft and
compassionate sense of the Wants of our poor Brethren, to put our selves in
their Case, and represent their Condition to our own Hearts and Affections, as
if it were our own; and thereby to endeavor and excite in our selves a
proportionable Feeling of their Calamity and Misery. And to this we are
universally obliged, whether we are high or low, rich or poor, whether we are
in Circumstances to relieve the Needs of others, or to need Relief for our
selves: for so the Precept runs universally, Finally be all of one mind,
having compassion one of another; love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, 1
Pet. iii. 8. And as we are universally obliged to compassionate those that are
in Need, so we are also bound, according as we have opportunity and ability, to
succor and relieve them. Indeed if we are poor and needy, we are by no means
obliged to pinch our selves, or our Families, to relieve the Necessities of
others; for the desire of Self-Preservation being of all others the most
vehement Passion, which God has implanted in our Natures; he does thereby not
only warrant, but direct us to take care of our selves in the first place, and
not to sacrifice the means of our own Preservation to the Needs and Necessities
of others. And then our nearest Relatives being next to our selves, we are
obliged in the next place to relieve them; and consequently in all Competitions
for our Relief and Mercy, to prefer the Wants and Necessities of our own
Families. But though we may not be able, without wronging our Families, to give
Alms to our necessitous Brother; yet if by representing his Necessities to
others who are better able to relieve him, if by soliciting his Cause and
begging Relief for him, which he perhaps is ashamed to do for himself, we can
any way contribute to his Succor and Support, we stand strictly obliged to it
by the Laws of Mercy: and this, if we can do no more, will be as acceptable to
God, as the most liberal Alms. For where the Deed is impossible, God always
accepts the Will for it, and reckons in all those good Works to our account,
which he knows we would do, if we were able. But when he has furnished us with
Means, as well as Opportunities, to relieve the Necessitous, he expects the
Deed, as well as the Will from us; knowing that we cannot sincerely will the
Deed, if when it is in our power we do not effect it: Hence is that of the Heb.
xiii. 16. To do good and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifice
God is well pleased. And accordingly the Apostle bids Timothy, 1 Timothy vi.
17, 18. To charge them that are rich, i. e. whose enjoyments do exceed their
necessities, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate. And how necessary the Deed is to the
Sincerity of the Will, when it is in our power, that passage of St. John does
fully Evidence, 1 Epist. chap. iii. v. 17. But whosoever has this worlds good and
sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him,
how dwells the love of God in him. This therefore is an Act of Mercy
indispensably due from us to those who are in Necessity, to contribute
according to our ability toward their Relief and Support; and accordingly,
Alms, which signifies a gift to one that is in need, comes from the Greek word
(...), and that from (...), which signifies Mercy: which plainly denotes it to
be one of the greatest and most principal Acts of Mercy that we owe to the
Miserable.

CHAP. III. Of Almsgiving, as to the manner of performing it; and some Motives
thereunto.
WE have seen that Almsgiving is one of the principal Acts of Mercy; and it
being so, I shall more largely insist upon it, and endeavor to show,

First, THE Manner in which it ought to be preformed: And Secondly, To press
the Performance of it by some Considerations.
I. THE Manner in which this Duty of Almsgiving ought to be performed, and that
in these following particulars:

First, IT ought to be performed with a good and merciful Intention. Secondly,
JUSTLY and Righteously. Thirdly, READILY and Cheerfully. Fourthly, LIBERALLY
and Bountifully. Fifthly, TIMELY and Seasonably. Sixthly, DISCREETLY and
Prudently.
I. THIS Duty of Almsgiving ought to be performed with a good and merciful
Intention, not merely to court the Applauses and Commendations of Men, to bring
our Names in vogue, or to serve our secular Designs; but chiefly and
principally to express our Gratitude and Duty to God, and Confidence in Him;
who has not only filled our Cup, but crowned it with an overflowing Plenty,
thereby inabling us to relieve others, and thereby constituting us Trustees for
the Poor and Needy, with a strict and inviolable Charge to give them their Food
in due season; to which he has annexed a Bill of Credit under his own Broad
Seal, to repay us the Principal of our Alms with a thousand-fold Interest: With
respect therefore to these mighty Reasons, and out of a tender Commiseration to
our poor Brethren, we ought to perform our Alms; that so like Curls of holy
Incense they may ascend to Heaven, and breath a sweet smelling Savor into the
Nostrils of God. For it is by this alone that they are consecrated into an
acceptable Sacrifice to him, and rendered true Piety and Devotion: whereas if
we give our Alms merely, or mainly to be seen of Men, or to serve a worldly
Interest, they proceed not from Mercy but Self-Love. And since all Acts that
are materially good do receive their Form, and Denomination from the Intention;
such Pharisaical Alms can be denominated neither Pieties, nor Mercies, but are
a sordid Traffic for Applause and Interest; and hence our Savior cautions us,
Take heed that ye do not your Alms before men, to be seen of them; otherwise ye
have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven: therefore when thou do
thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before thee, as the Hypocrites do in the
Synagogues, and in the Streets, that they may have glory of men; verily I say
unto you, they have their reward. Matthew. vi. 1, 2.

II. This Duty of Almsgiving ought to be performed with Justice and
Righteousness; that is, we ought not to give that in Alms which is none of our
own, supposing it has a rightful Owner, to whom we can make a Restitution of
it For what we have wrongfully got, is none of ours, but his whom we have
wrongfully deprived of it; and to him we are bound in Conscience to restore it,
in case he be living, and we know where to find him; if not, to his lawful
Heirs, or Assigns: But if either the Party be dead whom we have wronged of it,
or we cannot find him, or any Heir of his, that can lawfully claim it; it is
not only lawful, but necessary for us to bestow it upon the Poor and Needy. For
where there is no visible Owner, the Property reverts immediately into the
Hands of the Supreme Lord of the World; who has settled it as a Pension on the
Poor, to eek out the narrow Provisions which his Providence has made for them.
But to give Alms out of those unlawful Gains, which we are obliged in Justice
to restore to the rightful Owners, is to make our selves the Thieves, and the
Poor the Receivers. For to do Alms, is to give away something of our own to
remedy another's Want or Misery; and therefore to give away one Man's Right, to
supply another's Necessity, is not so much an Alms, as a Robbery. By this Rule
therefore Debtors that owe more than they can pay, are obliged in Conscience
not to entrench upon their Justice by their Mercy; nor to disable themselves
from being just to their Creditors, by being merciful to the Poor. For though
to relieve the Poor be nakedly, and abstractedly good; yet it is to be
considered, that particular Actions are good, or bad, according as the
Circumstances are which adhere to them: And when that Action which is nakedly
good, happens to be clothed with an evil Circumstance, it is so far Evil and
Unlawful. And therefore when my relieving the Poor is accompanied with this
evil Circumstance of defrauding my Creditors of their Due, I am so far bound in
Conscience not to relieve them; because if I do, I must relieve them unjustly:
this therefore we are especially to take care of, that our Alms be just and
righteous.

III. THIS Duty of Almsgiving ought to be performed readily and cheerfully. For
this is the Apostle's own Direction, Even man according as he purposes in his
heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loves a
Cheerful Giver 2 Cor. ix. 7. And indeed if we give Alms out of a Principle of
Mercy and Compassion, it is impossible but we must do it cheerfully; because by
Compassion we make others Miseries our own, and so by relieving them we relieve
our selves, and are Partakers with them in the Comfort of those Reliefs we
afford them. For when I see a Man struggling with Want, and groaning under a
sharp Necessity, if I relieve him, I ease and refresh my own yearning Bowels;
and the Humane Nature within me, which is common to us both, does by a kind of
sympathetick Motion, exalt and raise up it self, and swells with a generous
Pleasure. So that if Mercy be the Spring of my Alms, they will flow with a free
and cheerful Current, because all the while I am watering others, I shall feel
the Refreshment of my own Streams. When therefore we bestow our Alms with a
grudging and unwilling Mind, it is plain that it is not Mercy, but Shame, or
Fear, or Importunity that moves us; and if so, there is no Virtue in them, nor
can we expect that any Reward should attend them* For to contribute toward
another's Relief, because we are ashamed, or afraid to do otherwise, is rather
paying a Tax, than giving an Alms: And when nothing can be wrung out of me, but
what is distrained by Importunity, I give not for the Poor's Relief, but for my
own Peace and Quiet: And what Virtue is it for a Man to give, only to get rid
of a Dun, and ease himself of a troublesome Importunity? Wherefore to render
our Alms virtuous, and rewardable; it is necessary that they should be
performed with a free and cheerful Heart; that they should flow, like Water
from a Spring, in natural and unforced Streams, and not be pumped from us with
Shame, or Impottunity.

IV. THIS Duty of Almsgiving ought to be performed liberally, and bountifully;
according to the proportion of our Estate and Abilities. For the Design of
those Alms which are the Fruits of Mercy, is to redress the poor Man's Misery,
to satisfy his hungry Bowels, and rescue him from the pinching Necessities
under which he groans and languishes: And this being the Design of Mercy it
measures its Alms accordingly, and proportions them to the craving Necessities
it supplieth. And its Aim being not only to rescue the miserable from extreme
Misery, but also according to its Power, to render them happy; it does not
think it sufficient to rescue the Necessitous from extreme Want and Famine, but
does also covet to render their Lives happy, and give them a comfortable
Enjoyment of themselves. For merely to keep a Man from famishing, looks rather
like a design to prolong his Torment, and spin out the Duration of his Misery,
than to contribute to his Ease and Happiness; and if we design His Happiness,
as we must do if we design mercifully, we shall endeavor not only to enable
him to live, but to live comfortably, and accordingly proportion our Alms. It Is
true, the Liberality of our Alms is to be measured, not according to the
Quantity of them, but according to the proportion they bear to our Power and
Ability; and though I should give five times less than one who has ten times
my Estate, yet I should be as liberal as he, according to the proportion of my
Ability: And accordingly the indigent Widow's two mites are pronounced by our
Savior a more liberal Alms, than the much more which those which were Rich
cast into the Treasury, Mar. xii 42, 43, 44. Because they cast in of their
abundance, but she of her want. And therefore though (as I shall show by and
by) it is impossible to determine the Measures of Alms, which we are obliged to,
because the particular Measure of our Abilities is so various; yet this to be
sure the Law of Mercy exacteth, that in proportion to our Estates and
Circumstances, they should be liberal and bountiful. For he who gives in such
slender Proportions as bring little or no Relief to the Receiver, acts as if he
designed rather to mock him, than to supply his Necessities; or as if he
intended rather to keep him alive for a Prey to a long and lingering Misery,
than to render his Life happy and comfortable.

V. THIS Duty of Almsgiving ought to be performed timely and seasonably, i. e.
in the nick of Opportunity, when the poor Man's Necessities call loudest for
it, and our Relief and Succor may be most beneficial to him. To such Poor
indeed as do always want, our Alms can never be unseasonable, because their
Necessities do always call for them: But there are some particular Seasons when
their Wants call louder, as in times of Sickness; or Scarceness of Work; or
Dearness of Provisions; or in the beginning of Arrests, before the Prison has
devoured them; or after a great Loss, when their Fortunes are sinking, and a
small Support may keep their Heads above water; or, in a word, when they are
young and capable of Work, or Instruction, and their Parents are not able to
dispose of them, when the placing them out to some honest Calling may prevent
their turning Thieves or Beggars, and render them useful to the World; or when
they are setting up their Trades with an insufficient Stock, and a little Help
may encourage their Diligence, and advance them to a comfortable Livelihood.
These and such like are the proper Seasons of Almsgiving; in which by tendering
our helping hand, we may rescue many a poor Wretch out of a deep Abyss of
Misery, and render their future Condition happy and prosperous. Wherefore the
Law of Mercy obliges us, not only to bestow our Alms, but to bestow them at
such Times and Seasons wherein they are most needed, and may do the greatest
Good; that we should not reserve them to our last Will and Testament, like
Medlars that are never good till they are rotten; but embrace all
Opportunities, while we are living, to give timely Reliefs to the Necessitous.
For he who deferreth his Alms, when such proper Seasons are presented, is so
far the Cause of all the consequent Calamities which the Poor do suffer by the
want of them: And since the Design of Men's Alms is to relieve the Sufferings of
the Poor, it is doubtless a degree of Cruelty to prolong their Sufferings, by
needlessly delaying to relieve them. You would think her a cruel Mother, that
having Bread enough and to spare, should rather choose to afflict her Child
with a long unsatisfied Hunger, than to content its craving Appetite by giving
it its Food in due Season: And sure it is a great Defect of Compassion
unnecessarily to prolong the Sufferings of our indigent Brother, though it be
but for a Day or an Hour, when we have a present Opportunity to relieve him:
And since whatsoever Relief we do design him, he must necessarily lose so much
of it as the Time of our Delay amounts to, Mercy obliges us to relieve him
quickly, and not to suffer him to pine away, whilst our Charity is growing.

Sixthly and Lastly, THIS Duty of Almsgiving ought to be performed discreetly,
and prudently* For thus the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. cxii. 5. A good man
shows favor and lends, and will guide his affairs with discretion. And
indeed unless Prudence be the Dispenser of our Alms, Mercy will miss of what it
aims at and designs by them; which is to do good to the Poor, to supply their
craving Necessities and give them a comfortable enjoyment of themselves:
Instead of which, if we do not manage our Charities with Prudence, we shall
many times create Necessities by supplying them, and increase and multiply the
miseries of the World by an unskilful Endeavor to redress them. For it is with
Alms, as it is with Estates, where half of the Riches does consist in the
Discretion of the Owner; and those very Charities, which being distributed by a
blind Superstition, or a foolish Pity, do many times do more Hurt than Good;
might have been improved into a plentiful Provision for the Necessities of the
World, had they been wisely ordered and disposed. But what Harvest can the
World reap from this precious Seed of our Alms, when they are sown with a
careless, or unskilful hand? When they are either thrown on a heap to useless
or superstitious purposes, or scattered at all Adventures, without any
distinction of the cultivated from the fallow Ground; so that the Birds of
Prey, the useless Vagrants, Drones and Beggars devour and eat them up, whilst
the modest, impotent, and laborious Poor are utterly destitute and unprovided?
Since therefore the Design of Mercy is to do Good with its Alms, to comfort and
relieve the Poor, and supply their pinching Necessities; it is doubtless very
necessary in order to this end, that it should be conducted by Prudence and
Discretion; which ought more particularly to guide and direct our Alms; First,
In the Method of Provision of them. Secondly, In the Choice of the Objects of
them. Thirdly, in the Nature and Quality of them. Fourthly, As to the
Proportions of them. Fifthly, In the Manner of bestowing them.

I. WE ought to exercise our Prudence as to the Method of providing our Alms.
For herein Prudence will direct us, not only to be frugal in our Expenses, to
pare off our Superfluities, and to be diligent and industrious in our Callings,
that we may have to give to them that need; but also out of our Incomes and
Profits to consecrate a considerable Proportion to pious and charitable Uses.
And herein the Apostle gives us an excellent Rule, 1 Cor. xvi. 2. Upon the
first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store as God has
prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come: which though it does
not carry with it a necessary and indispensable Obligation, it being impossible
for many Men to take a Weekly Account how God has prospered them, and to lay
by accordingly; yet thus far at least it is a very wise Direction to us, that
as often as we cast up our Accounts, whether it be weekly, monthly, or annually,
we should in Proportion to our Increase devote some convenient Share of it, as
a private Bank or Treasury for charitable Uses; that so we may not be to seek
for Alms upon sudden and emergent Occasions, but may have a Store ready by us,
to supply our daily Expense and Distribution. And if we take care not to
alienate, or imbezle what we have thus devoted to our private Corban, we shall
always give with cheerfulness, having by us a Stock designed to no other End
but that of Charity.

II. WE ought also to exercise our Prudence in the Choice of the Objects of our
Charity, so as to take care that they be such as do truly need and deserve it.
For unless we do so, we shall many times encourage Vice, instead of relieving
Poverty; and be tempted by the clamorous Importunities of idle and vicious
Persons, to prostitute our Alms to their Sloth and Intemperance. For how often
do we see the imprudent Charities of well disposed Minds poured into those
Sinks of Filthiness; and like the Sacrifices of Bell, devoted to the importunate
Lusts of a company of idle Drones and Beggars; that are not so properly the
Members, as the Wens of the Body Politic, as being utterly useless to all its
Natural Ends, and only serving to deform and bring Diseases upon it, and to
draw away the Nourishment of it from its useful Parts and Members? Now what a
Shame and Pity is it, that these precious Fruits of Mercy should be thus abused
and misemployed, to pamper a company of devouring Vermin, whose business it is
to croak about the Streets, and wander from Door to Door; whilst many a poor
industrious Family, that has more Mouths to feed than Hands to Work, lies
drooping under its Wants, and Necessities? Wherefore though the former are not
to be altogether neglected, when their Needs are real and urgent; yet certainly
Prudence will direct our Charity to such persons, as have either fallen from
Riches to Poverty, and consequently are less able to Toil and Drudge for Bread;
or else to such as are either worn out by Labor, or disabled from it by
Sickness, or oppressed with such a numerous Charge of Children, as do exceed
their utmost Industry to maintain. In such good Grounds as these Prudence will
advise us to sow the main of our Charities, and not to throw it away with a
careless Hand upon the barren Rocks and Highways, to be devoured by Vermin, and
Birds and Prey.

III. WE ought to exercise our Prudence, in determining the Nature and Quality
of our Alms. And herein Prudence will direct us, to prefer those Alms which may
serve a poor Man for a constant Provision and put him in a fixed way of living,
before those which are transient, and do only help in a Pang of Need; which do
just hold him up from perishing for an Hour, but do not take him out of the
deep Waters. Wherefore if the Person, to whom we design a Relief, be fit and
able to work, or has been bred up in any honest Occupation, it is a much wiser
Charity, to provide him an Employment, or to contribute toward the Setting him
up in his Trade, than barely to relieve his present Necessity; because by this
means we relieve him both for the present and the future, and convert our Alms
into a standing Maintenance. Upon which Account it is doubtless a very prudent
Charity to contribute to the Erection and Maintenance of Public Workhouses
for the Poor, where they and their Children may be provided with such Work as
they are capable of; and thereby be inured to Industry, and enabled to support
themselves. And as prudent Charity prefers such Alms as do draw after them a
lasting Effect and Benefit, before such as do only supply a transient
Necessity; so it also chooses, if it be consistent with Convenience, to gives
its Alms in Kind rather than in Value, to give Clothes to the Naked, and Food
to the Hungry, Physic to the Sick, and Books to the Uninstructed: for though
Money indeed will answer all these Needs, yet we are not sure it will be always
laid out upon them.

IV. WE ought to exercise our Prudence also in sttating the Proportions of our
Charity; that is, what Proportion of our Income, or Increase we ought to devote
to Charitable Uses, and in what Proportion we ought to distribute. For as for
the first of these, when all is done, every Man must be his own Casuist: the
Jews indeed had a Proportion fixed and stated to their Hands; for there was a
double Tithing prescribed to them by the Law of Moses, viz. the every years
Tithing, which was an annual tenth part of their Increase, for the Maintenance
of their Priests and Sacred Officers; and then there was a third years Tithing,
which amounted to the thirtieth part of their Increase, and that was devoted
for the Supply and Maintenance of the Poor: and if such a Proportion were
required of the Jews, we may besure a greater is required of us, whose
Righteousness must exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if
ever we mean to enter into the Kingdom of God. But since God has not
determined the exact Proportions of our Charity, it is impossible for us to do
it, where there are such different Circumstances and Abilities in this matter:
therefore we must have Men, who best understand their own Condition, to the
Guidance of their own Conscience and Discretion; who are in the first place to
consider, what is requisite to support them in the condition of their Birth,
their Place, or Office, or Family, and to the Discharge of their several
Obligations. For Prudence does not require of all the same Proportions of
Charity; some may afford a twentieth, others a thirtieth, and to others whose
Children and Dependents are numerous, or whose Fortunes are clogged and
entangled, the hundredth part may be overmeasure. Wherefore according as the
Heap is, the wise Man is to sow and distribute; substracting not only what will
support his Life, but also what will maintain the Decency of his Estate and
Person; and that not only as to present Needs, but also as to future
Necessities, and very probable Contingencies. But yet in the stating of this
matter, it is doubtless much safer to exceed, than to fall short of our due
Proportions; for as for exceeding, we have many holy Persons for our
Precedents, we have Christ himself for our Voucher in the forenamed Case of the
poor Widow, and a vast Treasure in Heaven for our Reward. Wherefore in the
determination of this Case, Christian Prudence will direct us not to be too
nice and curious, too fond and partial to our selves, in stretching our Needs
and Conveniences beyond their just Dimensions; but to take easy and moderate
Measures of them, and to spare what may be decently spared from superfluous
Servants, idle Meetings, unnecessary Feasts, and chargeable Garments and
Diversions; and if we thus pare off our needless Expense, and lay aside the
Surplusage for Charity, the Consequence will be this; the Poor will be more
plentifully relieved, and our selves will be more able to do it, and we shall
reap more Pleasure and Profit from laying out upon the Backs and Bellies of the
Poor, than from wasting it on our own Vanity And now having fixed the
Proportion of your Estates for Charity, you ought in the next place to advise
with your Prudence in what Proportions to distribute it: and here Prudence will
direct you to differ in your Distributions, according to the different
Circumstances of those whom you design to relieve by them. To such as are of a
lower Rank, Prudence directs to give by little and little, according to their
emergent Necessities; yet so as not always to limit your Alms to their bare
Necessities, but sometimes to extend them even to their Refreshment and
Recreation; that so together with their Toil and Drudgery, they may now and
then enjoy some Sabbath for the Ease of Humane Nature: but to such whose
Fortunes are by Loss and Accident sunk and declined, both Decency and Mercy
requires us to enlarge the Proportion of our Alms; considering how great a Fall
it is from Plenty to Necessity, and consequently how much more is necessary to
raise up such dejected Creatures, who are so unexperienced to misery, into any
degree of Comfort, or Self-enjoyment.

Fifthly and Lastly, WE ought to exercise our Prudence also in the Manner of
bestowing and conveying our Alms; so as that we may oblige both by what we
give, and by the way of our giving it. And accordingly Prudence will sometimes
direct us to search and find out just Needs, and prevent the Poor from asking,
by surprising them with a Kindness which they did not look for: by which means
we shall strengthen their Faith in the Providence of God, who thus creates them
Friends out of the Dust, and brings them Supplies without, and beyond their
Expectations. And then in giving Prudence will direct us not to upbraid the
Want, or insult over the Miseries of those we give to; for that would be to
feed them with a Bit and a Knock, and to sophisticate our Mercy with Cruelty.
And when any miserable Creature would borrow, or beg of us, Prudence will
advise us not to turn him away with Scorn; nor yet to remove him at a distance
with signs of Disdain, or Contemptuous Violence; but if we see Reason to grant
him his Request, to do it with a ready and open hand, that so the Freedom of
our Charity may raise and enhanse the Comfort of it; and that that which we
design for a Relief and Succor, may leave no Sting behind it in the Mind of
the Receiver. And above all we ought to take especial Care, not to oppress the
Modesty of the Humble, especially of those who have been wont to give, and not
to receive; not to relieve them with lofty Looks, or angry Words, or a scornful
and severe Behavior; not to expose their Poverty by the divulging our Charity,
or conveying it to them in the open View of the World; but to hand our Relief
to them in such a secret and benign, courteous and obliging manner, as that
they may receive it with cheerfulness, and without Blushing and Confusion. And
then as for those whose constant Necessities have habituated them to ask, and
receive with more Confidence, and Assurance; our Prudence will direct us to
convey our Alms to them with such a mixture of Severity and Sweetness, as
neither to encourage them to grow upon our Charity, nor drive them into
Desperation of it.

I now proceed to press and enforce the Practice of this great Duty, with some
Motives and Arguments, which are these that follow. First, Almsgiving is
imposed upon us as a necessary Part of our Religion. Secondly, It Is recommended
to us by the Examples of God, and of our Savior. Thirdly, It is a substantial
Expression of our Love and Gratitude to God, and our Savior. Fourthly, It
charges an high Obligation* to us upon the Accounts of God, and our Savior.

I. CONSIDER that giving Alms is imposed upon us as a necessary Part of our
Religion; that is, when God has furnished us with Abilities and Opportunities
to do it. For where we cannot give Money to relieve the Poor, our Pity and our
Prayers are accepted for Alms: for if there be a willing mind, (says the
Apostle) that is, a charitable Heart, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. viii. 12. But where a Man
has, it is his indispensable duty to do accordingly: for Pure* Religion and
undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows
in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world, Jam. i. 27.
And that this visitation is to be performed with an open and a liberal Hand,
the same Apostle imformeth us, Iam. ii. 15, 16. If a brother or sister be naked
and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be
you warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are
needful to the body, what does it profit? That is, if instead of Food and
Raiment, you only give him fair Words and good Wishes, what does it profit him?
Or what advantage can you expect to reap by it? And to the same purpose, 1 John
iii. 17. But whosoever has this world's good and sees his brother have need and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him? that is, let him pretend what he pleases, he has not one Spark of Love to
God or true Religion in his Bosom. So that for Men to pretend to Religion, who
are able to relieve the Poor and yet refuse it, is one of the greatest
Mockeries in the World: for howsoever Men's Covetousness may bribe their
Conscience to dispense with the Obligations of Almsgiving, as if it were only a
carnal Ordinance, or useless Relic of Popery; a holy Cheat, a devout
Drunkard, a pious Fornicator are not greater Contradictions in the sense of
Scripture, than a hardhearted, a stingy, and a hide-bound* Saint For though our
Religion does by no means warrant us in such a vain and fond Opinion of our
good Works, as to think we merit Heaven by them; or to presume to drive a
Bargain with God, by putting our good Works into the Balance with an infinite
and eternal Reward, our hopes of which we wholly owe to the infinite Goodness
of God through Jesus Christ; yet it requires them of us as a necessary
Condition, upon which God has entailed all our future Bliss, and without which
we can never hope for Admittance into the Kingdom of God. So that if we are
able to relieve the Poor, and yet will not when we have Opportunity; by
shutting up our Bowels against them, we shut the Door of Heaven against our
selves; and must one day expect to receive the same Answer from God, that we
give to them; I have nothing for you, no Mercy, no Heaven for such unmerciful
Wretches, as would rather suffer their poor Brethren to perish, than part with
a penny to relieve them. For of this Doom our Savior himself has fairly
forewarned us, Matthew. XXV. 41, 42, 43. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire; for
when I was hungry, ye fed me not, when I was naked, ye clothed me not: so that
from any encouragement our Religion gives us, we may as well hope to go to
Heaven without Faith and Repentance, as without giving of Alms according to our
Ability and Opportunity.

II. CONSIDER that giving of Alms is highly recommended to us by the Examples
of God, and our Savior. For as for God, the whole Series of his Providence is
little else but a continued Dole of Alms and Charities to his Creatures: It was
his Charity that founded this vast and magnificent Hospital of the World, that
stocked it with such a numberless Swarm of Creatures, and endowed it with such
plentiful Provisions for the Support and Maintenance of them all: so that we do
all of us live upon his Alms, and depend upon his boundless Charity, for every
Breath of Air we draw, for every Bit of Bread we eat, and for every Rag of
Clothes we wear. And indeed what are all the Good Things of this World but so
many Effluxes and Arguments of his Almighty, Liberality? Look every where about
Nature, consider the whole Tenor of his Providence, survey all the Works and
Actions of his Hands, and you shall find them all conspiring in that amiable
Character the Psalmist gives of him, Psalm. cxix. 68. Thou art good, and thou
do good. So that in relieving the Necessities of others we act the Part, and
the best Part too of the Almighty Father of Beings; who sits at the upper End
of the Table, and carves to his whole Creation. Hence St. Gregory Nazian.
speaking of the Charitable Man, says that he is (...) i. e. A God to the
unfortunate, imitating the Mercies of God; for Man has in nothing so much of
God, as in doing good; which is doubtless the most divine and Godlike thing,
that a Creature is capable of. What then can be more honorable, or more
becoming a Creature, than to tread in the Footsteps of God, to transcribe his
Nature and Actions, and be a kind of Vice-God in the World? Surely did we but
understand and consider, how divinely magnificent it is to supply the
Necessities, and contribute to the Happiness of others; we should court it as
our highest Preferment, and bless God upon our bended Knees for deeming us
worthy of such an illustrious Employment, and that among the numerous Blessings
he has heaped upon us, he has vouchsafed to admit us to share with himself in
the Glory of doing Good.

AND as the Example of God does highly recommend to us relieving of the poor
and miserable, so also does the Example of our Savior. For it was for this
that he left his Father's Bosom, and came down from Heaven into our Nature,
that he might relieve a poor perishing World, and rescue it from Eternal Ruin.
And what a glorious Recommendation of Charity is this, that the Son of God
chose rather to do good upon Earth, than to reign over Angels in Heaven? And
while he was here, the sole Employment he thought worthy of himself, was to
relieve the Miserable, to feed the Hungry, to cure the Blind and the Lame, to
restore the Sick, to instruct the Ignorant, and reclaim the Rebellious. This
was the Drift of all his Actions, this the Subject of his Miracles, and this
the Scope of all his Doctrines: So that his whole Life was nothing else but a
continued Train of Beneficencies; for the Apostle tells us in the x. of the
Act. 38. that he went about doing good. Consider this therefore, O thou
hard-hearted Christian, that stoppest thy Ears, against the poor Man's Cries!
What would thy blessed Lord have done, had he been in thy Case and
Circumstances? Would He, who had so much Compassion on the Multitude, as to
work a Miracle to feed them, have turned that miserable Wretch away as thou
do, without the least Dram of Comfort and Relief? Would He, whose Heart and
Hand was always open to the Poor and Miserable, have despised the poor Man's
Moans as thou do, or shut his Bowels of Compassion against him? Do but peruse
the Pattern of his Life, and scan over his whole Behavior; and see if there be
any one Action in all that great Exemplar, that does not upbraid thee, and cry
Shame upon thee for entitling thy narrow, cruel, and stingy* Self a Disciple to
such a merciful, generous and liberal Master; and if so, learn for the future
either to be so honest as to follow his Rule and Example, or else so modest as
to disclaim thy Relation to him.

III. CONSIDER that giving of Alms is a most substantial Expression of our Love
and Gratitude to God, and our Savior. How much we are obliged to express our
Gratitude to God, for these our outward Enjoyments and Abilities to do good to
others, is evident from hence; because we receive them from him and do hold in
virtue of his Donation. For to suppose our selves independent* Possessors* of
them, is in effect to divest* God of his Dominion, and to strip him into an
insignificant Cipher* that only sits above in the Heavens, like an Almighty,
Sardanapalus, with his Arms folded in his Bosom; and no further concerning
himself in the Affairs of this lower World, than to look down from his Throne,
and please himself to see Men scrambling for their several Shares of it. But if
we suppose him, as we have infinite Reason to do, the Almighty, Author, and
Supreme Disposer of all things; then we must acknowledge, that it is from his
overflowing Bounty that we derive whatever we possess; that it is the Gold of
his Mines that enriches us, the Crops of his Fields that feed us, the Fleeces
of his Beasts that cloth us, and that every Good Thing we enjoy is handed to
us by the Ministry of his all-disposing Providence. And since we owe all to his
Bounty, and in our greatest Flourish are but his Almsmen and Pensioners; how
deeply are we obliged to return upon him in the Oblations of Love and
Thanksgiving? And since Love and Gratitude consist either in the Affection of
the Mind, or in the verbal Signification of it, or in the effectual Performance
of good things to the Person whom we thank and love; this last is the most
complete and substantial Expression of the Reality of our Words and Affections.
For though Good Will is indeed the Root of Love and Gratitude, yet that lying
under Ground and out of sight, we cannot conclude its Being and Life without
visible Fruits of Beneficence to the Person whom we thank and love: And as for
good Words, they are at best but the Leaves of Love and Gratitude; but it is
good Works that are the real Fruits of them, by which their Sincerity is
demonstrated. For as no Man does ever impress a false Stamp upon the finest
Metal, so costly Thanks and Love are seldom counterfeit. It is to decline
spending their Goods, or their Pains, that Men do so often forge and feign,
pretending to make up in wishing well the Defects of doing so, and paying down
Words instead of Things: But where Works are wanting, there is no Expression of
our Love or Gratitude can either be real in it self, or acceptable to God. So
that we may spare our Breath, if we keep back our Substance; for our close Hand
gives the lie to our full Mouth, and all our verbal Praises of God, when we
will part with nothing for his sake, are only so many empty Compliments, and
downright Mockeries. But then do our Love and Gratitude to God discover their
Reality, when it appears by our Actions that we think nothing too dear for him;
when for his sake who has fed and clothed us and abundantly supplied our
Necessities, we are ready upon all Opportunities to feed and cloth and supply
the Necessities of others. And can we think any Thing too dear, by which we may
express our Gratitude to Him, upon whose overflowing Bounty we depend for every
Blessing we have, or hope for; who has provided not only this Temporal World
for our Bodies, but also an Eternal Heaven for our Souls; and has sent his Son
to us from his own Bosom to tread out our Way to it, and conduct us thither? Or
can we think any Thanks too costly for that blessed Son, who never grudged to
come down from Heaven into this Vale of Miseries, and pour out his Blood for
our sakes? Was it not much harder for Him to part with Heaven, than it is for
you to part with a little Money? And can you think it much to bestow an Alms for
his sake, who never grudged to lay down his Life for yours? This is the
Argument of the Apostle, 2 Cor. viii. 9. For ye know the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes the became poor, that
ye through his poverty might be rich.

IV. CONSIDER that giving of Alms charges an high Obligation to us, upon the
Accounts of God and our Savior. For God lends the poor Man his Name, and
allows him to crave our Succors for his sake: He gives him Credit from himself
to us for what he stands in need of, and bids him charge what he receives upon
his own Account, permitting to reckon Himself obliged thereby, and to write Him
down our Debtor: So that when we stop our Ears to the Cries of the Poor, he
reckons himself repulsed by us, and interprets it as a rude Affront offered to
his own Person, it being offered to one that bears his Name, and wears his
Livery. For the poor Man's Rags are the Badges of his Relation to God, and his
Wants are the Mouths by which God himself entreats our Relief, and Succor;
assuring us that he will reckon it to our selves, and accept it as kindly at
our hands as if we had relieved Him in his own Person. For he that has pity
upon the poor, (says the Wise Man) lends unto the Lord, Prove. xix. 17. in
which one Sentence methinks there is more Rhetoric, than in a whole Library of
Sermons: And surely did we but understand, and consider it in its full
Emphasis, we should not need such Volumes of Instructions, but might easily
learn to be charitable by an Epitome. O blessed God! that thou should own
thy self my Debtor, only for repaying thee a Part of what thou have lent me,
and of what is still thine own by an unalienable Propriety; that thou who art
the great Landlord of the World, should thus acknowledge thy self indebted
to thy poor Tenant, for paying thee a small Quit-rent, a Pepper-corn of Homage
for what I hold in thy Right, and by thy Bounty! And yet thus it is, he lends
us our Estates, and then writes himself our Debtor, for that small Part which
we repay him in Works of Piety and Charity. And as God puts our Alms to his
own account, so does our Savior also: For so, Matthew. xxv. 40. In as much
(says he) as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me; that is, I account my self obliged by it, and do receive
it at your hands with the same Kindness and Acceptance, as if you had been with
me in my state of Humiliation, and showed me all this Mercy in my own Person.
And when both God and my Savior do send a poor Wretch to me in their own Name,
and Person, and desire me for their Sakes and upon their Accounts to relieve
him; Can I be either so ungrateful to them, to whom I am indebted for all that
I have or do hope for, or so wanting to my own Interest, as to neglect so fair
an Opportunity of making them some Return of their Favors, and thereby
obliging them to heap more Favors upon me? For when in giving to the Poor I
give to God and my Savior, what glorious Compensations may I expect from such
kind and liberal Pay-Masters? he that sows bountifully shall reap
bountifully, says the Apostle, speaking of Alms, 2 Cor. ix. 6. for he sows
in the richest Soil, in the fruitful Hands of God, and his Savior; where the
Seed being nourished with infinite Bounty never fails to increase and
multiply a thousand-fold. For God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and
labor of love which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered
to the Saints and do minister, Heb. vi. 10. Though he may sometimes defer, yet
he never forgets to return a charitable Work: So that you may safely reckon
upon it, that so much as you have bestowed in Works of Charity, so much with
vast Increase and Interest you have secured to you in the Hands of God; who
will either return it to you hither in Temporal Blessings, or, which is a
thousand times better, repay it to you with infinite Interest in the weight of
your Eternal Crown. For so our Savior promises the young Man, that if he would
give what he had to the poor, he should have treasure in heaven, Matthew. xix.
21. So that by giving Alms we make Earth tributary to Heaven, and in a nobler
sense than the new System of Astronomy teaches, advance it into a Celestial
Body; and consequently enrich not only our Selves, but our Wealth too, by thus
transmitting it to Heaven before us, as it were by Bills of Exchange, to be
repaid us when we come there in an everlasting Treasure of Happiness. And when
by relieving the poor Man's needs, we may thus transmute our Dross into Gold,
and, which is more, our perishing Gold into immortal Glory, What* Man in his
Wits would refuse any fair Opportunity of making such a blessed Exchange?

CHAP. IV. Of the Natural Reasons and Grounds of Mercy.
HAVING shown at large what Mercy is, and to what particular Duties it extends,
I shall now proceed to the second thing, viz. the Eternal Reasons upon which it
is founded and rendered morally Good. Which I shall reduce to these five
Particulars;

First, THE Suitableness of it to the Nature of God: Secondly, THE Convenience
of it with the Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature: Thirdly, THE near and
intimate Relation of those Persons to us upon whom our Mercy is to be
exercised: Fourthly, THE Equitableness of it to our own State and
Circumstances: Fifthly, THE Necessity of it to the tolerable Well-being of
Humane Society.
I. ONE eternal Reason upon which Mercy is founded and rendered morally Good,
is the Suitableness of it to the Nature of God; which abounding as it does with
all the possible Kinds and Degrees of Perfection, is an infinitely full and
everlasting Fountain of Happiness to it self; so that it cannot wish for any
Kind, or any Degree of Blessedness beyond the Enjoyment of it self, and those
infinite Complacencies it takes in its own essential Beauties and Perfections:
And having such an inexhaustible Treasure of Happiness within it self, it can
have no Need of, or Dependence upon any thing without it; nor consequently be
liable to any temptation to oppress, or render others miserable, either for the
Security, or Augmentation of its own Revenues: And as he who is infinitely
happy can have no Temptation to render others miserable, so his own Happiness
cannot but incline him to render the miserable happy For so from a Natural
Principle of Self-Love, every Being stands inclined to beget, and propagate its
own Likeness; and consequently every Being that is happy cannot but be inclined
to make others so, so far as it consists with its own Interest. Since therefore
God is not only happy in himself, but so securely happy as that he can
contribute what he pleases to the Happiness of others without any Prejudice to
his own; his own Self-Love, must nesarily incline him to beget his own Likeness
on his Creatures, and so propagate his Happiness through the World. And being
thus inclined by his own Self-Love to transform all other Beings into his
Likeness, that is, to make them happy as he is happy; he must needs be tenderly
affected with the Miseries of his Creatures, and immutably inclined, so far as
it is just and wise, to succor and relieve and render them happy. Thus Mercy,
you see, which is a Good Will to the Miserable, does most necessarily result
from God's own Self-Love; and consequently is an inseparable Principle of his
Nature: And accordingly God proclaims himself to Moses, Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7. The
Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, longsuffering, abuddant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgressions:
And hence his Mercy is said to be everlasting, Psalm. c. 5. and to be from
everlasting, Psalm ciii. 17. and to endure for ever, Psalm. cvi. 1. and he is
said to be rich in mercy, Ephesians. ii. 4. and is styled the God of all grace, 1
Pet. v. 10. and the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. i. 3. Now the Nature of God is
the supreme Example, and Pattern of all Rational Natures; and so far forth as
ours do swerve and deflect from his, they are maimed and imperfect. For his
Will is our Law, not merely because it is his Will, but because it is overruled
by the infinite Perfections of his Nature, by his Wisdom and Justice, his Mercy
and Goodness; which if upon an impossible Supposition he should will contrary
to, that Will would be no Law, i. e. it would have no force upon our
Consciences to oblige us to obey it. So that the supreme Law is the Nature of
God, by which his Will is, and all other Wills ought to be concluded and
determined; and whatsoever we discover in his Nature either by Reason, or
Revelation, that is communicable to ours, we ought to follow and imitate it as
our Sovereign Pattern and Exemplar. Since therefore both Reason and Revelation
do so plainly discover a most merciful Inclination in the Nature of God; this
is an everlasting Reason why we should be merciful: And this is the Reason our
Savior urges, Luke vi. 36. be ye merciful as your Father also is merciful;
that is, Let it be seen that you are the Children of God, by your participation
of his Nature, which is infinitely benevolent to the Miserable; for there is
nothing sinks you farther from God, or renders you more unlike him, than a
cruel and unmerciful Temper: It Is this that blackens and deforms your Souls,
that wreaths and distorts them into a contrary Figure to the most amiable
Nature of the Father of Spirits. For as the highest Perfection is the Nature of
God, and that is a most merciful one; so the lowest Imperfection is the Nature
of Devils, and that is a most cruel one: And therefore as by Mercy we incline
toward the Nature of God, which is the Landmark we ought to follow; so by
Cruelty we decline toward the Nature of Devils, which is the Sea-mark we ought
to avoid.

II. ANOTHER eternal Reason upon which Mercy is founded and rendered morally
Good, is the Convenience of it with the Frame: and Constitution of Humane
Nature; in which the wise Author of Nature has implanted a natural Sympathy
between those that partake of it, in each others Pains and Pleasures, So that
though the Humane Nature be largely diffused and spread through infinite
Numbers of Individuals, which by vast distances of Time and Place are separated
from one another; yet as if it were but all one common Soul, operating in
several Bodies in several Times and Places, it feels almost in every one Body*
what it enjoys, or suffers in every other; and whether it be pleased, or
offended in one Individual, is pleased or offended in them all: And though the
Sense be quickest in that Individual Part, or Member of Humane Nature, upon
which the Pain or Pleasure strikes immediately; yet all the rest how distant
soever in Time or Place, as soon as they have notice of it, are sensibly
touched and affected with it. For thus when we read, or hear of the Calamities
of other Men, our Bowels yern by a natural Sympathy, though they are never so
distant from us, and are no otherwise related to us than as they partake of our
Natures; and though they are long since dead, and out of the reach of any
Assistance, yet their Miseries without any Motives of Reason or Discourse
strike us into a soft Compassion; yea though we know the Calamities which we
read or hear of, to be nothing but Romantic Fictions, yet the very Imagination
of them is ready to melt us into Tears in despite of our Will and our Reason.
Nor is this visible only in Persons that are adult, but even in little
Children; who as soon as they are capable of taking notice of things, do
without any Reason express themselves pained and afflicted with the dissembled
Griefs and Sufferings of those that attend them. All which are most evident
Instances of that general Sympathy, which naturally intercedes between all Men;
since we can neither see, nor hear of, nor imagine another Miseries, without
being touched with a sensible Pain and Affliction.

AGAINST which I know no other Objection can be urged but this; that there are
sundry Instances of Men, who seem to have arrived to that degree of Cruelty, as
to take Pleasure in afflicting others; and are so far from Sympathizing with
their Pains, that they rather seem to be recreated with them. To which I shall
only answer these two things: First, That that Delight which some Men take in
plaguing and afflicting others, proceeds not from their natural Temper, but is
rather to be attributed to some violent Effervency, and Transport of their
Natures; such as are outrageous Anger, or deep and inveterate Revenge; under
both which Nature is discomposed and disordered, and chafed into a
preternatural Ferment: And accordingly when it is cooled again, and reduced to
a composed Temper, instead of rejoicing in the Mischiefs it has done, it
usually bewails and laments them, and reflects upon them with a great deal of
Horror and Remorse. Which is a plain Argument, that Humane Nature in it self is
very tender and compassionate; how much soever it may be accidentally
transported, by unnatural Passion superinduced upon it. Secondly, Suppose what
is objected be true, that there are some Natures so cankered, and Diaboliz'd,
as to be really pleased with the Pains and Miseries of others; the Instances of
this kind are so few, that they are only so many Exceptions to a General Rule;
and therefore ought rather to be looked upon as so many Monsters of Men, than
as the Standards of Humane Nature. For as we do not look upon it as natural to
Men to be born without Hands or Feet, though there have been Instances of such
monstrous and unnatural Births; so neither ought we to think it natural to Men
to be cruel and unmerciful, because of a few Devils in Humane Shape, that have
pulled out their own Bowels of Compassion. If we would understand what is
humane and natural, we must take our Measures from those who in all other cases
do live most conformably to the Laws of Nature; and to be sure the more regular
Men's Natures are, the more you will find them abounding with Pity and
Compassion. For hence it is that Mercy and Compassion are called Good Nature
and Humanity, and their contraries Ill Nature and Inhumanity; because as the
former are inseparable Properties of well-formed and regulated Natures; so the
latter are such hideous Deformities of Nature, as do in effect divest us of our
Manhood, and render us a kind of Monsters among Men. By all which it is
evident, that the great Creator has framed and composed our Nature to Mercy,
and implanted in it a tender Sympathy and fellowfeelling of each others
Miseries; by which, as by a Voice from Heaven, he does eternally call upon us
to let out these our natural Compassions into Acts of Mercy toward one
another. For the Voice of Nature is a genuine Echo, and Repetition of the
Voice of God; who, by creating in us such a tender Sympathy with one another,
does most expressly signify, that it is his Will that we should mutually
succor and relieve each other. For to what other end should he create in me
such a Feeling of my Brother's miseries, but only to provoke me by it to ease
and succor him? why should he cause me to partake, as I do, of other Men's
Pains and Pleasures, but to excite me thereby to use my best endeavor to
assuage their Pains, and advance their Pleasures? Since therefore the God of
Nature has made my Neighbor's Misery my Pain, and his Content my Pleasure;
and by the indissoluble Bands of mutual Sympathy has linked our Fortunes and
Affections together, so that it is for my own Ease to ease him, and for my own
Pleasure to please him; this is an eternal and immutable Reason, why I should
be merciful to him.

III. ANOTHER eternal Reason upon which Mercy is founded, and by which it is
constituted morally Good, is the near and intimate Relation of those Persons to
us, upon whom our Mercy is to be exercised. For there is between Men, and Men a
most intimate Kindred and Relation; as being all derived from one common Root,
whose prolifick Sap has sprouted into infinite Branches, which, like the
Boughs of Nebuchadnezzar's Tree, have spread themselves to all the ends of the
Earth. And as we are all Children of the same Parents, and consequently
Brethren by Nature; so we do all Communicate of the same Nature, as being
compounded of the same Materials, and animated with the same Forms, having all
the same Faculties, Inclinations, Appetites and Affections; and being only so
many several Copies, transcribed from the same Original: and there is no other
Difference between us, but what is made by things that are extrinsick and
accidental to our Natures. So that in short we are all but one, and the same
Substance, attired in a diverse Garb of Circumstances, divided into several
Times and Places, and diversified by the little Accidents of Color and
Stature, Figure and Proportions: in all which perhaps within a little while we
shall differ as much from our selves, as we do now from other Men. For do but
compare your selves in your Youth, or in your Health, or in your Prosperity,
with your selves in your Age, or in your Sickness, or in your Adversity; and
you will find as much Difference between your selves and your selves, as you do
now between your selves and others: so that in reality other Men are as much
you now, as you are your selves in other Circumstances; we being all the same
in every stable, essential Ingredient of our Natures, and being only
diversified by such Accidents from one another, as will in a little time
diversifie us from our selves. Thus the Apostle says, Acts xvii. 26. He has
made of one blood, that is, of one Nature, all nations of men to dwell on the
face of the earth. There being therefore such a close Conjunction, such a
strict Union of Natures between Men and Men, so that every other Man is every
other Man's self, a few trifling Circumstances excepted; this is an everlasting
Reason, why we should treat them as we do our selves, with all Compassion and
Humanity. For to commiserate one who is my other self, is that which I am
obliged to by own Self-Love, which God has made an eternal Law to my Nature:
it is to feed a Member of my own Body, and nourish a Branch of my own Root; yea,
it is to feed and succor my own Nature, that is only individuate from mine by I
know not what Metaphysical Principle, and clothed in different Accidents, and
Circumstances. So that now the very same Self-Love, which does so importunately
instigate us upon all occasions to redress our own miseries, ought in all
reason to provoke us to relieve and succor other Men; since all the Miseries
they endure are the Miseries of our own Nature: insomuch that we run their
Fortunes, and by a natural Communion are Partakers of their Pains and
Pleasures. For the Humane Nature which is common to us and them, endures the
smart of their afflictions, and bleeds through every wound that is given them;
so that by pouring into those Wounds the Balsam of our Mercy, we do an Act of
kindness to our selves, and wisely consult our own Preservation. As on the
contrary by dealing cruelly, and unmercifully by other Men, we do affront and
violate our own Natures; and most unnaturally thwart that Principle of
self-love, which God has implanted in us for our own Preservation. For he whom
thou treatest with so much Contempt and Cruelty is thy own self individuated
into another Person; and wears thy Nature under other Circumstances: he is Man
of thy Manhood, Flesh of thy Flesh, and Bone of thy Bone; and no man ever yet
hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it: Ephesians. v. 29. Wherefore
thou can not deal cruelly by him, without wounding thy self through his
sides, and committing an unnatural Outrage upon the Humane Nature, whereof he
is equally Partaker with thee.

IV. ANOTHER eternal Reason upon which Mercy is founded, and rendered morally
Good, is the Equitableness of it to our own State and Circumstances: for no Man
ever was, or ever can be so happy, as not to have need of Mercy for himself.
The best of Men are Sinners before God, and for that are liable without a World
of Mercy to be rendered miserable for ever; and there are very few whose
Conversations with Men have been so inoffensive, as never to have merited
severe Retributions at their Hands: and how happy and prosperous soever a Man's
outward State and Circumstances may be at present, he cannot be secure, but the
next Turn of Affairs may tumble him headlong thence into Wretchedness and
Calamity. Now since every Man might have been, or may be miserable, what can be
more just or equitable, than that we should deal with those that are so, as we
would be dealt by if we were so? Put the case then, as you may very reasonably
do, that You were now as miserable as that Wretched Creature is that craveth
your Succor and Relief; would not you desire Relief with the same Importunity
that he does? Doubtless you would; the Sense of Misery, and the Desire of
Miercy being naturally inseparable: well, but why would you desire it? Why,
Because you are miserable, you would say: and has not he the same Reason to
desire it of you? You may want what he desires, and if you should, you cannot
deny but you should desire the same: and is there not all the Reason in the
World, why you should grant him what you would ask for your self, if you were
in his Circumstances, and he in yours? This therefore is eternally reasonable,
that we should give, and ask by the same Measures; that we should grant that
Succor to those that are miserable, which we should think fit to ask or desire
of them, were We as miserable as They, and They as happy as We. For since we
are all of us naturally equal, whatsoever is fit for one, must be fit for
another in equal Circumstances. Either therefore it is not fit, that I should
desire Relief from others when I am miserable, or else it is fit, that I should
grant Relief to others when they are so: which if I refuse, I must condemn my
self, either for being unreasonable in desiring Mercy when I need it, or for
being unjust in denying Mercy when I am asked it. I know, I may be miserable my
self; and if ever I am, I know I cannot forbear desiring others to succor and
relieve me: and can I blame them for desiring that of me, which I could not
forbear desiring of them, were I in their Circumstances, and they in mine? And
yet of necessity I must either blame them for desiring of me what they do, or
blame my self for refusing them what they desire; since whatsoever is just for
them to desire of me, is very fit and reasonable for me to grant them: and if
ever I should happen to want Relief, with what Face can I desire, or expect it,
who am deaf and inexorable to the Wants of others? So that if I will show no
Mercy, I were best take heed that I never need any; for if I should, it will be
very unreasonable for me to expect it; because by my unmerciful Treatment of
others, I have made a Precedent against my self; against which it would be
Impudence for me to plead for Mercy, either with God, or Men. With what Face
can I supplicate for Mercy from the Hands of others, when I have so plainly
declared by my Actions, that were I in their stead, and They in mine, I would
never grant them what I ask for? And when my Actions do thus loudly deprecate
the Mercies which I pray for, and enter such an unanswerable Caveat against my
Claim and Pretense to them, it is but modest to let fall my Suit, and give up
my Hope of Mercy for ever.

Fifthly and Lastly, ANOTHER eternal Reason upon which Mercy is founded, and
rendered morally Good, is the Necessity of it to the tolerable Well-being of
Humane Societies. That God is good and merciful to his Creatures, has been
sufficiently demonstrated from the infinite Beatitude of his Nature; which
being an unbounded Ocean of Bliss and Happiness to it self, must needs be
abundantly communicative of Bliss and Happiness to others, according to the
Capacities of their Natures. Since therefore Humane Nature, of all these
sublunary Ones, contains the largest Capacities of Happiness; we may be sure
that God not only designs its Welfare, but that he has made all the Provisions
for it that are necessary in order thereunto. Notwithstanding which, you see he
has at present exposed it to so many evil Accidents, and Contingencies; that
unless those that are happy will take some care of the miserable, and we will
all of us mutually succor and relieve one another, there is not a sufficient
Provision made for our tolerable well-being in this World. Since therefore it
is evident even from the eternal Principles of God's Nature, that he is
infinitely kind and benevolent to us; and yet notwithstanding this, he has
placed us in a condition wherein we need one another's Mercy, and cannot be
happy without it; it necessarily follows, that it is his Will and Pleasure that
whereinsoever he has left us unprovided, we should mutually provide for one
another; and that our own Mercy should be instead of a Counterpart to supply
those Defects and void Spaces, which his Providence has left us in our present
Happiness. For we being free Agents, God did not so provide for our Happiness,
as to exclude our own Virtue from having an hand in it; but has only taken
care so to dispose and order our Affairs, as that we may be happy; if we will
contribute our Part, and behave our selves toward him, our selves, and one
another, so as is most conducive to our own, and one another Welfare. Since
therefore he designs that all should be happy, and in order thereunto, though
he has not actually made them so, yet has fairly provided that all may be so;
it is plain he has left something to be done on our Part, and expects we
should every one contribute what we are able toward every other Man's
Happiness. When therefore God places another's Happiness, or any Degree of it
within the Power of my Mercy; it is plain that it is with an Intent, I should
employ that Power to make him happy; and consequently that if I lavish out upon
my own Pleasures and Conveniences that Power to relieve the miserable, with
which he has entrusted me, and so permit them to continue miserable, I am an
unfaithful Steward to his Trust, and responsible to him for all their Miseries.
In short, since God by the eternal Bent and Inclination of his Nature aims at,
and intends our Happiness; but yet has put us into a condition, wherein
without the Assistance of each others Mercy we cannot be tolerably happy; this
is a plain Demonstration, that it is his Will we should assist and further his
Intention, by being merciful to one another. Whilst therefore God permits
Misery in one, that is an immutable Reason why he should exact Mercy from
another; since without that he can never obtain his End, which is the Happiness
of all. For as since by the Laws of Generation he has ordered all Men to come
into the World weak and helpless, and unable to provide for themselves; he was
bound in Goodness to oblige their Parents by a natural (...) and Affection, to
nourish and take Care of them, till they grow able to take Care for themselves,
that so they might not be utterly abandoned: so since he has thought good to
expose us here to so many Miseries, and Calamities; he stood obliged, by the
eternal Benignity of his Nature, to oblige us by all the Bowels of Mercy to
succor and relieve one another, till we are grown up to that Perfection of
Happiness wherein we shall have no more need of Succor; that so at present we
may not be left destitute and forlorn, but may find all that Relief in one
another's Mercy, which is wanting to us in his immediate Providence. For it is
for wise and merciful Ends that he permits us to be miserable here, to correct
our Follies, and polish and cultivate our Nature, and train us up under a
severe Discipline into a State of Everlasting Happiness; and therefore for the
Redress of these Miseries, which for our Good he is fain to inflict upon us, it
was necessary he should Consign us to the Protection of one another Mercy:
that so this for the present might be a Cordial to our Griefs, a Supply to our
Wants, an Ease to our Oppressions, and a Sanctuary to our Calamities; till
Misery has effected the gracious End she designed it for, and then he will
release our Mercy from its Work, and permit it to enjoy an Everlasting Sabbath.
But so long as he thinks fit to continue us in this state of Misery, his own
Benignity will oblige him to oblige us to assist and comfort one another, by
the mutual Exercise of our Mercy; that so being instead of Gods to one another,
we may not be utterly abandoned to Wretchedness; but by mutually succouring
each other might all of us be tolerably happy: which we should all of us most
certainly be, were we but so benign and merciful to one another, as he expects
and requires.

CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Mortification.
GOD having made us free Agents, and planted in our Natures an uncontrollable
Liberty of Choice; in Wisdom he has so ordered and disposed things, that as we
cannot be Miserable unless we will, so neither shall we be happy whether we
will, or no. For as his Goodness would not suffer him to make us necessarily
miserable, so neither would his Wisdom permit him to entail our Happiness on
our Natures, and make it inseparable to our Beings; for should he have done so,
he must have altered the Laws of his own wise Creation, and made those Beings
to act necessarily, which he made to act freely. For Happiness is the End of
all our Actions; and therefore should God have made that necessary to us, he
must have made us to act toward it with the same Necessity as inanimate Bodies
do toward their proper Center; and consequently there would have been no such
thing, as a free Agent in the lower World. That we may always act therefore
according to the Condition, and Frame of a free Nature, the Foundations of all
our Happiness and Misery are laid in the right Use, or Abuse of our Liberty;
and do immediately spring out of the Wisdom, or Folly of our own Choices: so
that if we choose wisely according to the Laws of Virtue and right Reason, we do
thereby advance toward that happy and heavenly State we were created for: as
on the contrary, if we choose foolishly according to the rash Counsels of our
own vicious Appetites and sensual Inclinations, we thereby sink our selves
deeper and deeper toward the Abyss of endless and inconceivable Misery. For
such is the Frame and Constitution of our Natures, that we cannot be good and
miserable, nor vicious and happy: and accordingly the Apostle sets before us
the inevitable Fate of our own Actions, Romans viii. 13. If ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live.

What these Deeds of the Flesh, or Body are, the Apostle tells us, Gal. v.
19, 20, 21. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like; and they which do such things, shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. This is the Muster-roll of that formidable Army
of Wickednesses, with which we are to engage, and which we must vanquish, or
perish for ever. If ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live; i. e. if
ye kill and destroy them, if ye wholly cease from them, both as to the outward
Act of them, and the inward Appetite and Inclination toward them: For
Mortification does not only consist in a formal Abstinence from the outward
Acts of Sin, or a superficial Skinning over the Orifice of its Wounds; but
searches to the very bottom of that putrid Core within, and eats out the inward
Corruption, from whence those outward Blisters arise: It purges the Heart as
well as the Hands, and drains those impure Inclinations, which are the Springs
of all Impiety and Wickedness.

BUT to handle this Subject more particularly, I shall do these three things;

First, SHOW wherein Mortification consists. Secondly, WHAT are the Proper
Instruments of it. Thirdly, WHAT are the most prevailing Motives to it.
I. WHEREIN does Mortification consist? I answer in these three Things. 1. In
Abstinence from the outward Acts of Sin. 2. In not consenting unto any Sin. 3.
In a constant Endeavor to extinguish our involuntary Sins.

I. MORTIFICATION requires Abstinence from the outward Acts of Sin: For it is
impossible that any Man should mortify his Lusts, while he indulges himself in
the free Practice of them; because Practice is the Fuel that foments and feeds
the inward vicious Inclinations, and both pampers and enrages the lustful
Appetites of the Soul. For that Delight which we reap from acting our own
Concupiscences, does but increase and provoke them; it being natural to Men,
when they have been pleased with any Action, to be more vehemently inclined to
repeat it; the Delight which they found in the former Enjoyment provoking their
Desires to enjoy it again. So that we may as well hope to put out a Fire by a
continual feeding it with Fuel, and blowing it into Flame; as to mortify a
Lust, whilst by our continued practicing it we nurse and cherish it, and do at
once both feed and irritate its Flames. If therefore we would ever mortify the
Lusts of the Flesh, we must strictly restrain our selves from all outward Acts
of them: For whilst we indulge our selves in these, we feed our Disease, and
pamper our bad Inclinations into vicious Habits, and our vicious Habits into
sinful Necessities.

II. MORTIFICATION consists in the Dissent of our Wills from all sinful
Proposals. It Is no piece of Mortification for a Man to abstain only from the
outward Acts of Sin, if in the mean time his Will is so far consenting to it,
as that he would practice it, were it not for some intervening hindrances, or
for want of a fair Opportunity. For in the Eye of God, to which our inmost
Thoughts and Purposes are all open and unmasked, the Will to Sin is the Sin
that is willed, though it should never proceed into Action: With Him it is
acted as soon as it is conceived, and it is conceived as soon as ever it is
thought of with Consent: It grows in the Delight we take in the Speculation of
it, but is ripened in the Resolution of committing it. For when once we are
resolved upon it, our Heart has done its utmost toward it; and so our
consenting to it makes it perfect Sin, though it should never break out into
Action. So that it is Nonsense to talk of mortifying our Sin, while it has the
Consent of our Wills; for though it is more dangerous in the Action, and
approaches nearer to a Habit, because the Consent continues all the while we
commit it, and is confirmed by the Pleasure we reap in the Commission; yet
still it is Sin, though it is only consented to; and it lives in the Purpose,
though it breaths not out into the Practice. Our Enemy is not conquered, when
it is only shut up within its Holds; and it does but fortify it self within,
while it wants Opportunities to sally out into Action. If we do not sin, only
because we cannot, or because we want Opportunity, we are but Devils in Chains;
and are never the less guilty, because we cannot do as much Mischief as we
would: For he that would sin if he could, has sinned already as far as he is
able; and so is every whit as criminal in the Account of God, as he that does
sin when he can. The Mortification of our Lusts therefore does necessarily
imply the withdrawing the Consent of our Wills from them, and the final
divorcing them from the Embraces of our Choice; for while they enjoy our
Consent, they live in us, and rule us, though they should never have the
Opportunity to come abroad into our Practice.

III. MORTIFICATION consists in a constant Endeavor to subdue our involuntary
Appetites and Inclinations to sin. It is not sufficient that we do not practice
sin, nor consent to the Practice of it; but we must make it our constant
Endeavor to wean, and abstract ourselves from those evil Tendencies and
Inclinations, which we have contracted by our former Sins: For though these
Inclinations remaining in us are no farther our Sin, than we do yield and
consent to them; yet while we patiently harbor them within our Bosoms, and do
not honestly endeavor to smother and extinguish them, they are chosen and
voluntary; and have the very Bane and Formality of Sin in them. Though we
should be disabled from Acts of Adultery, yet while we retain with Delight our
Inclinations toward it, and quietly please our selves in the fantastic Joys
of it; whilst we freely entertain its lewd and filthy Ideas, and suffer them to
walk to and fro upon the Stage of our Fancies without Check or Control; we are
still adulterous in the sight of God, to whom our Lust is as obvious within the
Closet of our Minds, as upon the Theater of our Practice. We must not think
therefore that our Sin is mortified, because we neither practice nor consent to
the Practice of it; for while we have any Inclinations to sin remaining in us,
we must endeavor to subdue and conquer them. If we do not, we have only forced
our Enemy into his last Retreat, where by our own Neglect we give him
Opportunity to rally and reinforce himself against us: For our Sin still lives
in our Inclination to sin, and will soon, if it be not beaten thence, recover
its broken Forces, and grow as formidable as ever. It Is true, he that does not
consent to his own evil Appetites, but constantly denies them those vicious
Gratifications which they crave, takes an infallible Course to starve and
destroy them: For as these were first raised in us, and afterward nourished
into Nature by our vicious Practices; so by refusing to practice those Sins
which they incline us to, and by practicing the contrary Virtues, we shall by
degrees abate the Strength and Vigor of them: And as they decay, so holy
Inclinations will spring up in their room; which being heightened and made
intense by a constant Practice of Holiness, will by degrees expel these our
vicious Inclinations, and grow into Nature and Habit. But merely to abstain
from the outward Acts of Sin, is a tedious way of mortifying our inward
Inclinations toward it; for vicious Appetites will live a great while, even
upon innocent Gratifications. Though we should be drunk no more, yet if we
indulge our selves the utmost Liberties of Sobriety, that will continue our
Appetite to Intemperance: Though we should abstain from all outward Acts of
Lasciviousness, yet unless we deny our selves some of the lawful Pleasures of
the Body, these will foment our wanton Inclinations: Though we should not
suffer our Rage and Spite and Malice to express themselves in any prohibited
Actions; yet if we allow our selves even in lawful Anger, and just Resentments
of Injuries, this will for a great while preserve and keep alive our most black
and devilish Propensions. And besides that, this way of abstaining merely from
Sin will make the business of Mortification tedious, it is also full of Hazard
and Difficulty: For he that only abstains from Sin, and gratifies his
Inclinations as far as lawfully he may, is every moment in danger of exceeding
the Line that parts the utmost of what is lawful from the nearmost of what is
sinful. For Inclination, like all other Motions, is always swiftest when it is
nearest its Center; and when once it is within the Reach and Attraction of its
beloved Vice, then it hurries toward it with Fury and Impatience; insomuch
that many times our Conscience proves too weak to stop the course of its
impetuous Motions: And then when once it has tasted the forbidden Pleasure of
its Sin, it immediately recovers all its impaired Strength, and many times
grows more fell and outrageous than ever; and so the Ground we got in a Month's
Abstinence from our Sin, we lose again in a Moment's Enjoying it; by which
means the Work of Mortification becomes extremely difficult and hazardous.
Wherefore if ever we mean to conquer our bad Inclinations, we must not only
abstain from the Sins we are inclined to, but also from the Occasions of them.
If it be Sensuality, we must starve it out by prudent Fasting and Abstinence;
if Devilishness, we must force it out by thwarting and contradicting it in the
course of our Practice, and keep it at the greatest distance from it: For evil
Inclinations are not to be mortifyed without Force and Violence, and like
crooked Staves, the speediest way to make them strait, is to keep them bent for
a while the contrary way. This therefore is implied in our honest Endeavor to
mortify our involuntary Inclinations to sin, that we do not only forbear the
sin it self, but avoid the Occasions that lead to it; and deny our selves those
lawful Liberties, which do nearly approach it, and set us upon the brink of it.
And thus you see wherein Mortification consists, namely in abstaining from the
outward Act, and inward Consent to sin, and in a constant Endeavor to mortify
those involuntary Inclinations to sin, which we have contracted in any former
Course of wilful sinning.

CHAP. II. Of the Means, and Instruments of Mortification.
HAVING explained wherein Mortification consists, I proceed in the next place
to consider what are the Means and Instruments of it: And these are chiefly
these Six;

First, FAITH. Secondly, CONSIDERATION. Thirdly, RESOLUTION. Fourthly,
DISCIPLINE. Fifthly, FREQUENT receiving of the Sacrament. Sixthly, CONSTANT
Prayer.
I. FAITH, or a thorough Belief of the Truth of our Religion; which will
furnish us with such Arguments against our Lusts, as all the Temptations they
can muster up will never be able to resist. Hence St. John tells us, that This
is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. 1 Epist. v. 4. where
by the World we are to understand all those Temptations to sin, that do arise
from these outward worldly Objects wherewithal we are here surrounded. Faith
therefore must needs be a mighty Instrument of mortifying our Sins, it being
the Victory whereby we overcome all the Temptations to them: And indeed a firm
Belief of the mighty Arguments of Christianity is in it self such an
efficacious Means to dissuade us from sinning, that one would think it were
impossible for the most bold and resolute Sinner to withstand it. For who but a
mad Man would prostitute himself to the Charms and Flatteries of a base Lust,
that believes that Promise which proposes a Heaven of immortal Ioys to dissuade
him from it? Who would be frighted into any Sin by the most amazing Danger that
can threaten, or befall him, that credits that Threat which denounces a Hell of
endless and intolerable Woes against every wilful Transgression? Did we but
believe, that it cost the Son of God his dearest Blood to redeem us from our
Sins; How could we be so disingenuous to our best Friend, as to harbor those
Lusts that were his Murderers, and which he abhors more than the Spear that
pierced his Side, or the Nails that gored his Hands and Feet? Yea, how could we
be so foolhardy as to dally with those Sins, which are so infinitely odious
unto God, that he would not be attoned for them by any meaner Sacrifice than
the Blood of his own Son? In a word, did we but believe, that we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give a strict Account for
whatsoever we have done in the Flesh; What Temptation could there be great
enough to balance our Fear of that dreadful Tribunal? Doubtless, did we but
heartily believe our Holy Religion, there is nothing in all the World would be
so terrible as Sin to us; the mighty Arguments of the Gospel would so overawe
us, that we should not be able to think of it without Horror and Amazement;
the very Sight of it would scare us like an Apparition, and cause us to run
away from it in as great a Fright, as if the Devil himself were at our heels.
For, Lord! can I be so stupid, as to hug my Lusts, while I believe that I shall
rue for it to all Eternity? Can I be so senseless of my own Interest, as to
treat and entertain those Vices, which I verily believe will rob me of all that
an everlasting Heaven means? No, no; Did I but believe the Propositions of the
Gospel, doubtless I should sooner trust my Body among ravenous Cannibals, than
my Soul among my Sins; and think my self much safer among Vipers and Scorpions,
than in the Embraces of my Lusts; which whilst they wrap themselves in amorous
Folds about me, sting me with an everlasting Venom. But our Misery is, that we
are most of us Christians by chance; and have taken up our Religion upon trust,
without ever satisfying our selves of its Credibility, or troubling our selves
to enquire why or wherefore, we profess it: So that though perhaps we do not
absolutely disbelieve, yet neither can we be properly said to believe it; it
being a matter we never troubled our selves about, so as to enquire whether it
be true or false; and therefore it is no great wonder, that it has so little
Effect upon us. For how can it be expected, that we should be affected with
that which we do not believe; or be persuaded to part with those Lusts that are
so dear to us, upon Proposals that we give no Credit to, and of whose Truth or
Falsehood we never troubled our selves to enquire? Let us therefore but satisfy
our own Reason of the Truth of our Religion, by considering impartially those
mighty Evidences it is founded upon; and then it will soon captivate our Souls
into the Love and Obedience of it; and none of our Lusts will be able to
withstand its mighty Force and Efficacy, but will all be forced to fall down
before it, as Dagon did before the Ark of the Lord. This therefore is the first
Instrument of Mortification, viz. a hearty Belief of the Christian Religion.

II. ANOTHER Instrument of Mortification is Consideration. For we have no other
way to mortify our Lusts, but only by Reason and Argument, and it is impossible
that any Arguments should persuade us, unless we duly consider the Strength and
Force of them. It Is true, our Religion furnishes us with sufficient Arguments
to baffle all the Temptations of Sin; But what will it signify to have good
Arguments in our Bibles, while they are out of our Thoughts, and are not at all
regarded by us? Do we expect they should cure our Souls, as Charms and Amulets
do our Bodies, merely by being written upon Paper, and worn in our Bosoms? Why
then may they not as well charm a Swine into Cleanliness, or a savage Tiger out
of his natural Fierceness and Cruelty? But alas! all the Arguments in the World
to an inconsiderate Mind, are but like so many Arrows shot against an Anvil,
where they cannot stick but are forced to rebound and fly off again without
making any Impression on it. And hence in the Parable of the Seed, the reason
which our Savior assigns why it prospered not in the Highway, the stony, and
thorny Ground, was either that they considered not at all, or not enough,
Matthew. xiii. 19, 20, 21, 22. either they were wholly inconsiderate, so that the
Seed of God's Word lay scattered upon the surface of their Minds, like Corn
upon the Highway, to be picked, and devoured by the Fowls of the Air; or they
considered but a little, so that the Divine Seed being not thoroughly rooted in
them, produced only a present Fit, and pang of Religion, which in the Heat of
the next Temptation withered and died away; or else they considered but by
halves, their Minds being all overgrown with worldly Cares and Thoughts, which
quickly choked that Holy Seed, and rendered it barren and unfruitful. Thus
Inconsideration, you see, will render the most powerful Motives insignificant;
and it will be to no purpose for Religion to knock at the door of our Souls,
while our Reason is asleep, and our Understandings deaf to its Importunities.
But would we be but so true to our own Interest, as to inure our selves to a
through Consideration of our Religion, that would arm us with such invincible
Arguments, as none of our Lusts would be able to withstand; and we should have
so many good Thoughts, like Guardian Angels, perpetually encamped about us,
that whenever the Devil or the World besieged us, they would find our Souls
impregnably fortified against all their Batteries. If in the Morning, before we
go into the World, we would sit down a while, and take a little pains to
antidote our Souls with such Thoughts as these; O my Soul! now am I going into
the midst of a crowd of temptations, where ever and anon one bad Object or
other will be beckoning to me, and inviting me unto that which is evil; let us
therefore consider a little what answer we shall return to all their
importunities: By and by perhaps some great opportunity of gain may present it
self before thee, to tempt thee to a fraud or consenage; but alas! What a poor
recompense will a little Money be for all that Eternity of misery, whereunto I
shall consign my self by it? Can I carry this sorry Pelf thither with me? Or if
I could, can I bribe my Flames, or corrupt my Tormentors with it? And shall I
for such a trifling momentary Gain, incur such an everlasting Damage? When I
have thus answered this Temptation, perhaps immediately after some amorous
Object may present it self, to court me to the Harlot's Bed; but O my Soul!
Will the Pleasures I am promised there compensate the loss of all that Heaven
of immortal Ioys, which I shall forfeit by it? And if they will not, as
doubtless they will not, shall I be so childish, as for the Pleasures of a
moment to extinguish all my hope of being pleased for ever? And when thou have
thus baffled this Temptation, perhaps thou may be solicited a new with some
importunate invitation to Intemperance; but O my Soul! Remember the bitter
Agonies that thy Savior endured upon the Score of thy Sins; how this among the
rest filled his deadly Cup, and vomited it full of Gall and Vinegar; and can I
be so senseless as to make light of any sin, the guilt whereof was so heavy as
to crush the Lord of Life into his Grave? Shall I be so disingenuous as to
gratify any Lust, that had a hand in the murder of my dearest Savior, my
Savior who loves me a thousand times better than I love my self? And now no
sooner have thou repulsed this temptation, but happily some other may assault
thee; thou may be presented with a favorable opportunity of treating thy
Lusts so privately and securely, as that no Eye shall discover thee; and then
how difficult will it be for thee to refuse such an inviting Occasion: but
consider O my Soul! thou art always and every where under the inspection of thy
Judge, by whose righteous Doom thou must stand or fall for ever; and he that
sees what thou do in private will one day call thee to account, and openly
unmask all thy actions, and present them barefaced upon the public Theater
before all the world of Spirits; unless therefore thou could find a place to
be wicked in where God might not see thee, it is in vain to promise thy self
coverts and retirements; for he will one day bring to light all thy deeds of
Darkness, and display thy shame to the open view of the world: would we, I say,
but take the pains every Morning, before we enter into the World, to season and
antidote our Souls with such Meditations as these, it would doubtless mightily
contribute to the Mortification of our Lusts. For this would make the Arguments
of our Religion so familiar to us, that no Temptations whatsoever would be able
to baffle our Resolutions; which being backed with such a Strength of Reason,
would stand like a Rock of Adamant, outbraving the Fury of those Waves that
dash themselves against it, and forcing them to retire after all their
threatening Rage in empty and insignificant Foams. For what Temptation can be
too hard for that Soul, that is armed with the Hope of Heaven and the Fear of
Hell; and is furnished with Arguments from all the Quarters of Reason and
Religion, to oppose against it? This therefore is another of those Means and
Instruments, by which we are to Mortify our Lusts; viz. a serious
Consideration of the Motives and Arguments whereby we are to oppose them.

III. ANOTHER Instrument of Mortification is a hearty and well-grounded
Resolution: and indeed without a firm Resolution it is in vain for us to
attempt the mortifying of our Lusts, or any difficult Undertaking whatsoever.
For there is a wide Distance between Thoughts and Things, and it is much easier
to discourse of Things than to pass them into Execution: for clear Reasonings
are accompanied with a wonderful Delight, because there we engage only with
Designs; and fighting only with the Idea's of Things, they will easily suffer
themselves to be conquered by us, and taken Captive at our Will: but when we
pass into Practice, that will revolt and oppose us in the Execution, which was
so very compliant in the Thought and Meditation; then you will find that you
must wrestle stoutly with those Difficulties that will make Head against you,
and that these will put you to a greater Proof of your Valor and Constancy
than ever you did imagine; so that unless you are armed with a great Strength of
Resolution, you will be beaten often at the first Attempt, and meeting with
greater Resistance than you expected, be forced upon a base and Cowardly
Retreat. Now to form a firm Resolution requires a great deal of Prudence and
good Conduct; for it is of great avail in all Cases to begin well; and as a
Foundation well laid does secure the Superstructure, so a Resolution well
formed will render the Execution of what we are to do a great deal more easy
and feasible* Before we do resolve therefore on mortifying our Lusts, let us be
sure to make use of the former Instrument of Mortification; that is, let us
acquaint our selves with all those mighty Arguments against sin, wherewith
either our Reason or Religion can furnish us; and let us consider them over and
over, till they are familiar to our Understandings, and our Thoughts have
extracted the utmost Force of them: for which End it will be necessary for us
to seek Direction from our Spiritual Guides. Then let us seriously consider
with our selves, what it is that we are about to do, what Vices we must
divorce, and what Virtues we must espouse; and let us thoroughly inform our
selves beforehand of all the foul Ways, and steep Ascents, and dangerous
Precipices that are in the Road of our Duty: and then as you go along in your
Meditations, ask your own Hearts whether there be any Passage that they startle
at, or whether notwithstanding all, they are seriously willing you should go
on? Remonstrate to your own Souls, that in such a place your Lust will be
tempting you with the Genial Pleasures of an adulterous Bed, and desire them to
deal plainly with you whether they can be deaf to those bewitching Invitations;
tell them that before you have gone many Paces farther, the Wants of poorer Men
than your selves will be soliciting your Charity, and desire to know of them
whether they are willing you should do good and trust God for a Repayment;
represent to them how highly you may be provoked at the next step by the
injurious Carriage of some insolent Adversary, and know of them whether they
are willing to contain their savage Passions within the bars of Reason and
Sobriety: and so go on in your own Thoughts through all the Paths of your Duty,
and never cease putting these and such like Questions distinctly to your own
Souls, till they give an express Consent to every Duty that presses for a
Resolution. And it will very much conduce to the settling of a fixed Judgment
in you, if you do not conclude too soon, but weigh all these things over again;
if you would ask your selves the next Morning, whether you still continue of
the same Mind, and whether your former Consent was not the effect of a present
Heat, or whether now after the cool of the Night you do still allow of it; for
in all probability if you resolve in have, you will repent at leisure. And
this, I doubt not, is the Bane of most of our good Resolutions, that generally
they are the Effects of some transitory Passion, and not of a sober Judgment
and serious Deliberation: for when Men resolve well in Heats of Passion, they
resolve to do they know not what themselves, but swallow their Religion by the
Lump, without considering the Particulars of it; and so they do by their Duty,
as Men do with bitter Pills, which they can swallow whole, but when they come
to chew, those prove so distastful, that presently they spit them out again.
When therefore you have calmly considered with your selves all the Arguments
against your Sins, and all the Difficulties of forsaking them, and you have
reasoned your Wills into an express Consent to part with them for ever: then
betake your selves to your bended Knees, and in the most solemn manner devote
your selves unto God: O Lord, I acknowledge, I have been a great Offender
against thee; and that my past life has been nothing else but a continued
Rebellion; but now I see my folly, and am ashamed to think what a notorious
Offender I have been; wherefore here I solemnly promise in thy dreadful
presence, and in the presence of all thy holy Angels, that wherever I have done
amiss, I will do so no more: be witness, O thou Righteous Judge of the World,
that here I shake hands with all my darling Lusts, and bid them adieu for ever:
wherefore be gone ye Soul-destroying Vipers, that have twined so long about me;
away, ye wretched Idols, whom I have too long adored; for in the name of God I
am fully resolved never to entertain you more. And now having reduced our
selves to a good Resolution of Mind, our greatest Difficulty is over: for so
long as we keep our Resolution, we are invincible, and all the Powers of Hell
will not be able to prevail against us. For our Wills are not to be forced by
any Power whatsoever; and there is no Temptation in the World can make us
return to our Sin, so long as we are heartily resolved against it: so that all
we have now to do is to keep the ground we have gotten, and not to suffer our
Spiritual Enemies to batter down those good Resolutions we have raised against
them, which if we can but maintain will infallibly secure us against all their
Power and Malice.

IV. ANOTHER Instrument of Mortification is a wise and prudent Discipline. When
by Consideration we have brought our selves to a thorough Resolution of
Amendment, then to confirm and secure our Resolution, there are sundry wise and
prudent Methods to be used: as First, a frequent Repetition and Renewal of it.
For at first our vicious Inclinations will muster up all their Strength against
our Resolution, and a perpetual Contest there will be between them, till either
the one or the other is subdued: but our good Resolution being yet but raw and
infirm, will ever and anon be apt to flinch and retreat; so that unless we
often renew and reinforce it, it will not long be able to withstand the
Assaults and Importunities of our vicious Inclinations. Wherefore if we mean to
be successful in this Work of Mortification, it will be necessary for some time
at least till the Strength of our bad Inclinations is broken, that we should
every Morning before we go abroad into the World renew our Vows and Resolutions
of Obedience, and reinforce them with a serious Consideration of those great
Arguments whereupon they were first founded; that we should go out of our
Chambers armed as Men that wait for their Enemies, and not trust our own Souls
among the Temptations of the World, till we have first chained up our
Inclinations with new Vows of Fidelity. Let us therefore every day as soon as
we open our Eyes thus resolve with our selves; I am now going into a world of
Temptations, where I shall be solicited both from within and without to
falsify my Vows which I have made to my God, and to betray my own Soul into
everlasting Perdition: wherefore I do here in the dreadful presence of God, and
of my Savior, and of all the heavenly Host renew and ratify again the good
Resolutions I have made, without any reservation or exception; and whatsoever
Invitations I may have to the contrary, I will never revoke this promise which
I now make, or any part of it: so help me, O my God. And if for a while we
would but use our selves to this Method, I doubt not but we should quickly find
our good Resolutions so strengthened and confirmed, that the Gates of Hell
would not be able to prevail against them: but if when we have made a
Resolution against our sins, we do not take care to confirm and renew it, we
shall find the Strength of it will by degrees so decay and abate, that at last
it will be foiled and baffled by every Temptation that encounters it. This
therefore is one Part of that wise and prudent Discipline we are to exercise
over our selves, when we are thoroughly resolved against our sin, frequently to
renew our Resolution.

II. ANOTHER Part of it is frequent Reflection upon and Examination of our
selves. And indeed if we do not inure our selves to this, we shall very often
sin unawares without either considering what we are doing, or reflecting upon
what we have done: and while we can thus sin without Check or Control, it will
be in vain for us to make Resolutions of Obedience. For still the Pleasure of
one Act will invite us to another, and so in the hurry of our worldly
Occasions, we shall go on to repeat sin after sin, without heeding what we do,
or repenting of what we have done: and if we suffer one sin to break through
the Fence, that will open a gap for others to follow; and if these are not
presently stopped by serious Reflection, they will make the Breach yet wider
for others; till at last they have trodden down all the Enclosures of our
Resolution, and laid open our whole Souls into a Common, and Throughfare of
Iniquity. But now by inuring our selves to a frequent Reflection upon and
Examination of our own Actions, we shall in a great measure prevent those many
Surprises which otherwise will be unavoidable to us: and when at any time we
stumble at unawares, the Penance we shall undergo in reflecting upon our fault
will so embitter the Pleasure of it, as to render it incapable of seducing us
again. Wherefore to secure the Mortification of our sins, as it is necessary
that every Morning we should renew our Resolution against it, so it is no less
requisite that every Night (especially till we have made some considerable
Progress) we should seriously examine our Performances, whether they have
comported with our Resolutions; and if upon an impartial Survey of our own
Actions we find that they have, let us lie down in Peace, blessing and adoring
that Grace by which we have been preserved. But if we are conscious to our
selves of any Breach that we have made upon our Morning Vows of Obedience, let
us bitterly bewail our own Folly and Baseness, and reflect upon it with the
greatest Shame and Indignation: What have I done, O wretched Traitor that I am,
both to God and my own Soul? I have mocked the great Majesty of Heaven, with
solemn vows of Obedience, and broke the most sacred Ties to come at those Lusts
which will be my ruin: what can I plead for my self, Base and Unworthy that I
am? With what face can I go into his dreadful presence, whom I so lately
invoked to be Witness to those Vows which I have this day falsified? Yet go I
will, though I am all ashamed and confounded, and confess and bewail mine
Iniquity before him. And if we would but keep our selves a while to this strict
Discipline, we cannot imagine how mightily it would contribute to the
Mortification of our Lusts: it would make our Reason so vigilant, and our
Conscience so tender, that in a little while we should be startled with every
Appearance of Evil; and Death it self would not be so terrible, as Sin to to
us; the Pleasure of our sin would be so allayed and abated by those stinging
Reflections that would follow it upon, that it would be no longer capable of
alluring and seducing us; and the dread of that bitter Penance, which we must
undergo at Night, would sufficiently secure us against the Temptations of the
Day.

Thirdly and Lastly, ANOTHER Part of that prudent Discipline which we are to
exercise upon our selves, is to keep our selves at as great a distance from
Sin, as prudently and conveniently we can. He that will mortify his Sin, must
at first not only abstain from sinning, but also from every thing that does
nearly approach and border upon it: as for instance, it is not sufficient to
mortify an intemperate Appetite, that we abstain from Drunkenness and
Gluttony; but besides this, we must for a while at least be very abstemious,
till we have reduced our Appetite from its wild Exorbitances, and not indulge
to our selves the utmost Liberties of lawful Eating and Drinking: it is not
sufficient for the subduing our wanton Inclinations, that we abstain from
Adultery and Fornication; but we must also forbear those Meats and Drinks,
those Gestures and Societies, those Sights and Sports which are apt to
administer Fuel to our immodest Flames: to tame our malicious and revengful
Passions, it is not enough that we abstain from all unjust Retaliations of
Injuries; but we must moreover restrain our selves even from that lawful
Displeasure and just Resentment, which may safely be allowed to a meek and
charitable Disposition. And under these strict Restraints we must keep our
selves for a while, till we have worn off our evil Inclinations, by habituating
our selves to the contrary Virtues: and then we may safely unloose our Bands,
and return again, to our lawful Freedoms. But if while we are strongly inclined
to any sin, we will venture as near to it as lawfully we may, it is a mighty
Hazard but our Inclination will carry us a great deal farther than we should
go. For generally the Transition out of the utmost of what is lawful into the
nearmost of what is sinful, is undiscernable; the (...) or Line that metes out
a Virtue form its neighboring Vice being commonly so small, that it is hard to
distinguish where they part, or to find out the just Boundary whereto we may go
and no farther: so that when we think we are only upon the Extremities of what
is lawful, we are many times passed the Line, and are far gone within the
Borders of what is sinful. So that unless we had an infallible Guide to
accompany us in all our Actions and Circumstances, and to point out to us the
particular Limits of lawful and unlawful; it is impossible we should be safe
within the Neighborhood of Evil: but like those who dwell upon the Confines of
two hostile Countries, we shall still lie open to Invasion on every side. For
our bad Inclinations are never so impatient of Restraint, as when they are
within Prospect of Satisfaction, and the objects which attract them are near
and easy to be enjoyed: now they will struggle with all their Might against
our Resolution, and taking a new scent of those beloved Lusts whose alluring
Relishes they had almost forgotten, with all the ties of Conscience we shall
hardly be able to withhold them from following the beloved Game. So that unless
we keep our selves at a convenient Distance from sin, our bad Inclinations will
be always within View of Temptation; which the nearer it is, the more it will
court and importune them: and while we keep near our sin, and do not enjoy it,
we do but tantalize our selves, and enrage our own Hunger by keeing a Bait
before us which we dare not swallow. If ever therefore we mean to mortify our
Lusts, we must not only avoid coming at them, but so far as we can, approaching
toward them; at least till we have so weaned our Inclination from them, that
their Nearness ceases to be a Temptation to us. These are the Parts of that
wise and prudent Discipline, which we are to exercise upon our selves, as a
Mean and Instrument to mortify our Lusts.

V. ANOTHER Instrument of Mortification is frequent Receiving of the Sacrament.
And indeed I do not know any one more effectual Cause, or more fatal Symptom of
the Decay of Christian Piety among us, than is the common and woeful Neglect of
this solemn Ordinance, which were it but frequented with that wise and due
Preparation that it ought to be, would doubtless be highly instrumental to
reform the World, and to make Men good in good earnest. For besides that those
sacred Elements are by God's Institution become moral Conveyances of the Divine
Grace, whereby our good Resolutions are nourished and confirmed; there we have
represented openly to our Senses one of the greatest Arguments against Sin in
all our Religion, viz. the Passion and Sacrifice of our blessed Savior: There
he is represented to my Eyes in all his Wounds and Agonies, bruised and broken
for my Sin, and bleeding to expiate my Transgressions. And, O my obdurate Soul,
can thou behold this tragical Spectacle, without Indignation against thy Sins
which were the Cause of it? Does not thy Heart rise against thy Sins, whilst
thou here beholdest him weltering in his Blood, and hear those gaping Wounds
it issues from proclaiming them his Assassines and Murderers? But if thou have
not Ingenuity enough to prompt thee to revenge thy Savior's quarrel upon these
his mortal Enemies, yet methinks Self-love would move thee not to be fond of
thy Sins, when thou here beholdest how much the Son of God endured to expiate
them. For how can thou think of sinning without Trembling and Astonishment,
who have here before thine Eyes such a dreadful Example of God's Severity
against it? Does it not strike thy Soul into an Agony to behold this bloody
Tragedy, wherein the all-merciful Father is represented so inexorably incensed
against thy Sins, that he that was the most innocent Person that ever was upon
Earth, and also the greatest Favorite that ever was in Heaven, could not with
all his Prayers and Tears obtain thy Pardon, without undergoing for thee the
bitter Agonies of a woeful Death? Sure if thou have any one Spark of Love in
thee either toward thy Savior, or thy self, this solemn Commemoration of his
Passion cannot but affect thee with Horror and Indignation against thy Sins.
But then as in this great Solemnity we do commemorate our Savior's Passion, so
we do also renew the Vows of our Obedience to him; which (as I have showed you)
is very instrumental in it self to the subduing of our sins; but much more,
when it is done in so sacred a manner. For as Feasting upon Sacrifices was
always used as a federal Rite, both among the Jews, and Heathens, whereby God
and Men by eating together did mutually oblige themselves to one another; so
the Lords Supper being a Feast upon the Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood,
when we come thither we eat and drink of his Sacrifice, and do thereby devote
our selves in the most solemn manner to his Service: We swear Allegiance to him
upon his own Body and Blood, and take the Sacrament upon it, that we will be
his faithful Votaries. When we take the Consecrated Symbols into our hands, we
make this solemn Dedication of our selves to God; Here we offer and present
unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our Souls and Bodies to be a reasonable holy and
lively sacrifice unto thee, and here we call to witness this sacred Blood that
redeemed us, and those vocal Wounds that interceded for us, that from
henceforth we oblige our selves never to start from thy service, what
Difficulties soever we may encounter in it, and what Temptations soever we may
have to forsake it. Now what can be a greater Restraint to us, when we are
solicited to any Evil, than such a solemn and sacred Obligation? Methinks the
Sense of that dreadful Vow that is upon us, should so overawe us, that we
should not be able to think of sinning without Horror: For, Lord! how shall I
dare to cheat and defraud my Neighbor, when 'twas but the other day that I
vowed to be honest, and took the Sacrament upon it! with what Conscience can I
now hate or design revenge against my Brother, when I so lately swore unto God
upon the Body and Blood of my Savior, that I would love and forgive all the
world! Surely if Men had any Sense of God, any Dram of Religion in them, they
would not be able after such engagements to look upon any Temptation to sin
without Trembling: And whatsoever Pretenses of Unworthiness Men may make to
keep themselves from this Ordinance, I doubt not but the great Reason of their
Neglect is this, that they love their Lusts, and are resolved whatsoever comes
of it they will not part with them; and so they will not come to the Sacrament,
because they must be obliged to renounce their Lusts there, which they are
extremely unwilling to do. And if this be their Reason, as I fear it is, they
are unworthy indeed, the more Shame for them; but it is such an Unworthiness as
is so far from excusing their Neglect, that it is a foul Aggravation of it: For
he that will not receive the Sacrament, because he will not renounce his Lusts,
makes one Sin the Reason of another, and so pleads that for his Excuse which
will be the Cause of his Condemnation. But if we are honestly resolved to part
with all our Sins, and can but willingly devote them as Sacrifices to the
Altar, we are sufficiently prepared for this great Solemnity, and shall be
welcome Guests to the Table of our Lord: If we can sincerely pay our Vows at
his Altar, we may confidently take the Cup of Salvation and call upon the Name
of the Lord. And having thus chained up our Lusts by the Vows of Obedience we
have paid there, it will be hard for them to shake off such mighty Fetters, or
ever to get loose again from so strict a Confinement; especially if we take
care to repeat this our Sacramental Vow as often as conveniently we can. For
(as I have already showed you) the frequent Renewal of our holy Vows and
Resolutions does mightily tend to strengthen and reinforce them: And therefore
it is worth observing, how much care Christ has taken in the very Constitution
of his Religion, to oblige us to a constant Repetition of our Vows and good
Purposes. For at our first Entrance into Covenant with him, we are to be
baptized; in which Solemnity we do renounce the Devil and all his Works, and
religiously devote our selves to his Service: But because we are apt to forget
our Vows, and the matter of it is continually to be performed, and more than
one World does depend upon it; therefore he has thought fit not to trust to
our first Engagement, but so to methodize our Religion that we should ever and
anon be obliged to give him new Security. For which End he has instituted this
other Sacrament, which is not like that of Baptism to be received by us once
for all, but is to be often repeated; that so at every return of it we might be
obliged again to renew our old Vows of Obedience: And doubtless would we but
follow this good Design of our Savior, we should be far more successful in our
Religion than we are. For till we come to a confirmed State of Goodness, our
holy Fervor will be very apt to cool, our good Purposes to slacken and unwind,
and our virtuous Endeavors to languish and grow weary: So that unless we
revive our Religion by frequent Restoratives, in a little time it will faint,
and dye away. Wherefore to keep it alive, it is very necessary that we should
come to our great Master's Table every time we are invited by the solemn
Returns of this holy Festival; that here we may renew our Vows, and
reinvigorate our Resolutions, and repair our Decays, and put our sluggish
Graces into a new Fermentation: And if we would thus frequently communicate
with a due Preparation of Mind, we should doubtless at every Sacrament acquire
new Life and Vigor, and our good Resolutions would every day get ground of our
bad Inclinations, till at last they had totally subdued them.

VI. And Lastly, ANOTHER Instrument of Mortification is constant Prayer. For
besides that by our sincere and honest Prayers we are sure to obtain Strength
and Assistance from God, to enable us to vanquish and subdue our Lusts, he
having promised to give his Holy Spirit unto every one that asks it: Besides
this, I say, by a constant and serious Devotion our Hearts will be filled with
such an overawing Sense of God, that in all our Actions we shall dread and
revere his Authority, and be ready to tremble at every Thought of offending
him. For there is nothing gives us such a quick Sense of God, as Prayer; that
being the most immediate Address that we can make to him, and the highest
Elevation of our Souls toward him. For we are a sort of Beings that are a kin
to two Worlds, being placed in the middle between Heaven and Earth, as the
common Center wherein these distant Regions meet. By our superior Faculties we
hold Communion with the spiritual World, and by our inferior with the
corporeal one: But to this sensible or corporeal World we lie open and bare,
all its Objects being present to us, and striking immediately on our Senses;
whereas between us and the spiritual World there is a Cloud of sensible things,
which interrupts our Prospect of that clear Heaven above them; so that before
we can perceive that which is Divine, we must remove this World out of the way,
and withdraw our Souls from those Thoughts and Desires wherein these lower
things have entangled them; that so we may lie open to the heavenly Light, and
our cold Affections may be immediately exposed to the enlivening Warmths of the
Sun of Righteousness. And hence arises the Necessity of holy Meditations and
devout Prayers; the one being necessary to abstract our Minds from the Objects
of corporeal Sense, and the other to inspire our Wills with divine Affections
and Inclinations: For Meditation furnishes our Understandings with noble
Thoughts and heavenly Ideas; and Prayer carries out our Wills to the Love of
them, and joins our Affections fast to them; so that by the one we are tied in
our Minds, and by the other in our Choice of the better World. For Prayer does
naturally sublimate our gross, and earthly Passions; and by keeping our Minds
intent upon God, it wings our Affections toward him, and animates them with
Divine Fires: And we do never rise from our Knees after a devout Address unto
God, without deriving a magnetic Virtue from him, and being sensibly touched
with his Charms and Attractions. So that if we did but inure our selves to
fervent Prayer, those holy Affections which we should suck in with our
Devotions would be instrumental to extinguish our vicious Inclinations; and we
should go every day from the Throne of Grace with such a lively Sense of God,
and such a vigorous Relish of Divine things, as would be sufficient to antidote
us all the day after against the Venom of any sinful Contagion. Wherefore if we
are in good earnest, and do seriously intend the Mortification of our Lusts,
let us every day before we go into the World be seasoning of our Minds with
holy Devotions; and while we are addressing unto God in the deepest Sense of
his unbounded Perfections, and of our own Dependence upon him, let us pour out
our Souls before him, and make an hearty Oblation of our Souls and Bodies to
him. Let us offer up our Wills to him broken and contrite, that he may put them
into what Form and Posture he pleases; show him an Heart that quitteth all
Interest in it self, and that would be only led and conducted by him; tell him
that you are sensible, that to mortify your Lusts is far more difficult than to
resolve to do it; and beseech him to enable you to be valiant in your Actions,
as through his Grace you are already in your Minds and Hearts; that you may
with as much Certainty, if not with as much Ease, do and effect, as you have
projected and resolved. And having thus implored his Aid, and sincerely offered
up your selves unto him, you have laid a strong Engagement upon him not to
abandon you: For to be sure he will not throw away a Heart, that puts it self
thus humbly into his hands; nor suffer the Devil to make a Prey of that which
has been so affectionately devoted to him. For it was by the Concurrence of
his Grace, with our own Faculties, that this Resolution of Submission to him
was begotten in us; and can we think that the Father of Love will ever abandon
his own Offspring, while it cries out to him, and with pitiful and bemoaning
Looks implores his Aid and Compassion? Surely this cannot choose but move his
Fatherly Bowels, and make them yern and turn toward it, and by a strong
Sympathy draw his compassionate Arm to aid and relieve it. Let us therefore but
faithfully use our own Endeavors, and fervently implore God's Grace; and then
to be sure he will never suffer that Divine Fire, which he has kindled within
us, to be overborn by our Corruptions; but will kindly cherish it with his own
Influence, and touch it with an outstretched Ray from Himself, till it has
burned through all that Rubbish that oppresses it, and till it rises into a
victorious Flame.

CHAP. III. Of some Motives to Mortification, taken from the Mischiefs of Sin.
HAVING shown you at large what are the proper Instruments of Mortification, I
shall in the next place proceed to press you with some prevailing Motives and
Arguments faithfully to employ and use them. And here I shall not insist upon
those Arguments which arise from the Consideration of the future State, because
these will fall in hereafter, when I come to discourse upon it: All the
Arguments that I shall here urge therefore to press you to mortify your Sins,
shall be drawn from the Consideration of those present Miseries and
Inconveniences which they bring you into. And these I shall rank under two
general Heads:

First, SUCH as are outward and Bodily. Secondly, SUCH as are inward and
Spiritual.
I. THE outward and Bodily Inconveniences which our Sins bring upon us are
chiefly these Four;

First, THEY destroy our Health and shorten our Lives. Secondly, THEY stain our
Reputation. Thirdly, THEY waste our Estates. Fourthly, THEY disturb even our
sensual Pleasures and Delights.
I. CONSIDER how your Sins destroy your Health and shorten your Lives. And to
convince you of this, I need do no more than only to lead you into the
Slaughter-houses of Death, and to show you how thick they are hung round about
with the numerous Trophies of Lust and Intemperance: Behold, there lies an
Adulterer choked with the stench of his own Rottenness; there a Drunkard
fettered with Gouts, and drowned in Catarrhs and Dropsies; there a Glutton
stifled with the Loads of his own undigested Meals; lo there lie the
dismembered Martyrs of Revenge and Insolence, that have lost their Limbs upon
the Field in a foolish Quarrel for Vanity and Mistresses; and there the Envoys
of Rapine and Murder, whose infamous Carcasses have furnished the Scaffolds and
the Gallows. These and such like woeful Examples almost every day's Experience
presents to our View, which one would think were sufficient to warn Men of
those Vices, which they so commonly find attended with such tragical Effects:
And indeed there is no Vice whatsoever, but does one way or other undermine our
Health, and impair the Strengths of Nature. For all Viciousness consists in an
Excess either of our Passions, or our Appetites; and it is plain and obvious,
how destructive to our Health the wild Excesses of our Appetites are: how
naturally Wantonness does melt our Strength, consume our Spirits, and rot our
Bones: how Gluttony obstructs our Breath, oppresses our Stomachs, and drowns
our Bodies in unwholesome Crudities: how Drunkenness inflames our Livers,
corrupts our Blood, dilutes our Brains, and converts us into walking Hospitals
of Diseases. And as for the Excesses of our Passion, it is no less apparent how
much they disturb and discompose our Natures: Thus Anger we see fires the
Spirits and inflames the Blood, and makes the Humors sharp and corroding: Thus
immoderate Sorrow oppresses the Heart, dries the Bones, shrivels the Skin, and
overcasts the Spirits with Clouds of Melancholy: Thus Envy swells the
Hypocondries, which by drinking up the Nourishment of the neighboring Parts,
makes the whole Body lean and meager: And in a word, thus excessive Fear
stagnates the flowing Spirits, and turns the Blood into a trembling Ielly. And
such Disorders as these, when they are frequent, must needs gradually undermine
the Forts of Life, and hasten them into an untimely Ruin. Now is it not very
strange, that those Men who are commonly so over-tender of their Lives, should
be fond of Diseases, and court their own Executioners? That they should choose
to swallow Sicknesses, to drink dead Palsies, and foaming Epilepsies, and to
pass through so severe a Discipline of Torments, only to get an Habit of
destroying themselves? It Is true indeed, some there are that have been so
naturalized to their Vices, that they cannot live, nor be well without them;
that are sick while they are temperate, and are not able to sleep, but in a Sea
of Liquor, and are fain to put themselves into Excesses of Passion to ferment
their Blood, and rouse their drousy Spirits: But then it is to be considered,
that generally they bring themselves to this sad pass by their own evil Habits,
and Customs which they acquire, by doing great Violence to themselves, and
committing forcible Outrages on their own Natures. There is no unreasonable
Passion, or Appetite can be necessary to our Health, or Ease, till we are first
habituated to them; and before we can be habituated, we must undergo a tedious
Course of Pain and Uneasiness; many a Fit of tormenting Rage must be endured,
many an uneasy Draught and sickly Qualm and fainting Sweat must be undergone,
before Wrath and Intemperance can be made easy and pleasant to us; and much
more before they become necessary Remedies: And it is rare, if ever we have
need of these Excesses, till by a long Course of Violence upon our selves we
have first over-turned our natural Temper and Constitution. And what Man in his
Wits would ever swallow Poison, merely to force his Nature into a
Reconciliation with it; when he is sure before hand, that if he does not die in
the Experiment, (as it is a great Chance but he does) yet that he must undergo
many a Sickness and bitter Agony, before his Nature is so accustomed to it as
to be preserved and nourished by it? But alas! by that time we are arrived to
that Pitch of Intemperance, as to be drunk without the Penance of a Surfeit or
a Fever, the Heat and Vigor of our Nature is usually so quenched with crude
Humors, our Spirits so drowned in Rheums, and Dropsies, and our Brains so
drenched in Clouds of unwholesome Moisture, that all our Life after we are but
so many walking Statues of Earth and Phlegm; and having washed away all the
Principles of Reason and Discretion in us, we grow old in Folly and
Sottishness, and at the last die Changelings. Thus Sin, you see, is a Disease
to the Body; it wastes our Strength, and either makes the Candle of our Life to
burn dim, or blazes it out into an untimely Period. Why then should we not be
as earnest in the Cure of this, as we are of our other Diseases? For doubtless
would we but as carefully apply the Means and Instruments of Mortification, as
we do, when we are sick of a Fever or an Ague, the proper Remedies against
them; we should quickly cure those Excesses of our Passions, and Appetites,
which do so disease our Bodies, and disturb our Natures.

II. CONSIDER how your Sins do stain and blemish your Reputation. For there is
nothing in the whole World more natural to Men, than to admire Virtue and
disesteem Vice wheresoever they find it: This we seem to do by a Natural
Instinct, antecedently to all our Reasoning and Discourse; and it is no more in
our Power not to do it, than it is to choose whether our Pulse shall beat, or
our Blood circulate. For that Virtue is an Ornament, and Vice a Deformity to
humane Nature, is a Proposition so self-evident, that at the first Proposal it
commands the Assent of all Rational Beings; nor is it in any Man's Power so far
to offer Violence to his own Faculties, as to believe Vice praiseworthy, or
commendable, any more than it is to believe that to be white and strait, which
he sees to be black and crooked: And accordingly you will find, that by all
Mankind it has ever been branded with an infamous Character, and looked on as
a Disparagment to the noblest Accomplishments. For in all the Monuments of
former Ages; never were any Man's Lusts and Intemperances recorded among the
Titles of his Honor; nor was there ever any one Canonized in the Records of
Fame, for being a Villain, or a great Debauchee. But generally they are the
Wise, or the Valiant, the Just, or the Merciful, the Chaste, or the Liberal,
whose Names have been consecrated in History; and no Man ever acquired a
Glorious Memory, but it was either by being virtuous, or by seeming to be so.
And though wicked Men, like Glowworms, do sometimes shine in the dark, where
either their Vice is not seen, or is mistaken for Virtue; yet usually at the
Approach either of Time, or Light, their Luster vanishes and goes out in Stink
and Dishonor. So that methinks had we any regard to our own Reputation, we
should scorn to harbor those infamous Lusts, which in the Opinion of all the
World are so great Disparagements to us: For what a monstrous Shame is it to be
despised by all wise Men, to be hooted at by Boys, to be talked of in Fairs and
Markets, and pointed at and described by Appellatives of Scorn? And yet all
this we expose our selves to for the sake of a few base Lusts, which cause us
to rot above ground and to stink alive, and when we are dead will strew our
Graves with Dishonor, and inroll our Names in the black Records of Infamy.

III. CONSIDER how your Vices do waste and consume your Estates. For generally
it is a very chargeable thing to be wicked, there being few Lusts but do
require a large Revenue to maintain them: For what a vast Expense is the
Epicure at to provide Meat and Drink Offerings for that Idol-God his Belly?
What an inestimable Charge is it to the prodigal ostentatious Fool to gratify
all his Vanities, and plume the Wings of his Fantastic Pride? How much does it
cost the insatiate Wanton to make Provision for his unbounded Sensuality? How
many a fair Estate has there been spent in litigious Suits at Law, merely to
improve a Quarrel, and gratify a silly Revenge? And how many a prosperous
Trader has undermined himself by his own Fraud and Knavery; whilst for a
present dishonest Gain he loses a Customer, by whom he might have honestly
gotten ten times more in seven years Trade and Commerce? And indeed for the
generality there is a world of ill Husbandry in being wicked; most of our Lusts
being like the Holes of a Sieve, through which our Estate runs out as fast as
we can pour it in: And I believe it were easy to demonstrate, that the Ruin of
most Families, and the Beggary of most Persons, is owing to one Vice or other;
and that where one is sunk by mere Misfortune, there are twenty ruined by their
own Wickedness. Now what Man in his wits would keep such a company of devouring
Lusts about him, that are perpetually spunging upon his Estate, and eating the
Bread out of his Childrens Mouths? Who would ever expose himself and his Family
to the hazard of Want and Beggary, merely to gratify an unreasonable Passion,
or to satiate a wild and intemperate Appetite? But perhaps you think that there
is no great Danger of this; for whatever comes of it, you will take care of the
main Chance, and be such good Husbands in your Wickedness, as to be sure not to
impair your Estates by it. Alas poor Men! you know not what you will be; for
when once you are set into a Course of Wickedness, you are like so many eager
Gamesters, that when they set to it resolve to lose but a Crown, or a Piece at
most; but when they have lost that, they double their Stakes in hope to recover
all again, and so game on till they have no more to lose. And first perhaps
your Lusts will be very modest, and content themselves with the cheapest
Provisions you can make for them; but when once they have inveagled and drawn
you in, they will still be craving more costly Entertainments, and will by
degrees so encroach upon you, that you know not when or where you shall stop:
So that it is in vain for you to talk what you will do, for either you must
mortify your Lusts, or resolve to gratify them; and if you do the latter, there
is no End of it; for like the Daughters of the Horseleech, they will still be
crying Give, Give, till you have no more to give, and then they will prey upon
your selves.

Fourthly and Lastly, CONSIDER how your Vices do disturb and interrupt even
your sensual Pleasures and Delights. For how often do you embroil the Peace of
your Families by your own peevish Passions, and disturb the whole Neighborhood
with whom you might enjoy the Pleasures of a friendly Conversation? How many
Enemies do you create your selves by your own Malice and Ill Nature, whom you
might as easily oblige by Kindness and Good Will, at least to a fair
Correspondence, if not to a Return of mutual Indearments? To how many Hazards
and Difficulties, Iealousies and Disappointments, Impatiencies of Desire and
Fears of discovery does Lasciviousness expose you? When as would you but
confine your vagrant Lusts within the holy Circles of Conjugal Chastity, you
might entertain your Appetites with Innocence and Ease, with equal Pleasure and
less Difficulty, with a pure Conscience, and without the Hazard either of
Disappointment or Discovery. How do you perplex and entangle your selves by
Lying and Knavery, consuming the Pleasure of your Lives within a winding Maze
of little Tricks and intricate Contrivances? And what shameful Retreats and
false Colors and Daubings are you fain to use to avoid Contradiction and
Discovery? Whereas were you but honest and sincere in your Professions and
Actions, your way would be open and easy and uniform; where you might pursue
all your Ends by the directest Means, and need never wander about in the
Labyrinths of a mysterious Sub tilty; where you may walk without Blushing in
the sight of the Sun, and the View of the World, and have no occasion to skulk
into Coverts and Retirements. Once more, What miserable Drudges does
Covetousness make of us? It will not let us rest Day nor Night, but sends us
about in everlasting Errands; now to be scorched in the Southern, anon to be
frozen in the Northern Parts of the World; this day it exposes us to be
shipwracked at Sea, the next to be terrified on shore; and all this to get a
great Heap of Wealth, which when we have gotten, it will not let us enjoy: So
that when we have what we so impatiently hungered after, we have only acquired
a greater Necessity; because before we needed only what we had not, but now we
need what we have too; our covetous Desires luring us off, and not enduring we
should feed upon our own Quarry: And so after all our Toil, we shall need as
much at least as we did before; only before we did not possess what we needed,
whereas now we shall need what we do possess. But did we take the pains to
learn that great Lesson of Christian Contentment, we should then pursue the
World with far less Vehemence, and enjoy it with far more freedom: We should be
industrious without that eager Solicitude, and if it pleased God to bless our
Industry, we should neither waste what we have, nor want it; and many a happy
year we should enjoy that which now we consume in vexatious Care to keep, and
restless Desire to increase it. How unpleasant is the Life of the intemperate
Epicure, who lives in a continual Lethargy, and dozes away his time in
Sottishness and Stupidity; and by perpetually sucking in Rheums and Defluxions,
does so weaken and dilute the Vigor of the Organs of Sense, that he perceives
not the briskness of his own Relishes; but after his delicious Gobbets are past
his Throat, they load and oppress him, and his Stomach is fain to do Penance
for the Folly and Extravagance of his Palate; and those deep Draughts wherein
he seeks to drown his Conscience and his Melancholy, leave behind them such an
Uneasiness both in his Body and Mind, as nothing can reprieve? For as soon as
he has slept away the Fumes of his Intemperance, he finds himself sick as well
of Company as of Solitude, and is fain to endure all the four Regrets both of
his Conscience and his Stomach. Whereas would but this Man govern his Appetite
by the Laws of Temperance; would he eat to satisfy, and not to invite his
Hunger, and drink to refresh and not to force and oppress himself; his Relish
would be quick and vigorous, his Gust sincere, and his Digestion easy; and his
Appetite being not overloaded with the foregoing Meal, would quickly return
again and give a pleasing Relish to his next Morsel: When he rose from his
Table, his Nature would not be burdened, but refreshed and recreated; his Eyes
would not swim in Floods of Rheum, nor his Brains in Seas of Liquor; his Face
would not be fired with the unwholesome Inflammations of his Liver, nor his
Reason overcast with the Clouds and Vapors of his gorged Stomach; but after
his frugal Meals, he would still find his Organs fresh, and vigorous; and when
he went to bed, his Sleep would not be broken with so many unquiet Starts, nor
sickly Qualms; nor in the Morning would he awake in a Fever: but all his Life
would be serene and calm, and he would enjoy all that is pleasant in Luxury,
and be only barred from the apparent Sting of it. Many other Instances I might
add, but these I think are sufficient to demonstrate, that Vice is the great
Disturber even of those sensual Pleasures and Delights that it promises to us:
So that it plainly contradicts its own Pretensions, and though it invites to
Pleasure, yet entertains us with nothing but Distraction and Uneasiness. The
Cup of Fornication which it holds out to us, though it is spiced at the top, is
Gall and Wormwood at the bottom; and all those Delights that it courts us with,
are only so many painted Miseries; which though they may look amiable and
inviting at a distance, yet upon a more considerate View will be found to be
most wretched Cheats and Impostures. So that methinks were we but ingenious
Epicures, that understood the Pleasures of the Body, and the true Methods of
enjoying them; we should for their sakes discard those Lusts, that are so
contrary and destructive to them; and it would be as impossible for us not to
hate our Sins, as not to love our Pleasures.

AND thus you see, how many Mischiefs and Inconveniences our Lusts bring upon
us in respect of our Bodies and outward Circumstances; so that if we had no
immortal Spirit to take care of, no Interest beyond the Grave to look after,
yet methinks had we but Reason enough to understand, and Self-Love enough to
pursue our present Welfare, that were sufficient to oblige us to mortify our
Lusts. For so long as they live they will be Plagues to us, and we must never
expect a quiet Possession of our own Happiness, till we have utterly destroyed
these mutinous Disturbers of it, that are as so many Thorns in our Eyes, and
Goads in our Sides. But alas! it is not our bodily Happiness only that they
interrupt, and invade; but (which is more intolerable) they poison our Souls
with their contagious Breath, and scatter Plagues and Infection over our
noblest Faculties.) Which brings me to the Second sort of motives, to persuade
you to mortify your Sin, viz. those that are drawn from the present Mischiefs
and Inconveniences that it brings upon our Souls; which are chiefly these
three.

First, IT spoils our Understandings. Secondly, IT subverts the natural
Subordination of our Faculties. Thirdly, IT disturbs the Tranquillity of our
Minds.
I. CONSIDER how much your Sins do spoil and waste your Understandings. For Sin
is an Affront to our Understandings, and a plain Contradiction to the Reason of
our Minds; there being no Vice whatsoever but what is founded in Folly and
Unreasonableness. Whilst therefore we live in Sin, we do so far lay aside our
Reason, (which ought to be the Moderator of our Actions) and abandon our selves
to the Conduct of our own blind Appetites and headstrong Passions; which will
naturally weaken our Rational Faculties, and bring a lingering Consumption on
our Understandings. For as our Powers are improved and perfected by Exercise,
so they are impaired and wasted by Disuse and Inactivity; and therefore our
Reason being such a Power as is not naturally to be perfected but by Action, it
necessarily follows that the less active it is, the more imperfect it must be.
Whilst therefore we live in Sin, or (which is all one) in the Neglect of our
Reason, we consume and waste our Rational Faculties; which being unemploy'd
will naturally contract Rust, and grow every day more weak and restive. For a
Life of Sin is all transacted by Sense and Passion; Reason sits looking on, and
having no part in the brutish Scene, melts away in Sloth and Idleness: Its
Vital Powers freeze for want of Motion, and like standing Waters stagnate, and
gather Mire till they corrupt and putrify. And besides this Decay that Sin
brings upon our Understanding, by taking us off from the exercise of it, it is
also injurious to those bodily Organs, by which our Understanding while we are
in the Flesh, does reason and operate. For our Body is as it were the Musical
Instrument, upon which our Mind sets all its Harmony, and by which it runs all
the curious Divisions of Discourse: And the Blood and Spirits and Brain, and
other Parts of it are the Strings of this Instrument, upon the well-tuning of
which depends all the Music of Reason. But now there is scarce any Sin, that
does not some way or other indispose our Bodies for the use of our Minds, and
render them unfit, especially for the most perfect Exercise of our Reason. Thus
Drunkenness dilutes the Brain, which is the Mint of the Understanding, and
drowns those Images which are stamped upon it in a Deluge of unwholesome
Moistures. Thus Gluttony cloggs the Animal Spirits, which are as it were the
Wings of the Mind, and renders them incapable of performing the noblest and
sublimest Flights of Reason. Thus Anger and Wantonness force up the boiling
Blood into the Brain, and by that disorders the Motions of the Spirits there,
confounds the Fantasms, and disturbs the Conceptions, and shuffles the Ideas of
the Imagination into an heap of inarticulate and disorderly Fancies. And how is
it possible our Minds should strike true Harmony, when its Instrument is thus
disordered, and all the Strings of it are so out of Tune? How should we
understand well, while our Brains are overcast with the thick Fumes of sensual
Lusts; and those Spirits, which should wing our minds, are grown so listless
and unactive, that they rather hamper and entangle them? For what Clearness is
to the Eye, that Purity is to the Mind: As Clearness does dispose the Eye to a
quick and distinct Perception of Material Objects; so Purity from Lust and
Passion disposes the Mind to a more clear Apprehension of Intellectual ones;
and the more any Man's Soul is cleansed from the Filth and Dregs of Sensuality,
the brighter it will be in its Conceptions, and the more nimble and expedite in
its Operations. For Purity does naturally fit the Body to the Mind; it puts its
Organs all in Tune, and renders its spirits fine and agil, and fit for the
noblest Exercises of Reason: which they can never be, whilst they are subject
to disorderly Passions, and drenched in the unwholesome Reeks of Sensuality and
Voluptuousness. But besides this Mischief which Sin does to our Understandings,
by rendering our Bodies unapt to all Intellectual Purposes; it also dies the
mind with false Colors, and fills it with Prejudice, and undue Apprehensions
of Things. For while our Souls are under the sway of any disorderly Passion or
Appetite, they will naturally warp our Judgments into a Compliance with their
own Interest; and bribe us to judge of things, not according to what they are,
but according to what we would have them: And when our Judgments are thus
bribed by our Interest, and swayed by our Passions, it is impossible we should
judge truly of Things. For our Passions will discolor the Objects of our
Understandings, and disguise them into such Shapes as are most agreeable to our
Humor and Interest; and so our Opinions of Things will alter upon every
Variation of our Humors, and our Thoughts, like Weather-cocks, will be
wheeling about upon every Change of Wind. So that while we are encompassed with
the Mists of sinful Prejudice, they will necessarily hinder the Prospect of our
Reason, and obscure the Brightness of our Understandings, and the Clearness of
our discerning Faculties. And thus you see, how natural it is to Vice to spoil
and wast our Understandings, and to choke up those Fountains of Light within us
with Clouds and Darkness. And that it does so is very apparent in Fact; for how
much wicked Men have lost their Reason, is apparent by the ridiculous
Principles upon which they generally act; which generally are so very weak and
absurd, that it would be impossible for Men to assent to them, were not their
Understandings perished, and the Reason of their minds woefully impaired and
wasted. As for instance; the desperate Atheist wishes that there were no God,
upon this Principle, that it is better for Men to be without a God, than to be
without their Lusts; then which there can be nothing more wild or extravagant:
For it is plain that without our Lusts we can be happier than with them;
whereas it is the common Interest of Mankind, that the World should be governed
by infinite Goodness conducted by infinite Power and Wisdom; and no Man, or
Society of Men can be happy without it. For take God out of the World, and you
take away all Hope from the miserable, all Comfort from the sorrowful, and all
Support from the dejected and calamitous; and at one blow cut in sunder all the
Bands of Society, raze the Foundations of Virtue, and confound all Distinction
between Good and Evil. And yet the besotted Wretch, for the sake of a paltry
Lust that betrays him with a Kiss, and stings him in the Enjoyment, would fain
banish God out of the World; though it is apparent that in so doing he would do
Mankind more Mischief, than if he should blow out all the Lights of Heaven, or
pull down the Sun from the Firmament. And in the general, what more ridiculous
Principles can there be thought, than such as these; That Sense is to be
preferred before Reason, Earth before Heaven, Moments before Eternity; that the
short-lived pleasures of sin, which expire in the fruition, are sufficient to
balance the loss of an immortal Heaven, and the sense of an eternal Hell; that
it is time enough to repent when we can sin no more; and that God is so fond a
Being, as that rather than ruin those that wilfully spurn at his Authority, and
trample upon his Laws, he will accept a few Tears and Promises to live well,
when we can live no longer, in exchange for all the Duty we owe him; and that
we may sit all the day in the lap of our Lusts, and enjoy them without
control, and then at night when we can enjoy them no longer fly up to Heaven,
upon the Wings of a Lord have mercy upon us. And yet a wicked Life is either
built upon no Principles at all, or upon such as these; which are ridiculous
beyond all the extravagant Conceits of Fools, or Madmen. It Is no wonder
therefore, that the Scripture so frequently brands the Sinner with the infamous
Character of a Fool; for if you measure him by the Principles he acts upon,
there is not a greater Fool in Nature: which is a plain Evidence, how much Vice
does besot the Understandings of Men, and like those Barbarous Philistines,
puts out their Eyes, only to sport it self with their Follies and
Extravagances. So that methinks had we any Reverence for our own Reason, by
which we are constituted Men, and distinguished from the Beasts that perish; we
should never endure those Lusts within our Bosoms, that do so much impair, and
wast it.

II. SIN subverts the natural Subordination of our Faculties. For the natural
Order and Polity of our Natures consists in the Dominion of our Rational
Faculties, over our sensitive Passions and Appetites; so that then only we live
according to the Law of our Nature, when we eat and drink, and love and hate,
and fear and hope, and desire and delight, according as right Reason,
prescribes. For the noblest Principle of Humane Nature is Reason, by which it
is that we are constituted Men, and advanced into a Form of Beings above all
sublunary Creatures; and this Reason of ours is implanted in us, by the great
Author of our Beings, for no other End, but only to steer and direct us; to be
an Eye to our blind and brutish Affections, to correct the Errors of our
Imaginations, and bound the Extravagances of our Passions and Appetites, and to
regulate the whole Course of our Actions; so as that we may demean our selves,
as becomes such Beings as we are, and placed in such Relations and
Circumstances. God therefore having compounded us of contrary Natures, viz.
Rational and Sensual, which are pregnant with contrary Inclinations and
Affections; from hence arises the Necessity of all those Heroic Virtues, which
consist in the Dominion of our Reason over our Sensitive Affections and
Appetites; such as Chastity and Sobriety, Meekness and Equanimity, and the
like; all which are proper to us as Beings made up of contrary Principles, from
whence spring those contrary Inclinations, in the good or bad Government
whereof consists the Nature of Virtue and Vice. Whilst therefore we keep our
Brutal Passions and Appetites in Subjection to our Reason, we follow the
genuine Current of Humane Nature; in which our best and noblest Principle
rules, and all our inferior Powers are regularly subordinate to it: But when
we degenerate into a State of Sin, we thereby discompose the Harmony of our
Natures, and put all our well-ranked Faculties into a strange Disorder and
Confusion. For every Sin is a Rebellion either of our Passions, or Appetites
against our Reason; and we never commit any known Evil, but we wilfully affront
our own Understandings, and offer open Violence to those superior Faculties
that should rule and govern us. So that when by a Custom of sinning, our
Passions and Appetites have been trained up for a while in Disobedience to our
Reason, they will by degrees grow so headstrong and ungovernable, that it will
be a hard matter to restrain them within any Compass of Reason and Sobriety;
and unless we take a world of pains to suppress them, they will never leave
rioting and tumultuating within us, till they have broke through all their
natural Confinements into a licentious, wild, and boundless Anarchy; and having
thus got head within us, and beaten our Reason from its native Throne, they
will hurry us headlong into all manner of Follies and Extravagances. For now we
shall act no longer from Reason, but from Sense; our Nature being turned
upside-down, and the Cardinal Points of our Motion changed into quite contrary
Positions; so that our Reason will stand us in no other stead, but only to
cater for our Flesh and sensitive Affections, and to make us Brutes with
greater Luxury and Relish: And being thus wholly acted by our brutish Sense,
and led only by the blind Instincts of the Flesh, our Reason will have no hand
in the Government of our Lives; but, like the Beasts of the Field, we shall
live at random, and do things, not because they are reasonable in themselves,
but because they are pleasing to our unreasonable Affections and Appetites.
Such a strange Disorder does Sin bring upon our Natures; so miserably does it
blend and confound our Faculties, that were it not for our Speech and Shape, it
would scarce leave us any remaining Character of Distinction from the Beasts
that perish. For it dissolves our Reason into a mere sensual Sagacity, and
enslaves that highborn Power to every base Passion and Appetite; and so
reduces our well-formed Natures into an undistinguished Chaos, where Sense and
Reason, Brute and Man are shuffled together in a heap of rude and undigested
Ruins. So that methinks had we any Reverence for that excellent Nature that we
carry about with us, that Nature by which we are allied to Angels, and do
border upon God himself; we should never endure to harbor those inhumane
Lusts, that do so disorder and confound it, that make such Spoils and
Devastations within us, that do so disturb the Harmony of our Faculties, and
disjoint the very Frame of our Beings.

III. SIN disturbs the Tranquillity of our Minds; and this naturally follows
from the former: For the Mind of Man can never be at Ease, so long as its Bones
are out of joint, and all its Faculties so woefully disordered. For thus every
thing is at Ease, so long as it is in its own natural State and Condition; but
when once its Parts are displaced, or put into a Disorder, or distorted into an
unnatural Figure; it is in restless Motion, till it returns again to the
specific State and Posture of its own Nature. And so it is with the Mind of
Man; which while it preserves its own natural Station, and Superiority over our
Affections and Appetites, is calm and quiet and serene, and enjoys within it
self perpetual Ease and Tranquillity: But being thrown out of its native Throne,
and led into Captivity by its own Vassals, it can find no Rest in this
preternatural State; but, like a disjointed Member, is in perpetual Anguish,
and Anxiety; and having, like all other Things, an inward strong Propension to
its own natural State and Condition, it will be perpetually struggling and
contending toward it, till it has quite wearied and tired out it self with
its own vain and ineffectual Efforts; and then it will sit down and bemoan it
self, and pine away with Grief and Diffatisfaction. And hence it is that in the
Course of a wicked Life we feel such Contentions between the Flesh, and the
Spirit, such perpetual Broils between the Law in our Minds, and the Law in our
Members; which proceeds from this natural Struggling, and Conatus of the Mind
to recover its native Empire over our Affections and Appetites: From which it
will never wholly surcease, till it is wholly subdued to the Will of the Flesh;
and when it is so, it will be perpetually torn and distracted by those various
wild and inconsistent Affections, whereunto it will be subjected. For so long
as our Passions are subject to our Reason, there can be no Division among them;
because nothing can divide our Passions, but only our proposing to our selves
different and contrary Ends: But the Ends of Reason are all consistent with,
and subordinate to one another, its lesser and inferior Ends being only the
Inns at which it baits upon the Road toward its superior ones; and whilst we
are under the Power and Conduct of one Sovereign End, our Passions must
necessarily join hand in hand, and walk together like Brethren in Unity. But
when once they have shaken off the Yoke of Reason, and submitted themselves to
the Dominion of Sense; among that great Variety of Ends and Objects which Sense
proposes to them, they must needs be torn and divided one from another. For
such is the Scantiness of Sensual Goods, that we not being able to content our
selves with any one of them, are fain to walk the Rounds in a constant
Succession and Circle of Varieties; and then every one of these various Goods
will create within us a various Desire: And so as Sense does multiply its
Temptations, we shall still multiply our Desires and Affections; and at every
new Game that springs, we shall still let fly new Passions. But now the Ends of
Vice are not only various, but also contrary to, and inconsistent with one
another: For all Vices consisting in Extremes, either in Excesses or Defects,
their Ends must be contrary too, and so they cannot but disagree; Excess and
Defect being in themselves most contrary. And these contrary Vices must needs
raise contrary Factions in the Mind, and people it with a Rabble of wild and
inconsistent Passions; which will be always bandying one against another, and
consequently embroiling the Soul in eternal Mutinies and Tumults. And this is
the State of every vicious Man; he is divided into infinite Schisms and
Separations; and like a barbarous Country, cantoned out into a World of petty
Principalities, which are always together by the Ears, and continually invading
one another Dominions. Now what a miserable Distraction must a Man's Mind be
in, when it is thus justl'd to and fro in such a crowd of contrary and
impetuous Passions; when Pride shoves it one way, and Covetousness another;
when Ambition thrusts it forward, and Cowardice pulls it back again; and so
many different Lusts do at the same time hurry it so many different and
contrary Ways? How is it possible it should escape Actaeon's Fate, to be
worried till it is torn in pieces by its own Hounds? And therefore as we value
the Peace of our own Minds, and would not have the inward Harmony discomposed
by the perpetual Iarrings of so many contrary Passions; it concerns us to
subdue and mortify our Lusts: For so long as we entertain these seditious
Incendiaries, they will be perpetually raising Tumults within us, and our Minds
will never be at quiet for them. For the only Way to keep our Minds at Peace,
is to unite our Affections; which we can never hope to do, till we have subdued
them to the Empire of our Reason. But when we come to be under the Command of
that one supreme End, which our Reason will propose to us, as the utmost Scope
of our Desires; then and not till then will these scattered Rivulets of our
Affections unite themselves in one and the same Channel, and flow toward one
and the same Ocean: And then our Mind will be at Rest, and all its contrary
Passions being laid, which now like the boisterous Waves dash one against
another, it will no longer be capable of being ruffl'd into a Storm; but in the
midst of all the Changes of this World, will find it self perpetually inspired
with the most calm, and gentle Thoughts.

CHAP. IV. Of Helps to Mortification, given us by the Spirit of God.
THE Motives, and Arguments for Mortification, which arise from considering the
Mischiefs and Inconveniences of Sin, having been spoken to; I shall now proceed
to such Helps to this Duty, as are given us by the Spirit of God: And I shall
consider them under these four Heads,

First, THE external Arguments and Motives of the Gospel. Secondly, THE
external Providence of the Divine Spirit by which he excites us to our Duty.
Thirdly, THE Aids and Assistances which the Holy Angels give us, who are the
Agents and Ministers of the Holy Ghost. Fourthly, THE internal Motions and
Operations of the Holy Ghost upon our Souls.
I. LET us consider the external Arguments and Motives of the Gospel; such as
the Promises and Threats of it, the great Example of our Savior described in
it, together with all those mighty Considerations out of his Passion and
Resurrection, his Intercession for us at the right hand of God, and his Coming
to judge the World in the last day: All which are the Aids and Assistances of
the Holy Spirit, who has revealed them to us, and demonstrated their Truth and
Divinity by sundry miraculous Operations; which are therefore called the
Evidences and Demonstrations of the Spirit. So that whatsoever there is in the
Gospel to enable us to our Duty; whatsoever Counter-charms its Promises afford
us against the Charms and Allurements of our own Lusts; whatsoever Antidotes
its Threatenings prescribe us against the terrors of the Devil's Temptations;
whatsoever Motives there are in the Life, or Death, Resurrection, and
Intercession of our Blessed Savior, and in his final Judgment by which we must
stand, or fall for ever: In a word, whatsoever Arguments the Laws or the Creed
of our Holy Religion offer us, either to incite us to our Duty, or to enable us
to baffle the Temptations of Vice; they are all from the Spirit, and
consequently are to be reckoned among those gracious Aids and Assistances which
He affords us. And hence the Gospel, which teaches us to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, is called the grace
of God which brings salvation unto all men; Tit. ii. 11, 12. And in Romans
viii. 2. the Apostle calls it the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
by which he was made free from the law of sin and death: Nay, sometimes the
Gospel is called the Spirit, 2 Cor. iii. 6. who also has made us able
ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the spiri; i. e. not
of the Law, but of the Gospel, for the letter kills, but the spirit gives
life: That is, as he elsewhere explains himself, the Law is a Ministration of
Death, but the Gospel brings Life and Immortality to light: And that this is
the Meaning, is plain from what follows, v. 7, 8. but if the ministration of
death written and engraven in stones was glorious, (which is a plain
description of the Law of Moses) how shall not the ministration of the spirit
be rather glorious? And consonantly hereunto by the Spirit we may understand
the Motives and Arguments of the Gospel.

II. LET us consider the external Providence of the divine Spirit by which he
excites us to our Duty, and does many ways administer to our Reformation; which
are so considerable a part of God's Grace and Assistance, that there are very
few good Thoughts or Purposes that spring up in our Minds, which have not their
Rise from some external Event of Divine Providence. And this we may easily
observe, by following the Train of our own Thoughts, and pursuing the Stream of
them to their Spring and Original: For though many times we find good Thoughts
injected into us we know not how, nor whence; yet, if we do but curiously
observe the Rise of our soberest Thoughts and Purposes, we shall generally find
that it is some external Accident or other that occasions them. Either our Sin
betrays us into some great Shame or Infelicity, or our wicked Designs are
baffled by some intervening Accident, or some remarkable Judgment meets us, as
the Angel did Balaam, in the Road of our Folly and Wickedness, by which our
stupid Consciences are many times startled into Reflections; or by some good
Providence we are directed to a serious Book, or faithful Guide, or linked into
some pious Family, or virtuous Association, by whose wise Admonitions, holy
Examples, or friendly Reproofs, we are frequently inspired with good Thoughts,
and serious Resolutions; and from these, or such like Providence ordinarily
spring the Beginnings of our Reformation. So that it is no mean Assistance that
the Divine Providence contributes to us; but by a thousand Arts of Love, and
Methods of Kindness which we take no notice of, it administers to our Recovery,
and serves the everlasting Interests of our Souls. Sometimes it removes
Temptations from us, and keeps them at a distance, while our Lust is hot and
ready to take fire, till it is cooled and extinguished by sober Counsels:
Sometimes by indiscernible Accidents it suggests good Thoughts to us, and
raises good Desires in us; and then seconds those Accidents with such a Train
of Events, as it knows will be most conducive to continue those Thoughts, and
to nurse up those Desires into fixed and lasting Resolutions: In a word, it
observes the molliafandi-tempora, and is infinitely watchful in the timing its
Addresses, so as to strike while the Iron is hot, and to interpose when we are
most apt to be persuaded and wrought upon. If therefore by these Assistances of
the Divine Providence we do mortify our Lusts, we do it by the Spirit; who does
so order and dispose all those outward Events, and Accidents, as may be most
conducive to our Amendment.

III. LET us consider those Aids and Assistances, which the holy Angels give
us, who are the Agents and Ministers of the Holy Ghost; whom he sends forth to
succor and assist us in the Discharge of our Duty. And hence Heb. i. 14. they
are said to be ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation: And in pursuance of this their Ministry they are said to
pitch their tents round about those that fear God, Psalm. xxxiv. 7. and God
himself has promised to give his Angels charge over them to keep them in all
their ways, in the xci. Psalm. 11. which Expressions, I confess, do immediately
refer unto the outward and temporal Protection, which good Men do receive from
the holy Angels: But since those blessed and benign Spirits are so much
concerned in Humane Affairs, we cannot but suppose that, so far as their own
Ability, and the Laws of the invisible World will permit them, they are ready
to succor our Souls, as well as Bodies; and to contribute to our eternal, as
well as temporal Interests; especially considering that of our Savior, Luke
xv. 10. that there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner
that repents. And if they are so far concerned in our Repentance, as to
rejoice in it, to be sure they will and do promote it; since in so doing they
contribute to their own Joy Now the holy Angels, being the Ministers of the
Divine Providence, have great Advantages of assisting us in our Duties, and
serving the Interests of our Souls; which Advantages to be sure their own
Goodness and Benignity will prompt them to make the utmost Improvement of. They
have many Opportunities to present good Objects to us, and to remove
Temptations from us; of disciplining our Natures by Prosperities and
Afflictions, and of ordering and varying our outward Circumstances, so as to
render our Duty more facile and easy to us. And besides, as they are Spirits,
they have a very near and familiar Access to our Souls; not that they can make
any immediate Impressions upon our Understandings, or Wills, which is a Sphere
of Light to which no created Spirit can approach, but is under the immediate
Economy of the Father of Spirits: But yet being Spirits, I conceive, they may
easily insinuate themselves into our Fancies, and mingle with the Spirits and
Humors of our Bodies; and by that means suggest good Thoughts to us, and raise
holy Affections in us. For that they can work upon our Fancies is apparent;
else there could be neither Diabolical, nor Angelical Dreams: And if they can
so act upon our Fancies, as to excite new Images and Representations in them,
they may by this means communicate new Thoughts to the Understanding; which
naturally prints off from the Fancy all those Ideas, and Images which it sets
and composes. And as they can work upon our Fancies, so they can also upon our
Spirits and Humors; else they have not the Power of curing, or inflicting a
Disease: And by thus working upon our Spirits, they can in some measure
moderate the Violence of our Passions; which are nothing but the flowings and
reflowings of the Spirits to and fro from the Heart: And by working upon our
Humors they can compose us to such a sedate and serious Temper, as is most apt
to receive religious Impressions, and to be influenced by the Motions of the
Holy Ghost. These things I doubt not but the blessed Angels can do, and many
times do, though we perceive it not: And though possibly by the Laws of the
World of Spirits they may be restrained from doing their utmost for us, that so
we may still act with an uncontrouled Freedom, and be left under a Necessity of
constant and diligent Endeavor; yet doubtless their Assistance is not wanting
to us; but as the evil Angels are always ready to pervert and seduce us, so the
good are no less ready to reform and recover us. And since whatsoever they do
for us, they do as the Agents and Ministers of the Divine Spirits; whatsoever
we do by their Assistance, we do by the Holy Spirit.

Fourthly and Lastly, LET us consider the internal Motions and Operations of
the Holy Ghost upon our Souls. For besides all those Assistances which the Holy
Spirit vouchsafes to us by his Word, and his Providence, and his Holy Angels;
he does also very powerfully aid and help us by his own immediate Motions, and
Suggestions. For that the Ministrations of Religion have been always
accompanied with the internal Operations of the Spirit, is evident from that
miraculous Success that Religion has found in the World: For I cannot imagine
how Christianity, that never was beholding to humane Force and Power, but
instead of that found all the Powers of the World armed against it, and had so
many mighty Prejudices to combat, before ever it could be admitted to speak
with Men's Reason; I say, I cannot imagine, how under such Circumstances it
could have thrived and flourished as it did, had it not been accompanied with
an invisible Power, from above. For how did it triumph in its very Infancy over
all the Power and Malice of the World, growing like the Palm Tree by
Depression, and conquering in the midst of Flames? What wonderful Alterations
did it make in the Lives and Manners of Men, transforming in an instant the
debauched and dissolute into Patterns of the strictest Temperance and Sobriety,
and with its mighty Charms turning Wolves into Lambs, and Vulturs into
Tuttle-doves? Which wondrous effects were so very frequent, that the Heathens
themselves took special notice of them; which, as St. Austin tells us, made
them to attribute its Success to the Power of Magic; thinking it impossible
that it should do such Wonders, without the Assistance of some powerful Spirit.
And indeed it is not to be supposed, how it should work such strange and
sudden Alterations in Men, by its external Arguments and Motives, without a
divine Power concurring with them and animating and enforcing them; and though
now that Christianity has gotten such footing in the World, and is become the
Religion of Nations, the divine Spirit does not ordinarily work upon Men in
such a strange and miraculous way; but proceeds in more humane Methods by
joining in with our Understandings, and leading us forward by the Rules of
Reason and Sobriety; so that whatsoever Aids it affords us, they work in the
same Way, and after the same Manner, as if all were performed by the Strength
of our own Reason; yet we have a standing Promise which extends to all Ages of
Christianity, that to him who improves the Grace which he has already, more
Grace shall be given; that if we work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, God will work in us to will and to do; and that he will give his
holy Spirit to every one that sincerely asks, and seeks it. For of the
Performance of this Promise, there are none of us all but have had many
sensible Experiences; for how often do we find good Thoughts injected into our
Minds we know not how, nor whence? How frequently are we seized with strong and
vehement Convictions of the Folly and Danger of our own Wicked courses, even in
the midst of our loose Mirth and Iollity, when we are rocked into a deep
Security, when we have endeavored to chase good Thoughts from our Minds, or to
drown them in Sensuality and Voluptuousness? How often have we been haunted
with their Importunities, till we have been scared by them into sober
Resolutions? And when we have complied with them, what Ioys and Refreshments
have we sometimes found in the Discharge of our Duty, to encourage us to
Perseverance in Well-doing? All which are plain and sensible Instances of the
internal Operations of the Holy Spirit upon our Souls: So that when we comply
with these inward Motions of the Holy Ghost, so as to forsake those sins which
they dissuade us from, we do then mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit.

FROM the Consideration of these Benefits by the Spirit of God, many useful
Inferences may be deduced: And First, From hence we may discern the Necessity
of the Spirit, to enable us to mortify the Deeds of the Body. And indeed
considering the Infirmity of our Natures, and the many Temptations we have to
encounter, how we are habituated to a Sensual Life before we are capable of
exercising our Reason, and how much our Wills are biased by our Carnal
Inclinations; it is hardly to be imagined, how we should ever be able to
retrieve our selves from the Power and Dominion of our own Lusts, without some
supernatural Aid and Assistance. For though we have an Understanding capable of
distinguishing between Good and Evil, and of discerning all those Advantages
and Mischiefs that are inseparable unto virtuous and vicious Actions; though we
have a Will that can comply with the Dictates of right Reason, and is no ways
determined and necessitated to Evil; and though we can do whatsoever we will:
Yet if besides those Motives which arise out of the Nature of Virtue and Vice,
we had not supernatural Arguments to assist us, our Inclinations would
certainly prove too strong for our Reason. If the lascivious Wanton had no
other Arguments to oppose against the Temptations of Lust, but that it vexes
him with Impatience, fills him with mad and ungovernable Desires, torments him
with Fear and Jealousy, betrays him into Sickness and Poverty, and the like;
How can it be expected that such slender Arguments should prevail against the
Importunities of his depraved Appetite? If the covetous Oppressor had no other
Motive to confront his Lust with, but that his Injustice exposes him to the
Hatred of those whom he injures, and violates the Laws of Society, and
consequently is destructive of the Public Good, in which his own is involved;
alas! What thin Arguments would these be to him, in comparison with the
Temptations of a Bag of Gold? And though to these natural Arguments God has
added sundry supernatural ones in the Revelation of the Gospel, such as are in
themselves sufficient to check our most outrageous Appetites, and to baffle the
strongest Temptations; Yet alas! our Thoughts are so squandered among this
great Multiplicity of carnal Objects that surround us, that did not the Divine
Spirit frequently suggest those supernatural Arguments to us, and by the
powerful Influence of his Grace keep our Minds intent upon them; we should
never recollect our selves to such a thorough Consideration of them; as is
necessary to persuade our selves by them into a lasting Resolution of
Amendment. So that we have very great need both of the outward, and inward
Grace of God; for though we can deliberate what is best to choose, and choose
what we find best upon Deliberation; yet we are like Men standing in bivio,
between two contrary Roads, and are naturally indeed free to turn either to the
Right hand or to the Left; but on the Left Hand way there are so many
Temptations perpetually beckoning to us, and inviting us unto that which is
Evil, and our brutish Passions and Appetites are so ready upon all occasions to
yield and comply with them; that we should certainty go that way, did not the
Holy Spirit importune us with strong Arguments to turn to the Right Hand way of
Virtue and Goodness.

II. WE may learn from hence the Necessity of our Concurrence with the Spirit,
For the Spirit of God works upon us in such a way, as is most congruous to our
Free and Rational Natures; that is, it does not act upon us by mere Force, or
irresistible Power, but addresses to our Reason, with Arguments and
Persuasions, and so moves upon our Wills by the Mediation of our
Understandings: But when He has done all, He leaves it to our own Choice
whether we will reject, or embrace his Proposals. For although I firmly
believe, as no Man would be wicked, were he not invited by the Temptations of
sin, so no Man would be good, were he not solicited by the Grace of God; yet I
see no Reason to imagine, that either the one, or the other invades the Liberty
of our Wills. The Temptations of Sin indeed incline us one way, and the Grace
of God another; but when all is done, they leave us free to choose or refuse,
and neither the one nor the other forces or necessitates us. And hence the
Successes of the Divine Grace are in Scripture attributed to the Disposition,
or Indisposition of the Subject it acts upon: So Matthew. xi. 20, 21. Then began
he to upbraid the Cities, wherein his mighty works were done; woe unto thee
Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done in
you had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. From whence I argue, that that Grace which would have
converted Tire and Sidon, was not irresistible; for if it had it would have
converted Corazin and Bethsaida too: For how could they have resisted
irresistible Grace? And why should it not have had the same Effect on the one,
which it would have had on the other; had there not been something in the one
which was not in the other, which did actually resist and vanquish it? And so
likewise in the Parable of the Seed sown in the Highway, the stony, thorny,
and good Ground, Matthew. xiii. the Reason why the Seed prospered in some, and
not in others, is plainly resolved into the different Condition of the Soil:
for as for those that either considered not at all, or not enough, the Seed of
the Divine Grace proved altogether ineffectual to them; but as for those who
had so thoroughly considered its Proposals, as to form in their Minds a firm and
settled Judgment of them, it produced in them a most fruitful Spring of Virtues
and good Works. Which is a plain Argument that the Successes of God's Grace
depend upon the Concurrence of our Endeavors with it; for had it wrought
irresistibly upon these different Soils, it must have had the same Success in
all. And indeed it is infinitely unreasonable to expect, that God should make
us good irresistibly, without the free Concurrence of our own Will, and
Endeavors; since by so doing he must offer Violence to the Frame of our
Beings, and alter the established Course of our Natures; which consists in a
free Determination of our selves, according to the Dictates of our own Reason.
For that which is irresistible must necessitate the Subject upon which it acts;
and therefore if we are impelled to be good by a Power which we cannot resist,
it is not in our Power to choose whether we will be good or no. Wherefore
though God be infinitely desirous of our Happiness, and ready to contribute
whatsoever is necessary to promote it; yet he will not effect it by necessary
Means and Causes, but in such a way only as is fairly consistent with the
Liberty of our Wills: that is, he will not save us without our selves, whether
we will or no; but take our free Consent and Endeavor along with him. And
having done all that is necessary to persuade us, he expects that we should
consider what he says, and upon that, consent to his gracious Proposals, and
express this Consent in a constant Course of holy and virtuous Endeavors: and
if we will not do this, we cannot be saved, unless God work a Miracle for us,
and alters the Course of Nature; which is the great Law by which his Providence
does govern all the Beings in the World. And this we have no Reason to expect,
either from the Goodness of God's Nature, or from any Revelation he has made
to us: not from the Goodness of his Nature; for why is it not as consistent
with that to govern us as free Agents, as to make us such? Not from any
Revelation of his Will; for that indispensably exacts our free Concurrence with
his Grace, and Assistance, and requires us to make our selves a new Heart, to
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and to work out
our own salvation with fear and trembling. It Is true, God is also said to work
in us to will and to do, to create in us a new heart, and to create us in Jesus
Christ unto good works: Which seemingly repugnant expressions can be no
otherwise reconciled, but by supposing God and Man to be Ioint-Causes
contributing to the same Effect; so that where God speaks as if He did all, we
must suppose the Concurrence of our Endeavors; and where he speaks as if We
were to do all, we must suppose the Concurrence of his own Grace.

III. WE may be assured from hence of the Certainty of Success, upon such a
Concurrence of our Endeavors with the Spirit of God: which plainly implies the
Assistances of the Spirit to Be within our Power, as being in an inseparable
Conjunction with our sincere and faithful Endeavors. And that they are so, is
apparent; for as for the outward Assistances of the Spirit, which are the
powerful Arguments and Motives of the Gospel, we have them always at hand, and
may make use of them when we please; we have a free Access to this divine
Armoury, and may at any time furnish our selves with sufficient Weapons to
assoil the most formidable Temptations: And as for the inward Aids of the
blessed Spirit, God by his own free Promise has inseparably entailed them upon
our honest and pious Endeavors. Thus he has promised to give his grace to
those who humble themselves, and to draw nigh unto them who submit themselves
to him: Iam. iv. 6, 7, 8. and unto every one that has, that is, improveth what
he has, he has promised it shall be given and that he shall have abundance:
xxv. Matthew. 29. and to every one that asks sincerely and honestly, he has
promised to give his Holy Spirit, Luke xi. 13. And thus by his own free Promise
he has tied his Spirit to our Endeavors, so that we may have his Assistance
when we please; he being confined by his own Promise to be ready at our Call,
and to come in to the Aid of our Endeavors, whenever we shall need and ask
his Assistance. And having such a powerful Second engaged in our Quarrel, what
Reason have we to doubt of Success and Victory? For what Lust is there so
strong that we may not subdue? What Habit so inveterate, that we may not
conquer? What Temptation so powerful that we may not repulse, whose endeavors
are thus seconded with Almighty Aids from above? For now whatsoever the Divine
Spirit can do in us, we can do; because we can do that, which being done, will
infallibly oblige him to concur with us: And though we cannot conquer our Lusts
in our own single Strength, yet we can by our Endeavors engage him on our
side, who is both able and willing to enable us to conquer them. So that if we
will, we may be invincible; and there is no Temptation can be too strong for
us, if we do not by our own Sloth, and Cowardice disingage the Almighty Spirit
from assisting us.

IV. FROM hence we may perceive how much Reason there is for our continual
Prayers, and Supplications to God; since it is so apparent that our Victory
over Sin, and consequently our eternal Welfare does so much depend upon the
Aids and Assistances of the Spirit of God; and since God is so ready to give
his holy Spirit to us, whenever we sincerely ask and desire it. Now the great
Reason of Prayer is Want, and the greatest Encouragement to it is Assurance of
Supply; but there is nothing in the world that we have more Need of, and (if we
faithfully seek it) nothing that we can have more Assurance of, than the
gracious Influence of the Holy Ghost. We have as much Need of it, as of our
daily Bread; because our Souls will starve and famish without it: And we have
as much Assurance of it, as the sacred Word of the God of Truth can give us;
because He has promised it to us who can as soon cease to be, as to be
faithful: And therefore if after so much Need and Encouragement, we do neglect
our Prayers, and turn our backs upon the Throne of Grace; it is a plain
Argument, that either we are wretchedly insensible of our Need of God's Grace,
or causelessly suspicious of the Truth of his Promise. And doubtless he that can
pass day after day without putting up one Prayer to Heaven, that can venture
himself among the infinite Snares and Temptations of this world, without
imploring the Divine Aid and Protection, is a very bold and foolhardy Sinner;
one that declares he regards neither God, nor his own Soul, and that he cares
not what becomes of him either here, or hereafter. Methinks did we but soberly
consider how much we want God's Grace, and how ready He is to afford it us; we
should as soon venture to rush naked into a Battle among Squadrons of Swords
and Spears, as to go at any time into the World without God, to hazard our
immortal Souls in the midst of such a numberless Battle of Temptations, without
arming our selves by Prayer with the Divine Grace and Assistance. Wherefore
since we have so much Need, and (if we seek it) so much Assurance too of the
Spirit of God; let us take that excellent Counsel of the Author to the Hebrews,
Heb. iv. 16. Go boldly and importunately to the Throne of Grace that we may
obtain mercy and find grace to help us in the time of need*

V. FROM hence we may perceive the indispensable Necessity of our faithful and
sincere Endeavors, in order to the m^rtifying our Lusts. It Is a strange
Principle which some Men have taken up, that if their Names are recorded in the
eternal Roll of Election, they shall in time be made good by an irresistible
Grace; and that if they are not, they shall never be good at all, though they
should endeavor it with their utmost, Power and Diligence: And so they think,
their best way is to lie still in the Harbor, and expect the Event; concluding
it in vain to begin their Voyage toward Heaven, without an irresistible Gale
from thence. A Doctrine which I doubt too many Men have improved to their own
everlasting Ruin; though it has no Foundation at all in Reason, and has
nothing to support it self, but a few mistaken Phrases of Scripture. But he
that shall impartially consult the whole Current of God's Word, will find that
the ordinary Language and Sense of it is this; that God desires not the death
of a sinner, but would have all men to be saved; but because he would save us
in such a Way as is congruous to free Agents, and not by fatal and necessary
Means, therefore he indispensably exacts the Concurrence of our Endeavors;
that we should run the Race that is set before us, and strive to enter into the
strait gate, and that by patient continuance in well-doing we should seek for
honor and glory and immortality. And from any thing that God has said to us,
we have as much Reason to hope to be nourished without Eating, as to be saved
without Endeavor. It Is true, God has promised by his Grace to cooperate with
us, to join in with our Faculties, and bless our virtuous Essays; but he is by
no means obliged to work for us, while we sit idle; to mortify our Lusts while
we feed and pamper them; or to purify our Minds, while we go on to pollute them
with all the Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit. No; if we would that God
should assist us, we must do what we can for our selves: We can attend upon the
ordinary Means and Ministries of Salvation, we can ponder and consider the
great Motives of our Religion, and abstain at least from the outward Acts of
Sin, and implore the Divine Aid to prosper and succeed our Endeavors: And if
we will do but this, and what else is in our Power, let us then blame God, if
we are not successful; and if we die in our Sins, let us charge his Decrees
with our Ruin. But if we will disregard the public Ministries of Religion,
and wilfully excommunicate all good Thoughts from our minds; if we will comply
with every Temptation to sin, and refuse to crave Assistance from Heaven
against it; we have none to blame for our Ruin but our selves. For God has
told us beforehand* that He will not save us without our selves; and therefore
he that is to go a long Journey, has as much Reason to sit down in hope to be
snatched up into the Air by Whirlwind, and so to be carried on the wings of it
to his appointed Stage; as we have to neglect our Endeavors for Heaven, in
expectation to be haled and snatched up thither, by the Almighty Pulleys of an
irresistible Grace. Let us not therefore upon this vain Presumption sit still
any longer with our hands in our bosoms, lest we perish in our Sloth, and
expose our own Souls to everlasting Ruin, by an idle Expectation of being
irresistibly saved.

VI. FROM hence we may discern the Possibility of keeping the Commands of God,
in that God by his Spirit does so powerfully aid and assist us. For supposing
we cannot keep the Divine Law by our own single Strength and Power, yet it is
apparent that we can do that which will oblige the Divine Spirit to assist and
enable us to keep it; that is, we can do our Endeavor, which being done,
entitles us to the Promise of Divine Grace, and Assistance. And though we
cannot do all our selves, yet since we can do so much as will certainly oblige
God to empower us to do the rest; it is already in our Power to do all, if we
will. He that is strong enough to carry a Burden of an hundred weight, but is
required to carry two, may carry both; supposing that by bearing as much as he
can, he shall certainly be enabled to carry the whole. Now God has promised us
by the Assistances of his Grace, whatsoever is wanting in the Power of our
Nature; and therefore if we fall short of our Duty, and consequently of the
Rewards of it, we can reasonably blame no one but our selves. For though we
cannot do all in our own Strength, yet that we do not do all, is as much our
Fault, as if we could; since we may do all through Christ, who would strengthen
us, would we but do what we can. Let us therefore no longer cry out of the
Impossibility of God's Commands, nor charge our Disobedience to them upon the
unavoidable Weakness of our own Natures; since it is so plain, that our Sin is
resolveable into no other Principle, but our own wretched Wilfulness and
Obstinacy. But let us betake our selves to a serious and hearty Endeavor of
doing our Master's Will; and if when we have done all that we can, we should
then fall short of our Duty, and miss the Reward of it; we may then with good
Reason call him an austere Man, for imposing tyrannical and impossible
Commands, and expecting to reap where he has not sown.

Seventhly and Lastly, WE may perceive from hence the Inexcusableness of
Sinners, if they go on in their Wickedness. For God, you see, does vouchsafe to
us such plentiful Measures of his Grace and Assistance; that in the Strength of
it we may mortify our Lusts if we will, and work out our own eternal Salvation:
but if we will be negligent, and rather choose to perish in our Sin, than take
the pains to subdue it by the Grace of God, our Folly is inexcusable; and no
one can be charged with our Ruin, but our selves. For what could God have done
more for us, than he has already done? He has solicited us to forsake our Sin
with the most important Arguments and Motives, tempted our Hopes with a Heaven
of immortal Ioys, and alarmed our Fears with the Horrors of an endless and
intolerable Damnation; so that we cannot go on in our Sin without leaping over
Heaven into Hell, and wading through an infinite Ocean of Happiness into the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone. He has plainly told us, what the Event and Issue
of our Folly will be; and warned us beforehand that if we will be wicked, we
must be miserable: So that if after this we do go on in our Sin, we run our
selves upon a foreseen Damnation, and leap into Hell with our Eyes open. He
has promised, that if we will seriously attempt our own Recovery, his Grace
shall be sufficient for us, to back our Endeavors and crown them with Success:
So that if after this we do persist in our Folly, we choose Destruction, and
rush headlong into a Ruin which we might easily avoid. In a word, he has again
and again suggested good Thoughts to our Minds, and by an importunate Iteration
of them has frequently courted us to repent, and live: So that if still we
persevere in our Impenitence, we stop our Ears to the Addresses of Heaven; and
do in effect tell God, that we will not hearken to him, though our Souls are at
stake, and it is no less than an everlasting Ruin that he dissuades us from. And
what Remedy, or Excuse is there for such intolerable Obstinacy? So that it is a
plain Case, God has done so much for us, that there is not any thing wanting
to our everlasting Salvation, but only our own Wills; and if we will not comply
with his Grace and Assistance, he will not save us whether we will or no. So
that when Inquisition shall be made for the Blood of our Souls, the utmost we
can charge God with, is this; that he did not tie up our hands, to keep us from
murdering our selves, with the Cords of an irresistible Fate; and by his
invincible Power drag us to Heaven, whether we would or no. But if we have so
little Regard of our selves, as to spurn at our own Happiness, it is not fit
that God should force it upon us; and it would be a mean and unreasonable
Condescension in him, to prostitute the Rewards of Virtue to those that
wilfully refuse them. Wherefore if we perish in our Sin, after God has done so
much for us; he may fairly wash his Hands in Innocence over us, and charge our
Blood upon our own heads: And how deplorable soever our Condition proves in the
future State, God's Justice will triumph for ever in our Ruin; and our own
Consciences, in Consort with all the Rational World, will pronounce him to be
most just and righteous in all his ways.

CHAP. V. Of the Eternal Reward of Mortification, and Holiness.
THE Apostle having declared for our Encouragement, Romans viii. 13. that if we
mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live; I shall now insist upon these two
Propositions,

First, THAT there is a State of Everlasting Life, and Happiness prepared for
good men. Secondly, THAT this their Everlasting Happiness depends upon their
mortifying their Lusts.
I. THAT there is a State of Everlasting Life and Happiness prepared for good
Men: The Truth of which I shall Endeavor to prove by some plain and easy
Arguments.

I. BECAUSE the Law of our Natures has not a sufficient Sanction without it.
That there is in us such a Law of Nature, by which Things and Actions are
distinguished into good and evil; is every whit as evident, as that we have
within us a Principle of Reason. For no Man using his Reason can ever think it
indifferent in it self, whether we obey our Parents, or contemn them; whether
we lie, or speak Truth; whether we be grateful, or disingenuous to our
Benefactors: For between these Things there is such an essential Difference,
that they can never be equal Competitors to a Rational Approbation. And
accordingly among all Mankind we may observe, that there are some Vices, which
have as much the universal Judgment of Reason against them, as any false
Conclusion in the Mathematics; and some Virtues, whose Goodness has been as
universally acknowledged, as the Truth of any Principle in Philosophy.
Wherefore since God has created us with such a Faculty, as does necessarily
make such a Judgment of Good and Evil; this Judgment must be God's, as well as
the Faculties which made it: And that which is God's Judgment in us, must
necessarily be a Law to us. God therefore having put such a Law into our
Natures; we cannot but suppose, that he has taken Care to enforce the
Observation of it, by rewarding and punishing us, according as we obey, or
violate it: For without the Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, to induce Men
to observe them, Laws are insignificant; and that Lawgiver does but petition
his Subjects to obey, that does not promise such Rewards, nor denounce such
Penalties, as are sufficient to oblige them to it. And no Reward can be
sufficient to oblige us to obey, that does not abundantly compensate any Loss,
or Evil we may sustain by our Obedience; no Punishment sufficient to deter us
from disobeying, that does not far surmount all that Benefit, or Pleasure we
can hope to reap from our Disobedience. Since therefore God has implanted a
Law in our Natures, we must either suppose, that he has not sufficiently
secured it by Rewards, and Punishments; which is to blaspheme his Wisdom, and
Conduct: Or else we must acknowledge, that he has established it with such
Rewards, and Punishments, as do make it far more advisable to obey, than to
transgress it; which that he has done in all Instances, can never be proved,
without granting the Rewards, and Punishments of another World. For if there be
no such thing as future Rewards and Punishments: it is a Folly for any Man to
concern himself about any thing but his present Interest; and in reason we
ought to judge things to be good or evil, only as they promote, or obstruct our
temporal Happiness and Welfare. Now though it is certain, that in the general
there is a natural Good accruing to us from all virtuous Actions, as on the
contrary a natural Evil from all vicious ones; and it is ordinarily more
conducive for our temporal Interests to obey, than to disobey the great Law of
our Natures: Yet there are a world of Instances, wherein Vice may be more
advantageous to us than Virtue, abstracting from the Rewards and Punishments of
another World. It is ordinarily better for me to be an honest Man, than a
Knave; it is more for my Reputation, yea, and usually for my Profit too; and it
is more for the public Good, in which my own is involved: But yet pro hic and
nunc it may be better for me, with respect only to this World, to be a Knave,
than an honest man. For whenever I can but cheat so secretly and securely, as
not to fall under the public Lash, nor to impair my Reputation; and I can but
gain more by the Cheat, than I shall lose in the Damage of the Public; it will
be doubtless more advantageous for me, as to my worldly Interest, to cheat than
to be honest. And how often such fair Opportunities of Couzenage do occur, no
Man can be insensible, that has but the least Insight into the Affairs of the
World. So that if God had not reserved Rewards and Punishments for us in
another World, we should not have sufficient Motives universally to observe
that great Law of Righteousness, which he has given us: For whenever we
could cheat, or steal securely, it would be highly reasonable for us to do it;
because thereby we might promote our own temporal Happiness, which would be the
only End we should have to pursue. And the same may be said of all other Laws
of Nature, which without the great Motives of a future Happiness and Misery,
could no longer induce any reasonable Man to obey them, than it is for his
temporal Interest to do so. For suppose I can secretly stab, or poison a Man,
whom I hate or dread, or from whose Death I may reap any considerable
Advantage: What should restrain me from such a barbarous Fact? If you say, the
Law of Nature; pray what Reward does the Law of Nature propose sufficient to
compensate the Dissatisfaction of my Revenge, or the Danger I run in suffering
my Enemy to live? Or what Punishment does the Law of Nature denounce, that is
sufficient to balance the Advantage of a thousand or ten thousand Pounds a
year, that may accrue to me by his Death? If you say, the Law of Nature
proposes to me the Reward of a quiet and satisfied Mind, if I forbear; and
denounces the Punishment of a guilty and amazed Conscience, if I commit the
Murder: I easily answer, that this Peace, or Horror, which is consequent to the
Forbearance, or Commission of Murder, arises from the Hope, and Dread of future
Rewards and Punishments; which being taken away, to murder or not murder will
be indifferent, as to any Peace or Horror that will follow upon it: And this
being removed, what Consideration will there be left sufficient to restrain me
from the bloody Fact, when I have an Opportunity to act it securely, and am
furiously spurred on to it by my own Revenge and Covetousness? So that if there
be no Rewards and Punishments in another Life, to enforce the Commands of the
Law of Nature; it is apparent, that no such Rewards or Punishments are annexed
to it in this Life, as are universally sufficient to oblige Men to observe it.
And is it likely, that the All-wise Governor of the World would ever impose a
Law under an insufficient Sanction? That he would ever give out his Commands to
his Creatures, and then leave it indifferent to them whether they will obey
him, or no? As he must needs have done, if in all circumstances it be not far
better for us to obey him, than to disobey him. And if our Nature is so framed,
as not to be effectually persuaded to Obedience, without the Motives of
everlasting Rewards and Punishments, it is at least highly credible, that there
are such: Because it would be unworthy of God, so to frame the Nature of one of
his noblest Creatures, as to render it incapable of being governed by him
without Falsehood and Deceit.

II. THAT there is a future Happiness reserved for Good Men in the other World,
is highly probable from those Desires and Expectations of it, which do so
generally and naturally arise in pure and virtuous Minds. We rarely, if ever,
read of any virtuous Man of whatsoever Nation, or Religion, or Sect of
Philosophers, whose Mind has not been winged with earnest Hopes and Desires of
future Happiness; and I know none that have ever denied, or despaired of it,
but only such as have (...) (...) and vitiated the Principles of their own
Nature. Such were the Sadducees and Epicureans, Sects that had drowned all that
was humane in them in Sensuality and Voluptuousness, and are branded upon
Record for their shameful Indulgence to their own brutish Genius: And such are
no Standards of Humane Nature, but ought rather to be looked upon as Monsters
of Men; and therefore as we do not think it natural to Men, to be born with six
Fingers upon one Hand, though there have been many such monstrous and unnatural
Births; so neither ought we to judge either of what is natural or unnatural to
Men, by those humane Brutes, who by their perpetual wallowing in the Pleasures
of the Body have monstrously disfigured their own Natures, and dissolved all
that Reason, by which they are constituted Men, into a mere sensual Sagacity of
catering for the Appetites of the Flesh. If we would know therefore what is
humane and natural to us, we must take our Measures from those who are least
depraved, and are most conformable to the Laws of a Rational Nature; who have
preserved the natural Subordination of their Faculties, and reduced their
Passions and Appetites under the Empire of their Reason: And these are the Men
whom we call virtuous, and who because they live in the Exercise of those noble
Virtues which are proper to us Men, are to be looked upon as the Standards of
Humane Nature: by whom alone we can judge of what is natural and unnatural to
us. Now Virtue, and the Desires and Hopes of Immortality are so near allied,
that like Hippocrates's Twins, they live and die together. For though while Men
live a brutish and sensual Life, their future Hopes are usually drowned in
their present Enjoyments; yet when once they recover out of this unnatural
State, and begin to live virtuously like reasonable Beings, immediately they
feel great Desires and Expectations of a future Happiness, springing up in
their Minds, and arising higher and higher, proportionably as their Progress is
in Virtue and true Goodness. Which is a plain Evidence, that these Hopes and
Desires are natural to us; and that they are interwoven by the great Creator in
the Frame and Constitution of our Souls. Now how can it consist with the
Goodness of God, to implant such Desires and Hopes in our Natures, and then to
withhold from them the only Object that can suit and satisfy them? As if it
were a Recreation to him, to sit above in the Heavens, and behold the Work of
his Hands spending it self in weary Strugglings toward him, and gasping all
the while it continues in Being, after an Happiness it shall never enjoy? As
for other Beings, we see they have no natural Desire in vain; the good God
having so ordered things, that there are Objects in Nature apportioned to all
their natural Appetites: but if there be no State of Happiness reserved for
good Men in the other World, we are by a natural Principle most strongly
inclined to that which we can never attain to. As if God had purposely framed
us with such Inclinations, that we might be perpetually tormented between those
two Passions Desire and Despair, an earnest Propension after a future
Happiness, and an utter Incapacity of ever enjoying it: as if Nature it self,
whereby all other Beings are disposed to their Perfection, did serve only in
Mankind to make them miserable, and which is more considerable, as if Virtue
which is the Perfection of Nature, did only contribute to our Infelicity, by
raising in us Desires and Expectations, which without a future Happiness must
be for ever baffled and disappointed. For if there be no future Happiness,
either we may know it, or we may not, if we may not know it, why should we
think that, which reflects so much Dishonor upon God, viz. that he has created
in us Desires and Expectations, only to mock and tantalize them? But if we may
know it, then do these Desires and Expectations seem to be created in us on
purpose to torment us. For, for what other End can we desire to be eternally
happy, who are only brought forth into the Light to be ever long extinguished,
and shut up in everlasting Darkness? The Consideration of which must needs be
an exceeding Torture and Affliction to us.

III. THAT there is a future Happiness reserved for good Men, is evident from
the Justice and Equity of the Divine Providence. That God is a most just and
righteous Governor, is acknowledged by all that believe there is a God, and
that he rules and governs the World: and if it be so, then his Justice must
first or last discover it self in distributing Rewards and Punishments to men,
according as they obey, or violate the Laws of his Government. For what Justice
can he express in governing the World, if he rules at random; if he never makes
any Difference between the Good and the Bad, but rewards and punishes his
Subjects promiscuously, without any Distinction between the Loyal and
Rebellious? And yet in the ordinary Course of Divine Providence in this world,
we see little or no Distinction made between them; but as the Wise Man has
observed, Eccl. ix. 2. All things come alike to all, so that he cannot know
God's Love or Hatred by any thing that is before us: nay, many times we see the
wicked, as the Psalmist describes them, flourishing like a green Bay Tree,
Psalm. xxxvii. 35. whilst the righteous are sorely oppressed, and crushed under
the triumphal Chariots of their barbarous Enemies. So that were there no other
State of things, but what we see before us; it would be impossible for us, to
give any tolerable Account of the just Retributions of the Divine Providence.
For if when we have all acted our Parts upon this Stage of Time, we were to lie
down together, and sleep for ever in the Dust; how many millions of Good Men
are there that have thought nothing too dear for God, and have not only
sacrificed their Lusts, but their Lives and Fortunes to his Service, who would
have no other Recompense for so doing, but a miserable Life, and a woeful Death,
and an obscure and dishonorable Grave? And on the contrary, how many millions
of millions of Wicked Men are there, whose whole Lives have been nothing but
one continued Act of Rebellion against God, who have blasphemed his Honor, and
affronted his Authority, and openly contemned all the Laws of his Government;
and yet would undergo no other Punishment for so doing, but only to live
prosperously, to die quietly, and then to be gloriously enshrined in Monuments
of Marble? And can we think this, and at the same time believe, that there is a
righteous Providence which superintends the Affairs of the World? Certainly if
not to govern this material World, and to put things into such a regular Course
as may be suitable to their Natures, and the Operations for which they are
designed, would argue some Defect of Wisdom in God; then doubtless not to
compensate Virtue and Vice, and adjust things suitably to their Qualifications;
but thus crosly to couple Prosperity with Vice, and Misery with Virtue, would
argue him deficient both in Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice. And perhaps it
would be no less expedient, with Epicurus to deny all Providence, than to
ascribe to it such Defects; it being less unworthy of the Divine Nature to
neglect the Universe altogether, than to administer humane Affairs with so much
Injustice and Irregularity. So that either we must deny Providence, or (which
is worse) deny the Justice of it; or believe that there is a future State,
wherein all things shall be adjusted, and good Men crowned with the Rewards of
their Obedience, and the Wicked undergo the Punishment of their own Follies.
For this we are sure of, that the Judge of all the World will do righteously;
and that first or last he will distribute his Rewards and Punishments,
according to the Merit and Demerit of his Subjects: and therefore because we
see he does not ordinarily do it in this World, we have great Reason to
conclude, that he will do it effectually in the World to come.

Fourthly and Lastly, THAT there is a State of future Happiness prepared for
good Men, is evident from the Revelation of his Will, which God has made to us
by Jesus Christ. And this, I confess, is the most concluding Argument of all:
as for the former Arguments, they render the Case so highly probable, that this
at least must be acknowledged, that we have far more Reason to believe and
expect a future Happiness, than we have to doubt or despair of it: but as for
this last, it puts all out of Question, and leaves us no Pretense of Reason why
we should doubt or suspect it. For eternal Happiness, and Salvation is the
great Blessing which our Savior has promised us, to encourage us to
Perseverance in Well-doing; and in that everlasting Gospel which he preached to
the World, he has in the name of God proposed to us a Heaven of endless Joys
and Felicities, and brought life and immortality to light. So that if he were
commissioned from God to make this great Proposal to Mankind, we have as much
Security of a future Happiness, as we can have of the Truth of God; which is
the Foundation of all the Certainty we have, whether in Philosophy or Divinity.
Now that he was commissioned from God to promise what he did to us is apparent,
because God himself by sundry Voices from Heaven declared him to be his
Ambassador to the World; and proclaimed him his beloved Son in whom he was well
pleased, and whom he had substituted the Supreme Minister of his Grace and
Goodness to Mankind: and what he declared in Words, he also demonstrated in
Deeds. For when Christ was baptized, God sent down his holy Spirit upon him in
a bright shining Flame, which spreading it self round his Head encircled his
Brows, like a Crown of Sunbeams, and remained upon him: which glorious
Appearance answering to that visible Glory, by which God appeared from between
the Cherubim, declared him to be the Temple of God, in whom the Fullness of the
Godhead dwelt bodily, and in which he meant to take his Residence for ever. And
accordingly after this visible Shechinah, or Glory disappeared, we find most
palpable and apparent Signs of the Presence of God in him; for by this it was
that he cured the Sick, and calmed the Seas, and raised the dead, and wrought
all those wondrous Works by which he proved his Mission from above. For so we
are told, that the went about doing good and healing all that were oppressed of
the Devil, for God was with him; Acts. x. 38. and after all the Miracles that
he did in his Life, by this Power and Presence of God that was in him, being
barbarously murdered, he rose from the dead by the same Power, and ascended
triumphantly to Heaven. Of the Truth of all which we have as clear and credible
Testimony, as ever was given to any Matters of Fact; the Report of them being
handed down to us from those who were Eye and Ear-Witnesses; who in the defense
of what they testified exposed themselves to infinite Hazards, and at last
confirmed their Testimony with their dearest Blood; which is the greatest
Security, that any Witness can possibly give of his Honesty. For what should
move them to testify these things, had they not known them to be true? It was
apparently their temporal Interest to have concealed them; and their Religion,
in which their eternal Interest was involved, prohibited them all wilful Lying
under the Penalty of an endless Damnation: and would any Men in their wits have
maintained a known Imposture, when they were assured beforehand, that all they
should gain by it was to die for it here, and to be damned for it hereafter?
And if their Testimony be true, as we have all manner of Reason to believe it
is, then what they testify does plainly denote the Blessed Jesus to be the
Holy One of God; from whom, as from his most holy Habitation, God would
hereafter communicate all his Blessings to Mankind. And if so, then we are sure
of eternal Life, upon condition of our patient continuance in well-doing: for
whatsoever he has promised us, he must have promised us from God; who dwelt in
the sacred Temple of his Body, and from thence pronounced the Oracles of his
Grace and Goodness, and manifested himself perpetually by sundry miraculous
Effects.

FROM the Consideration of our Future Happiness, many useful Inferences may be
raised: and First, from hence we may perceive, what an unreasonable thing it is
for us Christians, immoderatly to dote upon the World. I confess,, if our
chief, or only Interest were involved in this World, and we had no Hopes beyond
the Grave; there were then some Excuse to be made for immoderate Solicitude
about the trifling Concerns of this present Life: but when it is so apparent,
that we are born to higher Hopes, and are here but Candidates, and Probationers
for an everlasting Preferment in the highest Heavens; methinks the Sense of it
should make us blush at our own Follies, to think how busy we are in pursuing
the fading Vanities of this World, whilst the great Interest of our Eternity is
wholly neglected and forgotten. Blessed God! Who would imagine, that in a World
peopled with immortal Spirits that must live for ever in unconceivable
Happiness or Misery, the greatest Number of us should be such utter Strangers
to the Thoughts, and Concerns of another World? That we who are so industrious
in our temporal Affairs, as not to slip any Opportunity of Gain; but are so
ready to court every occasion, that tends to advance these our momentary
Pleasures, Profits and Honors; should be regardless of those Celestial Joys,
which if we fall short of, we are undone for ever; and which if we arrive to,
we shall be as happy as all the Beatitudes of an immortal Heaven can make us! O
inconsiderate Beings that we are! Where is the Reason that constitutes us Men,
that we should choose thus crosly to the Nature of Things, when there is so vast
a Disproportion between the Objects of our Choice, between Heaven and Earth,
between Moments and Eternity, between the hungry and withering Joys of this
World, and the eternally ravishing Pleasures of the World to come? Methinks if
we had any Dram of Reason left in us, the Consideration that we are born to an
immortal Crown, which nothing but our own Folly can disseise us of, were enough
to inspire us with a noble Disdain of all these bewitching Vanities about us;
and to make us look upon them as Things beneath us, Toys and Trifles, not
worthy our scrambling for, When we consider, that there is an Heaven of endless
Ioys prepared for us, which if we will we may make as sure of, as we can of our
own Beings; methinks so vast an Hope should raise our grovelling Thoughts so
high above this World, that when we look down upon it, it should disappear, or
look like a thin blew Landscape next to nothing; and all the Hurries and
Scramblings of silly Mortals for little Parcels of Earth, should seem as
trifling and inconsiderable to us, as the Toils and Labors of a little World
of Ants about a Molehil. For how is it possible almost, that such little
Impertinencies should take up our Thoughts, who have an Eternity of Weal, and
Woe before us? And when we have all that an everlasting Heaven means, to busy
our Thoughts, and employ our Cares about, how can we engage with so much Zeal
and Vigor in the petty Affairs of this World? Foolish and unwise that we are!
Thus to neglect our most important Interests for every impertinent Trifle, to
sell our Souls for a little money, and give immortal Hallelujahs for a Song!
And when we are born to such infinite Hopes, to choose Nebuchadnezzar's Fate,
and leave Crowns and Scepters to live among the Savage Herds of the Wilderness.

II FROM hence we may learn, how vigorous and industrious we ought to be in
discharging the Duties of our Religion. For how can we think any Pains too
much, when an everlasting Heaven is the Reward of our Labor? What a poor thing
is it, that we should grudge to spend a few Moments here in the severest
Exercises of Holiness and Virtue; when within this little little while, in
consideration of our short Pains, we shall have nothing else to do throughout a
long and blessed Eternity, but to enjoy a Heaven of pure Pleasures, and has
our Faculties for ever in fresh Delights; to converse with the Fountain of all
Love and Goodness, and warble eternally Praises to him; and in the Vision of
his Beauty and Goodness to live in everlasting Raptures of Joy and Love? O my
Soul! What though thou toilest and labourest now to climb the everlasting
Hills! Yet be of good Heart, for it will not be long before thou art at the
top, where thou will find such pleasant Gales, and glorious Prospects as will
make thee infinite Amends for all: yea, though the Toil thou undergoest were
abundantly more than it is; though instead of the Labor of mortifying thy
Lusts, and living soberly, righteously and godly, thy Task were to row in the
Galleys, or dig in the Mines for a thousand years together; yet methinks the
Consideration that Heaven will be at last thy Reward, should be enough to
sweeten, and endear it. O would we but often represent to our Minds the
glorious Things of another World, what holy Fervours would such charming
Thoughts kindle within us? And with how much Spirit and Vigor would they carry
us through the weary Stages of our Duty? what Lust is there so dear to us, that
we should not willingly sacrifice to the Hopes of Immortality? What Duty so
difficult, that we should not cheerfully undergo, while the Crown of Glory is
in our Eye? Surely did we but look more frequently to the recompense of Reward,
we should be all Life and Spirit and Wing; our sluggish Souls would be inspired
with an Angelical Vigor, and Activity; and we should run with Alacrity, as
well as Patience, the race that is set before us: but alas! We look upon our
Reward as a Thing a great way off; and it is, I confess, reserved for us within
that invisible World whereinto our dull Sense is not able to penetrate; which
is the Reason that we are not so vigorously affected with it. Wherefore to make
Amends for this Disadvantage, let us often revive the Considerations of
Eternity upon our Minds, and inculcate the Reality and Certainty of our future
Weal or Woe, together with the great Weight and Importance of them: let us thus
reason with our selves; O my Soul! If it be so certain as it is, that there are
such unspeakable Ioys reserved for good Men, and such intolerable Miseries for
the wicked; why should not these things be to me, as if they were already
present? Why should I not be as much afraid to sin, as if the gates of Hell
stood open before me, and I saw the astonishing miseries of those damned Ghosts
that are weltring in the flames of it? and why should I not as cheerfully
comply with my Duty, as if I had now a full prospect of the Regions of
Happiness, and I saw the great Jesus at the right Hand of God, with Diadems of
Glory in his Hand, to crown those pure and blessed Spirits who have been his
faithful Servants to the death? And doubtless would we but inure our Minds a
little to such Thoughts as these, they would wonderfully actuate all the Powers
of our Souls, and be continually inspiring us with new Vigor in the ways of
Holiness and Virtue: for what Difficulties are there that can daunt our good
Resolutions, while they are animated with this Persuasion, that if we have our
fruit unto holiness, our end shall be everlasting life? Romans vi. xxii.

III. FROM hence we may perceive, how upright and sincere we ought to be in all
our Professions and Actions. For if there be such an Happiness reserved for us
in Heaven, then doubtless, if we intend to partake of it, we must be sincerely
good; because he that is the Donour of this glorious Reward, is a God that
searches the heart and tries the reins, and is a curious Observer of our
secret* Thoughts and most retired Actions; and consequently will reward us, not
according to what we seem to be, but to what we really are. We may possibly
cheat Men into a fair Opinion of us, by disguising our selves in a form of
Godliness, and facing our Conversation with specious Pretenses of Piety: but
that God, with whom we have to do, sees through all the Dawbings, and Fucus's
of Hypocrisy; and can easily discern a rotten Core, through the most beautiful
Rind, that can be distended over it. So that we can never hope to obtain His
Blessing, as Jacob did his blind Father's, by a counterfeit Voice, or exterior
Disguise of Religion: for all the fair Vizards of Hypocrisy are so far from
hiding our Blemishes from God, that they lay them more open to his all-seeing
Eye, and make them appear more monstrous and deformed. Wherefore, unless we are
really good, we were better not to seem to be so; for mere Pretenses of Piety
will be so far from procuring Salvation for us, that they will but enhanse and
aggravate our Condemnation, and sink and plunge us deeper into Hell, instead of
obtaining any Entrance for us into the Kingdom of Heaven. Since therefore there
is such an immortal Reward prepared for us in the World to come, if we love our
selves, or have any regard for our most important Interest, we cannot but be in
good earnest for Heaven; and if we are so, we shall be sincere and upright in
all our Actions, and the great Design of our Lives will be to approve our
selves to God, and our own Consciences. If by giving Alms we hope to increase
our Stock in that great Bank of Bliss above, we shall not care so much to blow
a Trumpet when we do it, that so the World may take notice of, and praise our
Bounty; but our rejoicing will be this, that we have approved our selves to
God, from whom we expect the Reward of our Obedience. If we abstain from Sin
with respect to the future Recompense, we shall do it in private, as well as in
the View of the World; knowing that wherever we are, we are under God's Eye,
who alone can make us happy, or miserable for ever. In a word, if we seriously
mind the Glory that is set before us, we shall be as curious of our Thoughts,
and secret Purposes, as if they were to be exposed upon an open Theater;
considering that they are all open and naked to that God with whom we have to
do, and upon whom the Hope of our immortal Happiness depends. For to what
purpose should we dissemble and play the Hypocrites, unless we could impose
upon the Almighty, and make Him believe that we are good, when we are not, and
so steal to Heaven in a Vizard?

Fourthly and Lastly, FROM hence it is visible, what great reason we have to be
cheerful under the Afflictions and Miseries of this World; considering what
Glories and Felicities there are prepared for us in the World to come. Indeed
all the Miseries of this World are more or less, as we have more or less reason
to be supported under them; but when we consider, that our Time here is but a
Moment, compared with our everlasting* Abode in the World to come, our present*
Happiness and Misery will appear to be very inconsiderable. We are now upon our
Journey toward our heavenly Country, and it is no great matter how rough the
Way is, provided that Heaven be our Journey's End: for though here we want many
of those Accommodations which we may expect, and desire: yet this is but the
common Fate of Travelers, and we must be contented to take things as we find
them, and not look to have every thing just to our Mind. But all these
Difficulties and Inconveniences will shortly be over, and after a few days
will be quite forgotten, and be to us as if they never had been: and when we
are safely landed in our own Country, we shall look back from the Shore with
Pleasure and Delight upon those boisterous Seas which we have escaped, and for
ever bless the Storms and Winds that drove us thither. Wherefore hold* O my
Faith and Patience, a little longer, and your work will soon be at an end* and
all my Sighs and Groans within a few moments will expire into everlasting Songs
and Hallelujahs: (...)* Now our days are dark and gloomy, but the bright
glorious day is dawning, which Night shall never interrupt; for God himself is
the eternal Sun, that enlightens us with the bright Rays of his own Glory. And
what is a little cloudy Weather compared with an everlasting Sunshine?
Doubtless these light Afflictions which are but for a moment, are not worthy to
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Let us therefore
comfort our selves with these things, and while we are groaning under the
Miseries of this Life, let us encourage our selves with this Consideration;
that within a little little while all our Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes,
and there shall be an everlasting Period put to all our Sorrows and Miseries;
when we shall be removed from all the Troubles and Temptations of a wicked and
ill-natured World, be past all Storms, and secured from all further danger of
Shipwreck, and be safely landed in the Regions of Bliss and Immortality. And
can we complain of the Foulness of a way, that leads into a Paradise of endless
Delights; and not cheerfully undergo these short though bitter Throws, which,
like the Virgin-Mother's, will quickly end in Songs and everlasting
Magnificats? Cheer up therefore, O my crest-fallen Soul, for thy bitter Passion
will soon be at an end; and though now thou art sailing in a tempestuous Sea,
yet a few Leagues off lies that blessed Port, where thou shall be crowned as
soon as thou art landed; and then the Remembrance of the Storms thou have
passed will contribute to the Triumphs of thy Coronation; and all the bad
Entertainments thou meetest with in this life, will but make Earth more
loathsome to thee while thou art here, and Heaven more welcome when thou come
there; and these thy light Afflictions which are but for a moment will work for
thee a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. 2 Cor. iv. 17.

CHAP. VI. Of the Necessity of Mortification to the obtaining of Eternal Life.
I COME now to the Second thing proposed, namely that the eternal Life and
Happiness of good Men depends upon their mortifying the Deeds of the Body: and
that it does so, I shall endeavor to prove,

First, FROM God's Ordination and Appointment. Secondly, FROM the Nature of the
Thing.
I. FROM God's Ordination and Appointment. God, who is the supreme Governor of
the World, has proposed Eternal Life, as an Encouragement to those who by
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality: And
supposing that wicked Men could enjoy the Happiness of the other World, yet it
would be inconsistent with the Wisdom of his Government to admit them to it.
For should he reward Offenders with eternal Happiness, who would be afraid of
offending him? And if once he rules with such a slack and indulgent Rein, as to
take away all reason of Fear from his Subjects, his Government must immediately
dissolve into Anarchy and Confusion. And therefore to prevent this, he has
fairly warned us by his reiterated Threats, that if we live in Disobedience to
his Laws, we shall be for ever banished from that Kingdom of Happiness which he
has prepared for those that love and fear him: So in Romans viii. 13. we are
assured, that if we live after the flesh, we shall die: And in Gal. v. 19, 20,
21. we are told, that the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of which I tell you before, as
I have also told you in times past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God: And so 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Know ye not (says the
Apostle) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? be not
deceived, neither fornicators nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God:
And to the same purpose the same Apostle tells us, that no whoremonger, nor
unclean person, nor covetous man who is an idolater has any inheritance in the
kingdom of God; Ephesians. v. 5. All which dreadful Denunciations must be supposed
to be conditional; for else they are not consistent with the Promise of Pardon
to those that truly repent: So that the meaning of them is plainly this, that
if we persevere in these Lusts of the Flesh, and do not mortify them, we shall
have no Part nor Portion in the Kingdom of God. Hence the Apostle exhorts us,
Col. iii. 5, 6. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is idolatry: for which things sake the wrath of God comes
on the children of disobedience: which plainly implies, that if they did
mortify these Lusts, the Wrath of God should not come upon them; but if they
did not, they should be liable to the divine Indignation among the Children of
Disobedience. By all which it is apparent, that according to God's free
Ordination and Appointment, our eternal Happiness and Welfare depends upon our
mortifying the deeds of the Body; since God has so ordained, that if we do
mortify them, we shall live, and that if we do not, we shall be for ever
excommunicated from the Regions of Life and Immortality.

II. THIS is also apparent from the Nature of the Thing. For if God had not
excluded those that live in their sins from eternal Life, by his own free
Ordination; yet they must have been excluded, the future Happiness being so
inconsistent with a vicious State, that it is impossible ever to reconcile
them. For the Thing it self implies a Contradiction, and is not an Object of
any Power, no not of Omnipotence it self; and God may as well make White to be
Black while it is White, as a vicious Soul to be happy while it is vicious. For
Happiness is a relative thing, and does in its own Nature imply a
Correspondence and Agreement between the Faculty and the Object; and be the
Object never so good in it self, yet if it does not agree with the Faculty
whereunto it is objected, it is Misery and Affliction to it. Though a Man
should be entertained with all the delicate Relishes of Music, yet if he has
not a musical Ear, it will be but a tedious ungrateful Din to him: And though
his Appetite should be courted with all the rich varieties in Nature, yet if
they do not agree with his coarse and homely Palate, he will distaste and
nauseate them. And so if a Man should be placed in Heaven, among all the Joys
with which that blessed State abounds; yet unless his Mind and Temper did suit
and agree with them, they would all be so many Miseries and Torments to him; he
would be afflicted even in Abraham's Bosom, and grope for Heaven in the midst
of Paradise; and it would be impossible for him to be pleased with his
Condition, till the Genius and Temper of his Mind were altered, and the
Dispositions of his Soul were reconciled to that heavenly State. So that if we
can demonstrate, that there is and must be Antipathy and Disagreement in wicked
Souls to the future Happiness; it will then be apparent from the Nature, and
Reason of the Thing, that our Enjoyment of the future Happiness depends upon
our ceasing to be wicked; or which is all one, upon our mortifying the Deeds of
the Flesh. Now to evidence this Disagreement between wicked Souls, and the
heavenly State, I shall do these three things;

First, SHOW wherein the Felicities of the future State do consist. Secondly,
WHAT the Temper and Disposition of wicked Souls will be in the future State.
Thirdly, HOW contrary such a Temper and Disposition must be unto such
Felicities.
I. I am to show wherein the Felicities of the future State do consist. And
here I shall not presume to give you a particular Description of Heaven, the
Felicities whereof the Apostle tells us are ineffable; but shall content my
self to give you the general Account of it, which I find in the Revelation of
the Gospel. In general therefore we may be secure of this, that Heaven is such
an Happiness as is most suitable to a Rational Nature; it being designed and
prepared for reasonable Beings, to whom (as I have showed) it would not be a
Heaven, if it were not agreeable to their Natures. For should God have provided
for us a Heaven of sensual Felicities, to gratify the unbounded Licorishness of
our carnal Appetites; it would have been a Happiness fitter for Beasts than
Men: And whilst our sensual and brutish Part had been feasted with everlasting
Varieties of carnal Pleasures, our intellectual Powers, which are the noblest
Ingredients of our Natures, must have pined away a long Eternity, for want of
those Joys and Delights, which alone are proper and agreeable to their Natures.
Now our proper Happiness, as we are reasonable Beings, consists in being
perfectly Rational, and in the Union of our Understandings, Wills, and
Affections, with such Objects as are most agreeable to our rational Natures:
And what is it to be perfectly rational, but to reason truly according to the
Nature of Things; and to choose and refuse, and love and hate according to the
Dictates of true Reason? And what is it to have our Understandings, Wills and
Affections united to such Objects as are most agreeable to our reasonable
Natures, but only to know that which is most worthy to be known, and to choose
and love that which is most worthy to be chosen and loved? When therefore our
Understanding is become so clear and vigorous, as to reason aright, and
penetrate into the Natures of things; and our Wills and Affections are
perfectly compliant and harmonious with it; and all these are in conjunction
with God, the Fountain of all Truth and Goodness; we are then arrived to the
heavenly State of reasonable Natures. And therefore all that is positively
affirmed of the heavenly Happiness in the Gospel, is only this; that it
consists in our seeing God, and loving and resembling him, and being for ever
associated with those blessed Spirits, that see and love and resemble him as
well as We. And this doubtless is such a Felicity, as no mortal Language can
express: For how will my Understanding triumph, when it is once emerged out of
all the Mists and Clouds, with which it is here surrounded, into the clear
Heaven of Vision, where it shall have a free and uninterrupted Prospect
throughout the whole Horizon of Truth; when God and Heaven, and all the
Mysteries of the other World shall be always present to my ravished Thoughts?
How hail and sound, how light and expedite will my Soul be, when it is
disentangled from all those unreasonable Passions, which here do clog and
disease her? When all her jarring Faculties shall be reduced into a perfect
Harmony, what a Heaven of Content and Peace will there spring up within her own
Bosom? And when she is thus contempered to the Divine Perfection, and inspired
throughout with a God-like Nature, in what Raptures of Love and Ecstasies of
Ioys will she converse with God and blessed Spirits? This doubtless, if there
were no more, is enough to make the heavenly State unspeakably happy and
blessed: And this together with a perfect Freedom from Pains and Misery, and
Death, is all of Heaven that God has made known to us in his Gospel: Here we
are told that we shall be made perfect, that we shall see as we are seen, and
know as we are known, and behold him that is Invisible face to face: For yet it
does not appear what we shall be, says St. John, but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. 1 Epist.
iii. 2. There may be, and doubtless are sundry additional Felicities to these;
but in these it is apparent the main of Heaven does consist, because these are
all that God has plainly revealed, and made known to us.

II. THE next thing proposed was to show, what the Temper and Disposition of
wicked Souls will be in the future State. And this may be easily gathered, by
considering wherein a wicked Temper consists; for doubtless with the same
Temper of Mind that we are of in this World, we shall go into the other: for
merely by going into the other World, Men cannot be altered as to their main
State, though they may be perfected as to those good Dispositions that were
here begun; so that he that is wicked here will be wicked there too, and that
same Disposition of Mind that we carry with us to our Graves, we shall retain
with us in Eternity. If therefore we would know, what the Temper of a wicked
Soul will be in the future State; our best way will be to enquire, what it is
that we call a wicked Temper here; because it will be the same here, and
hereafter. Now a wicked Temper consists of two things; First, of Sensuality,
and Secondly, of Devilishness. By Sensuality, I mean an immoderate Propension
of the Soul to the Pleasures of the Body; such an headstrong Propension, as
wholly diverts the Soul from all her nobler Delights to the brutish Pleasures
of Intemperance, and Wantonness and Gluttony; together with those other Lusts
that are subservient to them, such as Fraud, and Covetousness, and Ambition,
and the like: By Devilishness, I mean those spiritual Wickednesses which do not
so much depend upon the Body as the former, but are more immediately centered
in the Soul, such as Pride, and Malice, and Wrath, and Envy, and Hatred, and
Revenge, etc. which are the Sins of the Devil, by which those once glorious and
blessed Spirits were transformed into Friends and Furies. These are the
Venomous Ingredients of which a wicked Temper is composed. If you enquire
therefore what the Temper of a wicked Soul will be in the future State; I
answer, it will be the same there that it is here; that is, it will be sensual
and devilish. As for the latter, there can be no doubt of it; for Devilishness
being immediately subjected in the Soul, cannot be supposed to be separated
from her by her Separation from the Body; and may as well abide in naked and
separated Spirits, as it does in the Apostate Angels. And as for Sensuality,
though it cannot be supposed that a Soul should retain the Appetites of the
Body, after it is separated from it; yet having wholly abandoned it self to
corporeal Pleasures while it was in the Body, it may, and doubtless will retain
a vehement Hankering after a Reunion with it, which is the only Sensuality
that a separated Soul is capable of. For when She comes into the World of
Spirits, her former accustoming her self unto the Pleasures of the Body will
have so debauched and vitiated her Appetite; that She will be incapable of
relishing any other Pleasures, but what are carnal and sensual; which because
She cannot enjoy but in the Body, She must needs retain an earnest and vehement
Longing to be reunited to it. For having never had any former Experience of
the Pleasures of Spirits, when she comes into the other World, she will find
her self miserably destitute of all that can be pleasant and delightful to her;
and because she knows, that the only pleasures she can relish are such as are
not to be enjoyed, but in conjunction with the Body, therefore all her
Appetites and Longings must needs unite into one outrageous Desire of being
embodied again, that so she may repeat these sensual Pleasures, and act over
the brutish Scene anew. Which possibly may be the Reason, why such sensual
Souls have appeared so often in Churchyards, and Charnelhouses, Union with the
Body being that which these wandering Ghosts have the most eager Affections to,
and that they are most loath to be separated from; which makes them perpetually
hover about, and linger after their dear Consort, the Body; the Impossibility
of their Reunion with it not being able to cure them of their impotent
Desires, but still they would fain be alive again. Virgil.

-- Iterumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora: quae lucis miferis tam dira cupido?
And this, I doubt not, was one great Reason of those extraordinary
Abstinencies, and bodily Severities that were imposed by the Primitive Church;
that by this means they might gently wean the Soul from the Pleasures of the
Body, and teach it beforehand to live upon the Delights of separated Spirits;
that so it might drop into Eternity with Ease and Willingness, like ripe Fruit
from the Tree; and that when it was arrived into the other World, it might not
have its Appetite so vitiated with these sensual Delights, as to be incapable
of relishing those spiritual Ones, and so be endlesly tormented with a
fruitless Desire of returning to the Body again. This therefore from the whole
is plain and apparent, that the Temper of wicked Souls in the other World will
be much the same as it is in this; that is, sensual and devilish, made up of
Rage and Spite and Malice, together with a vehement. Longing after the
deserted Body, in which they enjoyed the only Pleasures they were capable of.

AND having thus showed you, what are the Felicities of the future State; and
what the Temper of wicked Souls will be in the future State; I now proceed,

III. To show you, how contrary such a Temper and Disposition must be unto such
Felicities. And indeed Sensuality and Devilishness are the only Indispositions
for Heaven; but such Indispositions they are, that if upon an impossible
Supposition a Soul could be admitted with them into the Habitations of the
Blessed, She would not be able to relish one Pleasure there, among all the
Delights with which the beatifick State abounds: there would none be found that
would please her distempered Palate, which, like a fevourish Tongue, must
disrelish and nauseate the sweetest Liquor, by reason of its overflowing Gall.
And hence the Apostle exhorting his Christian Colossians, to be thankful unto
God for making them meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light; tells them, that this was effected by God's translating them out of
the Kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of his own dear Son; that is, by
enabling them to mortify their Lusts, and inspiring them with the Graces of
the Gospel: 1 Colos. xii. 13. And this will evidently appear, if we consider
the particular Felicities of which the heavenly State consists; which (as I
have showed above) consist, First, In the Vision of God; Secondly, In our
Likeness or Resemblance to Him; Thirdly, In the Love of Him; and fourthly, In
the Society of pure and blessed Spirits: to all which there is an utter
Antipathy and Disagreement in every sensual and devilish Temper and Disposition.

I. IN every sensual and devilish Mind, there is an Antipathy and Contrariety
to the Vision of God; for the Sight of God can be pleasant unto none, but those
who are in some measure contemper'd to his Perfections, and transformed into
his Likeness. While we are unlike him, and contrary to him, as we must needs be
while we are sensual and devilish, the Sight of Him would be more apt to amaze
and terrify, than to please and delight us; for what Pleasure could a Soul
take in the Vision of that God, whom She always hated, and could never endure
to think of? Doubtless She would be so far from being pleased with the Sight of
him, that it would be her Grief and Torment to behold him. The Sight of his
Purity and Holiness would be so far from delighting her, that it would but
reproach her lewd and sordid Degeneracy from the Temper of a pure and immortal
Spirit: the Vision of his Mercy and Goodness would be so far from pleasing her,
that it would but upbraid the horrid devilishness of her own disposition: and
which way soever She turned her Eyes, She would see nothing in God, but what
did libel and condemn her own Impurity and Wickedness. And how is it possible,
that such a Sight should ever be pleasing unto such a Spectator? Doubtless the
Vision of God, which is the Heaven of Godlike Souls, would be a Hell to wicked
Ones; it would chase them out of Heaven, if they were in it, and cause them to
fly away from before the Glory of it, as Bats and Owls do from the Light of the
Sun, and of their own accords to wrap their guilty Heads in the Shades of
eternal Darkness, and Despair. For how could they endure the Sight of that God,
in whom, while they continue so infinitely unlike him, it is impossible they
should see any thing but Causes of Horror and Confusion? For there must be in
us some Likeness and Resemblance of God, to dispose us to behold him with
Pleasure and Delight. For as Maximus Tyrius has well observed, the (...), the
Divine Nature which is not visible to the eye of Sense, (...). Diss* I. Is yet
visible to that in the Soul; which is most pure and beautiful and sublime and
noble, in respect of a certain similitude and cognation that is between them.
But where this similitude is wanting, the Vision of God will be rather a Hell,
than a Heaven: if there be no Correspondence between what we see in God, and
what we are in our selves, his Glory may confound and dazzle us; but it is
impossible it should please us: for what Pleasure can we take in seeing that
which is so infinitely disagreeable to our Natures?

II. IN every sensual and devilish Mind there is an utter Indisposition and
Contrariety to the Love of God; for all Love is founded in Likeness, and does
result out of some Harmony and Resemblance that there is between the Lover and
the Beloved. But what Resemblance can there be between a devilish and
carnalized Soul, and a good and holy God? And if there be none, Light and
Darkness, or Heaven and Hell may as soon agree, as They. For how can a Soul,
whose Affections are drenched in Matter, and wedded to the Flesh, love the holy
God, who is a pure and spotless Spirit? What Amity can there be in a black and
devilish Nature toward the most kind and benign Being in the World? Doubtless
from such a Contrariety of Natures there must necessarily spring mutual
Antipathies and Aversations. So that could such a Soul be admitted to the
Vision of God, she would see nothing in him but what would enrage and canker
her with Malice against him: the Sight of those glorious Perfections in him,
which are so repugnant to her own Nature, instead of enamouring her, would but
boil up her Hatred into an higher degree of Aversation to him. For even here we
see, it is natural to lewd and wicked Men, to picture God by the foul and
monstrous Original of their own Tempers; and generally the Notion which they
have of him is nothing but the Image of themselves, which Narcissus-like they
fall in love with, because it represents what they most delight in, even their
own darling and beloved Lusts. Which is a plain Argument that they cannot love
God, till they have deformed him into their own likeness, and with the
Aethiopians copyed him out in the Resemblance of their own black and devilish
Tempers. When therefore they shall see Him as He is, encircled about with his
own Rays of unstained and immaculate Glory; the vast Unlikeness they will then
discern between Him and themselves, will doubtless enrage and sour their
Spirits against him, and convert all their fondness toward him into an utter
Antipathy and Aversation: for so long as He continues what He is, and they what
they are, there will be such an irreconcilable: Contrariety between them, that
they must hate either God or themselves, or else love Contraries at the same
time, which is impossible.

III. IN every sensual and devilish mind there is a strong Indisposition to
their being made like unto God, i. e. there is the same Indisposition in them
to their receiving the Likeness and Image of God, as there is in one Contrary
to admit of another. Their sensual and devilish Dispositions will as naturally
resist the transforming Impressions of the divine Purity and Goodness, as Fire
does Water, or Moisture Drought: for the Image of God being a moral Perfection,
must be impressed on us by the intervening Ministry of our Understandings, that
is, by our Sight and Vision of him; and hence the Apostle gives this Reason why
we shall be like him when he does appear, because we shall see him as he is: 1 John iii. 2. But the Sight of God, which assimilates us to him, must be
accompanied with the Love of him, for it is Love that provokes to Imitation,
and Imitation that transforms the Lover into the Image of the Beloved. For
though doubtless the beatifick Vision does work far more effectually upon
prepared Souls in the other Life, than the knowledge of God does in this;
because here we see but in a glass darkly, whereas there our Vision will be
unspeakably more clear, intense and vigorous: yet I doubt not but in
assimilating us to God, it works in a moral and rational way; that is, by
vigorously affecting our Wills with the Perfections of God, so as to stir us up
to an active Imitation of them, and efficaciously to excite us to transcribe
them into our own Natures; which it cannot be supposed to do, unless our Souls
be in some measure predisposed by Holiness and Purity to the Love of God, and
of those glorious Perfections we shall then behold in him. For if we do not
love God, the Sight of him will be so far from provoking us to imitate him;
that it will avert us from him, and render us more unimpressive to the
transforming Power of his glory. It Is true, this Vision of God will perfect our
Likeness to him, if it be begun; because then it will have a prepared Subject
to act upon, a Soul that is tempered and disposed to the Power of it; and to
take Impression from it: but yet it will not create a Likeness where it never
was, but will leave him that is wicked to be wicked still; he being an
incapable Subject of its benign Influences, and altogether indisposed to be
wrought upon by it. For as the Sun enlightens not the inward parts of an
impervious Dunghill, and has no other effect upon it, but only to draw out its
filthy Reeks and Steams; though as soon as he lifts his head above the
Hemisphere, he immediately transforms into his own Likeness all that vast Space
whether he can diffuse his Beams, and turns it into a Region of Light: even so
the divine Glory and Beauty, which is the Object of the beatifical Vision, will
never illustrate lewd and filthy Souls; their Temper being impervious unto his
heavenly Irradiations, and wholly indisposed to be enlightened by it; but
instead of that it will irritate their devilish Rage against it, and provoke
them to bark at that Light which they cannot endure: whereas it no sooner
arises upon welldisposed Minds, but it will immediately chase away all those
Relics of Darkness remaining in them, and transform them into its own
Likeness. But doubtless the Sight of the divine Purity, and Goodness will be so
far from exciting sensual and devilish Spirits to transcribe and imitate it;
that it will rather inspire them with Indignation against it, and provoke them
to curse and blaspheme the Author of it.

Fourthly and Lastly, IN every sensual and devilish Soul there is an utter
Incongruity, and Disagreement to the Society of the Spirits of just Men made
perfect. For even in this Life we see, how ungrateful the Society of good Men
is unto those that are wicked: it spoils them of their fulsome Mirth, and
checks them in those Riots and Scurrilities which are the Life and Piquancy of
their Conversation. So that when the good Man takes his leave, they reckon
themselves delivered, his Presence being a Confinement to their Folly and
Wickedness. And as it is in this, so doubtless it will be in the other World:
for how is it possible there should be any Agreement between such distant and
contrary Tempers, between such sensual and malicious, and such pure and benign
Spirits? What a Torment would it be to a spightful, and devilish Spirit to be
confined to a Society that is governed by the Laws of Love and Friendship? What
an Infelicity to a carnalized Soul, that nauseates all Pleasures but what are
fleshly and sensual, to be shut up among those pure and abstracted Spirits,
that live wholly upon the Pleasures of Wisdom, and Holiness, and Love?
Doubtless it would be as agreeable to a Wolf, to be governed by the Ten
Commandments, and fed with Lectures of Philosophy; as for such a Soul to live
under the Laws, and be entertained with the Delights of the heavenly Society.
So that could these wicked Spirits be admitted into the Company of the Blessed,
they would soon be weary of it; and perhaps it would be so tedious and irksom
to them, that they would rather choose to associate themselves with Devils, and
damned Ghosts, than to undergo the Torment of a Conversation so infinitely
repugnant to their Natures; accounting it more eligible to live in the dismal
Clamor of hellish Threnes and Blasphemies, than to have a tedious Din of
heavenly Praises and Hallelujahs perpetually ringing in their Ears. And indeed
considering the hellish Nature of a wicked Soul, how contrary it is to the
Goodness and Purity of Heaven; I have sometimes been apt to think, that it will
be less miserable in those dismal Shades, where the wretched Furies, like so
many Snakes and Adders do nothing but hiss at and sting one another for ever;
than it would be, were it admitted into the glorious Society of heavenly
Lovers, whose whole Conversation consists in loving and reloving, and is
nothing else but a perpetual Intercourse of mutual Indearments. For this would
be an Employment, so infinitely repugnant to its black and devilish
Disposition; that rather than endure so much Outrage and Violence, it would of
its own accord forsake the blessed Abodes, to flee to Hell for Sanctuary from
the Torment of being in Heaven. But this however we may rationally conclude,
that so long as the prevailing Temper of our Souls is sensual and devilish, we
are incapable of the Society of blessed Spirits; and that if it were possible
for us to be admitted into it, our Condition would be very unhappy, till our
Temper was changed: so that it is a plain Case both from God's Ordination, and
from the Nature of the Thing, that our eternal Happiness and Welfare depends
upon our mortifying the deeds of the Body.

To offer some Practical Inferences from hence;

I. WE may perceive how unreasonable it is, for any Man to presume upon going
to Heaven, upon any account whatsoever without mortifying his Lusts. For he
that thinks to go to Heaven without Mortification and Amendment, presumes both
against the Decrees of God and the Nature of Things: he believes all the
Threatenings of the Gospel to be nothing else but so many Bugs, and Scare-crows;
and though God has told him again and again, that unless he forsake his sins,
he shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; yet he fondly imagines, that
when it comes to the Trial, God will never be so severe as he pretends; but
will rather revoke the Decree that is gone out of his mouth, than exclude out
of the Paradise of endless Delights a Soul that is infinitely offensive to him.
As if God were so invincibly fond and indulgent, as that rather than
excommunicate an obstinate Rebel from Happiness, he would choose to prostitute
the Honor of his Laws and Government, and commit an Outrage upon the Rectitude
and Purity of his own Nature. For so long as he is a pure God, he cannot but be
displeased with impure Souls; and so long as he is a wise Governor, he cannot
but be offended with those that trample upon his Laws: so that before he can
admit a wicked Soul into Heaven, he must have extinguished all his natural
Antipathy to Sin, and stifled his just Resentment of our wilful Affronts to his
Authority. When therefore we can find any reason to imagine, that God is no
Enemy to sin, and that he has no regard of his own Authority; then, and not
till then, we may have some Pretense to presume upon going to Heaven without
Mortification and Amendment. But supposing this Hinderance were removed, and
that God were so easy as to be induced to prefer the Happiness of a wicked
Soul before the Honor of his Government and the Purity of his Nature; yet
still there is an invincible Obstacle behind, that renders her future Felicity
impossible; and that is, that it cannot be without a plain Contradiction to the
Nature of Things. For as I have showed you already, the Genius and Temper of a
wicked Soul is wholly repugnant to all the Felicities of the other World; so
that if they were set before her, She would not be able to enjoy them, but must
be forced to pine and famish amidst all that Plenty of Delights, there being
not one Viand in all the heavenly Banquet that she could relish any Sweetness
in. Wherefore either her Nature must be changed, or the Nature of Heaven; for
while both continue what they are, they are irreconcilable: and if God himself
were so easy and indulgent, as to pass by all the Affronts in the other World
which wicked Souls have offered him in this; yet he could not make them happy
there, without creating in them a new Heart, or creating for them a New Heaven.
For it is altogether as possible for us to see without Eyes, or hear without
Ears, as to enjoy Heaven without a heavenly Disposition. How causelessly
therefore do thou presume, that talkest of going to Heaven, whilst thou
continuest in thy Sin? Alas poor Wretch! What would thou do there, if upon
an impossible Supposition thou could be admitted into it? There are no wanton
Amors among those heavenly Lovers, no Rivers of Wine among their Rivers of
Pleasure, to gratify thy unbounded Sensuality; no Parasite to flatter thy
lofty Pride, no Miseries to feed thy meager Envy, no Mischiefs to tickle thy
devilish Revenge; but all the Felicities, with which that heavenly State
abounds, are such as Thou would loath and nauseate, as being too pure and
refined for thy depraved Appetite: So that if thou were in Heaven, it would be
but a cooler Damnation to thee; yea perhaps Hell it self would be less
intolerable, than a Heaven so incongruous to thy Nature. And yet how ordinary
is it for lewd and dissolute Persons, to flatter themselves into confident
Hopes of Heaven; for which, when they come to be examined they can give no
other Reason but this, that they firmly rely upon the Merits of their Savior,
who died for them, and obeyed God's Law in their stead; and therefore though
they have no Righteousness of their own, yet they doubt not, being clothed in
the white Garment of Christ's, they shall be pardoned and accepted of God?
Which is a Pretense so very absurd and unreasonable, that one would think it
were impossible for any Man to be imposed upon by it, that had not a Mind to
deceive himself: for supposing what is false, that Christ did obey the Law in
our stead, and that God does account us righteous because He was so; yet what
would this signify to our Pardon and future Happiness, without an inherent
Righteousness of our own; which is so necessary to our future Happiness, that
Heaven it self cannot make us happy without it? For if by being clothed in the
Robe of Christ's Righteousness, we could be admitted into Heaven; yet unless we
left behind us our hellish Disposition, we should be miserable Wretches under
that glorious Garment; in which we should be only crucified, like Jesus in his
purple Robe, with greater Scorn and Solemnity. For since the main of Heaven
consists in the perfection of inherent Holiness, it necessarily follows that a
mere imputable Holiness will only entitle us to an imputable Happiness, that
is, to a mere imaginary Heaven; which how glorious soever it may look at a
distance, will when we come to embrace it glide from between our Arms, and
leave us desperate and miserable. And though it is true, that Christ by his
Death and Passion has purchased for us Pardon and eternal Life; yet it is upon
this Condition, that we mortify our Lusts, and conform to the Rule of the
Gospel: and indeed without this, Pardon and eternal Life are Words that
signify nothing; for what does a Pardon signify to one that is dying of the
Stone, or Strangury? He can but die, if he be not pardoned, and die he must
though he be. And as little Advantage it would be to a depraved Soul, to be
pardoned and absolved by God, while She has a Disease within her that preys
upon her Vitals, and hastens her to a certain Ruin: she could have been but
miserable in the future Life, if she had not been pardoned; and miserable she
must be, if she continue wicked, whether she be pardoned, or no. All the
Advantage that such a Soul could reap from God's pardoning her, would be only
to be released from those arbitrary Punishments, which God may inflict on her
in the world to come; but if she were freed from these, yet by a Necessity of
Nature she must still be extremely miserable; for her own Wickedness would
incapacitate her for Heaven, and kindle a perpetual Hell within her. So that
should Christ have died to obtain a Pardon for those that continue in their
sin, he would have died to no purpose: for a wicked Soul cannot be pardoned,
because there is such an inseparable Relation between Sin and Punishment, that
it is as great a Contradiction for the one to be without the other, as for a
Son to be without a Father. And then though Christ by his Death has procured
eternal Life, yet he cannot have procured it for those that are unreformed:
because they, if they might, yet cannot enjoy it, their inward Temper and
Disposition being contrary to it; so that unless Christ by his Death had
altered the Nature of Heaven, and converted that Paradise of pure and holy
Pleasures into a Seraglio of brutish and carnal Enjoyments, he cannot have
procured it for lewd and depraved Souls. So that for any Man to presume upon
Heaven upon any account without Holiness and Amendment, is the most egregious
Nonsense in the World: For Heaven is nothing else but Holiness in its
Perfection, freed from all those Encumbrances that here do perpetually clog and
annoy it; so that a Heaven without Holiness is a Heaven without a Heaven, that
is, a Word that signifies nothing, a Happiness wholly abstracted from it self.
While therefore we flatter our selves with the Hopes of a future Bliss,
continuing in our Sins, we do but court a painted Heaven, and woo Happiness in
a Picture; but in the mean time are sinking into a true and real Hell, where
all our foolish Hopes will be swallowed up for ever, in our woeful Experience of
its substantial Miseries.

II. WE may discern from hence the indispensable Necessity of Mortification,
since it is plain we cannot be happy without it: so that to mortify our Lusts is
just as necessary for us, as it is to obtain Heaven, and avoid Hell. For Virtue
and Vice are the Foundations of Heaven and Hell; Hell is nothing but that
Hemisphere of Darkness, in which all Sin and Wickedness moves; and Heaven is
the opposite Hemisphere of Light, the glorious Orb of Holiness, Truth, and
Goodness; and in the Possession of the one, or the other, we do all of us
actually enstate our selves in this Life. For take Holiness and Virtue out of
Heaven, and all its Glories will immediately be clouded in horrid Darkness, and
overcast with the dismal Shades of Hell: Take Sin and Wickedness out of Hell,
and all its blackness of Darkness will vanish, and it will presently clear up
into Light and Serenity, and shine out into a glorious Heaven. For it is not so
much the Place, as the State that makes either the one, or the other; and the
State of Heaven and Hell consists in perfect Holiness and Wickedness; and
proportionably as we do improve in either of these, so we do approach toward
Heaven, or Hell. For as Heaven is the Center of all that is virtuous, pure, and
holy; and every thing that is good tends thither by a natural Sympathy: so Hell
is the Center of all Impiety and Wickedness; and whatsoever is bad does
naturally press and sink down thither, as toward its proper Place and Element.
And should not the divine Vengeance concern it self in excluding wicked Souls
out of Heaven, yet their own Wickedness would do it; for that is a Place of
such inaccessible Light and Purity, that nothing that is impure or wicked can
approach it; but must of Necessity be beaten off by the perpetual Lightnings of
its Glory, and tumbled headlong down as often as ever it essays to climb up into
it. As on the other hand, should not God by an immediate Vengeance precipitate
wicked Souls into Hell; yet their own Sin and Wickedness, hastened by the
mighty Weight of its own Nature, would necessarily hurry them down thither with
a most swift and headlong Motion. And if this be so, then questionless it is as
necessary for us not to continue in our Sin, as it is not to be excluded out of
Heaven, nor thrust down into the flames of Hell: and did we but know what this
meant, doubtless we should run away from our Sins in a greater Fright and Maze,
than ever we did from the most astonishing Danger. For consider, O Man, by
those short Pleasures with which thou treatest thy lusts, thou excommunicatest
thy self from eternal Joy; and would thou be but so wise as to deny thy self
the Pleasure of a Moment, thou might be pleased for ever, and millions of
Ages hence be rejoicing among Angels and blessed Spirits, because thou would
not gratify thy self with those fulsom Delights, which would have died away in
the Enjoyment. And is it possible thou should be so besotted, as to exchange
the Pleasures of an immortal Heaven, for those of an intemperate Draught, to
sell the Joys of Angels for the Embraces of an Harlot, and pawn thy Part in
Paradise for a little Money, of which ever long thou will have no other Use,
but only to purchase six foot of Earth, and a Winding Sheet? O most prodigious
Folly! What account can thou give for such an extravagant Bargain, at the
Tribunal of thy own Reason? But it may be you will say; What does the loss of
Heaven signify, since (as you have told us already) if we could be admitted to
it, it could be no Heaven to us? And why should we think much of losing that
which we cannot enjoy? To which I answer; It Is true, you cannot enjoy it,
unless you part with your Lusts; because Heaven, and they are inconsistent: but
you may part with your Lusts, if you will, and being quit of these, you may and
shall enjoy it for ever. Your Sin is the only Wall of Separation between you
and Heaven; which being once demolished, you may enter into it without any
Interruption, and take Possession of all its Glories. So that if you think the
Loss of Heaven will be no Trouble to you in the other World, because it is such
a Heaven as your depraved Souls will be averse to, you are infinitely mistaken;
for though you will be averse to it, yet your own Consciences will tell you,
that if you would, you might have conquered that Aversation, as well as those
blessed Spirits that do enjoy it; and that if you had done so, you might have
been infinitely happy as well as they. Whereas now you are condemned to wander
for ever in a woeful Eternity, tormented with a restless Rage, and hungry
unsatisfied Desire after these sensual Goods you have left behind you, and to
which you shall never return more; the Consideration of which will render the
Loss of Heaven as grievous to you, as if it were a Heaven overflowing with
sensual Delights, and abounding with such Ioys, as you will then hunger after,
but can never enjoy. For how will it sting you to the heart, when you shall
thus ruminate with your selves, as you are wandering through the Infernal
Shades; Ah besotted Fool that I am! now I see too late, that Heaven is a state
wherein a Soul may be infinitely happy; look how yonder blessed Spirits are
imparadised! how they exult and triumph! how they sing and give praise, and are
rapt into ecstasies of love and joy! whilst I through my own Sensuality and
Devilishness am utterly incapable of those sublime Delights, whereof their
Heaven is composed; and like a forlorn Wretch, am left for ever destitute of
those sensual pleasures, which are the only Heaven I can now enjoy. And
therefore as you would not spend an Eternity in such direful Reflections, and
have those dismal Thoughts like so many Vulturs preying upon you for ever; be
persuaded to set persently upon this great and necessary Work of Mortification.
For assure your selves, God will as soon let Hell loose into Heaven, and people
the Regions of immortal Bliss with the Inhabitants of the Land of Darkness; as
crown a wicked Soul with the glorious Reward of eternal Life. For God has
reduced us to this issue, either our Sins, or our Souls must die; and we must
shake hands with Heaven, or our Lusts: so that unless we value eternal
Happiness so little, as to exchange it for the sordid and trifling Pleasures of
Sin; and unless we love our Sins so well, as to ransom them with the blood of
our immortal Souls; it concerns us speedily to shake off our sins by
Repentance: for this is an eternal and immutable Law, that if we will be
wicked, we must be miserable.

III. FROM hence we may perceive, what is the only true and solid Foundation of
our Assurance of Heaven, namely, our mortifying the Deeds of the Body* for if
they that mortify the deeds of the body shall live, then if we do, or have
mortified them, we are sure that we are entitled to eternal Life. So that to be
assured of Heaven, we need not go about to spell out our Names in the Stars, or
to read them in the secret Volumes of eternal Predestination: for if our Wills
be but so subdued to the Will of God, that we do not live in any wilful
Violation of his Laws; we may be as certainly persuaded of our Interest in
eternal Life, as if one of the winged Messengers from above should come down
and tell us, that he saw our Names enrolled in the Volumes of Eternity. For
besides that God has promised Heaven to us upon condition of our
Mortification, we shall, when our Lusts are thoroughly subdued, feel Heaven
opening it self within us, and rising up from the center of our Souls in a
Divine Life and Godlike Nature: so that we shall not need to seek for Heaven
without us, because we shall find it already come down into us, and transcribed
into our own Natures. And as we grow in Grace from one degree to another, so
Heaven will break forth clearer and clearer upon us; and the nearer we approach
to the top of the Hill, the fuller View we shall have of the Horizon, and
extended Sky; till at last we come to walk all along in sight of Heaven, and to
travel toward it in a full View and Assurance of it. But if we secure our
selves of Heaven, before we have mortifyed our Lusts, we do but entertain our
Fancies with a golden Dream; which when we awake will vanish away, and leave us
desperate and miserable. If therefore we would be assured of our future
Happiness, let us not trouble our selves with numerous Signs of Grace; nor go
about to erect Schemes of our spiritual Nativity, to cast a Figure to know
whether we have Grace, or were converted secundum artem: but let us impartially
examine, whether our Wills are so subdued to the Will of God, as universally to
choose what he enjoins, and refuse what he forbids. For if they are, our
Condition is good, and our Hope secure, by what Means or Motives soever it was
effected; and whether they are or no, we need no Marks or Signs to resolve us:
for our Thoughts and Resolutions and Intentions are Signs enough to themselves,
and we need no Marks to know what it is that we choose and refuse: this our
Soul can easily discern by that innate Power she has of reflecting upon our
own Motions, by which she does as naturally feel her own Deliberations and
Volitions, as the Body does its Hunger and Thirst. It Is true indeed, holy
Dispositions, like all other Motions, the weaker they are, and the more they
are interrupted by contrary Motions and Inclinations, the less they will be
perceived; which is the Reason, why Beginners in Religion cannot be so sensible
of the Grace that is in them; because their good Inclinations are checked and
hindered by the strong and vehement Counter-Motions of their Lusts: but the more
their good Inclinations prevail and free themselves from these contrary
Inclinations which clog and incumber them, the more their Souls will be
sensible of them. For this we find by Experience, that as we perceive our own
motions, the more vigorous they are, the more we perceive them; especially when
they are advised and deliberate, as all virtuous Motions and Inclinations are.
For that a Man should be insensible of a Motion which he exerts advisedly, or
not be able to know that he is so disposed, when he is knowingly so disposed,
implies a Contradiction: and indeed, if we are not able to know when we choose
and refuse, as we should when we resolve well and intend aright, we cannot
discern when we do right or wrong; but are left to a Necessity of acting at
random; like Travelers in the dark, that go on at a venture without knowing
whether they go backward or forward. If we cannot know when we do well, it is
impossible we should know how to do well; but must necessarily leave the
Conduct of our Actions to Chance, and Fortune must determine us unto Right or
Wrong. Since therefore our Soul is not a senseless Machin that has no
Perception of her own Motions, but is naturally sensible of whatsoever is
transacted within her; let us no longer excuse our Ignorance of our own
Condition with that common Pretense, that our Hearts are deceitful and
hypocritical: for our Hearts are our selves, and if they are deceitful and
hypocritical, we our selves are so. And yet I know not how it comes to pass, it
passes among some Men for a great Sign of Grace and Sincerity, to complain of
the Falseness and Hypocrisy of their own Hearts; not considering that Men are
as their Hearts are, and that if these are Hypocritical, they themselves are
Hypocrites. If therefore our Complaint be true, the more Shame for us: this is
so far from being a Sign that we have Grace, that it is a plain Confession that
we are graceless Dissemblers. If our Complaint be false, we falsely accuse our
selves in it; which is also so far from being a Sign of Grace, that it is an
Argument only of our own extravagant Folly. But if we mistake in our Complaint,
and think that to be Hypocrisy, which is not, we should seek to be better
informed: and if when you are so, you still complain of your Hypocrisy, I
doubt you have too much Reason for it; and if you fear that you are Hypocrites,
I fear you are so too. For why should one that knows what an Hypocrite is, fear
that he is an Hypocrite; were he not conscious to himself, that he does
dissemble with God, and under an open Pretense of submitting to him, disguise
some secret Purpose of rebelling against him? Let us therefore lay aside all
our impertinent Scrupulosity, and fairly examine our own Souls, whether we do
submit to God without any reserve, and are willing to lay down all our beloved
Lusts at his Feet: for whether we are or no, we may easily discern if we will.
If we are, then are the Foundations of Heaven already laid within our own
Bosoms; and if upon this Principle we grow in Grace, and add one Degree of
Virtue to another, we may be sure the Superstructure will go on, until the
whole Fabric of our Happiness is completed. For as Nature by its powerful
Magic is continually drawing every thing unto its proper Place, and Center; so
Heaven attracts to it self, and freely imbosoms every thing that is heavenly;
and thrusts off nothing but what is unfit for and heterogeneous to it. If
therefore our Souls be of a pure and heavenly Temper, Heaven is the Center of
our Motions, and the proper Place whereunto we belong; and whither at last we
shall safely arrive, in despite of all those dismal Shades of Darkness, that
would beat us back, and interrupt our Progress toward it: but on the contrary,
if we secure our selves of Heaven while we are enslaved to any Lusts, we
presume unreasonably; and embark our Hopes in a leaky Bottom, which in stress
of Weather will certainly founder under us, and sink us into utter Despair: For
how can we hope to be admitted into Heaven, whilst we retain that within our
own Bosoms which kindles Hell, and is the Spring of the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone? This would be a confounding of utter Darkness with the Regions of
Light, a blending of Heaven and Hell together.

Fourthly and Lastly, FROM hence it appears what is the great Design of the
Christian Religion. We may be sure, God would not have sent his Son into the
World, had not the Embassy upon which he was employed been of the highest
Moment and Concernment to us: And what other End, besides doing the greatest
Good, could a good God propose in so great a Transaction? Surely had we been in
Heaven, when the Holy One descended thence into the World, though we had not
known the Particulars of his Errand, yet we should have concluded that
doubtless he was employed upon some great Design of Love; to communicate from
the Almighty Father some mighty Blessing to the World: and accordingly we find,
that though the holy Angels did not comprehend the particular Intention, and
Mystery of Christ's Incarnation; yet they concluded in the general, that it was
intended for some great Good to the World; as is apparent by the Anthem they
sung at his Nativity, Glory be to* God on high, on Earth peace, good will
toward Men. Now the greatest Expression of God's good Will toward Men is to
rescue them from all Iniquity, and restore them to the Purity and Perfection of
their Natures: for without this all the Blessings of Heaven, and Earth are not
sufficient to make us happy. While our Nature is debauched and overgrown with
unreasonable Lusts and Passions, we must be miserable, notwithstanding all that
an Omnipotent Goodness can do for us: for Misery is so essential to Sin, that
we may as well be Men without being reasonable, as sinful Men without being
miserable. Since therefore the End of Christ's coming into the World was to
dispense God's greatest Blessings to Mankind; and since the greatest Blessing
that we can receive from God, is to be redeemed by his Grace from our
Iniquities, and to be made Partakers of the Divine Nature; we may reasonably
conclude, that this was his main Design in the World, and the great End of that
everlasting Gospel which he revealed to it. And hence the name Jesus was given
him by the Direction of an Angel, because he should save his people from their
Sins: Matthew. i. 21. and indeed I cannot imagine any Design whatsoever,
excepting this, that could be worthy the Son of God's coming down into the
World, to live such a miserable Life, and die such a shameful Death. Had it
been only to save us from a Plague, or War or Famine, it had been an
Undertaking fit for the lowest Angel in the heavenly Hierarchy: but to save us
from our sins was an Enterprise so great and good, as none in Heaven or Earth,
but the Son of God himself, was thought worthy to be employed in. This
therefore was the Mark of all his Aims while he was upon Earth, the Center in
which all his Actions and Sufferings met, to save us from our Sins, and to
inspire us with a divine Life and God-like Nature; that thereby we might be
disposed for the Enjoyment of Heaven, and made to be meet Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. It Is true, he died to procure our Pardon
too; but it was with respect to a farther End, namely that we might not grow
desperate with the Sense of our Guilts; but that by the Promise of Pardon,
which he has purchased for us, we might be encouraged to repent and amend. But
should he have procured a Pardon for our Sin, whether we had repented of it or
no; he would have only skinned over a Wound, which if it be not perfectly
cured, will rankle of its own accord into an incurable Gangrene. Christ
therefore by the offering of himself is said to purge our consciences from dead
works, that we might serve the living God: Heb. ix. 14. and the great Apostle
makes the ultimate Intention of his giving himself for us to be this, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works: Tit. ii. 14. And until his Death has had this Effect
upon us, it is not all the Merit of his Blood, and Virtue of his Sacrifice,
that can release us from the direful Punishments of the other Life. For unless
he by his Death had so altered the Nature of Sin, as that it might be in us
without being a Plague to us; it must necessarily, if we carry it with us into
the other World, prove a perpetual Hell and Torment to us. So that it is
apparent, that the great and ultimate Design of Christ, was not to hide our
filthy sores, but to heal and cure them: and for this End it was that he
revealed to us the grace of God from Heaven, to teach us to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this
present world. Tit. ii. 12. Let us not therefore cheat our own Souls, by
thinking that the Gospel requires nothing of us, but only to be holy by Proxy,
righteous by being clothed in the Garments of another's Righteousness; as if
its Design was not so much to cure, as cover our filthy Sores, not to make us
whole, but to make us accounted so. For can any Man imagine, that Christ would
ever have undertaken such a mighty Design, and made so great a noise of doing
something; which when it is all summed up is nothing but a Notion, and does not
at last amount unto a Reality? As if the great Design of his coming down from
Heaven to live and die for us, was only to make a Cloak for our sins, wherein
we might appear righteous before God without being so. But do not deceive your
selves; it is not all the Innocence and Obedience of Christ's Life, nor all the
Virtue and Merit of his Death, that can render you pure and holy in God's eyes;
unless you really are so: and you may as well be Well with another's Health, or
wise with another's Wisdom, as righteous before God with the Righteousness of
Christ, while you abide in your Sins. For God sees you as you are; and the most
glorious Disguise you can appear in before him will never be able to delude his
all-seeing Eye, so as to make him account you righteous when you are not: and
if it were possible for you to impose upon God, yet unless you could also
impose upon the Nature of Things, and by fancying them to be otherwise than
they are, make them to be what they are not, it will be to no purpose. For if
you could be clothed in Christ's Righteousness, while you continue wicked; it
would signify no more to your Happiness, than it would to be clothed in a
most splendid Garment, while you were pining with Famine, or tortured with the
Gout or Strangury. Wherefore as we love our own Souls, and would not betray our
selves into an irrecoverable Ruin, let us firmly conclude with our selves, that
the great Design of our Religion is internal Holiness and Righteousness; and
that without this, all that Christ has done and suffered for us will be so far
from contributing to our Happiness, that it will prove an eternal Aggravation
to our Misery; and that all that precious Blood, which he shed in our behalf,
will be so far from obtaining Pardon and eternal Happiness for us, that it will
arise in Judgment against us; and like the innocent blood of Abel, instead of
interceeding for us, will cry down Vengance from Heaven upon us. For how can we
imagine, that the pure and holy Jesus, who hated our Sins more than all the
Pangs and Horrors of a woeful Death, should all of a sudden be so kind to them,
as to give them Shelter and Sanctuary within his own meritorious Wounds; and to
make his Blood the Price of a general Indulgence to all Impiety and Wickedness,
that so we might sin securely, and enjoy a safe Retreat from his Authority
under the covert of his Sacrifice? But be not deceived; the holy Jesus will
never make himself an unholy Savior for your sake; and your being called by
the Name of Christ is so far from giving you a Privilege to sin, that it lays
you under a stricter Restraint; and if you violate it, it will expose you to a
severer Punishment, than if you had been Heathens and Infidels. For this is the
great Proposal of our Religion, that Jesus Christ died to purchase Pardon, and
eternal Life, for all that do repent and amend; but if we still go on in our
Sin, we are at a greater distance from Pardon and eternal Life, than if we
never had had a Savior to undertake for us.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby.
THE Christian Life, Part I. from its beginning to its Consummation in Glory;
together with the several Means and Instruments of Christianity conducing
thereunto: with directions for Private Devotion, and Forms of Prayer fitted to
the several States of Christians. Octavo.

The Christian Life, Part II. Wherein the Fundamental Principles of Christian
Duty are Assigned, Explained and Proved. Vol. 1.

The Christian Life, Part II. Wherein the Fundamental Principle of Christian
Duty, the Doctrine of our Savior's Mediation is Explained and Proved* Volume
2. All three by John Scott, D. D. Late Rector of St. Giles's in the Fields.

Of Trust in God, or a Discourse concerning the Duty of casting our Care upon
God in all our difficulties; together with an Exhortation to patient suffering
for Righteousness, in a Sermon on 1 Pet. iii. 14, 15. By Nathanael Spinks, M.
A. A Presbyter of the Church of England.

A Discourse concerning Lent, in two Parts. The first an Historical Account of
its Observation. The second, an Essay concerning its Original; this subdivided
into two Repartitions; whereof the first is Preparatory, and shows that most of
our Christian Ordinances are derived from the second Conjectures that Lent is
of the same Original. By George Hooper, D. D. Dean of Canterbury.

Mysteries in Religion Vindicated, or the Filiation, Deity and Satisfaction of
our Savior, asserted against Socinians and others, with Occasional Reflections
on several late Pamphlets. By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the Church of
England.

An Enquiry into New Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Prebyterians of
Scotland; together also with some Animadversions on a late Book Entitled a
Defense of the Vindication, of the Kirk, in a Letter to a Friend at Edinburgh.
By Alexander Monro, D. D.

The Principles of the Cyprianic Age, with regard to Episcopal Power and
Jurisdiction, asserted and recommended from the Genuine Writings of St. Cyprian
himself, and his Contemporaries, by which it is made Evident that the
Vindicator of the Kirk of Scotland is obliged, by his own Concessions, to
acknowledge that he and his Associates are Schismatics. In a Letter to a
Friend. By I. S.

Bishop Overal's Convocation Book. 4o

The Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man. 12o

Mr. Hallywel's Defense of Revealed Religion in Six Sermons. 8o

Dr. Gregory's Doctrine of the Trinity not Explained but Asserted. 8o

Dr. Templer's Treatise relating to the Worship of God, divided into Six
Sections. 1. The Nature of Worship. 2. The Peculiar Object of Worship. 3. The
True Worshippers. 4. Assistance Requisite to Worship. 5. The Place of Worship.
6. The Solemn Time of Worship.

FINIS.

