A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT CHELMSFORD, In the County of ESSEX, AUGUST
31, 1685. Before the Honorable Sir THOMAS STREET, Knight. One of the JUDGES of his
Majesty's Court of COMMON PLEAS.

By JOHN SCOTT, D. D. Rector of St. Peter's Poor, London.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Rob. Horn at the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange, and Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1686.

To my Honored Friend JOSEPH SMART, Esquire High Sheriff of the County of Essex.
SIR,
I Do not think my self obliged to make an Apology to the World for the
publication of this Sermon, which you very well know, Sir, is none of my act,
and I am sure was far from my intention when I composed it; indeed, as for the
faults of the Sermon, I alone am responsible, but then it ought to be
considered that the more faulty it is, the more obedience I have shown in the
publication of it; and indeed, it would have very ill become me, especially
after I had been preaching up Submission to Superiors, so far to have
contradicted my own Doctrine by my Practice, as not to have complied with the
repeated desires of the learned and reverend Judge, your self and those loyal
Gentlemen of the Grand Jury. I know very well that Discourses of this nature
are but too needful in such an Age as this, wherein the minds of the People,
by sucking in the contagious breath of false Teachers, are so woefully infected
with seditious and rebellious Principles; against which I have herein
endeavored to prescribe as much antidote as the narrow compass of a Sermon
would contain; but in so short a Discourse it is a hard matter to do justice
to so copious an argument. And I am apt to think, Sir, that had not your
judgment been too much bribed by the known candor and goodness of your nature,
by your kindness to the Author of it, and especially by your immovable
Loyalty to your Prince, which could never be shocked by all the late attempts
of a popular Faction, you would have found defects enough in it to have excused
me for my own credit sake from publishing it to the World; but since it must
be, I pray God it may answer your honest intention, which I am very sure was to
do good to the World by it, to open the eyes of those miserably misled Souls
that in numerous droves have been seduced into Faction and Disloyalty, and to
direct their wandering steps into the paths of righteousness and peace and
obedience. I remain,

Sir, Your most obliged and affectionate Servant, JOHN SCOTT.

Romans XIII. I. Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; for the Powers
that are, are ordained of God.
IN which words you have first a Duty injoined, Let every Soul be subject to
the higher Powers. Secondly, A reason enforcing it, for the Powers that are,
are ordained of God. In the duty there are three things considerable. First,
The extent of it, it is to every Soul. Secondly, The matter of it, it is to be
subject. Thirdly, The Object of it, the higher Powers; of each of which I shall
discourse very briefly.

First, Here is the extent of this Duty, it is to every Soul, that is, to every
man of what Order or Degree or Quality soever, whether he be High or Low, Rich
or Poor, Spiritual or Secular, none are exempt, let every Soul be subject;
without any exception either of St. Peter and his Successors, or of the Body
of the People, for the reason extends equally to both, because the Powers that
are, are ordained of God; they are by God's Commission and rule by his
Authority, and therefore neither the Bishop of Rome, nor the majority of the
People can claim exemption from this duty of Subjection, without arrogating to
themselves an Authority superior to God's; for if we must be subject to them,
because they rule by God's Authority, then it is certain there are none that are
subject to God but are under the force and obligation of this reason.

But then Secondly, You have here the matter of this Duty, and that is to be
subject, in which comprehensive phrase is included the whole Duty of Subjects
to their Princes and Governors, honoring their Persons, reverencing their
Authority, assisting them against their Enemies, defending the rights of their
Government, and conscientiously rendering to them their due Customs and
Tributes; but more especially and particularly, it includes our free and ready
submission to them in yielding a cheerful obedience to their Commands, so far
as we can innocently and consistently with our duty to God, and where we cannot
in patiently undergoing all those pains and penalties they shall think meet to
inflict on us for our disobedience, in suffering their unjust persecutions
without murmuring or clamor, without disturbing their Government, or resisting
their Authority, or endeavoring to repel their Force with Force, but meekly
submitting our cause to the judgment of God, who is the Patron and Protector
of oppressed Innocence: But for our clearer understanding this necessary duty
of subjection to our Princes and Governors, I shall briefly explain the
particulars implied in it, which are these five.

First, It implies our ready and cheerful obedience to them in all lawful
things.

Secondly, Our obedience to them in all doubtful things.

Thirdly, It implies our obedience to them in all those cases wherein we are
not able to judge for our selves.

Fourthly, It implies great wariness and caution, in pronouncing against their
judgment and determinations.

Fifthly, It implies our meek and patient submission to the penalties of their
Laws and determinations, when upon a full persuasion of the unlawfulness of
them, we cannot actually comply with them.

First, This subjection to our Prince implies our cheerful and ready obedience
to him, in all lawful things, for, whatsoever God has neither commanded nor
forbidden by his own immediate dictate and authority, he has authorized his
Vicegerents to command or forbid, as they shall judge it most expedient for the
public; so that when they command what God has not forbidden, or forbid what
he has not commanded, their will is God's, who commands us by their mouths,
and stamps their injunctions with his own authority; and unless we admit this,
we totally divest the Magistrate of his power of making Laws, because there
remains no other matter for new Laws, but only that which the Laws of God have
left indifferent: so that unless this may be commanded or forbidden by the
Magistrate, he has no new matter left to make new Laws of, when therefore the
matter which he injoins or forbids, is left free and unrestrained by the Laws
of God, we are obliged in Conscience by that divine Authority which God has
vested him with, to render him a free and cheerful obedience.

Secondly, This Subjection to our Governors implies our ready obedience to
them in all doubtful things, for it is to be considered, that it is as much our
duty to obey our Governors in things that are lawful, as not to obey them in
things that are unlawful; and therefore if we only doubt whether their
Commands are lawful, or no, our doubt ought to make us as fearful of
disobeying as it does of obeying them, because the danger of sinning is on both
sides equal, and therefore in this case where we are necessitated to determine
our selves one way or the other, it is doubtless our duty to determine on that
side which makes most for the public security and peace, which next to the
Honor of God and the Salvation of Souls ought to be preferred above all things;
wherefore in cases of a doubtful nature, it is both modest and safe to
subscribe to the judgment of our Superiors, because in so doing we have not
only our own ignorance to excuse, but their authority to warrant us; and if we
should happen to be in the wrong through our modesty and humility, 'twill be
safer for us than to be in the right through our pride and self-conceit.

Thirdly, This duty of Subjection to our Governors, implies our ready
obedience to them in all those cases wherein we are not capable of judging for
our selves; for he who refuses to obey his Governors in matters that he cannot
judge of, disobeys he knows not why, and to avoid doing that which he does not
know to be a Sin refuses to do that which he knows to be a Duty; so that
though that which he refuses should be unlawful, yet this cannot be the motive
of his refusal who understands not the reasons which make it so; but by
following the reason of our Governors where our own cannot guide us we take
the best course we can not to be mistaken, and if we should be mistaken we have
this to excuse us, that 'twas by following an authority which God himself has
set over us, whereas if we are mistaken on the other side, we are altogether
inexcusable.

Fourthly, This duty of Subjection to our Superiors does also imply great
wariness and caution in pronouncing against their judgment and determinations,
for by the Laws of Christian modesty we are obliged to believe our Governors
to be wiser than we, because they have a larger prospect of things, and greater
advantages of inquiring into them; and therefore though we may have some little
probability that their judgment is false, or their command unlawful, yet we
ought not presently to determine it so, unless it be in such plain and evident
cases as do not only outweigh the probability of their opinion but the
authority of it too; for he who rashly rejects the command of his Superiors as
unlawful, plainly shows that it is not so much the Sin of their Command that
displeases him as the Authority of it, and that it is not his Conscience that
takes offense at it, but his Humor; for if it were Conscience, the reverence
which he bears to the authority which commands him would inspire him with an
awful respect to the judgment of his Superiors, and a modest suspicion of his
own: He therefore who upon every slight appearance of probability against the
judgment of his Superiors immediately pronounces it false and erroneous,
plainly shows that he has too little deference to them and too much to
himself; and while he thus undervalues their Wisdom and overvalues his own,
it is evident that he wants a great deal of that modesty and humility that
becomes a dutiful and obedient Subject.

Fifthly and lastly, This duty of Subjection to our Superiors also implies our
meek and patient submission to the penalties of their Laws, when upon a full
persuasion of the unlawfulness of them we cannot actually comply with them; for
when the Commands of our Prince do interfere with the Commands of God, it is an
undoubted Rule that we must obey God rather than Man; but then at the same time
that our Allegiance to the Throne of Heaven obliges to refuse active Obedience
to our temporal Prince, it indispensably obliges us to render passive, and not
to use any violence against him, though it be in the defense of our Estates, or
Liberties, or Lives, or which ought to be dearer than all, our Religion; for
the just use of violence is founded in a just authority over the Person upon
whom it is exercised, and supposes a right in him that uses it to call the
Person to account against whom he uses it, and punish him according to his
demerit, without which right the use of violence is an injurious outrage and
oppression; but sovereign Princes are in their several Dominions next to and
immediate under God, the most high Sovereign of the World, and therefore having
no Authority but his above them are accountable only to his Tribunal; so that
for Subjects in any case whatsoever to offer violence to their Prince is to
usurp the Throne of God, and invade his sovereign Tribunal, for in offering
violence to them we claim a superiority over them, and in so doing impiously
trespass on the peculiar of the Almighty, and arrogate his divine Prerogative
of being King of Kings and Lord of Lords; for since God alone is placed above
them, as being the sole King of sovereign Kings, how can we assume superiority
over them without setting our selves in the place of God? unless therefore we
will render our selves guilty of the highest affront to, and profanation of
the divine Majesty, we have no other remedy, whenever we are reduced to that
extremity as that we cannot obey our Prince without disobeying God, but to
discharge our duty courageously and faithfully to God, and meekly and quietly
to submit to the unjust Persecutions of our Prince, referring our Cause to that
sovereign Tribunal before which Princes and Peasants must one day give an
account together for every unjust and unrighteous action: And though this may
seem a hard Chapter to those who consider only one side of the case, yet there
is nothing more apparent than that the liberty of resisting Princes would prove
a far greater mischief to the World than all the Cruelties and oppressions of
the most barbarous Tyrants; for what though there never was any Governor so
wise and good as not to be chargeable with some faults and miscarriages, we
ought to consider that our World must be governed by Men and not by Angels, and
that perhaps there never was any lawful Prince so bad, the benefits of whose
Government did not far outweigh the mischiefs of his Tyranny; and that
therefore it is wisely eligible for us rather to suffer a less evil than to
deprive our selves of a greater good. It is a notable saying of Tacitus, where
he brings Cerialis the Roman General thus bespeaking his revolted Soldiers,
Quomodo sterilitatem, nimios imbres and caetera naturae mala, sic luxum vel
avaritiam dominantium tolerate: vitia erunt donec homines, sed neque haec
continua, and meliorum interventu pensantur; i. e. you must bear the Luxury and
Covetousness of your Rulers as ye do Barrenness and unseasonable Showers; there
will be faults as long as there are Men, but bad Men are not always, and we are
generally compensated for them with a succession of good. But had God left us
at liberty to resist when we are oppressed, the consequence of this must have
been an eternal state of War, in which instead of suffering the oppressions of
one Tyrant, we should every one turn Tyrant to every other, and therefore it is
apparently for our good that he has tied up our hands. And thus with all
possible brevity I have explained the Particulars included in this Duty of
Subjection.

I now proceed to the third and last considerable in this Duty, viz. the Object
of it, viz. the higher Powers; by which it is evident we are to understand the
Persons of sovereign Princes and Governors, and not the Laws and
Constitutions, as some of our Republican Doctors pretend, for this Epistle was
writ either under Claudius or Nero, whose Wills were the only Laws they
governed by, and yet these were the higher Powers to whom the Apostle requires
our Subjection; and those whom he here calls the higher Powers in the third
Verse he calls the Rulers, and in the fourth Verse he tells us that this higher
Power is the Minister of God, and a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, which must necessarily be meant of the Governors, and not of the
Laws; and accordingly St. Peter thus explains it, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Be subject to
every ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, (...),
as supreme, which is the very word that is here used for the higher Powers, so
that by the higher Powers here must be meant the Person or Persons that are
vested with the supreme and sovereign Power; for that in every Nation there
should be a sovereign Power is as indispensably necessary as that there should
be a Government; for wherever there is any Government there must be a last
Appeal, otherwise no difference or controversy can ever be finally decided;
and wherever the last Appeal is, whether it be to a King, a Senate, or the
majority of the People, there must be absolute and sovereign Power from which
there can be no farther appeal, and against which there can be no opposition or
resistance; for to talk of a supreme Power which is not unaccountable and
irresistible is nonsense, for whatsoever Power is liable to be called to
account or resisted, has a Power that is superior to it, and so cannot be
supreme: and accordingly the Apostle declares in the Verse ensuing my Text,
that whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and that
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Now the supreme power
to which we of this Nation owe subjection is the King, whom our Laws do declare
and recognize to be our supreme and sovereign Lord, for so, for instance the
Statute of Praemunire declares, that the Crown of England is in no earthly
Subjection, but immediately subject to God in all things touching the Regality
of the same, and 25 H. 8. 21. makes this Recognition to his Majesty, That his
Grace's Realm has no superior under God but only his Grace, and that next
unto God they owe him a natural and humble obedience; and in other Laws it is
declared to be high Treason to levy Arms against the King either within or
without the Realm, and that it is unlawful for both or either Houses of
Parliament to raise or levy War offensive or defensive against his Majesty or
his Heirs and lawful Successors, and that it is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever to take Arms against the King, and that we are to abhor that
traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or
against those who are commissioned by him; by all which it is abundantly
evident who this higher Power is among us, to whom we are to render our
Subjection.

Having thus explained the Terms of the Duty, I proceed in the next place to
the Reason of it, for the Powers that are, are ordained of God.

All Sovereign Princes do derive their power and authority from God, whose
Almighty providence does more peculiarly concern it self in the disposal of
Crowns and Sceptres, and does influence all second causes to conspire in the
advancement of such persons to Empire, as he himself has first chosen and
approved, for there is no person can have right to govern in God's Kingdom
under him, unless it be by commission and authority from him; and indeed to
derive the authority of Sovereign Princes from any other head but God, is in
effect to deny him to be the supreme Governor of the World, which those
persons would do well to consider who make the people the Fountain of regal
authority; for as on the one hand, if it be by God's Authority that Kings
Reign, it is God that governs by them, and not the people, so on the other, if
it be by the peoples authority, it is the people that govern by them and not
God, if it be the choice of the people that makes their Prince without any
Commission or Authority from God, then it is certain that Princes are the
peoples Vicegerents and not God's, but now in all governments the supreme is
the Fountain of all inferior authorities, and if there be any authority within
its Jurisdiction that is not from it, and dependent upon it, it must be
coordinate with it, and then it cannot be supreme, how then can God be supreme
Governor of the World, when there are other coordinate Authorities with him
that are independent from him, and that owe not their being to him? The Peoples
choice therefore even in Elective Governments, can signify no more than the
bare presenting of a person to God, to be authorized his Vicegerent by him, who
if their choice be just and lawful, is supposed to direct them to it by his
providence, and consequently to consent to and approve it, and thereby to
authorize the person so presented, for Sovereign authority in the abstract is
ordained and instituted by God, but abstracted Authority cannot govern without
a person vested with it, and to vest him with it, he must not be only applied
to the Authority, but the Authority must be applied to him; but now where the
people have a right to Election, they can only apply the person to the
Authority, but it is God's consent and approbation which applies the Authority
to the person, who thereupon commences supreme under God, and has no superior
Tribunal but God's to account to, and thus according to the Prophet Daniel, the
most high rules in the Kingdoms of men, because as Lord of all the Lords, and
King of all the Kings of the Earth, he rules by their Ministry, and they rule
by his Authority; and hence in Scripture they are said to be the Ministers of
God, Romans 13. 6. The Christ's or anointed of the Lord, Isa. 45. 1. And are
styled Gods, and the Children of the most high, Psalm. 82. 6. And hence also
they are said to act in God's stead, and to judge not for men but for God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. And their Kingdoms are said to be given them by God, and they to
be advanced to their Thrones by God, 2 Dan. 21. 37.

Since therefore all supreme Powers are ordained and commissioned and
authorized by God, it hence necessarily follows, that to refuse subjection to
them is no less than open Rebellion against God himself; for Kings in their
several Provinces, are the Viceroys of the Almighty Sovereign of the World, and
therefore as he who denies subjection to the King's Viceroy affronts the
Authority of the King, so they who deny subjection to the King, brave and
affront the Authority of the King of Kings; for since it is by God's Authority,
that the King rules, it is God's Authority that they refuse to be ruled by, for
whatsoever the personal qualifications of Princes are, we ought to consider
that the Character they bear is Divine, as being a ray and representation of
the great Majesty above; and therefore it is not so much to them that we are
obliged to bow down as to the Divine Image which they bear about them, so that
like Ambassadors they derive not their honor from themselves, but from the
Sovereign Majesty which they represent and personate, and the veneration we
render them like that which Moses paid to the burning Bush, is not so properly
rendered to them, as to the Divinity in them; whether therefore they are good or
bad we are obliged to respect them as the supreme Vicegerents of God in the
World, and to consider their Persons as consecrated with the Divine Majesty
which Robes and invests them, and herein consists the force of the Apostle's
reason, for the Powers that are, are ordained of God.

And now having given you an account of the duty in the Text, Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers. I shall crave leave briefly to enforce it, by
some other motives and considerations, besides that which the Apostle here
urges, viz. That the Powers that are, are ordained of God.

First, Consider, that upon our dutiful Subjection to our Prince, depends our
temporal Happiness and welfare; for as without government there can be no
Society, so without obedience there can be no Government; and so long as men
are indisposed to obey, the Government must be a burden to them, and they to
the Government; and whilst the Rulers and Subjects instead of being supports
are oppressions to one another, they are in the ready way to dissolve and fly
in pieces, and what can the consequence of this be, but an overflowing deluge
of Miseries and Confusions, of the truth of which, we of this Nation have not
many years ago made a woeful experiment; for when through our restless
impatience of Subjection, we had pulled down our lawful Sovereign from his
Throne, and unhinged the ancient frame of our Government, what was the issue of
it but Oppression and Slavery, and endless Confusion? for when once we had
unfixt our selves from our proper Center, how did we roll through every form of
Government, still addressing to each for relief and ease? and when we had moved
every Stone, and raised it to the top of the Hill, it still came tumbling down
again upon us; so that ours, like Sisyphus his labor was like to have no other
end, but various, restless, and endless Calamity, till at last, God took pity
on us, and resetled us on our ancient Foundations; so that had it not been for
this late shameless and barefaced Rebellion, by which if God had not been more
merciful to us, we had hurled back our selves again into our old confusions, I
could never have imagined we could have been so abandoned of our reason, as in
the same age to act over the same Tragedy again; but if as a just punishment of
our Sins, God should permit us to be so far infatuated, as to sell our
liberties again, for fear of being inslaved, to fight against the principles of
our Religion in the defense of it, to rip up the Bowels of our native Country
to preserve it, and in a word, to go to cross or pile with a company of
beggarly Malcontents for our own Estates and Fortunes, and run our selves
into present and certain mischiefs, to prevent future and contingent ones; if
these things, I say, should happen again, which God forbid, a very small
Prophet may easily foretell the woeful consequence of it; and when we shall see
our Fields strewed over again with the Carcasses of our Friends and Relations,
our Cities, Towns and Countries laid waste by an unnatural War, and shall come
to cast up our accounts, and to reckon all the Blood and Treasure we have
spent, only to purchase Confusion or Slavery, then we shall remember perhaps
with tears in our Eyes, that it was nothing but a surfeit of happiness that
caused our misery. But, beloved, I hope better things of you, and of the
wisdom and dear-bought Experience of the Age; if therefore we would be secured
from these public Calamities, let us render to our Prince all dutiful
subjection, the least defect of which is an apparent advance toward Ruin and
Confusion.

Secondly, Consider that upon our dutiful subjection to our Prince, the honor
of our Religion depends, for men do generally esteem and value things according
to the present good or hurt which they do in the World; and even Religion it
self, though it be the most sacred thing among men, is usually valued by the
present advantages which accrue from it, and how beneficial soever it may be as
to the other Life, if it should be found hurtful and mischievous in this, it
will be impossible to secure it from the hatred and contempt of mankind. Now
there is nothing in which men are at present more generally concerned, than in
the support and security of the Government under which they live, the weal of
which is like a public Bank, in which every Subject has his stock and share;
so that if once it should appear that our Religion is mischievous to
Government, mankind would soon conspire to proclaim War with it, and to decry
and explode it as a public nuisance to the World. Now the generality of men do
judge of Religion by the actions of those that make the loudest Pretenses to
it, and if once it appear that they are factious and ungovernable, those who
understand no better, will certainly conclude that it is their Religion that
teaches them to be so, and being possessed with this opinion of it, it is no
wonder if they fall foul on it, and decry it for a common makebate and
kindle-cole: for that which strikes at Government strikes at mankind. When
therefore we represent our Religion as doing so, by making it a pretense for
Faction and Disobedience, we do what in us lies to alarm the World against it,
and to expose it as a common Enemy, to the public Odium of mankind; and I
verily believe should men consult the Devil himself, what course they were best
take to blast the honor of Religion, he could not direct them to a more
effectual one than under sanctified pretenses to turn Rebels to the Government;
and accordingly heretofore the Adversaries of Christianity could find no such
effectual calumny to blast and expose it as this, that it was an Enemy to the
civil Government, as wisely enough considering, that could they but infuse into
mankind a belief of this scandal, there was nothing could be more conducive to
antidote men's minds against it, and to render it base and infamous in the
opinion of the World; whilst therefore we conduct any seditious design under
the holy banners of Christianity, we join hands with its open and professed
adversaries, and endeavor so far as in us lies, to defend their most malicious
Calumnies against it; and our factious behavior glossed with pretenses of
Christian zeal, is a much stronger proof of that Heathen Calumny, than all the
arguments of Celsus, and Porphyrie, and Hierocles together, because the
confession of a seeming Friend, is of much more credit than the accusation of
an open Enemy; whilst therefore we make our Religion a color for our Faction
and Disloyalty, we confess it to be guilty of the most infamous thing that it
was ever charged with, by the worst of its enemies, viz. that it lays trains of
factious Principles in men's Hearts and Consciences, on purpose to blow up,
Thrones and Governments, and throw the World into Ruins and Confusions; whereas
on the contrary by our firm and unshaken Loyalty to our Governors, we give an
ocular demonstration to the World, that our Religion is good for the best
purposes, that it is not only beneficial in order to our future happiness,
which being distant and invisible is not so apt to affect Men, but that it is
the most effectual instrument even of our present safety and welfare, as it is
the great prop of Thrones and the surest supporter of Government, upon which
the welfare of Mankind depends; and if we can but once convince Men, as we
might easily do by our steady Loyalty, that our Religion is the best security
of Government, without which the World of Men is a mere Wilderness of Wolves
and Tigers, we shall in this do it greater honor, and give it a more glorious
reputation in the World than by our most demure and specious pretenses to
Sanctity without it; for whatever Men may imagine, it is demonstrable that
factious Godliness is a greater reproach and scandal to Religion than open
profaneness and impiety.

Thirdly, consider that upon our faithful Subjection to our Prince the safety
of our Religion depends; for there is nothing in the World can more endanger
our Religion than our making it a pretense for Rebellion, for hereby we
inevitably expose it to the hatred of Princes, and do what in us lies to arm
their power against it, for by our actions we do in effect make this open
Declaration to them: Sirs, To tell you plainly, ye may thank our Religion for
our Disobedience, we would be Loyal but it will not suffer us, and therefore ye
were best have a care of it, for if ye do not suppress it it will undermine
your Thrones, and one time or other arm the hands of your People against your
Persons and Dignities: When therefore we set up our Religion against our
Governors, we force them in their own defense to set themselves against it,
and to endeavor so far as in them lies to root it out of the World, and if
being provoked by our Sedition, they should ever draw their Swords against it,
it may thank us for it, who first began the Quarrel and gave the Challenge, and
did in effect declare by out Actions, that unless they forced us to lay down
our Religion, our Religion would force them to lay down their Crowns, yea and
though we should succeed in our Rebellion and prove too hard for our
Governors, yet first or last our Religion will be sure to smart for it; for
when we have pulled down them we must set up some others in their room, and
whosoever they are, though they may love the Treason by which themselves were
advanced, to be sure they will hate the traitorous Religion, and never think
themselves safe in their Usurpation whilst those Principles prevail in the
Consciences of the People upon which they rebelled against their former
Governors; for let Men be never so zealous for seditious Principles whilst
they are Rebels, you may depend upon it they will be as zealous against them
when they are Usurpers, and be as much concerned to suppress and extirpate them
as ever they were before to uphold and propagate them; of the truth of which ye
have a notorious instance in the late Usurper, who though while he was a
Subject was a zealous stickler for those Religious pretenses under which that
barbarous Rebellion was conducted, yet was no sooner seated in the Throne but
he grew quite aweary of them, and could he but have seduced our sequestered
Clergy from their natural Prince, which he sundry times attempted, would
willingly have pulled down those Seditious Sects that raised him, and
re-established the Church of England, of whose inflexible Loyalty to Government
he had had sufficient experience.

Our Loyalty therefore is not only the honestest but the wisest provision we
can make for the safety of our Religion, because hereby we recommend it to
Princes as the safest guard of their Thrones, and the surest defense of their
Authority, as that which will secure and facilitate their Government, and tie
their Subjects to them by their Hearts and Consciences, and when by good
experience they are convinced of this, they cannot be enemies to it without
being enemies to themselves, and arming their Power against their own authority.

Fourthly and lastly, Consider that if we of this Nation had no other motive,
yet in mere gratitude we stand obliged to render faithful Subjection to our
Princes, for considering with what an easy and indulgent Government, and with
what a succession of excellent Princes God Almighty has blessed us, I know no
Nation under the Cope of Heaven that may be so happy as our selves if we
please; for as our Government is in the frame and constitution of it a most
easy Yoke and gentle Burden, so for sundry Ages we have had Princes as gentle
and gracious as our Government; Princes that have studied our ease and our
happiness, and that have in nothing so much exceeded as in their Mercy and
Indulgence toward us; for, not to mention that glorious Lady Queen Elizabeth,
that wise and learned, that peaceable and gracious Prince King James I. of the
Blessings of whose Reigns but few if any of us were partakers, not to mention
that pious and every way incomparable Prince Charles I. whose sacred Blood is
such a monumental shame to Treason and Rebellion, as must make Rebels and
Traitors, if they have any modesty remaining in them blush and be confounded
for ever; besides these, it is not long since that God almighty has deprived
us of one of the wisest, most gracious and merciful Kings that ever swayed a
Scepter, a King that had been long endeared to us not only by the gentleness
of his Reign, the prudence of his conduct, and the incomparable sweetness of
his temper, but also by sundry miraculous Deliverances, and as miraculous a
Restoration, a Restoration that proclaimed and signalized him the Darling and
Favorite of the divine Providence, a Prince that reigned in all honest Hearts
by the inconquerable Charms of his own native goodness, which had virtue enough
in them, had the thing been possible, to have obliged Ingratitude, and even to
have made Faction ashamed, and Fanaticism Loyal. And now to him in despite of
all the Hellish machinations of a restless Faction, our present rightful Lord
peaceably succeeds, a Prince whom God seems to have reserved on purpose to make
us amends for the inestimable loss we sustained in Charles the Wise and Good;
and indeed considering the great and Princely Virtues which adorn his Mind, and
shine through the whole Sphere of his activity, we have all the encouragement
in the world to promise our selves a continuance of those Halcion days under
his happy influence, if by our own intestine Seditions we do not cloud and
disturb them that we have so long enjoyed under the auspicious Reign of his
Brother; for if from an undaunted courage and firmness of Mind, if from an
immense greatness and generosity of Soul, if from an inflexible sincerity and
integrity of Manners, if from an impartial Justice, sweetened with an indearing
benignity of Temper, if from the fair conjunction of all these Royal Virtues in
a Prince, a People may presage their own happiness, we have all these to build
our hope on in our present Sovereign, who to give an absolute confidence to our
hope, has graciously deposited in our hands that sacred pledge of his own
Royal Faith by a public repeated Declaration inviolably to preserve our Laws,
and Liberties, and Properties, and which ought to be dearest to us than all,
the established Religion of our Church, which for purity of Worship and
Doctrine, for antiquity of Discipline and Government, for loyalty of Principles
and Practice, outshines all the Churches in the World; and for us to mistrust
the security of that Faith which yet was never forfeited to any Man, would be
not only rude and disingenuous, but unjust and malicious; so that considering
the admirable frame of our Government, and the unparalled goodness of our
Princes, we are certainly the most obliged Subjects in the World. And if after
this we should prove factious and disloyal, what will the World say of us, but
that we are a People of a base and ungrateful Genius, whom no goodness can
indear or oblige? and what may we expect from God, but that, as a just
retribution for our black ingratitude, he should make us feel the smart of all
those barbarous Tyrannies and Oppressions which hitherto we have unjustly
complained of? Wherefore, unless we intend to render our selves both infamous
to Men, and odious to God, let us cheerfully comply with this great Precept of
our Religion, Let every Soul of us be subject to the higher Powers, forasmuch
as the Powers that are, are ordained of God.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are lately published by the same Author the Books following.

The Christian Life, Part I. From its Beginning to its Consummation in Glory,
together with the several Means and Instruments of Christianity conducing
thereunto; with directions for private Devotion, and forms of Prayer fitted to
the several states of Christians. The third Edition.

The Christian Life, Part II. Wherein the fundamental Principles of Christian
Duty are assigned, explained and proved. Vol. I.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc. December. 16.
1683. on Prove. XXIV. 21. And meddle not with them that are given to change.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc. on July 26.
1685. being the day of Thanksgiving for His Majesty's Victory over the Rebels,
on 2 Samuel XVIII. 28. And Ahimaaz called and said unto the King, All is well.
And he fell down to the earth upon his face before the King, and said, Blessed
be the Lord thy God, which has delivered up the men that lift up their hand
against my Lord the King.


